                                 PREFACE




THIS BOOK grew out of a sense of puzzlement: the fact that for many years the
industrialized nations of North America and Europe were supposed to be
the indubitable models for the societies of Asia, Africa, and Latin America,
the so-called Third World, and that these societies must catch up with the
industrialized countries, perhaps even become like them. This belief is still
held today in many quarters. Development was and continues to be—
although less convincingly so as the years go by and its promises go unful-
filled—the magic formula. The presumed ineluctability of this notion—and,
for the most part, its unquestioned desirability—was most puzzling to me.
This work arose out of the need to explain this situation, namely, the crea-
tion of a Third World and the dream of development, both of which have
been an integral part of the socioeconomic, cultural, and political life of the
post–World War II period.
    The overall approach taken in the book can be described as poststruc-
turalist. More precisely, the approach is discursive, in the sense that it stems
from the recognition of the importance of the dynamics of discourse and
power to any study of culture. But there is much more than an analysis of
discourse and practice; I also attempt to contribute to the development of a
framework for the cultural critique of economics as a foundational structure
of modernity, including the formulation of a culture-based political econ-
omy. In addition, I include a detailed examination of the emergence of peas-
ants, women, and the environment as clients of the development apparatus
in the 1970s and 1980s. Finally, I incorporate throughout the text accounts
of Third World scholars, many of whom tell stories that are less mediated by
the needs of the U.S. and European academy.
    The approach is also anthropological. As Stuart Hall said, “If culture hap-
pens to be what seizes your soul, you will have to recognize that you will
always be working in an area of displacement.” The analysis in this book is
cultural in the anthropological sense but also in the sense of cultural studies.
It may be situated among current attempts to advance anthropology and
cultural studies as critical, intellectual, and political projects.
    As the title of the book suggests, development and even the Third World
may be in the process of being unmade. This is happening not so much
because the Second World (the socialist economies of Europe) is gone and
the Holy Trinity of the post–World War II era is finally collapsing on its own
but because of development’s failure and the increasing opposition to it by
popular groups in the Third World. The voices that are calling for an end to
viii                                 PREFACE

development are becoming more numerous and audible. This book can be
seen as part of this effort; I also hope that it will be part of the task of imagin-
ing and fostering alternatives.

I would like to thank the following people: Sheldon Margen, Paul Rabinow,
and C. West Churchman of the University of California, Berkeley; Jacque-
line Urla and Sonia E. Alvarez, special friends and co-workers in anthro-
pology and social movements research, respectively; Tracey Tsugawa, Jen-
nifer Terry, Orin Starn, Miguel Díaz-Barriga, Deborah Gordon, and Ron
Balderrama, also good friends and interlocutors; Michael Taussig, James
O’Connor, Lourdes Benería, Adele Mueller, Stephen Gudeman, and James
Clifford, important sources of insights and support.
   Scholars working on related approaches to development whose writings,
discussions, and active support I appreciate include Majid Rahnema, Ashis
Nandy, Vandana Shiva, Shiv Visvanathan, Stephen and Frédérique Marglin,
and the group gathered around Wolfgang Sachs, Ivan Illich, and Barbara
Duden; James Ferguson and Stacy Leigh Pigg, fellow anthropologists; and
María Cristina Rojas de Ferro, also studying Colombian regimes of repre-
sentation. Donald Lowe and John Borrego read and offered suggestions on
my doctoral dissertation in Berkeley.
   Several people in Colombia have been extremely important to this book.
I want to thank especially Alvaro Pedrosa, Orlando Fals Borda, María
Cristina Salazar, and Magdalena León de Leal for providing intellectual ex-
change and friendship. My research on food, nutrition, and rural develop-
ment was made easier and more interesting by Darío Fajardo, Patricia Pri-
eto, Sofía Valencia, and Beatriz Hernandez. In the United States, I thank
Leonard Joy, Michael Latham, Alain de Janvry, and Nola Reinhardt, also for
their work on food and nutrition, on which I draw. The Latin American
dimension of the book received vital impetus from the following friends and
colleagues: Fernando Calderón and Alejandro Piscitelli (Buenos Aires);
Margarita López Maya, Luis Gómez, María Pilar García, and Edgardo and
Luis Lander (Caracas); Edmundo Fuenzalida (Santiago); Heloisa Boarque
de Hollanda (Rio de Janeiro); Aníbal Quijano (Lima); and Fernando Flores
in Berkeley, who was instrumental in helping me obtain financial support for
a year of writing at Berkeley. Funding for fifteen months of fieldwork in
Colombia (1981–1982; 1983) was provided by the United Nations Univer-
sity.
   More often than not, my undergraduate students at the University of Cal-
ifornia, Santa Cruz, and Smith College responded enthusiastically and criti-
cally to many of the ideas presented in this book. I want to thank particularly
Ned Bade, and Granis Stewart and Beth Bessinger, my research assistants at
Santa Cruz and Smith College, respectively.
   On a more personal note (although in the case of many of those already
                                 PREFACE                                   ix
mentioned the line between the personal and the professional is blurred at
best), I would like to thank friends in the San Francisco Bay Area, particu-
lary Celso Alvarez, Cathryn Teasley, Zé Araújo, Ignacio Valero, Guillermo
Padilla, Marcio Cámara, Judit Moschkovich, Isabel de Sena, Ron Levaco,
Rosselyn Lash, Rafael Coto, Tina Rotenberg, Clementina Acedo, Lorena
Martos, Inés Gómez, Jorge Myers, and Richard Harris; Marta Morello-
Frosch, Julianne Burton, and David Sweet at the Latin American Studies
program at the University of California at Santa Cruz, where I taught for
three years; Nancy Gutman and Richard Lim in Northampton, Massachu-
setts; and my colleagues in the anthropology department at Smith College—
Elizabeth Hopkins, Frédérique Apffel-Marglin, and Donald Joralemon. In
Colombia, a similar group of friends includes Consuelo Moreno, Jaime Fer-
nando Valencia, Mercedes Franco, and their children, and Yolanda Arango
and Alvaro Bedoya. Finally, I want to thank especially my family—Yadira,
María Victoria, Chepe, Tracey, and María Elena. I also want to remember
my father, Gustavo, who died in 1990 still dreaming of his small hometown
while trying (without great success in terms of conventional economic and
development indicators) to make it in the big city so that his children could
“get ahead” and become modern.
   The suggestions of Mary Murrell, my editor at Princeton University
Press, were an important catalyst in bringing the book to completion in its
present form. I am grateful to her for her trust in the project. Finally, I
would like to acknowledge two other sources of inspiration: Michel Fou-
cault, whose work provided insights in many forms and at many levels, and
the vibrant sounds of many Third World musicians—Caribbean, West Afri-
can, and Latin American—particularly when I lived in the San Francisco
Bay Area. It is not a coincidence that Third World music is becoming in-
creasingly important in the cultural productions of the West. This brief men-
tion is meant as a reminder that perhaps many books—this one included—
would be quite different without it.
Encountering Development
                                    Chapter 1

      INTRODUCTION: DEVELOPMENT AND THE
          ANTHROPOLOGY OF MODERNITY

              There is a sense in which rapid economic progress is
                 impossible without painful adjustments. Ancient
             philosophies have to be scrapped; old social institutions
            have to disintegrate; bonds of caste, creed and race have to
            burst; and large numbers of persons who cannot keep up
                with progress have to have their expectations of a
              comfortable life frustrated. Very few communities are
                willing to pay the full price of economic progress.
                                 —United Nations,
                   Department of Social and Economic Affairs,
                    Measures for the Economic Development of
                         Underdeveloped Countries, 1951




IN HIS inaugural address as president of the United States on January 20,
1949, Harry Truman announced his concept of a “fair deal” for the entire
world. An essential component of this concept was his appeal to the United
States and the world to solve the problems of the “underdeveloped areas” of
the globe.
  More than half the people of the world are living in conditions approaching
  misery. Their food is inadequate, they are victims of disease. Their economic
  life is primitive and stagnant. Their poverty is a handicap and a threat both to
  them and to more prosperous areas. For the first time in history humanity
  possesses the knowledge and the skill to relieve the suffering of these peo-
  ple. . . . I believe that we should make available to peace-loving peoples the
  benefits of our store of technical knowledge in order to help them realize their
  aspirations for a better life. . . . What we envisage is a program of development
  based on the concepts of democractic fair dealing. . . . Greater production is the
  key to prosperity and peace. And the key to greater production is a wider and
  more vigorous application of modern scientific and technical knowledge. (Tru-
  man [1949] 1964)

The Truman doctrine initiated a new era in the understanding and manage-
ment of world affairs, particularly those concerning the less economically
accomplished countries of the world. The intent was quite ambitious: to
4                                    CHAPTER 1

bring about the conditions necessary to replicating the world over the fea-
tures that characterized the “advanced” societies of the time—high levels of
industrialization and urbanization, technicalization of agriculture, rapid
growth of material production and living standards, and the widespread
adoption of modern education and cultural values. In Truman’s vision, capi-
tal, science, and technology were the main ingredients that would make this
massive revolution possible. Only in this way could the American dream of
peace and abundance be extended to all the peoples of the planet.
   This dream was not solely the creation of the United States but the result
of the specific historical conjuncture at the end of the Second World War.
Within a few years, the dream was universally embraced by those in power.
The dream was not seen as an easy process, however; predictably perhaps,
the obstacles perceived ahead contributed to consolidating the mission. One
of the most influential documents of the period, prepared by a group of
experts convened by the United Nations with the objective of designing
concrete policies and measures “for the economic development of underde-
veloped countries,” put it thus:
    There is a sense in which rapid economic progress is impossible without painful
    adjustments. Ancient philosophies have to be scrapped; old social institutions
    have to disintegrate; bonds of cast, creed and race have to burst; and large
    numbers of persons who cannot keep up with progress have to have their ex-
    pectations of a comfortable life frustrated. Very few communities are willing to
    pay the full price of economic progress. (United Nations, Department of Social
    and Economic Affairs [1951], 15)1

The report suggested no less than a total restructuring of “underdeveloped”
societies. The statement quoted earlier might seem to us today amazingly
ethnocentric and arrogant, at best naive; yet what has to be explained is
precisely the fact that it was uttered and that it made perfect sense. The
statement exemplified a growing will to transform drastically two-thirds of
the world in the pursuit of the goal of material prosperity and economic
progress. By the early 1950s, such a will had become hegemonic at the level
of the circles of power.
   This book tells the story of this dream and how it progressively turned into
a nightmare. For instead of the kingdom of abundance promised by theorists
and politicians in the 1950s, the discourse and strategy of development pro-
duced its opposite: massive underdevelopment and impoverishment, untold
exploitation and oppression. The debt crisis, the Sahelian famine, increasing
poverty, malnutrition, and violence are only the most pathetic signs of the
failure of forty years of development. In this way, this book can be read as
the history of the loss of an illusion, in which many genuinely believed.
Above all, however, it is about how the “Third World” has been produced by
the discourses and practices of development since their inception in the
early post–World War II period.
                               INTRODUCTION                                  5

           ORIENTALISM, AFRICANISM, AND DEVELOPMENTALISM
Until the late 1970s, the central stake in discussions on Asia, Africa, and
Latin America was the nature of development. As we will see, from the
economic development theories of the 1950s to the “basic human needs
approach” of the 1970s—which emphasized not only economic growth per
se as in earlier decades but also the distribution of the benefits of growth—
the main preoccupation of theorists and politicians was the kinds of develop-
ment that needed to be pursued to solve the social and economic problems
of these parts of the world. Even those who opposed the prevailing capitalist
strategies were obliged to couch their critique in terms of the need for devel-
opment, through concepts such as “another development,” “participatory
development,” “socialist development,” and the like. In short, one could
criticize a given approach and propose modifications or improvements ac-
cordingly, but the fact of development itself, and the need for it, could not
be doubted. Development had achieved the status of a certainty in the social
imaginary.
   Indeed, it seemed impossible to conceptualize social reality in other
terms. Wherever one looked, one found the repetitive and omnipresent real-
ity of development: governments designing and implementing ambitious
development plans, institutions carrying out development programs in city
and countryside alike, experts of all kinds studying underdevelopment and
producing theories ad nauseam. The fact that most people’s conditions not
only did not improve but deteriorated with the passing of time did not seem
to bother most experts. Reality, in sum, had been colonized by the develop-
ment discourse, and those who were dissatisfied with this state of affairs had
to struggle for bits and pieces of freedom within it, in the hope that in the
process a different reality could be constructed.2
   More recently, however, the development of new tools of analysis, in ges-
tation since the late 1960s but the application of which became widespread
only during the 1980s, has made possible analyses of this type of “coloniza-
tion of reality” which seek to account for this very fact: how certain repre-
sentations become dominant and shape indelibly the ways in which reality
is imagined and acted upon. Foucault’s work on the dynamics of discourse
and power in the representation of social reality, in particular, has been
instrumental in unveiling the mechanisms by which a certain order of dis-
course produces permissible modes of being and thinking while disqualify-
ing and even making others impossible. Extensions of Foucault’s insights
to colonial and postcolonial situations by authors such as Edward Said,
V. Y. Mudimbe, Chandra Mohanty, and Homi Bhabha, among others, have
opened up new ways of thinking about representations of the Third World.
Anthropology’s self-critique and renewal during the 1980s have also been
important in this regard.
   Thinking of development in terms of discourse makes it possible to main-
6                                       CHAPTER 1

tain the focus on domination—as earlier Marxist analyses, for instance,
did—and at the same time to explore more fruitfully the conditions of possi-
bility and the most pervasive effects of development. Discourse analysis cre-
ates the possibility of “stand[ing] detached from [the development dis-
course], bracketing its familiarity, in order to analyze the theoretical and
practical context with which it has been associated” (Foucault 1986, 3). It
gives us the possibility of singling out “development” as an encompassing
cultural space and at the same time of separating ourselves from it by per-
ceiving it in a totally new form. This is the task the present book sets out to
accomplish.
   To see development as a historically produced discourse entails an exam-
ination of why so many countries started to see themselves as underdevel-
oped in the early post–World War II period, how “to develop” became a
fundamental problem for them, and how, finally, they embarked upon the
task of “un-underdeveloping” themselves by subjecting their societies to
increasingly systematic, detailed, and comprehensive interventions. As
Western experts and politicians started to see certain conditions in Asia,
Africa, and Latin America as a problem—mostly what was perceived as pov-
erty and backwardness—a new domain of thought and experience, namely,
development, came into being, resulting in a new strategy for dealing with
the alleged problems. Initiated in the United States and Western Europe,
this strategy became in a few years a powerful force in the Third World.
   The study of development as discourse is akin to Said’s study of the dis-
courses on the Orient. “Orientalism,” writes Said,
    can be discussed and analyzed as the corporate institution for dealing with the
    Orient—dealing with it by making statements about it, authorizing views of it,
    describing it, by teaching it, settling it, ruling over it: in short, Orientalism as a
    Western style for dominating, restructuring, and having authority over the Ori-
    ent. . . . My contention is that without examining Orientalism as a discourse we
    cannot possibly understand the enormously systematic discipline by which Eu-
    ropean culture was able to manage—and even produce—the Orient politically,
    sociologically, ideologically, scientifically, and imaginatively during the post-
    Enlightenment period. (1979, 3)

Since its publication, Orientalism has sparked a number of creative studies
and inquiries about representations of the Third World in various contexts,
although few have dealt explicitly with the question of development. Never-
theless, the general questions some of these works raised serve as markers
for the analysis of development as a regime of representation. In his excel-
lent book The Invention of Africa, the African philosopher V. Y. Mudimbe,
for example, states his objective thus: “To study the theme of the founda-
tions of discourse about Africa . . . [how] African worlds have been estab-
lished as realities for knowledge” (1988, xi) in Western discourse. His con-
                               INTRODUCTION                                  7
cern, moreover, goes beyond “the ‘invention’ of Africanism as a scientific
discipline” (9), particularly in anthropology and philosophy, in order to in-
vestigate the “amplification” by African scholars of the work of critical Euro-
pean thinkers, particularly Foucault and Lévi-Strauss. Although Mudimbe
finds that even in the most Afrocentric perspectives the Western epistemo-
logical order continues to be both context and referent, he nevertheless finds
some works in which critical European insights are being carried even fur-
ther than those works themselves anticipated. What is at stake for these
latter works, Mudimbe explains, is a critical reinterpretation of African his-
tory as it has been seen from Africa’s (epistemological, historical, and geo-
graphical) exteriority, indeed, a weakening of the very notion of Africa. This,
for Mudimbe, implies a radical break in African anthropology, history, and
ideology.
   Critical work of this kind, Mudimbe believes, may open the way for “the
process of refounding and reassuming an interrupted historicity within rep-
resentations” (183), in other words, the process by which Africans can have
greater autonomy over how they are represented and how they can con-
struct their own social and cultural models in ways not so mediated by a
Western episteme and historicity—albeit in an increasingly transnational
context. This notion can be extended to the Third World as a whole, for what
is at stake is the process by which, in the history of the modern West, non-
European areas have been systematically organized into, and transformed
according to, European constructs. Representations of Asia, Africa, and
Latin America as Third World and underdeveloped are the heirs of an illus-
trious genealogy of Western conceptions about those parts of the world.3
   Timothy Mitchell unveils another important mechanism at work in Euro-
pean representations of other societies. Like Mudimbe, Mitchell’s goal is to
explore “the peculiar methods of order and truth that characterise the mod-
ern West” (1988, ix) and their impact on nineteenth-century Egypt. The
setting up of the world as a picture, in the model of the world exhibitions of
the last century, Mitchell suggests, is at the core of these methods and their
political expediency. For the modern (European) subject, this entailed that
s/he would experience life as if s/he were set apart from the physical world,
as if s/he were a visitor at an exhibition. The observer inevitably “enframed”
external reality in order to make sense of it; this enframing took place ac-
cording to European categories. What emerged was a regime of objectivism
in which Europeans were subjected to a double demand: to be detached and
objective, and yet to immerse themselves in local life.
   This experience as participant observer was made possible by a curious
trick, that of eliminating from the picture the presence of the European
observer (see also Clifford 1988, 145); in more concrete terms, observing the
(colonial) world as object “from a position that is invisible and set apart”
(Mitchell 1988, 28). The West had come to live “as though the world were
8                                       CHAPTER 1

divided in this way into two: into a realm of mere representations and a
realm of the ‘real’; into exhibitions and an external reality; into an order of
mere models, descriptions or copies, and an order of the original” (32). This
regime of order and truth is a quintessential aspect of modernity and has
been deepened by economics and development. It is reflected in an objec-
tivist and empiricist stand that dictates that the Third World and its peoples
exist “out there,” to be known through theories and intervened upon from
the outside.
   The consequences of this feature of modernity have been enormous.
Chandra Mohanty, for example, refers to the same feature when raising the
questions of who produces knowledge about Third World women and from
what spaces; she discovered that women in the Third World are represented
in most feminist literature on development as having “needs” and “prob-
lems” but few choices and no freedom to act. What emerges from such
modes of analysis is the image of an average Third World woman, con-
structed through the use of statistics and certain categories:
    This average third world woman leads an essentially truncated life based on her
    feminine gender (read: sexually constrained) and her being “third world” (read:
    ignorant, poor, uneducated, tradition-bound, domestic, family-oriented, victim-
    ized, etc.). This, I suggest, is in contrast to the (implicit) self-representation of
    Western women as educated, as modern, as having control over their own bod-
    ies and sexualities, and the freedom to make their own decisions. (1991b, 56)

These representations implicitly assume Western standards as the bench-
mark against which to measure the situation of Third World women. The
result, Mohanty believes, is a paternalistic attitude on the part of Western
women toward their Third World counterparts and, more generally, the
perpetuation of the hegemonic idea of the West’s superiority. Within this
discursive regime, works about Third World women develop a certain co-
herence of effects that reinforces that hegemony. “It is in this process of
discursive homogenization and systematization of the oppression of women
in the third world,” Mohanty concludes, “that power is exercised in much of
recent Western feminist discourse, and this power needs to be defined and
named” (54).4
   Needless to say, Mohanty’s critique applies with greater pertinence to
mainstream development literature, in which there exists a veritable under-
developed subjectivity endowed with features such as powerlessness, pas-
sivity, poverty, and ignorance, usually dark and lacking in historical agency,
as if waiting for the (white) Western hand to help subjects along and not
infrequently hungry, illiterate, needy, and oppressed by its own stubborn-
ness, lack of initiative, and traditions. This image also universalizes and ho-
mogenizes Third World cultures in an ahistorical fashion. Only from a cer-
tain Western perspective does this description make sense; that it exists at
                                  INTRODUCTION                                           9
all is more a sign of power over the Third World than a truth about it. It is
important to highlight for now that the deployment of this discourse in a
world system in which the West has a certain dominance over the Third
World has profound political, economic, and cultural effects that have to be
explored.
   The production of discourse under conditions of unequal power is what
Mohanty and others refer to as “the colonialist move.” This move entails
specific constructions of the colonial / Third World subject in/through dis-
course in ways that allow the exercise of power over it. Colonial discourse,
although “the most theoretically underdeveloped form of discourse,” ac-
cording to Homi Bhabha, is “crucial to the binding of a range of differences
and discriminations that inform the discursive and political practices of ra-
cial and cultural hierarchization” (1990, 72). Bhabha’s definition of colonial
discourse, although complex, is illuminating:
  [Colonial discourse] is an apparatus that turns on the recognition and disavowal
  of racial/cultural/historical differences. Its predominant strategic function is the
  creation of a space for a “subject peoples” through the production of knowl-
  edges in terms of which surveillance is exercised and a complex form of plea-
  sure/unpleasure is incited. . . . The objective of colonial discourse is to construe
  the colonized as a population of degenerate types on the basis of racial origin,
  in order to justify conquest and to establish systems of administration and in-
  struction. . . . I am referring to a form of governmentality that in marking out a
  “subject nation,” appropriates, directs and dominates its various spheres of ac-
  tivity. (1990, 75)

Although some of the terms of this definition might be more applicable to
the colonial context strictly speaking, the development discourse is gov-
erned by the same principles; it has created an extremely efficient apparatus
for producing knowledge about, and the exercise of power over, the Third
World. This apparatus came into existence roughly in the period 1945 to
1955 and has not since ceased to produce new arrangements of knowledge
and power, new practices, theories, strategies, and so on. In sum, it has
successfully deployed a regime of government over the Third World, a
“space for ‘subject peoples’ ” that ensures certain control over it.
   This space is also a geopolitical space, a series of imaginative geographies,
to use Said’s (1979) term. The development discourse inevitably contained
a geopolitical imagination that has shaped the meaning of development for
more than four decades. For some, this will to spatial power is one of the
most essential features of development (Slater 1993). It is implicit in expres-
sions such as First and Third World, North and South, center and periphery.
The social production of space implicit in these terms is bound with the
production of differences, subjectivities, and social orders. Despite the cor-
rectives introduced to this geopolitics—the decentering of the world, the
10                                CHAPTER 1

demise of the Second World, the emergence of a network of world cities, the
globalization of cultural production, and so on—they continue to function
imaginatively in powerful ways. There is a relation among history, geogra-
phy, and modernity that resists disintegration as far as the Third World is
concerned, despite the important changes that have given rise to postmod-
ern geographies (Soja 1989).

To sum up, I propose to speak of development as a historically singular
experience, the creation of a domain of thought and action, by analyzing the
characteristics and interrelations of the three axes that define it: the forms of
knowledge that refer to it and through which it comes into being and is
elaborated into objects, concepts, theories, and the like; the system of power
that regulates its practice; and the forms of subjectivity fostered by this dis-
course, those through which people come to recognize themselves as devel-
oped or underdeveloped. The ensemble of forms found along these axes
constitutes development as a discursive formation, giving rise to an efficient
apparatus that systematically relates forms of knowledge and techiques of
power.5
   The analysis will thus be couched in terms of regimes of discourse and
representation. Regimes of representation can be analyzed as places of en-
counter where identities are constructed and also where violence is origi-
nated, symbolized, and managed. This useful hypothesis, developed by a
Colombian scholar to explain nineteenth-century violence in her country,
building particularly on the works of Bakhtin, Foucault, and Girard, con-
ceives of regimes of representation as places of encounter of languages of the
past and languages of the present (such as the languages of “civilization” and
“barbarism” in postindependence Latin America), internal and external lan-
guages, and languages of self and other (Rojas de Ferro 1994). A similar
encounter of regimes of representation took place in the late 1940s with the
emergence of development, also accompanied by specific forms of modern-
ized violence.6
   The notion of regimes of representation is a final theoretical and method-
ological principle for examining the mechanisms for, and consequences of,
the construction of the Third World in/through representation. Charting
regimes of representation of the Third World brought about by the develop-
ment discourse represents an attempt to draw the “cartographies” (Deleuze
1988) or maps of the configurations of knowledge and power that define the
post–World War II period. These are also cartographies of struggle, as Mo-
hanty (1991a) adds. Although they are geared toward an understanding of
the conceptual maps that are used to locate and chart Third World people’s
experience, they also reveal—even if indirectly at times—the categories
with which people have to struggle. This book provides a general map for
orienting oneself in the discourses and practices that account for today’s
                               INTRODUCTION                                 11
dominant forms of sociocultural and economic production of the Third
World.
   The goals of this book are precisely to examine the establishment and
consolidation of this discourse and apparatus from the early post–World
War II period to the present (chapter 2); analyze the construction of a notion
of underdevelopment in post–World War II economic development theo-
ries (chapter 3); and demonstrate the way in which the apparatus functions
through the systematic production of knowldege and power in specific
fields—such as rural development, sustainable development, and women
and development (chapters 4 and 5). Finally, the conclusion deals with the
important question of how to imagine a postdevelopment regime of repre-
sentation and how to investigate and pursue alternative practices in the con-
text of today’s social movements in the Third World.
   This, one might say, is a study of developmentalism as a discursive field.
Unlike Said’s study of Orientalism, however, I pay closer attention to the
deployment of the discourse through practices. I want to show that this
discourse results in concrete practices of thinking and acting through which
the Third World is produced. The example I chose for this closer investi-
gation is the implementation of rural development, health, and nutrition
programs in Latin America in the 1970s and 1980s. Another difference in
relation to Orientalism originates in Homi Bhabha’s caution that “there is
always, in Said, the suggestion that colonial power is possessed entirely by
the colonizer, given its intentionality and unidirectionality” (1990, 77). This
is a danger I seek to avoid by considering the variety of forms with which
Third World people resist development interventions and how they struggle
to create alternative ways of being and doing.
   Like Mudimbe’s study of Africanism, I also want to unveil the foundations
of an order of knowledge and a discourse about the Third World as underde-
veloped. I want to map, so to say, the invention of development. Instead of
focusing on anthropology and philosophy, however, I contextualize the era
of development within the overall space of modernity, particularly modern
economic practices. From this perspective, development can be seen as a
chapter of what can be called an anthropology of modernity, that is, a general
investigation of Western modernity as a culturally and historically specific
phenomenon. If it is true that there is an “anthropological structure” (Fou-
cault 1975, 198) that sustains the modern order and its human sciences, it
must be investigated to what extent this structure has also given rise to the
regime of development, perhaps as a specific mutation of modernity. A gen-
eral direction for this anthropology of modernity has already been sug-
gested, in the sense of rendering “exotic” the West’s cultural products in
order to see them for what they are: “We need to anthropologize the West:
show how exotic its constitution of reality has been; emphasize those do-
mains most taken for granted as universal (this includes epistemology and
12                                CHAPTER 1

economics); make them seem as historically peculiar as possible; show how
their claims to truth are linked to social practices and have hence become
effective forces in the social world” (Rabinow 1986, 241).
   The anthropology of modernity would rely on ethnographic approaches
that look at social forms as produced by historical practices combining
knowledge and power; it would seek to examine how truth claims are related
to practices and symbols that produce and regulate social life. As we will see,
the production of the Third World through the articulation of knowledge
and power is essential to the development discourse. This does not preclude
the fact that from many Third World spaces, even the most reasonable
among the West’s social and cultural practices might look quite peculiar,
even strange. Nevertheless, even today most people in the West (and many
parts of the Third World) have great difficulty thinking about Third World
situations and people in terms other than those provided by the develop-
ment discourse. These terms—such as overpopulation, the permanent
threat of famine, poverty, illiteracy, and the like—operate as the most com-
mon signifiers, already stereotyped and burdened with development signi-
fieds. Media images of the Third World are the clearest example of develop-
mentalist representations. These images just do not seem to go away. This is
why it is necessary to examine development in relation to the modern expe-
riences of knowing, seeing, counting, economizing, and the like.


                      DECONSTRUCTING DEVELOPMENT
The discursive analysis of development started in the late 1980s and will
most likely continue into the 1990s, coupled with attempts at articulating
alternative regimes of representation and practice. Few works, however,
have undertaken the deconstruction of the development discourse.7 James
Ferguson’s recent book on development in Lesotho (1990) is a sophisticated
example of the deconstructionist approach. Ferguson provides an in-depth
analysis of rural development programs implemented in the country under
World Bank sponsorship. Further entrenchment of the state, the restructur-
ing of rural social relations, the deepening of Western modernizing influ-
ences, and the depoliticization of problems are among the most important
effects of the deployment of rural development in Lesotho, despite the ap-
parent failure of the programs in terms of their stated objectives. It is at the
level of these effects, Ferguson concludes, that the productivity of the appa-
ratus has to be assessed.
   Another deconstructionist approach (Sachs 1992) analyzes the central
constructs or key words of the development discourse, such as market, plan-
ning, population, environment, production, equality, participation, needs,
poverty, and the like. After briefly tracing the origin of each concept in Eu-
ropean civilization, each chapter examines the uses and transformation of
                               INTRODUCTION                                  13
the concept in the development discourse from the 1950s to the present.
The intent of the book is to expose the arbitrary character of the concepts,
their cultural and historical specificity, and the dangers that their use repre-
sents in the context of the Third World.8 A related, group project is con-
ceived in terms of a “systems of knowledge” approach. Cultures, this group
believes, are characterized not only by rules and values but also by ways of
knowing. Development has relied exclusively on one knowledge system,
namely, the modern Western one. The dominance of this knowledge system
has dictated the marginalization and disqualification of non-Western knowl-
edge systems. In these latter knowledge systems, the authors conclude, re-
searchers and activists might find alternative rationalities to guide social
action away from economistic and reductionistic ways of thinking.9
   In the 1970s, women were discovered to have been “bypassed” by devel-
opment interventions. This “discovery” resulted in the growth during the
late 1970s and 1980s of a whole new field, women in development (WID),
which has been analyzed by several feminist researchers as a regime of rep-
resentation, most notably Adele Mueller (1986, 1987a, 1991) and Chandra
Mohanty. At the core of these works is an insightful analysis of the practices
of dominant development institutions in creating and managing their client
populations. Similar analyses of particular development subfields—such as
economics and the environment, for example—are a needed contribution to
the understanding of the function of development as a discourse and will
continue to appear.10
   A group of Swedish anthropologists focus their work on how the concepts
of development and modernity are used, interpreted, questioned, and re-
produced in various social contexts in different parts of the world. An entire
constellation of usages, modes of operation, and effects associated with these
terms, which are profoundly local, is beginning to surface. Whether in a
Papua New Guinean village or in a small town of Kenya or Ethiopia, local
versions of development and modernity are formulated according to com-
plex processes that include traditional cultural practices, histories of coloni-
alism, and contemporary location within the global economy of goods and
symbols (Dahl and Rabo 1992). These much-needed local ethnographies of
development and modernity are also being pioneered by Pigg (1992) in her
work on the introduction of health practices in Nepal. More on these works
in the next chapter.
   Finally, it is important to mention a few works that focus on the role of
conventional disciplines within the development discourse. Irene Gendzier
(1985) examines the role political science played in the conformation of the-
ories of modernization, particularly in the 1950s, and its relation to issues of
the moment such as national security and economic imperatives. Also within
political science, Kathryn Sikkink (1991) has more recently taken on the
emergence of developmentalism in Brazil and Argentina in the 1950s and
14                                CHAPTER 1

1960s. Her chief interest is the role of ideas in the adoption, implementa-
tion, and consolidation of developmentalism as an economic development
model.11 The Chilean Pedro Morandé (1984) analyzes how the adoption and
dominance of North American sociology in the 1950s and 1960s in Latin
America set the stage for a purely functional conception of development,
conceived of as the transformation of “traditional” into a “modern” society
and devoid of any cultural considerations. Kate Manzo (1991) makes a some-
what similar case in her analysis of the shortcomings of modernist ap-
proaches to development, such as dependency theory, and in her call for
paying attention to “countermodernist” alternatives that are grounded in the
practices of Third World grassroots actors. The call for a return of culture in
the critical analysis of development, particularly local cultures, is also cen-
tral to this book.
   As this short review shows, there are already a small but relatively coher-
ent number of works that contribute to articulating a discursive critique of
development. The present work makes the most general case in this regard;
it seeks to provide a general view of the historical construction of develop-
ment and the Third World as a whole and exemplifies the way the discourse
functions in one particular case. The goal of the analysis is to contribute to
the liberation of the discursive field so that the task of imagining alternatives
can be commenced (or perceived by researchers in a new light) in those
spaces where the production of scholarly and expert knowledge for develop-
ment purposes continues to take place. The local-level ethnographies of de-
velopment mentioned earlier provide useful elements toward this end. In
the conclusion, I extend the insights these works afford and attempt to elab-
orate a view of “the alternative” as a research question and a social practice.


            ANTHROPOLOGY AND THE DEVELOPMENT ENCOUNTER
In the introduction to his well-known collection on anthropology’s relation
to colonialism, Anthropology and the Colonial Encounter (1973), Talal Asad
raised the question of whether there was not still “a strange reluctance on
the part of most professional anthropologists to consider seriously the power
structure within which their discipline has taken shape” (5), namely, the
whole problematic of colonialism and neocolonialism, their political econ-
omy and institutions. Does not development today, as colonialism did in a
former epoch, make possible “the kind of human intimacy on which anthro-
pological fieldwork is based, but insure[s] that intimacy should be one-sided
and provisional” (17), even if the contemporary subjects move and talk back?
In addition, if during the colonial period “the general drift of anthropological
understanding did not constitute a basic challenge to the unequal world
represented by the colonial system” (18), is this not also the case with the
                               INTRODUCTION                                  15
development system? In sum, can we not speak with equal pertinence of
“anthropology and the development encounter”?
   It is generally true that anthropology as a whole has not dealt explicitly
with the fact that it takes place within the post–World War II encounter
between rich and poor nations established by the development discourse.
Although a number of anthropologists have opposed development interven-
tions, particularly on behalf of indigenous people,12 large numbers of anthro-
pologists have been involved with development organizations such as the
World Bank and the United States Agency for International Development
(U.S. AID). This problematic involvement was particularly noticeable in the
decade 1975–1985 and has been analyzed elsewhere (Escobar 1991). As
Stacy Leigh Pigg (1992) rightly points out, anthropologists have been for the
most part either inside development, as applied anthropologists, or outside
development, as the champions of the authentically indigenous and “the
native’s point of view.” Thus they overlook the ways in which development
operates as an arena of cultural contestation and identity construction. A
small number of anthropologists, however, have studied forms and pro-
cesses of resistance to development interventions (Taussig 1980; Fals Borda
1984; Scott 1985; Ong 1987; see also Comaroff 1985 and Comaroff and Co-
maroff 1991 for resistance in the colonial context).
   The absence of anthropologists from discussions of development as a re-
gime of representation is regrettable because, if it is true that many aspects
of colonialism have been superseded, representations of the Third World
through development are no less pervasive and effective than their colonial
counterparts. Perhaps even more so. It is also disturbing, as Said has pointed
out, that in recent anthropological literature “there is an almost total absence
of any reference to American imperial intervention as a factor affecting the
theoretical discussion” (1989, 214; see also Friedman 1987; Ulin 1991). This
imperial intervention takes place at many levels—economic, military, politi-
cal, and cultural—which are woven together by development representa-
tions. Also disturbing, as Said proceeds to argue, is the lack of attention on
the part of Western scholars to the sizable and impassioned critical literature
by Third World intellectuals on colonialism, history, tradition, and domi-
nation—and, one might add, development. The number of Third World
voices calling for a dismantling of the entire discourse of development is fast
increasing.
   The deep changes experienced in anthropology during the 1980s opened
the way for examining how anthropology is bound up with “Western ways of
creating the world,” as Strathern (1988, 4) advises, and potentially with
other possible ways of representing the interests of Third World peoples.
This critical examination of anthropology’s practices led to the realization
that “no one can write about others any longer as if they were discrete ob-
16                                CHAPTER 1

jects or texts.” A new task thus insinuated itself: that of coming up with
“more subtle, concrete ways of writing and reading . . . new conceptions of
culture as interactive and historical” (Clifford 1986, 25). Innovation in an-
thropological writing within this context was seen as “moving [ethnography]
toward an unprecedentedly acute political and historical sensibility that is
transforming the way cultural diversity is portrayed” (Marcus and Fischer
1986, 16).
   This reimagining of anthropology, launched in the mid-1980s, has be-
come the object of various critiques, qualifications, and extensions from
within its own ranks and by feminists, political economists, Third World
scholars, Third World feminists, and anti-postmodernists. Some of these cri-
tiques are more or less pointed and constructive than others, and it is not
necessary to analyze them in this introduction.13 To this extent, “the experi-
mental moment” of the 1980s has been very fruitful and relatively rich in
applications. The process of reimagining anthropology, however, is clearly
still under way and will have to be deepened, perhaps by taking the debates
to other arenas and in other directions. Anthropology, it is now argued, has
to “reenter” the real world, after the moment of textualist critique. To do
this, it has to rehistoricize its own practice and acknowledge that this prac-
tice is shaped by many forces that are well beyond the control of the eth-
nographer. Moreover, it must be willing to subject its most cherished no-
tions, such as ethnography, culture, and science, to a more radical scrutiny
(Fox 1991).
   Strathern’s call that this questioning be advanced in the context of West-
ern social science practices and their “endorsement of certain interests in
the description of social life” is of fundamental importance. At the core of
this recentering of the debates within the disciplines are the limits that exist
to the Western project of deconstruction and self-critique. It is becoming
increasingly evident, at least for those who are struggling for different ways
of having a voice, that the process of deconstructing and dismantling has to
be accompanied by that of constructing new ways of seeing and acting.
Needless to say, this aspect is crucial in discussions about development,
because people’s survival is at stake. As Mohanty (1991a) insists, both proj-
ects—deconstruction and reconstruction—have to be carried out simulta-
neously. As I discuss in the final chapter, this simultaneous project could
focus strategically on the collective action of social movements: they struggle
not only for goods and services but also for the very definition of life, econ-
omy, nature, and society. They are, in short, cultural struggles.
   As Bhabha wants us to acknowledge, deconstruction and other types of
critiques do not lead automatically to “an unproblematic reading of other
cultural and discursive systems.” They might be necessary to combat ethno-
centrism, “but they cannot, of themselves, unreconstructed, represent that
                               INTRODUCTION                                  17
otherness” (Bhabha 1990, 75). Moreover, there is the tendency in these cri-
tiques to discuss otherness principally in terms of the limits of Western
logocentricity, thus denying that cultural otherness is “implicated in specific
historical and discursive conditions, requiring constructions in different
practices of reading” (Bhabha 1990, 73). There is a similar insistence in Latin
America that the proposals of postmodernism, to be fruitful there, have to
make clear their commitment to justice and to the construction of alterna-
tive social orders.14 These Third World correctives indicate the need for
alternative questions and strategies for the construction of anticolonialist
discourses (and the reconstruction of Third World societies in/through rep-
resentations that can develop into alternative practices). Calling into ques-
tion the limitations of the West’s self-critique, as currently practiced in
much of contemporary theory, they make it possible to visualize the “discur-
sive insurrection” by Third World people proposed by Mudimbe in relation
to the “sovereignty of the very European thought from which we wish to
disentangle ourselves” (quoted in Diawara 1990, 79).
    The needed liberation of anthropology from the space mapped by the
development encounter (and, more generally, modernity), to be achieved
through a close examination of the ways in which it has been implicated in
it, is an important step in the direction of more autonomous regimes of rep-
resentation; this is so to the extent that it might motivate anthropologists and
others to delve into the strategies people in the Third World pursue to resig-
nify and transform their reality through their collective political practice.
This challenge may provide paths toward the radicalization of the disci-
pline’s reimagining started with enthusiasm during the 1980s.


                           OVERVIEW OF THE BOOK
The following chapter studies the emergence and consolidation of the dis-
course and strategy of development in the early post–World War II period,
as a result of the problematization of poverty that took place during those
years. It presents the major historical conditions that made such a process
possible and identifies the principal mechanisms through which develop-
ment has been deployed, namely, the professionalization of development
knowledge and the institutionalization of development practices. An impor-
tant aspect of this chapter is to illustrate the nature and dynamics of the
discourse, its archaeology, and its modes of operation. Central to this aspect
is the identification of the basic set of elements and relations that hold to-
gether the discourse. To speak development, one must adhere to certain
rules of statement that go back to the basic system of categories and rela-
tions. This system defines the hegemonic worldview of development, a
worldview that increasingly permeates and transforms the economic, social,
18                                CHAPTER 1

and cultural fabric of Third World cities and villages, even if the languages
of development are always adapted and reworked significantly at the local
level.
   Chapter 3 is intended to articulate a cultural critique of economics by
taking on the single most influential force shaping the development field:
the discourse of development economics. To understand this discourse, one
has to analyze the conditions of its coming into being: how it emerged, build-
ing upon the already existing Western economy and the economic doctrine
generated by it (classical, neoclassical, Keynesian, and growth economic the-
ories); how development economists constructed “the underdeveloped
economy,” embodying in their theories features of the advanced capitalist
societies and culture; the political economy of the capitalist world economy
linked to this construction; and finally, the planning practices that inevitably
came with development economics and that became a powerful force in the
production and management of development. From this privileged space,
economics pervaded the entire practice of development. As the last part of
the chapter shows, there is no indication that economists might consider a
redefinition of their tenets and forms of analysis, although some hopeful
insights for this redefinition can be found in recent works in economic an-
thropology. The notion of “communities of modellers” (Gudeman and Ri-
vera 1990) is examined as a possible method to construct a cultural politics
for engaging critically, and I hope neutralizing partly, the dominant eco-
nomic discourse.
   Chapters 4 and 5 are intended to show in detail how development works.
The goal of chapter 4 is to show how a corpus of rational techniques—plan-
ning, methods of measurement and assessment, professional knowledges,
institutional practices, and the like—organizes both forms of knowledge and
types of power, relating one to the other, in the construction and treatment
of one specific problem: malnutrition and hunger. The chapter examines the
birth, rise, and decline of a set of disciplines (forms of knowledge) and strat-
egies in nutrition, health, and rural development. Outlined initially in the
early 1970s by a handful of experts in North American and British universi-
ties, the World Bank, and the United Nations, the strategy of national plan-
ning for nutrition and rural development resulted in the implementation of
massive programs in Third World countries throughout the 1970s and
1980s, funded primarily by the World Bank and Third World governments.
A case study of these plans in Colombia, based on my fieldwork with a group
of government planners in charge of their design and implementation, is
presented as an illustration of the functioning of the development apparatus.
By paying close attention to the political economy of food and hunger and
the discursive constructions linked to it, this chapter and the next contribute
to the development of a poststructuralist-oriented political economy.
                                INTRODUCTION                                  19
   Chapter 5 extends the analysis of chapter 4 by focusing on the regimes of
representation that underlie constructions of peasants, women, and the en-
vironment. In particular, the chapter exposes the links between representa-
tion and power at work in the practices of the World Bank. This institution
is presented as an exemplar of development discourse, a blueprint of devel-
opment. Particular attention is paid to representations of peasants, women,
and the environment in recent development literature, and the contradic-
tions and possibilities inherent in the tasks of integrated rural development,
incorporating women into development, and sustainable development. The
mapping of visibilities by development through the representations plan-
ners and experts utilize as they design and carry out their programs is ana-
lyzed in detail in order to show the connection between the creation of
visibility in discourse, particularly through modern techniques of visuality,
and the exercise of power. This chapter also contributes to theorizing the
question of discursive change and transformation by explaining how dis-
courses on peasants, women, and the environment emerge and function in
similar ways within the overall space of development.
   The concluding chapter tackles the question of the transformation of the
development regime of representation and the articulation of alternatives.
The call by a growing number of Third and First World voices to signal the
end of development is reviewed and assessed. Similarly, recent work in
Latin American social science, on “hybrid cultures” as a mode of cultural
affirmation in the face of modernity’s crisis, is used as a basis for theorizing
the formulation of alternatives as a research question and a social practice.
I argue that instead of searching for grand alternative models or strategies,
what is needed is the investigation of alternative representations and prac-
tices in concrete local settings, particularly as they exist in contexts of hy-
bridization, collective action, and political mobilization. This proposal is de-
veloped in the context of the ecological phase of capital and the struggles
over the world’s biological diversity. These struggles—between global capi-
tal and biotechnology interests, on the one hand, and local communities and
organizations, on the other—constitute the most advanced stage in which
the meanings of development and postdevelopment are being fought over.
The fact that the struggles usually involve minority cultures in the tropical
regions of the world raises unprecedented questions concerning the cultural
politics around the design of social orders, technology, nature, and life itself.
   The fact that the analysis, finally, is conducted in terms of tales is not
meant to indicate that the said tales are mere fictions. As Donna Haraway
says in her analysis of the narratives of biology (1989a, 1991), narratives are
neither fictions nor opposed to “facts.” Narratives are, indeed, historical tex-
tures woven of fact and fiction. Even the most neutral scientific domains are
narratives in this sense. To treat science as narrative, Haraway insists, is not
20                               CHAPTER 1

to be dismissive. On the contrary, it is to treat it in the most serious way,
without succumbing to its mystification as “the truth” or to the ironic skepti-
cism common to many critiques. Science and expert discourses such as de-
velopment produce powerful truths, ways of creating and intervening in the
world, including ourselves; they are instances “where possible worlds are
constantly reinvented in the contest for very real, present worlds” (Haraway
1989a, 5). Narratives, such as the tales in this book, are always inmmersed in
history and never innocent. Whether we can unmake development and per-
haps even bid farewell to the Third World will equally depend on the social
invention of new narratives, new ways of thinking and doing.15
