                                   Chapter 5

                    POWER AND VISIBILITY:
                 TALES OF PEASANTS, WOMEN,
                   AND THE ENVIRONMENT

              We can only deplore the mechanism which favors the
            transfer to Africa of problems and their solutions, of certain
            institutions which result from a purely Western historical
               process. Organizations for the promotion of women’s
              rights tend naturally to extend identical activities into
               Africa, and, in so doing, to assimilate us into a strictly
              European mentality and historical experience. Hardly
             anything has been written about African women that has
                       not presented them as minor elements.
              —Proceedings from the meeting the Civilization of the
                Woman in African Tradition, Abidjan, Ivory Coast,
                        quoted in Trinh T. Minh-ha, Woman,
                                 Native, Other, 1989




                           DISCOURSE AND VISUALITY
THE HISTORY of development is seen in conventional analyses in terms of the
evolution of theories and ideas, or as the succession of more or less effective
interventions. For political economists, the same history reflects different
ideological responses to allegedly deeper contradictions, dictated by capital
accumulation and circulation. This history, however, can also be seen from
the perspective of the changes and transformations in the discursive regime,
even if these changes, as should be clear by now, are circumscribed by dis-
cursive practices tied to political economies, knowledge traditions, and insti-
tutions of ruling.
   In chapter 2, I argued that the development discourse is a rule-governed
system held together by a set of statements that the discursive practice con-
tinues to reproduce—whether such practice refers to industrialization, agri-
culture, peasants, or women and the environment, as we will see shortly.
Although it is true that the discursive practice has remained largely un-
changed, significant changes have occurred within the discursive formation
of development. What is the meaning of these changes, particularly in terms
of creating conditions for types of transformation that might take us into
                           POWER AND VISIBILITY                           155
other discursive orders? Should the proliferation of new areas of inquiry and
intervention be understood merely as the discourse’s conquest of new do-
mains? Even if this is the case, does this process not inevitably create new
possibilities for struggle and resistance, for advancing alternative cultural
possibilities?
   For example, intergrated rural development was conceived by experts as
a strategy to correct the biases of the green gevolution. Did the inclusion of
a new client category, small farmers, modify in any significant way the de-
velopment discourse? How were peasants represented? What were the con-
sequences for them? It is worth examining in detail the specific represen-
tations that “packaged” the peasantry for the development apparatus. The
inclusion of the peasantry was the first instance in which a new client group
was created en masse for the apparatus, in which the economizing and tech-
nologizing gaze of the apparatus was turned on a new subject. From the late
1970s until today, another client group of even larger proportions has been
brought into the space of visibility of development: women. It was thus that
the women in development (WID) discourse achieved a certain preemi-
nence. Finally, in the 1980s, the objectifying gaze was turned not to peo-
ple but to nature—or, rather, the environment—resulting in the by now
in/famous discourse of sustainable development.
   This chapter follows the displacement of the development gaze across the
terrains in which these three social actors move. The gaze turned peasants,
women, and the environment into spectacles. Let us remember that the
apparatus (the dispositif) is an abstract machine that links statements and
visibilities, the visible and the expressible (Deleuze 1988). Modernity intro-
duced an objectifying regime of visuality—a scopic regime, as it has been
called (Jay 1988)—that, as we will see, dictated the manner in which peas-
ants, women, and the environment were apprehended. New client catego-
ries were brought into the field of vision though a process of enframing that
turned them into spectacles. The “developmentalization” of peasants,
women, and the environment took place in similar ways in the three do-
mains, a reflection of the existence of discursive regularities at work. The
production of new discourses, however, is not a one-sided process; it might
create conditions for resistance. This can be gleaned in the discourse of
some peasants, feminists, and environmentalists; it is reflected in new prac-
tices of vision and knowledge, even if these resistances take place within the
modes of the development discourse.
   Why emphasize vision? The phrase panoptic gaze—the gaze of the guard
who, in his tower, can watch over all the prisoners in the building without
being seen—has become synonymous with apparatuses of social control.
But the role of vision extends far beyond technologies of control to encom-
pass many modern means for the production of the social. The birth of sci-
ence itself was marked by an alliance that almost two centuries ago “was
156                                 CHAPTER 5

forged between words and things, enabling one to see and to say” (Foucault
1975, xii). This alliance was enacted by the empirical clinician upon opening
the corpse for the first time “to really see” what was inside. The spatializa-
tion and verbalization of the pathological inaugurated regimes of visuality
that are still with us. From the analysis of tissues in nineteenth-century
medicine through the microscope and the camera to satellite surveillance,
sonography, and space photography the importance of vision has only
grown:
  The eyes have been used to signify a perverse capacity—honed to perfection in
  the history of science tied to militarism, capitalism, colonialism, and male su-
  premacy—to distance the knowing subject from everybody and everything in
  the interest of unfettered power. . . . The visualization technologies are without
  apparent limit. . . . Vision in this technological feast becomes unregulated glut-
  tony; all seems not just mythically about the god trick of seeing everything from
  nowhere, but to have put the myth into ordinary practice. (Haraway 1988, 581)

   This affirmation about visualization technologies applies to the politics of
discourse in more than metaphorical ways. To bring people into discourse—
as in the case of development—is similarly to consign them to fields of vi-
sion. It is also about exercising “the god trick of seeing everything from
nowhere.” As we will see, this assertion describes well the work style of the
World Bank. The development discourse maps people into certain coordi-
nates of control. The aim is not simply to discipline individuals but to trans-
form the conditions under which they live into a productive, normalized
social environment: in short, to create modernity. Let us see in detail what
this means, how it is achieved, and what it entails in terms of the possibility
of shifting visibilities.


            THE DISCOVERY OF “SMALL FARMERS”: FROM
   GREEN REVOLUTION IMPERIALISM TO RURAL DEVELOPMENT POPULISM
                           The Mapping of Visibilities
In one of the most celebrated technical papers prepared by DRI in its initial
years on the traditional or small production subsector, one finds the follow-
ing statement on the potential effects of the program on various types of
peasant farmers:
  The articulation of small production units to the market, be it through the mar-
  ket for products, inputs, labor or capital (especially credit), fosters continuous
  transformation of the sub-sector’s internal organization and its position within
  the national economy. . . . Two situations may happen: a) the small producer
  may be able to technify his productive process, which entails his becoming an
                             POWER AND VISIBILITY                              157
  agrarian entrepreneur; and b) the small producer is not prepared to assume
  such level of competitiveness, in which case he will be displaced from the
  market and perhaps even from production in that area altogether. (DNP/DRI
  1979, 47)

In other words, produce or perish. Only those farmers who accomplished
successfully their “graduation into small entrepreneurs,” as the transforma-
tion was commonly referred to at DRI, would survive. This statement was in
accordance with DRI’s overall objective—to increase production and in-
come in the traditional subsector by rationalizing its insertion into the mar-
ket economy—also explicit, as we will see in the next section, in the World
Bank’s rural development theory.
   In those cases in which the program’s performance did not fulfill these
objectives, it was, as an influential DRI evaluation study put it on the eve of
phase two, “due to structural factors such as the precarious availability of
land, deficient soil quality and the strong resistance of rural communities to
produce for the market. As it was already pointed out,” the document con-
tinued, “DRI does not intend to provide solutions for this type of problems.”
In conlusion, “DRI’s effectiveness as a rural development strategy is dem-
onstrated only when it has to deal with the following factors: lack of capital
for production, unskilled labor and backward production practices, lack of
community organization, and insufficient physical infrastructure, especially
roads” (DNP/UEA 1982a, 10).
   At stake was a redistribution of the economy of visibilities articulated
around the dualism of tradition and modernity. This dualism was already
present in the original development map; but the positions then occupied by
the main actors were quite different: before the productive potential of the
small farmer was discovered, peasants figured in development discourse
only as a somewhat bothersome and undifferentiated mass with an invisible
face; they were part of the amorphous “surplus population,” which sooner or
latter would be absorbed by a blooming urban economy. As their face be-
came more present and unpleasant, and as their muted voice became more
audible, a tactical reshuffling of forces began to occur. Another aspect of the
rural face started to engulf the city: thousands of migrants putting new de-
mands on the city, coupled with a countryside that could no longer produce
enough food. The dynamics of the discourse (its “machinic” processes) dic-
tated a reorganization of visibilities, linking state support, international insti-
tutions, class conflict, existing food politics, and the like into a new strategy:
integrated rural development (IRD).
   Not surprisingly, the representation of peasants deployed in this strategy
was—and continues to be—essentially economistic. Since the mid-1960s,
economists studying small farmers had not ceased to emphasize that the
same backward peasants they had discounted in previous decades would
158                                 CHAPTER 5

behave like good and decent capitalist farmers if they were provided with
the necessary conditions for doing so. Economists discovered, to their pleas-
ant surprise and with the help of economic anthropologists, that peasants
behaved rationally; given their constraints, they optimized their options,
minimized risks, and utilized resources efficiently. This called for “investing
in human resources” (Schultz 1964). These conceptions went into the mak-
ing of rural development strategies; predictably, the failure of farmers to
behave as theory predicted was construed as the peasants’ inability to re-
spond adequately to the programs’ inputs. Occasionally one finds in DRI
evaluation documents mention of peasant “resistance to produce for the
market,” but without any further explanation.
   This understanding of peasants is intimately linked to certain views of
food, agriculture, the land, development, and nature. Although it would be
impossible to trace these connections here, it is worth mentioning those
which came to shape the core of the IRD discourse. Integrated rural devel-
opment was conceived as a way of bringing the green revolution to small
farmers, and it was in this latter strategy that many of the constructs of the
former originated. Let us listen attentively to how green revolution experts
built their arguments, how they carried themselves in the realm of state-
ments. For Norman Borlaug, the father of the green revolution, in “provok-
ing rapid economic and social changes . . . [the green revolution] was gener-
ating enthusiasm and new hope for a better life . . . displacing an attitude of
despair and apathy that permeated the entire social fabric of these countries
only a few years ago.” Moreover,
  In the awakening there is a growing demand for more and better schools, better
  housing, more warehouses, improved rural roads and transportation, more elec-
  tricity to drive the motors and wells and to light the houses. . . . As the entire
  activity of the country [continues] to increase in tempo . . . many millions of
  rural people, who formerly lived outside the general economy of the country—
  at a subsistence level—are becoming active participants in the economy. Mil-
  lions of others desire to enter. If they are denied this opportunity, then the new
  upsurge will lead to increasing political unrest and political upheaval. (Quoted
  in Bird 1984, 5)

   We already encountered the trope of economic darkness in Lewis’s de-
scription of the dual economy. Borlaug adds a realm of social darkness, apa-
thy, and despair so pervasive that it will recede only before the avalanche of
progress. But people have first to be awakened to the new possibilities; they
have to be taken by the hand into the new, exciting road. Millions desire to
enter. It would be the task of the white fathers to introduce the good but
backward Third World people into the temple of progress. Otherwise, a
violent future might be in store, and they might revert to their marginal past
with its tendency toward apathy and despair—not discounting savagery.
                             POWER AND VISIBILITY                                159
This representation speaks “of fathers and sons and younger brothers with
the vague feminized threats of engulfment and return to irrationality.”1 It is
also about disallowing anything that is outside the market economy, espe-
cially the activities of subsistence and local reciprocity and exchange, so
many times crucial to peasants, women, and indigenous people; it is, finally,
about a definition of progress that is taken as universally valid, not as marked
by culture and history.
   Let us listen to the defense of the the so-called green revolution offered
by another of its leading advocates, Lester Brown (now master of ceremonies
at the World Watch Institute, where the “facts” about the state of the world
are produced annually):
  The “Green Revolution” has . . . already made major contributions to the well-
  being of millions of people in many countries and thus bears witness to the fact
  that careful evaluation, sound scientific and economic planning, and sustained
  effort can overcome the pathology of chronic under-production and gradually
  bring about rapidly increasing economic advance. A formula for success can be
  designed for any area that has available the new adapted plant varieties and the
  other inputs and accelerators that must be applied in logical fashion. (Quoted in
  Bird 1984, 7)

   In other words, the change that must happen requires unprecedented
action carefully guided by the experts of the West. Because the Third
Worlders do not have this knowledge—but instead are caught in a chronic
pathological condition—the scientist, like a good doctor, has the moral obli-
gation to intervene in order to cure the diseased (social) body. Moreover, the
formula for success is available to anybody, meaning any country that is
willing to accept the call of the new savior and be led into the salvation that
only modern science and technology can offer. In short, as Elizabeth Bird
succinctly put it,
  The messages [in the green revolution literature] are, first, that these develop-
  ment planners know what “the people” in the “developing countries” want; that
  what they want is what “we” have; third, that “they” are not yet advanced
  enough to be able to fully indulge themselves without repercussions; and
  fourth, that discipline, prudence and forebearance are some of the qualities
  necessary to success. (1984, 23)

   The green revolution literature is full of cultural asumptions regarding
science, progress, and the economy, in which one can discern the authorial
stances of a father/savior talking with selfless condescension to the child/
native. It is also full of statements about the dangers of many “monsters,”
particularly the “population monster,” the “spectre of hunger,” and “political
upheaval.” Did the new preoccupation with the small farmer temper the
dreams of massive solutions that would work once and for all? Did it in any
160                                CHAPTER 5

way shake the universals embodied in the discourse of the green revolution?
To answer these questions, we may start with another founder of discourse,
the father of IRD and the basic human needs (BHN) approach, the president
of the World Bank at the time, Robert McNamara.
   McNamara presented the basis of the IRD strategy in his famous Nairobi
speech of September 1973, delivered at the annual meeting of the board of
governors of the World Bank Group. The problem, he stated, is a serious
one: more than 100 million families with holdings of land too small and
conditions of cultivation too unproductive to contribute significantly to agri-
cultural production. “The question,” he remarked after having introduced
“the problem” without spelling out whose problem or by whose standard, “is
what can the developing countries do to increase the productivity of the
small farmer. How can they duplicate the conditions which have led to very
rapid agricultural growth in a few experimental areas and in a few countries
so as to stimulate agricultural growth and combat rural poverty on a broad
scale?” The few experimental areas were the pilot IRD projects in Mexico,
Colombia, and other places; the “few countries” were Japan and, to some
extent, China. What, then, would be the goal?
  I suggest that the goal be to increase production on small farms so that by 1985
  their output will be growing at the rate of 5% per year. If the goal is met, and
  small holders maintain that momentum, they can double their annual output
  between 1985 and the end of the century. Clearly, this is an ambitious objective
  . . . But if Japan in 1970 could produce 6,720 kilograms of rice per hectare on
  very small farms, then Africa with its 1,270 kilograms per hectare, Asia with
  1,750 and Latin America with 2,060 have an enormous potential for expanding
  productivity. Thus I believe the goal is feasible. (McNamara 1975, 90, 91)

   We begin to recognize here many of the traits already analyzed; for in-
stance, the use of physicalist and probabilistic discourse, based on a purely
instrumental conception of nature and work; the setting of goals according
to statistical calculations that bear no relation to actual social conditions; and
the reliance on a model (Japan), without recognizing any historical specific-
ity. The principle of authority is clear: “I believe the goal to be feasible,”
when the “I” is uttered as representative of all bankers investing in develop-
ment. Qualifying this principle of authority only makes authority stronger:
“Neither we at the Bank, nor anyone else, have very clear answers on how
to bring the improved technology and other inputs to other 100 million small
farmers. . . . But we do understand enough to get started. Admittedly, we
will have to take some risks. We will have to improvise and experiment. And
if some of the experiments fail, we will have to learn from them and start
anew (McNamara 1975, 91).
   If “the Bank” does not have clear answers, nobody else does. Being “the
Bank,” however, it can take some risks, and if “some of the experiments fail,”
                             POWER AND VISIBILITY                                 161
they will bow to the difficulties of life (in the Third World) and humbly start
all over again. Quite a comfortable position, especially if we consider that it
is not they who have to suffer the consequences of failure, because the loans
are paid back by Third World people. This position allows the World Bank
to maintain all options open; it certainly will not be driven out of business by
repeated failure. But McNamara’s address was only the announcement of a
strategy to be spelled out in a series of ensuing “sector policy papers.” The
first discursive operation was to explain the rationale for the new strategy;
this was done in one of the most celebrated sector policy papers:
  Past strategies in most developing countries have tended to emphasize eco-
  nomic growth without specifically considering the manner in which the bene-
  fits of growth are to be redistributed. . . . Although, in the long run, economic
  development for the growing rural population will depend on expansion of the
  modern sector and on nonagricultural pursuits, too strong an emphasis on the
  modern sector is apt to neglect the growth potential of the rural areas. Failure
  to recognize this has been a major reason why rural growth has been slow and
  rural poverty has been increasing. (World Bank 1975, 16)

   In this type of statement—invariably without subject—the World Bank
did not see itself as part of those somewhat misguided past strategies. Its
response was unmistakable: growth was the right answer, yet there was
growth potential in the rural areas as well. Moreover, with this move the
World Bank appeared as the champion of justice, because the new strategy
spoke of redistribution. This begged the question on two counts: not only
did it assume that the Bank’s proposal for redistribution would actually re-
distribute in the right direction, that is, toward greater income equality
(which was and is almost never the case); it intelligently hid the role of the
Bank and growth strategies in creating inequality in the first place.
   Given this rationale, let us now see how the new approach was formu-
lated:
  Rural development is a strategy designed to improve the economic and social
  life of a specific group of people—the rural poor. It involves extending the
  benefits of development to the poorest among those who seek a livelihood in
  rural areas. The group involves small-scale farmers, tenants and the landless. A
  strategy for rural development must recognize three points. Firstly, the rate of
  transfer of people out of low productivity agriculture and related activities into
  more rewarding pursuits has been slow. . . . Secondly, the mass of people in the
  rural areas of developing countries face varying degrees of poverty; their posi-
  tion is likely to get worse if population expands at unprecedented rates while
  limitations continue to be imposed by available resources, technology, and in-
  stitutions and organizations. Thirdly, rural areas have labor, land and at least
  some capital which, if mobilized, could reduce poverty and improve the quality
  of life. (World Bank 1975, 3)
162                               CHAPTER 5

   “Extending the benefits of development” to rural areas overlooked the
fact that a majority of the people in the modern sector—the poor urban
classes—did not enjoy the fruits of development. Peasants were seen in
purely economic terms, as “seeking a livelihood in the rural areas,” not as
trying to make viable a whole way of life. They were talked about as a group
whose “rate of transfer” into “more rewarding activities” had to be acceler-
ated, pretty much in the same way as cows are moved from low-productivity
ranches to tightly packed commercial livestock farms where they are fed
concentrates. Their “labor” had to be “mobilized” if they were to be taken
out of the pit of their poverty—as if subsistence, “low-productivity” farming
did not involve labor. Having too many babies naturally was a curse they
imposed upon themselves.
   Imbued with the major tenets of economistic, reductionistic, and Malthu-
sian thinking, it is not surprising that the World Bank defined rural develop-
ment as a strategy “concerned with the modernization and monetization of
rural society, and with its transition from traditional isolation to integration
with the national economy . . . [it] implies greater interaction between the
modern and traditional sectors” (1975, 3). These experts would not entertain
the idea that too much interaction with the modern sector was the source of
peasants’ problems. Nor would they give up the belief that modern-sector
and macroeconomic policies continued to be the most important for devel-
opment theory (16), even if a few sentences earlier too much concern with
growth had been blamed for rural poverty!
   This imperialism in representation reflects structural and institutionalized
power relations; it is a mechanism of truth production more than of repres-
sion. The rural development discourse repeats the same relations that has
defined development discourse since its emergence: the fact that develop-
ment is about growth, about capital, about technology, about becoming mod-
ern. Nothing else. “Traditional peasants need to be modernized; they need
to be given access to capital, technology, and adequate assistance. Only in
this way can production and productivity be increased.” These statements
were uttered pretty much in the same way in 1949 (World Bank mission to
Colombia) as in 1960 (the Alliance for Progress) and in 1973 (McNamara’s
speech), and today they are still repeated ad nauseam in many quarters.
Such a poverty of the imagination, one may think. The persistence of such
a monotonous discourse is precisely what is most puzzling.
   This persistence, especially in light of the unassuaged intensity of the
problems these programs are supposed to solve, cannot be explained in any
way but by acknowledging a remarkable productivity in terms of power rela-
tions. What the IRD discourse achieves is the integration of those state-
ments which reproduce, as it were, the world we know: a world of produc-
tion and markets, of good and bad, of developed and underdeveloped, of aid,
of investment by multinational corporations, of science and technology, of
                            POWER AND VISIBILITY                             163
progress and happiness, of individuality and economics. This curve of inte-
gration of statements influences our perceptions greatly; the orderings, pri-
oritizations, and serializations in which it relies circumbscribe the Third
World, fragment and recompose the countryside and its people, manipulate
visibilities, act on imperfections or deficiencies (of capital, of technology, of
knowledge, perhaps even of the right skin color), make projects happen; in
short, they ensure a certain functioning of power.
   Integrated rural development differentiates tradition and modernity,
making them distinct by creating strata that encompass both. As a regime of
statements and a field of visibilities, in short, as a discourse, IRD is sum-
moned by and at the same time constitutes and reproduces the apparatus of
development. And it does so even if between the statements that it produces
and the visibilities it organizes there exists a noticeable gap; for, are not the
statements about the improvement of people’s conditions? And are not visi-
bilities about practices of discipline and control, about managing social rela-
tions? This disjunction between statements and visibilities is a characteristic
feature of discourse (Deleuze 1988). At this level, the green revolution and
IRD are the same thing, even if they define different fields of statements and
visibilities.
   It is important to keep in mind that the entire debate is primarily about
food production. What is involved in agricultural strategies such as IRD is
the further expansion of the type of agriculture responsible for the emer-
gence of modern food (fully commodified and industrially produced food
products of remarkable uniformity, perhaps best exemplified in sliced white
bread as a standard of modern life), with the concomitant effect of generaliz-
ing the culturally accepted transformation of natural products, which in our
days accounts for genetically improved corn, tomatoes, or milk—instances of
nature “improved upon” by culture (Goodman, Sorj, and Wilkinson 1987).
The process, however, has not been successful; food production has not in-
creased sufficiently, and where it has food has not reached those who need
it; consequently, the levels of poverty and malnutrition have become stag-
gering. This is the political economy that goes with the economy of state-
ments and visibilities organized by the development discourse. The World
Bank, master strategist in the game of linking the economies of discourse
and production, has been the chief champion and agent of this process. It is
worth taking a brief look at the practices of this institution.


               The World Bank: An Exemplar of Development
The World Bank is by far the largest international development agency.
What this institution stands for and its style of development are well ex-
pressed by an anthropologist doing research on local languages of develop-
ment in Nepal. Her observation concerns an encounter with World Bank
164                                 CHAPTER 5

staff in a family planning program, who tried to get her to contribute data on
local life in the countryside:
  Naively, I hadn’t realized that health in Nepal’s development mostly means
  family planning. I was rather shocked, in fact, to see how much money goes into
  trying to get these folks not to reproduce. And all this seems so incongruous in
  relation to the joy and delight Nepalis find in children. I went back for a week
  to visit the people I’d lived with, and their pleasure in children was the thing I
  most noticed. . . . Which goes only to show how pathetically narrow the World
  Bank’s vision is, if it can be a radically new idea to understand what happens at
  the local level. . . . Thus I learned something very important about the World
  Bank in Nepal. To work there you cannot set foot in the real Nepal. Literally.
  Being in the World Bank office assumes you live in a house with running water
  and that you have a driver to take you from door to door.2

   This is the tip of the iceberg of what Ernest Feder (1983) has called per-
verse development. The World Bank, however, continues to be the official
policy guide in the development world. In Africa, the World Bank has been
the major foreign donor and the most powerful external force in economic
policy-making; these policies, some argue (Rau 1991; Gran 1986), are largely
responsible for the Sahelian famines of the last three decades. “That most
policy makers in North and South continue to sanction the same institutions,
values, analytic approaches and programs, thus insuring continued starva-
tion, merits comment,” writes Guy Gran in his study of the role of develop-
ment knowledge in the creation of African famines (1986, 275). The com-
ment that needs to be made is how the World Bank achieves this feat.
   The importance of the World Bank in the Third World derives in part
from the volume of lending but is greatly amplified through a series of prac-
tices, critically analyzed by Cheryl Payer (1982, 1991). Cofinancing with
other funding agencies is one such practice; it relies on the World Bank’s
persuading other funding agencies to participate in projects that have been
already appraised by the Bank. The World Bank also engages in mutual-
assistance agreements with UN agencies, particularly FAO, whose profes-
sional staff have helped the World Bank prepare agriculture and rural devel-
opment projects. The World Bank also coordinates the so-called donor
clubs, which determine external financing of a select group of Third World
countries. Colombia is one of those selected countries. Since 1963, Colom-
bia’s Consultative Group has been meeting periodically in Paris (Bogotá is
clearly not fancy enough for these international financiers, including their
Colombian counterparts), with the World Bank coordinating the donor
group, which includes private banks and official development agencies from
the United States, United Kingdom, Germany, Japan, Holland, France,
Italy, Canada, and a few other European countries. In the 1979 Paris meet-
ing, for instance, Colombian government economists negotiated loans for
                            POWER AND VISIBILITY                             165
about $1.5 billion a year for the period 1979–1983, mostly from private
banks (including $600 million from the Chemical Bank of New York). One
of those loans went to DRI (Banco de la República 1979).
   Most of the loans the World Bank disbursed correspond to projects sub-
jected to international bidding. Needless to say, most often the contracts go
to multinational companies, which reap the profits of this multibillion-dollar
market (a cumulative $80 billion at the end of 1980, of which about 80 per-
cent had been allocated through “international competitive bidding,” mostly
awarded to multinationals and experts from the First World). This is how the
World Bank maintains intellectual and financial hegemony in development:
it channels the largest amount of funds; it opens new regions to investment
through transportation, electrification, and telecommunications projects; it
contributes to the spread of MNCs through contracts; it deepens depen-
dence on international markets by insisting on production for exports; it
refuses to lend to “unfriendly governments” (such as Chile under Allende);
it opposes protectionist measures of local industries; it fosters the loss of
control of resources by local people by insisting on large projects that benefit
national elites and MNCs; it responds closely to the interests of international
capitalism in general and U.S. foreign policy in particular (the United States
controls about 21 percent of the voting power, with the top five—the United
States, United Kingdom, Germany, France, and Japan—controlling almost
45 percent); and it collaborates with and helps maintain in power corrupt
and undemocratic regimes throughout the Third World (Brazil, Mexico, In-
donesia, South Korea, Turkey, Colombia, and the Philippines had been the
major borrowers, in that order, until 1981) (Payer 1982).
   The World Bank, on the other hand, exercises a bureaucratics that en-
sures the institution against responsibility thorugh a series of practices. Its
field missions usually rely on official contacts in capital cities and are pro-
grammed according to what Robert Chambers rightly called “rural and
urban development tourism” (which refers not so much to the mission mem-
bers’ traveling first class and staying at the best hotels, which they invariably
do, but rather to their style of work); its learning about a country’s problems
is achieved through the lens of neoclassical economics, which is the only one
compatible with its predetermined model (about 70 percent of the World
Bank’s professional staff are economists; a good portion of the remaining
30 percent are engineers); and it never discusses in any significant way the
underlying causes of the problems it deals with—for instance, the lengthy
appraisal report for PAN’s loan devoted one paragraph to discussing “the
causes of malnutrition” and another to “the consequences of malnutrition,”
whereas most of the report was devoted to technical and economic discus-
sions, including cost-benefit analysis (World Bank 1977). It is then not sur-
prising that A. W. Clausen, who came to the World Bank to succeed Mc-
Namara from his post as president of Bank of America, could say that “the
166                                 CHAPTER 5

heart of Africa’s economic crisis is the low rate of return on its capital invest-
ment” (quoted in Gran 1986, 279), in spite of well-known studies that show
the African famines to be the result of complex socioeconomic and historical
processes (Watts 1983).
  Gran concludes:
  The World Bank generates knowledge and transforms it into policy and prac-
  tice by means of a remarkably closed, insular and elitist process. Neo-classical
  economists in Washington rather than African peasants define both the prob-
  lem and the solution for African rural development. . . . The current situation is
  a dialogue of elites. . . . The absence of peasant participation matters. (1986,
  277, 278)

   As a pacesetter in the development industry, the World Bank influences
decisively the fate of the nearly $60-billion-a-year offical aid to the South. As
already mentioned, up to 80 percent of that aid is spent in donor countries
on the contracts and salaries of staff and consultants, representing a not
insignificant subsidy to the domestic economies of the First World, paid for
mostly by its working people. Indeed, thousands of domestic jobs in the
First World depend on development aid. This aid also contributes to spread-
ing the commercial interests of First World corporations. Of the fifty largest
customers of U.S. commodity corporations (Cargill, Monsanto, General
Foods, and so on), thirty are developing countries, and of these thirty the
majority are or were major recipients of Food for Peace (P.L. 480) aid (Han-
cock 1989). This is not a coincidence; it makes patently clear the role of
development aid in creating business opportunities for First World elite
interests. Finally, the fact that the higher echelons of development organiza-
tions—particularly the World Bank and the IMF—earn extremely high sala-
ries even by First World standards and enjoy substantial fringe benefits does
not seem to produce moral qualms in the minds of these lords of poverty and
aristocracts of mercy, as Hancock calls international bureaucrats in his study
of development aid (1989). Hancock rightly denounces this situation as an
indecency of major proportions built on the backs of working people in the
Third and First worlds.
   Finally, the impact of World Bank financing on a single country can be
immense, even in cases where this influence does not take the form of overt
meddling in matters of internal policy and overall development approach, as
in Colombia. With the exception of one year (1957), the World Bank has
extended loans to Colombia in every year since 1949. These loans have been
negotiated for the most part at the annual Paris meeting, out of a list of
projects prepared jointly by the World Bank and the Department of Na-
tional Planning. In terms of dollars per capita, Colombia ranks first among
World Bank loan recipients. The influence of this volume of lending has
been felt primarily in areas such as the cycle of capital formation (acting as
                           POWER AND VISIBILITY                             167
a disincentive to domestic financing of public investment), sector policy de-
velopment (contributing to sectoral disarticulation, because of its concentra-
tion on industrial schemes, roads, and electricity), and institutional buildup
(strengthening the cutting-edge technocractic and modernizing institu-
tions). Although electricity generation has been given high priority, the
World Bank has been extremely reluctant to support water-supply projects
(Londoño and Perry 1985). This reveals not only the capitalist modernizing
bent of the institution but also its lack of concern for the welfare of poor
people in the Third World.
   Even if national planners admit that there are internal errors in policy
formulation, the Colombian experience unmistakably shows the influence of
international lending institutions. Between 1968 and 1985, external credit
financed between 25 percent and 38 percent of total public investment. This
financing is actually more critical, because the government gives central
importance to projects that have external funds. Indeed, as Londoño and
Perry conclude in their study of the presence of the World Bank in Colom-
bia, “There has not been any important public investment projects without
some external financing” (1985, 213). This presence became more decisive
after 1985, when the World Bank and the IMF forced a conventional stabili-
zation program on the government which contradicted the recommendation
of national planners and only worsened the balance-of-payments problem
(Londoño and Perry 1985). As Payer (1991) rightly affirms in her study of the
Latin American debt, these institutions act more like arsonists than fire
fighters, to the extent that their maneuvers contribute to creating or worsen-
ing the debt problem. After reading Payer’s elaborate argument, it is difficult
not to entertain seriously the thought that “the Fund and the Bank must be
considered among the major perpetrators of the debt crisis” (82).
   The impact of the World Bank goes well beyond the economic aspects.
This institution should be seen as an agent of economic and cultural imperi-
alism at the service of the global elite. As perhaps no other institution, the
World Bank embodies the development apparatus. It deploys development
with tremendous efficiency, establishing multiplicities in all corners of the
Third World, from which the discourse extends and renews itself.


     Decolonizing Representation: The Politics of Cultural Affirmation
Studies of peasant struggles in the context of strategies such as rural devel-
opment generally focus on the politics of land tenure and the open revolts to
take over or recapture land. Despite the crucial importance of this issue, it
is necessary to keep in mind that peasant resistance reflects more than the
struggle for land and living conditions; it is above all a struggle over symbols
and meanings, a cultural struggle. Scott’s vivid description of the struggle
against the combine harvester introduced by the green revolution in rural
168                              CHAPTER 5

Malaysia, for instance, illustrates well the contest over views of history and
the ways of life the new technologies foster (1985, 154–64). Studies of resis-
tance, however, only hint at the cultures from which resistance springs. The
forms of resistance and the concept itself are usually theorized in relation to
the cultures of the West. It is more difficult for the researcher to learn to
habitate the inner interpretive architecture of the resisting culture, which
would be the prerequisite for a representation that does not depend so much
on Western knowledge practices (Strathern 1988).
   In his study of peasant transformation in southwestern Colombia in the
1970s, Michael Taussig concluded that the effect of the introduction of the
green revolution and integrated rural development had to be examined in
terms of two clashing cultural possibilities: one based on use-value—a peas-
ant economy geared toward the satisfaction of needs defined qualitatively;
and another based on exchange value, with its drive toward accumulation
and profit and its quantitative rationality. Confronted with the new way of
ordering economic life that DRI and similar programs introduced, the black
peasant communities of this part of the country gave a series of responses
(such as the devil contracts) with which they sought to counteract the impo-
sition of commodity production on their customary ways (Taussig 1980).
   Similarly, Gudeman and Rivera (1990, 1993) demonstrate the coexistence
of two different economies in the Latin American countryside: one based on
livelihood, the other on acquisition. As mentioned, peasant and market
economies encompass aspects of both types, although the economy of liveli-
hood still predominates in the peasant world. The livelihood economy is not
ruled by the rationality laws of the market system. Peasants, for instance,
keep accounts of only those activities which are fully monetized. They con-
tinually innovate and attune their practices through trial and error, in a man-
ner more akin to art than rationality, even if the transformation of the former
into the latter is taking place steadily, driven by the acquisition economy.
Although profit slowly is becoming a cultural category for peasants, econo-
mizing and thrift continue to be central values. The house economy is fueled
not by acquisition but by material activities the central principle of which is
to care for the base. Included in the base are not only natural resources and
material things but also culturally known ways of doing, people, habits, and
habitats.
   In the maintenance of the livelihood economy—as in Taussig’s “use-
value” orientation—can be seen a form of resistance that springs from the
sheer fact of cultural difference. Peasant cultures in Latin America still evi-
dence a significant contrast to dominant cultures of European origin, in
terms of cultural constructs and practices regarding the land, food, and the
economy. This contrast is greatest in indigenous cultures but is also found to
varying degrees among mestizo and black subcultures. Cultural difference
serves as the base for current theorizations and politics of various kinds,
                           POWER AND VISIBILITY                            169
particularly politics of self-affirmation. Some claim that in the Peruvian
Andes, for instance, some preconquest practices might still be alive. This
particular group of intellectuals and activists (Proyecto Andino de Tec-
nologías Campesinas [PRATEC]) seeks not to explain the nature of Andean
society in terms of abstract frameworks but to show phenomenologically—
through a sort of hermeneutics based on staging peasant discourse—some of
the qualities of Andean culture and their validity for the majority of the
people in the Peruvian Andes today. Their aim is to contribute to the af-
firmation and autonomy of Andean culture.
   Within the Andean worldview—in PRATEC’s exposition3—the peasant
world is conceived of as a living being, with no separation between people
and nature, between individual and community, between society and the
gods. This live world continually re-creates itself through mutual caring by
all living beings. This caring depends on an intimate and ongoing dialogue
between all living beings (including, again, people, nature, and the gods), a
sort of affirmation of the essence and will of those involved. This dialogue is
maintained through continual interactions that are social and historical.
Each plot, for instance, demands different cultivation routines, different
practices of caring. No standardized recipes or “packages”—such as those of
IRD or the homogenized U.S. agriculture—can hope to encompass this di-
versity. The prescription of norms for “proper” cultivation is alien to Andean
agriculture. Practices and events are never repeated out of a preestablished
scheme; on the contrary, knowledge is continually re-created as part of a
commitment to strengthening and enriching reality, not to transforming it.
Language is alive, its meaning always dictated by the context; language is
never permanent or stable. Conversation implies the reenactment of events
talked about; words refer to what has been lived rather than to far-off
happenings.
   PRATEC activists recognize that Andean knowledge and practices have
been eroded, yet they emphatically assert the validity of many long-standing
practices among rural communities. They believe that peasants have learned
to use the instruments of modernity without losing much of their vision of
the world. Their project contemplates a process of affirmation and restruc-
turing of Peruvian society following the criteria of anti-imperialism, repeas-
antization, and a sort of pan-Andean heteregeneous re-ethnicization; it is a
strategy of decolonization, agrocentric and geared toward self-sufficiency in
food. In the Pacific Coast region of Colombia, mobilized black communities
are struggling to articulate and set into motion a process of cultural affirma-
tion that includes, among its guiding principles, the search for ethnic iden-
tity, autonomy, and the right to decide on their own perspectives on devel-
opment and social practice generally. Similar efforts are continually taking
place in the Third World, often in contradictory ways, through actions of
limited scope and visibility.
170                                  CHAPTER 5

   The process of gauging experiences such as these from Western perspec-
tives is not easy. Two extremes must be avoided: to embrace them uncriti-
cally as alternatives; or to dismiss them as romantic expositions by activists
or intellectuals who see in the realities they observe only what they want to
see, refusing to acknowledge the crude realities of the world, such as capital-
ist hegemony and the like. Academics in the West and elsewhere are too apt
to fall into the second trap, and progressive activists are more likely to fall
into the former. Instead of true or false representations of reality, these ac-
counts of cultural difference should be taken as instances of discourse and
counterdiscourse. They reflect struggles centered on the politics of differ-
ence, which often—as in the Colombian Pacific Coast—include an explicit
critique of development.
   As Ana María Alonso (1992) remarked in the context of another peasant
struggle at another historical moment, one must be careful not to naturalize
“traditional” worlds, that is, valorize as innocent and “natural” an order pro-
duced by history (such as the Andean world in PRATEC’s case or many of
the grassroots alternatives spoken about by activists in various countries).
These orders can also be interpreted in terms of specific effects of power and
meaning. The “local,” moreover, is neither unconnected nor unconstructed,
as it is thought at times. The temptation to “consume” grassroots experiences
in the market for “alternatives” in the Western academe should also be
avoided. As Rey Chow warns (1922), one must resist participating in the
reification of Third World experiences that often takes place under such
rubrics as multiculturalism and cultural diversity. This reification hides
other mechanisms:
  The apparent receptiveness of our curricula to the Third World, a receptive-
  ness that makes full use of non-Western human specimens as instruments for
  articulation, is something we have to practice and deconstruct at once. . . . We
  [must] find a resistance to the liberal illusion of the autonomy and indepen-
  dence we can “give” the other. It shows that social knowledge (and the respon-
  sibility that this knowledge entails) is not simply a matter of empathy or identi-
  fication with “the other” whose sorrows and frustrations are being made part of
  the spectacle. . . . This means that our attempts to “explore the ‘other’ point of
  view” and “to give it a chance to speak for itself,” as the passion of many current
  discourse goes, must always be distinguished from the other’s struggles, no
  matter how enthusiastically we assume the nonexistence of that distinction.
  (111, 112)

   At the end of chapter 4 I concluded that the struggle over representation
and for cultural affirmation must be carried out in conjunction with the
struggle against the exploitation of and domination over the conditions of
local, regional, national, and global political economies. The two projects
are, indeed, one and the same. Capitalist regimes undermine the reproduc-
                             POWER AND VISIBILITY                               171
tion of socially valued forms of identity; by destroying existing cultural prac-
tices, development projects destroy elements necessary for cultural affirma-
tion. In World Bank discourse, peasants have to be regulated by new tech-
nologies of power that transform them “into the docile subject of the epic of
progress” (Alonso 1992, 412). In many parts of the Third World, however,
rural life is significantly different from what the World Bank would have us
believe. Perhaps the manifold local models that researchers and activists
have begun to describe in recent years can serve as a basis for other regimes
of understanding and practice.


                        ENGENDERING VISION:
               THE DISCOVERY OF WOMEN IN DEVELOPMENT
                        Women: The Invisible Farmers
The characterization of Colombia’s rural population produced by the World
Bank mission of 1949 starts as follows:
  If we exclude housewives, domestic servants, and indefinite categories from the
  3,300,000 rural people classified in the 1938 census, there were in that year
  about 1,767,000 economically active persons on the 700,000 farms in villages
  under 1,500. (International Bank 1950, 64)

   Modern discourses have refused to recognize the productive role of
women. This is a general problem to which feminist scholars have paid close
attention for quite some time. Of more recent concern has been the role
women played in development and the effect of development policies on
them. Beginning with Ester Boserup’s Women’s Role in Economic Develop-
ment (1970), a number of studies have shown that development has not only
rendered invisible women’s contribution to the economy, it has had a detri-
mental effect on women’s economic position and status.4 Not only have
women’s living conditions become more difficult, women’s work load has
tended to increase as a result of development interventions. In many cases,
the status of women’s work has worsened following their exclusion from
agricultural development programs. The reason for this exclusion is related
to the male bias of both development and the model chosen, that of U.S.
agriculture:
  Development planners have tended to assume that men are the most produc-
  tive workers. There has been worldwide failure to evaluate the contribution of
  women to productive activity. Approaching agricultural development from a
  Western perspective, planners define the U.S. agricultural system as the ideal.
  Women’s contribution to agricultural production in the United States has re-
  mained invisible. . . . Programs for women have been in health, family planning,
  nutrition, child care and home economics. . . . For women, the consequences of
172                               CHAPTER 5

  development include increased work loads, loss of existing employment,
  changes in the reward structures for their work, and loss of control of land.
  (Sachs 1985, 127)

   In short, women have been the “invisible farmers.” Or, to be more pre-
cise, women’s visibility has been organized by techniques that consider only
their role as reproducers. As Sachs aptly put it, development has practiced
“agriculture for men and home economics for women.” Up the end of the
1970s, women appeared for the development apparatus only as mothers en-
gaged in feeding babies, pregnant or lactating, procuring water for cooking
and cleaning, dealing with children’s diseases, or, in the best of cases, grow-
ing some food in the home garden to supplement the family diet. Such was
the extent of women’s lives in most development literature. Only men were
considered to be engaged in productive activities, and, consequently, pro-
grams intended to improve agricultural production and productivity were
geared toward men. In cases where there was training for women, this took
place in areas considered natural for them, such as sewing or handicrafts.
   This allocation of visibilities was and continues to be embedded in con-
crete practices, despite the changes I will discuss shortly. Most agriculture
experts and extension agents are male, trained by male experts, and pre-
pared to cater and interact chiefly with male farmers; male farmers are the
beneficiaries of whatever social and technological improvements take place
in agriculture: they are the recipients of innovations, are allocated the best
lands, concentrate on the production of crops that have a higher market
content, and participate more fully in local and regional cash economies.
Inevitably, the status of women’s work declines as women are relegated to
subsistence activities. When technical improvements occur in productive
activities that are dominated by women, these are usually transferred to
men; for instance, when a crop grown by women becomes mechanized, the
control of tractors or tools goes not to women but to men. If there is labor
displaced by new technologies, it is usually women who are disposed of first.
Where there is a technological innovation that may ease the burden of
women’s work—grain mills replacing the mortar and pestle—women tend
to be left jobless or proletarianized in the most precarious conditions.
Women’s work is not viewed as skilled, and if it is, it may be in the process
of being deskilled. If malnutrition exists in a household, it is seen primarily
as the responsibility of the mother; and when food is distributed in the fam-
ily, usually the man of the house (if there is one) is served first. All of these
effects have had negative consequences for the well-being of women and
children (Latham 1988).
   International training supported by FAO and U.S. AID followed the same
division of intellectual labor: agriculture for men, home economics for
                           POWER AND VISIBILITY                             173
women. As some feminist writers observe, development managed to mod-
ernize patriarchy, with grave consequences for Third World women (Mitter
1986; SID 1986). Modernized patriarchy also hides the fact that women’s
unpaid and low-paid labor has provided much of the basis for “modern-
ization” (Simmons 1992). The invisibility of women in rural development
programs was more paradoxical if we consider that according to an FAO
estimate about 50 percent of the world’s food for direct consumption is pro-
duced by women, and that increasingly rural households are headed by
women—for instance, in Colombia 23 percent of urban households and 16
percent of rural households are headed by women (León, Prieto, and Salazar
1987, 137). We may assume that this was the result of a type of blindness
that the development apparatus could easily correct, but it is perhaps more
accurate to contend that development finds support in existing patriarchal
structures (both in developed and in developing countries) to organize a
particular economy of visibilities.
   In some cases, women farmers’ resistance to development interventions
gives an indication of patriarchal power at work. Taussig (1978), for instance,
found that women farmers resisted the adoption of the rural development
strategy that the government has pushed since the early 1970s in the Cauca
Valley region of Colombia. This strategy was based on monoculture and
production for the market. Women farmers preferred to continue with their
local practice, which included a more systemic pattern of cultivation, based
on intercropping and growing both cash and food crops, a combination
that ensured steady, even if little, income and the spread of labor evenly
throughout the year. Government agents insisted that fruit trees should be
cut, a practice that women farmers adamantly opposed. Most male farmers,
however, embraced the new approach, lured by the prospects of producing
for the market and having access to cash.
   As in many other parts of the Third World, this strategy led to a further
concentration of landholdings and the proletarianization of a larger segment
of the local population. Women farmers did not adopt the new approach, in
part because they were not pursued by male agents and in part because they
foresaw the dangers involved in switching to production solely for the mar-
ket. It is likely that they would have accepted credit and technical assistance
had these been provided with different criteria, more consonant with their
interests and ways of cultivation and on a equal footing with male farmers.
The fact that this was not the case resulted, as Rubbo’s (1975) research in the
same region showed, in the deterioration of the position of women through-
out the 1970s and 1980s, both in an economic sense and in relation to men.
Continued proletarianization and male-biased government policy reconsti-
tuted sex roles to facilitate the discipline of the female work force, which was
required for the expansion of capitalism in the region. In the process, not
174                              CHAPTER 5

only class and labor relations but also gender relations were altered, in many
ways to women’s disadvantage.
   In some countries, development has turned invisible the contribution of
women to agricultural production which was locally visible before. Staudt’s
work on agricultural policy in Kenya has shown that even preindependence
agricultural policy was more attentive to women’s crucial role in production.
This started to change in the 1950s, when land registration and training
began to favor men, and took a definite turn against women after indepen-
dence in 1963, when the country fully embarked on the road to develop-
ment. Despite the fact that the introduction of improved seeds, for instance,
placed added demands on women’s labor, agricultural policy had already
erased women from its field of visibility. International agencies did not help
at all. They typically placed men and women in agriculture and home eco-
nomics. A Home Economics Division was created within the Ministry of
Agriculture with the help of U.S. AID, and this agency provided training in
home economics in the United States for its top female officers (Staudt
1984). But one must not get the idea that under colonial rule the situation
was necessarily different. Even if development policies seemingly were
more detrimental to women than to their colonial counterparts in some
countries, the process of destroying women-centered agricultural produc-
tion practices started with colonialism. This was particularly true in settler
states such as Rhodesia, where white patriarchal colonialists colluded with
small groups of African men to control and “modernize” not only women but
the majority of African men as well (Page 1991).
   The situations Staudt and Page described are found in Senegambia,
where women-centered rice-production systems were first disrupted with
the introduction of peanuts by colonial powers in the nineteenth century.
This expansion of commodity production had noticeable consequences for
the more egalitarian traditional gender divisions of agricultural labor, shift-
ing labor from task- to crop-specific gender roles. Two of these conse-
quences were a decrease in food self-sufficiency, as land was diverted from
rice to peanut production, and increased demand on the labor of women,
who were in charge of rice production but under more difficult conditions.
As in Kenya, colonial authorities also paid more attention to women farmers,
in an attempt to convert the Gambia into a rice bowl that could export great
quantities of rice. Beginning in the 1940s, however, men were brought in
growing numbers to rice cultivation, a move that women resisted. After
World War II, when the British pushed mechanized rice cultivation, women
were relegated to wage labor in nonmechanized farm activities, a move they
again opposed. In sum, the attempt by colonial powers and the postindepen-
dence state to create a reliable paddy peasantry involved the restructuring
of gender, conjugal, and family relations. Women’s labor power and their
knowledge of agro-ecology production, however, remain central to this date,
                           POWER AND VISIBILITY                             175
and gender-based struggles continue to shape the trajectory of agrarian
change (Carney and Watts 1991). As this brief discussion of African experi-
ences shows, it would be more accurate to say that both colonialism and
development have utilized patriarchal practices in their construction of dis-
ciplined peasant farmers in the Third World, although the concrete mecha-
nisms of capture have changed throughout the times.
   One final aspect of the effect of economic development strategies on
women involves the relationship between gender and the changing interna-
tional division of labor. This has been of growing concern to feminist politi-
cal economists since the late 1970s, when scholars began to theorize the
emergence of an international division of labor based on the shift of manu-
facturing production to free trade zones and export platforms in the Third
World. Rising labor costs in the North, additional costs such as pollution
control and higher energy bills, intensification of worldwide competition,
and a shift to the right in center states led to a new structure of accumulation
based on reproletarianization and de-development in the North and the shift
of certain activities to the South (periphery and semiperiphery). This shift
was made possible by advances in transportation and communications, the
fragmentation of the labor process (which allowed corporations to transfer
the labor-intensive parts of a given production process to the Third World
while retaining the knowledge-intensive tasks in the center), and a host of
concessions given to MNCs by Third World states, such as tax breaks, ex-
emptions on pollution controls, and, more important, a steady supply of doc-
ile, cheap workers (Fröbel, Heinrichs, and Kreye 1989; Borrego 1981; Mies
1986).
   The fact that young women ended up being the optimal, and preferred,
“docile, cheap labor force” was neither a coincidence nor the result of a
sudden change of heart on the part of male planners and Third World elites
(Benería and Sen 1981; Benería 1982; Fuentes and Ehrenreich 1983; Fer-
nandez Kelly 1983; Ong 1987; Benería and Roldán 1987; Benería and
Feldman 1992).5 The promotion of industrialization in the Third World
through export platforms and free trade zones was happening at the same
time that calls for “intergrating women into development” were being hailed
by international organizations (see the next section). The inclusion of
women, however, was based on, and resulted in, the strenghtening of sexist
and racist beliefs and practices, which is not the point to discuss here (see
especially Fuentes and Ehrenreich 1983; Mies 1986; Ong 1987). Despite
the fact that women who worked in factories obtained some independence
due to their new source of income, feminist scholars studying this phenome-
non agree that the process has been generally detrimental not only to
women but to the popular classes of the Third World as a whole. The femini-
zation of the labor force in some industries continues, and it is linked to
development schemes; such is the case, for instance, with women in shrimp-
176                                 CHAPTER 5

packaging plants in the port of Tumaco in Colombia. The vast majority of
women working in these plants come from rural families who have lost their
lands; they now work under precarious conditions.
   In their sustained effort to unveil the twisted rationality and effects of
these processes, Lourdes Benería and other political economists recently
have focused on the effects on women of so-called structural adjustment
policies (SAPs) forced by the World Bank and the IMF on Third World
countries since the early 1980s. The general finding is that the burden of
SAP, although affecting drastically the middle and popular classes as a
whole, has fallen harder on poor women. Yet the studies also document the
creativity of households in coming up with survival strategies that allow
them to get by on a day-to-day basis. Persistent and aggravated poverty,
however, is changing the character of households and gender relations. The
household has indeed become a place in which families negotiate daily sur-
vival strategies; for women, this has meant either greater exposure to the
vagaries of the labor market under conditions of superexploitation or in-
creased participation in the informal sector, under more flexible yet increas-
ingly deteriorating conditions. In many cases, SAPs have led to the intensifi-
cation of domestic work for women. On the positive side, some case studies
show that the new conditions in the household and the economy at large can
serve as catalysts for social change, such as greater female autonomy in the
family and the community (Benería and Feldman 1992).
   It is clear that the new conditions of accumulation and reproduction are
leading to important cultural reconstructions in social and gender relations.
The extent to which these reconstructions alter the social systems that de-
fine identity is yet to be seen, although some of the effects are disturbing.
For instance, although in some countries, such as Peru, Bolivia, and Chile,
the crisis has tended to bring women together in various ways, in others
such as Mexico the struggle for survival has been increasingly privatized;
this privatization happens at the expense of the extended family and the
community (Benería 1992). This follows the ideology of privatization es-
poused by Reagan-Bush economics and the IMF; moreover, it facilitates the
process of flexible accumulation (read: freedom of superexploitation) that
has become so dear to the IMF and the post-Fordist regime of accumula-
tion. We cannot be mistaken about the negative effects of this conquest,
which are felt more by poorer households, many of which are disintegrat-
ing. Benería helps us keep in mind what it is like to live under these condi-
tions. She reports on a conversation she had in Mexico City with a struggling
twenty-three-year-old mother who was wondering whether she and her
family could survive their situation. Benería explains:
  As the mother of four children and housewife of a household classified under
  “extreme poverty,” the situation she was referring to actually meant that there
  were no chairs in the house for the interviewers to sit, the children did not wear
                              POWER AND VISIBILITY                                  177
  shoes, the roof leaked, the floor was not paved, the inside walls were extremely
  dirty by any standard, the house had only three small rooms (kitchen, dining
  room, and a bedroom) while some extra space, with very poor conditions, was
  rented to another large family for very little money. Job insecurity for the father
  and only occasional paid work for the mother were a constant source of anxiety
  and even despair. . . . In all cases, the depth of the crisis was felt in a way that
  escaped statistics and analytical quantification. (1992, 91)

   It is extremely important to maintain an awareness of this suffering and
yet resist two conclusions. The first is that these women are totally helpless
and unable to do anything for themselves. As Ruth Behar has said in her
study of a poor market woman from Mexico, we must resist seeing Latin
American poor women in terms already fixed in much of the academic and
media discourse—as “beasts of burden,” mothers and wives, staunch tradi-
tionalists, or heroic guerrilla fighters. “If looked from a cultural perspective,”
Behar continues, “Latin American women can emerge as thinkers, cosmolo-
gists, creators of worlds” (1990, 225). Household survival strategies are part
of this creativity. However, as Brinda Rao (1991) cautions, the focus on the
household should be accompanied by an interpretive account, similar to
Behar’s, of what household means to women. “Household” must be located
within local and transnational paradigms of gender, people, and nature. Sim-
ilarly, “survival startegies” must not be discussed at the cost of ignoring
changes in the subjective dimensions of women’s lives. The language of
“coping mechanisms” and “survival strategies,” although an important step
in making visible women’s agency, may still contribute to maintaining the
image of women as victims, as their dynamism is reduced to short-term
defenses of their life conditions within the economic domain (Rao 1991).
   The second temptation we must resist is the conclusion that what poor
women need is development (modernized patriarchy), which has been ex-
actly the answer given by the international development establishment. In
the next section, we study the rationality and danger of this reponse from the
perspective of the discursive critique of development; we also look at the
responses of some feminists who attempt to develop the discursive critique
of WID without losing sight of the harsh conditions under which Third
World women live. We then move to Colombian planning circles as they
construct, this time, the lives and troubles of peasant women.


              The WID Discourse and the Bureaucratization of
                          Feminist Knowledge
The Women in Development (WID) strategy is susceptible of the same kind
of analysis applied to the development discourse as a whole. The practice of
WID, in other words, is characterized by processes of discursive formation,
professionalization, and institutionalization; it also produces instrument-
178                                 CHAPTER 5

effects that affect women’s lives—the women who are the object of the inter-
ventions as much as the women planners designing the programs.
   According to Nüket Kardam (1991), a WID scholar and practitioner, the
term “women in development” was coined by the women’s committee of the
Washington, D.C., chapter of the largest development nongovernmental or-
ganization (NGO), the Society for International Development. This group
was influential in shaping U.S. AID’s New Directions legislation in 1973, as
a result of which the Office of Women in Development was established with
the aim of integrating women into the agency’s mainstream programming.
WID activities also started to increase within the UN system in the early
1970s, leading to the 1975 World Conference in Mexico and the launching
of the UN Decade for Women. At the time of the Nairobi Conference (1985),
which marked the Decade’s end, “there was no question of the consolidation
of an international women’s movement on a global basis” (Kardam 1991, 10);
more specifically, “the discourse about women and development empha-
sized the contribution women would make to the attainment of general
development goals” (12). Many believed that the success of the WID move-
ment would depend on the extent to which it could be successfully institu-
tionalized. To quote Kardam again:
  The responses of development agencies to women in development (WID) is-
  sues are shaped by the nature of their relations with other actors of the develop-
  ment assistance regime and by how well these new issues fit into organizational
  goals and procedures. “Policy entrepreneurs” within agencies can and do act on
  behalf of WID issues, framing them in ways that will be consistent with organi-
  zational goals and procedures, taking advantage of their agency’s position in
  relation to other members of the regime, and developing political clout in order
  to influence policymaking. Through these means, WID advocates are able to
  promote a meaningful response. (1991, 2)

  A meaningful response to WID issues, indeed, was what Kardam found
among the agencies she studied, the United Nations Development Program
(UNDP), the World Bank, and the Ford Foundation, even if with variations
and limitations. At the World Bank, a Division for Women in Development
was established in 1987, although more limited WID activities had begun
several years earlier; guidelines for project appraisal on women in develop-
ment were issued in 1989, accounting among other things for limitations
imposed on women’s work capacity “by culture and tradition” and making
the appeal to “invest in women” as a “cost-effective route to broader devel-
opment objectives such as improved economic performance, reduction of
poverty, greater family welfare, and slower population growth” (quoted in
Kardam 1991, 51). These policy formulations echo old home economics con-
ceptions, although this time couched in the language of economic efficiency,
motivated by the fact that “investments in human capital for women have a
                             POWER AND VISIBILITY                             179
high payoff” (in Kardam 1991, 52). The first WID adviser within the World
Bank was a population economist, and the office is housed within the Popu-
lation and Human Resources Department; this is no coincidence.
   By the early 1990s, the Division of Women in Development already had
six professional staff members. Although this has given WID issues greater
visibility within the organization, its effects are still limited due to a number
of institutional constraints; one of these constraints is the lack of correspond-
ing WID specialists within operational departments, which means that WID
policy does not necessarily make it into concrete implementable policies and
the project circuit. Kardam also found that “WID issues have received a
more favorable response from staff members when they were introduced
and justified on the basis of economic viability. The more the indispensabil-
ity of WID components to the economic success of projects can be demon-
strated, the more staff members are likely to pay attention” (80). Indeed, as
a World Bank economist had put it earlier, the question is to decide how
“female labor markets” can be rationalized to ensure more equitable partici-
pation by women (Lele 1986). Neoliberal economics and well-intentioned
but generally ineffective policy proclamations joined forces in launching
WID at the World Bank.
   As Adele Mueller’s ground-breaking work on WID has made apparent
(1986, 1987a, 1987b, 1991), this institutionalized and state-linked develop-
ment structure has become the organizational basis for the production of
knowledge about women in the Third World, filtering in important ways
what feminists in developed countries can know about Third World women.
Building on Dorothy Smith’s work, Mueller takes as a point of departure the
insight that the topics with which the WID discourse deals “are not entities
in the real world, merely there to be discovered, but rather are already con-
structed in procedures of rule” carried out by institutions (1987b, 1). This
does not mean that many of the conditions of women WID researchers de-
scribed are not real. It means that this reality serves only as a partial basis for
another, institutionally constructed reality that is consonant with conceptu-
alizations of the problems of development already put together in Washing-
ton, Ottawa, Rome, and Third World capitals. This power of the develop-
ment apparatus to name women in ways that lead us to take for granted
certain descriptions and solutions has to be made visible, for in the very
process of naming, as Mohanty (1991b) says, habitates the possibility of a
colonialist effect.
   When feminist researchers and development experts take for granted, as
the nature of their problem and the focus of their work, the category women
in development as it is constructed by the development apparatus, Mueller
insists, they take up with it a certain social organization of ruling. The use of
standardized procedures and statistics makes inevitable a certain erasure of
women’s experience. Typified descriptions become “a way of knowing and
180                                 CHAPTER 5

a way of not knowing, a way of talking about women and a way of silencing
women from speaking about the experience of their own lives as they are
organized by unseen and uncontrollable outside forces” (1987b, 8). For
Mueller, this has important consequences on two levels: the strengthening
of the development apparatus, and the relations between First World femi-
nists and Third World women. Mueller does not hesitate to call the develop-
ment apparatus “one of the biggest, most male-dominated, most world-dom-
inating institutions” (1991, 1). This does not mean that the work of feminists
within WID has been without results. As Mueller is quick to mention, the
results of WID in terms of improving women’s conditions in the Third
World or even providing jobs for women professionals in the United States
have been meager. Yet the growth of knowledge and expertise during the
last fifteen years, achieved in part as a result of WID, has changed the
ground on which women’s work, and their effort to reform development,
now takes place.
   This does not do away with the fact that, as Pam Simmons (1992) states,
the call to “integrate” did not come from Third World women, whose posi-
tion at the end of the UN Decade had worsened. It was development institu-
tions that quickly adopted “the idea that women are good to have around if
you are involved in project development” (Simmons 1992, 18). This gener-
ates powerful contradictions for feminists working within the development
apparatus, as Mueller indicates:
  When the issues and political aims of the women’s movement become knotted
  up with the ruling apparatus, it is no longer on the side of women in the Third
  World or the First World. I want to be very clear: this is not a damnation of
  feminism as in itself imperialist, but a recognition of the power of ruling forces
  to appropriate our topics, our language, our action for imperialist purposes
  which can never be our own. (Mueller 1991, 6)

   The WID discourse partakes of all the major practices of development
(creation of client categories, structured agendas, bureaucratics, and so on).
This effect is well illustrated by the Colombian National Food and Nutrition
Plan. Health and nutrition programs permitted PAN to organize a significant
part of women’s lives; it set in place a series of simultaneous operations to
instruct women on the rules of proper nutrition, health, and hygiene; and it
rationalized an existing sexual division of labor within the household. In
integrating these interventions in a novel fashion, PAN contributed to the
regulation of the lives of peasant women. Was all this bad? To answer this
complex question, we would have to analyze how these programs fared vis-
à-vis gender, class, and cultural relations, a point to which I will come back.
But we cannot forget that programs such as PAN participate in the deploy-
ment of a type of biopolitics through which a multiplicity of problems are
regulated as part of a greater web of power.
                           POWER AND VISIBILITY                            181
   Another aspect of Mueller’s concern is the mediation that is effected by
the development apparatus of the relations between First World feminists
and Third World women.6 Mueller starts by quoting two African women,
Marjorie Mbilinyi and Katherine Namuddu, who argue that as women be-
come identified as a problem for capitalist development and WID funding,
inevitably “Africa and Africans are recast by non-Africans as research data,
or instances of a theory, or cases of a project, all of which come out of and
feed directly into centralized information systems” (Mueller 1991, 5). The
history and culture of the South are discovered and translated in the journals
of the North, only to come back, reconceptualized and repackaged, as devel-
opment interventions. This troubling aspect of transcultural knowledge cre-
ation—which orginates in the objectifying and detached nature of Western
knowledge—is not restricted to feminist knowledge. It has been endemic to
anthropology and the social sciences (Said 1989; Clifford 1989); despite
some progress in the 1980s in terms of imagining new forms of representa-
tion, anthropology has yet to give satisfactory answers to the question of the
production of knowledge about the “other.”
   Mueller invites First World feminists to face this predicament by advanc-
ing beyond matters of sex bias and integration into development to question-
ing the very procedures and structures of development as an institution of
ruling. This is the only way to resist the bureaucratization of feminist knowl-
edge and start the process of its decolonization. The starting place should be
the standpoint of women, “where an interested and located investigation of
the social world must begin: at the place where the knower herself sits. The
knowers here are the professionals, academics, and bureaucrats who call
themselves feminists and Women in Development practitioners” (Mueller
1991, 7). Borrowing from the title of a book, In and Against the State—
authored by government social workers in London pondering the rationality
of women’s welfare programs—Mueller advises WID feminists to work “in
and against development.” Working as an insider implies trying to get at
“how things work,” that is, “how our practices contribute to and are articu-
lated with the relations that overpower our lives” (Smith 1990, 204).
   The risks of this strategy are clear, according to Mueller: exclusion, co-
optation, “ghettoization.” The prescription for working “in and against” de-
velopment, however, is epistemologically and politically insightful. It entails
examining the modes of knowing that are intensified by participating in spe-
cific social systems (Mani 1989), including professional training. It demands
resistance to translating Third World realities into a standardized, orderly
discourse and bureaucratic courses of action, which assumes in turn resis-
tance to seeing the world only through the conceptualizations provided by
professional expertise. It requires, finally, an acute awareness of the profes-
sionals’ position as mediator between the “needs” of a particular group of
women in the Third World and First World agencies. This last aspect—the
182                               CHAPTER 5

role of the professional as producer of “expert discourses” that mediate be-
tween needs articulation and needs satisfaction—is as crucial to the state as
it is to social movements (Fraser 1989).
    For Mueller, “in and against” development is a place to begin, a space in
which to pursue a more radical strategy of doing one’s work from and within
“a different social, economic, political and cultural space from that which is
provided by Development institutions” (1987b, 2; see also Ferguson 1990,
279–88). The choice does not have to be either/or, nor is it possible to sug-
gest across-the-board strategies. Mueller’s shift of focus from Third World
women and our need to “help” them to the ruling apparatus is politically
promising. One must keep in mind as well the actions of Third World
women—whether middle-class feminists or grassroots activists or both—for
cues about how power operates and is resisted by women in the Third
World. If it is true that women “are good to have around” if you are involved
in project development, it is equally true, as Simmons reminds us, that “at
the receiving end of [development] projects and plans, however, people are
loudly protesting” (1992, 19). Perhaps it is also true that “if women go on
defending economic growth, then they are also, by default, defending patri-
archal privilege” (19), which does not mean that it is not necessary to con-
tribute to women’s struggle for better living conditions. Let us see how
Colombian women have engaged in this struggle in and against the WID
discourse.


              The Struggle for Visibility and Empowerment:
      The Program for Development with Peasant Women in Colombia
As in the case of DRI with respect to IRD discourse, programs for peasant
women in Colombia have followed a route not completely charted by the
international WID discourse, although WID has been an important force in
shaping conceptions and policies. The 1988–1993 Programa de Desarrollo
Integral Campesino (Program for Integral Peasant Development)—to be
implemented as part of DRI’s third phase in Colombia—included the Pro-
gram for Development with Peasant Women (Programa para el Desarrollo
con la Mujer Campesina [PDMC]). Conceived as one of three parts within
the most important component of the Program for Integral Peasant Devel-
opment, namely, its production strategy, the PDMC represented an impor-
tant step in the development of policies for rural women in Colombia (DNP/
UEA 1988; Fondo DRI 1989a, 1989b, 1989c). The document describing the
program starts with the following caution:
  Among the elements considered for DRI III, the most difficult to formulate is
  perhaps the specific component for peasant women. There still exists, on the
  one hand and in the best of cases, skepticism regarding programs with peasant
                               POWER AND VISIBILITY                                   183
  women. On the other hand, to raise the question of the discrimination or subor-
  dination of women is always uncomfortable, since it touches the consciousness
  of everybody. Yet once the responsibility to implement programs on behalf of
  women is assumed, the awareness of this very situation generates the necessary
  conviction and strength to persist in the endeavor, even if this represents a daily
  struggle at all levels. This by itself justifies the allocation of resources to direct
  actions with and on behalf of peasant women. (Fondo DRI 1989c, 1)

   Feminists in many parts of the world will recognize and identify with this
statement. From the 1949 characterization of the Colombian population by
the World Bank mission, which made women invisible, to this formulation,
most certainly written by a female planner, there is a great distance. The
PDMC has also gained some distance from the traditional women’s pro-
grams conceived along the lines of home economics principles. In fact, most
of the resources for the program are to be devoted to aspects such as pro-
duction, credit, and technological assistance for agricultural production.
Women, in other words, are recognized in the program as active and inde-
pendent producers, not only as home makers and secondary breadwinners.
   The transition from home economics approaches to strategies of rural de-
velopment for and with women occurred in a few years. It is important to
analyze this transformation from the prespectives of the politics of discourse,
gender, and the economy. Let us start with a review of the most important
events that led to the new strategy. Until the mid-1970s, government pro-
grams for women were conventionally conceived and of limited scope.
Whether they addressed questions of nutrition, health, hygiene, or educa-
tion—such as the health and nutrition programs carried out by the Colom-
bian Institute for Family Welfare (ICBF), or the home garden projects run
by the Colombian Agricultural Institute (ICA)—state policies for poor
women were based on a perception of women as restricted to the domestic
domain. This perception continued throughout the 1970s as “income-gener-
ating” projects introduced in the wake of the United Nations Decade for
Women (1975–1985) devoted resources to projects such as home improve-
ment, manufacturing of handicrafts, and sewing. The projects sought to
make women more productive in those activities considered natural for
them. Although some improvements in areas such as nutrition did take
place, because these projects “accepted as a fact a [certain] sexual division of
labor, they contributed to the subordination of women” (León 1987, 123).
   In the early 1980s, a new situation emerged as a result of a complex set of
factors. It is impossible to give an answer valid for all countries. The Colom-
bian case suggests that the state’s response to this new situation was shaped
by complex processes involving the increasing presence of women planners
in the government apparatus, the availability of studies conducted by Co-
lombian and Latin American feminist researchers, new macroeconomic situ-
184                              CHAPTER 5

ations, and an international climate favorable to policies targeting women.
Let us start with this last factor. Many commentators, particularly in the
North, have pointed at the United Nations Decade for Women as the single
most important factor fostering the new visibility of women. The UN De-
cade and WID, in this view, were instrumental in creating spaces for Third
World women in which to organize and pursue their agendas, either on their
own or through state institutions. They promoted research on women, chan-
neled funds to women’s projects, and put First World feminists in touch
with Third World women activists, who, in turn, disseminated feminist
knowledge among the women groups with which they worked. In addition,
the international climate was instrumental in catapulting the issue of the
participation of women in development onto the public sectors of the Third
World. The fact that international organizations made clear their interest in
formulating women’s policies at the official level pushed governments in the
Third World in this direction.
   Feminists in many parts of the Third World recognize the importance of
the UN Decade and WID as a factor in the greater scope and visibility their
work achieved during the 1980s. As we saw, however, the WID discourse
was a mixed blessing, a fact that Third World feminists have also discussed.
The international climate also happened to coincide with two other phe-
nomena of the early 1980s: a worsening of the food situation in many coun-
tries and declining availability of funding for social services under the im-
pact of the debt crisis. It was thus that states “discovered” rural women
(León 1986, 1987). The way in which this took place in Colombia was com-
plicated. As late as 1983, there was no official policy for women in the agri-
cultural sector, let alone women in general. Yet a series of developments
were under way that prepared the ground for the adoption at the highest
level of government of a National Policy for Development with Peasant
Women (DNP/UEA 1984; Ministerio de Agricultura de Colombia 1985).
The National Food and Nutrition Plan and the Integrated Rural Develop-
ment Program, let it be recalled, had merged in 1982. As part of this reorga-
nization, planners had to decide what to do with the few programs for
women that existed, principally those at PAN and the National Agriculture
Institute. A first attempt to dismantle these programs, opposed by several
DRI/PAN women planners, led to the their reformulation on a more stable,
although still precarious, basis. During the process, a high-level DRI female
planner proposed that the upcoming national meeting of DRI users be con-
vened explicitly in the name of both peasant men and peasant women. Al-
though some women met separately at this meeting, an articulate peasant
woman was elected national chair of the DRI Peasant Users’ Association.7
   Also invited to participate in the meeting by the planner in question was
an accomplished scholar of rural issues and advocate of the rights of rural
women, Magdalena León. León’s career as a scholar had already given her
                           POWER AND VISIBILITY                           185
a prominent place in the expert community on agrarian issues discussed in
the previous chapter. The fact that she was invited to this meeting, how-
ever, reveals another set of issues. Although the participation of women in
the public sector in Colombia is generally high by many standards, it is
particularly so in the country’s planning apparatus, which is staffed by
highly qualified and trained professionals.8 As in the case of many other
countries in Latin America, most women planners do not see themselves
as feminist, yet at times their practice contributes to the advancement of
what could be called women’s or, in some cases, feminist issues; this takes
place as they pursue questions that arise out of their concrete planning prac-
tice. In some instances, as in the case just mentioned, planners approach
feminist researchers in search of conceptual insights and support for their
actions. Feminist researchers not infrequently participate in planning cir-
cles, mostly as consultants for research or evaluation of programs dealing
with women, under contract with planning agencies, NGOs, or international
organizations.
   In Colombia, works by feminist scholars in the 1980s was crucial to both
making visible the contribution of women to agricultural production and to
articulating a set of policies for women (see León 1980, 1985, 1986, 1987,
1993; Rey de Marulanda 1981; León 1982; López and Campillo 1983;
Campillo 1983; Bonilla 1985; León and Deere 1986; Bonilla and Vélez 1987;
León, Prieto, and Salazar 1987; Medrano and Villar 1988). These works not
only gave intellectual legitimacy to studies of peasant women but also pro-
vided the basis on which much of state policy was built. Among the most
important results of these studies was the documented critique of the as-
sumptions that development is gender neutral and that women are not en-
gaged in agricultural production to any significant degree. Women research-
ers presented ample evidence to undermine these assumptions.
   The work of two women at the Ministry of Agriculture, Cecilia López and
Fabiola Campillo (1983), carried out with funding from UNICEF and FAO,
was the centerpiece for the design of what became the National Policy for
Development with Peasant Women, approved by CONPES in 1984.9 The
avatars of the resulting state policy, however, are another matter. After an
initial period of enthusiam and support during the Betancur administration
(1982–1986), and following the departure of López and Campillo, the pro-
grams entered a period of disarray while funding for them languished. Dur-
ing the late 1980s, various programs for women were maintained at institu-
tions such as DRI, ICA, and the Agrarian Reform Institute, mostly because
they were in the agenda of international agencies. The advent of the Gaviria
administration (1990–1994) marked a renaissance for women’s policies at
the highest level. This time the thrust of the policy was to provide com-
pensatory measures for those groups perceived to be most vulnerable to
the ongoing neoliberal adjustment process, namely, women, youth, and the
186                              CHAPTER 5

elderly among the popular classes. DRI’s PDMC was again reinforced and
expanded as significant financial resources were devoted to policies for
women.10
   It is difficult to assess the significance of these policies and the results
achieved so far. Because Colombia is one of the first countries to design and
implement this type of policies for women, there are no parallels to be drawn
yet with experiences in other nations. Although the assumption of gender
neutrality has not been abandoned, a certain “gender distension” has taken
place, allowing institutional support for women’s projects (León 1993). The
scope of policies for women has widened throughout the years, to include
poor urban women in a limited way and transcend the agricultural focus. A
new promising angle has emerged as a result of the move toward decentral-
ization and local autonomy: the possibility of strengthening local and re-
gional organizations as they take charge of the implementation of the new
policies. In fact, it was the peasant women organizations that kept alive the
debate during the ebbing years of the policy. This move, however, coincides
with neoliberal pressures to scale down state operations and privatize wel-
fare and development operations. Women are gaining spaces, yet many of
these spaces are narrowing.
   As León (1986, 1987, 1993) concludes, Colombian policies for rural
women, despite their relative merits, still face important structural limita-
tions. Like Fajardo, León sees access to land as a prerequisite to achieving
significant improvements for rural people. In this way, as many other Latin
American feminists do, León stresses the fact that class and gender cannot
be separated from each other. Class and gender are “at a crossroads,” to use
Benería and Roldán’s (1987) expression. Yet there are also important gen-
der-specific obstacles to the success of the policies, which arise from the
persistence of patriarchal structures in the society; some of these factors
include continuing sexual divisions of labor within the household, a slow
reponse to the incorporation of gender on the part of the staff of implement-
ing agencies due to their own unexamined gender identities, and, in general,
the lack of articulation of techno-economic strategies seeking to incorpor-
ate women into development with explicit measures to undermine patriar-
chal ideology and culture. In the context of stringent macroeconomic poli-
cies, productivist programs for women—often small and isolated from one
another—not infrequently represent an added burden to women that do
not compensate for their efforts (León 1993). The productivist logic of the
opening to world markets is intended more to make women produce and
reproduce efficiently than to support women’s lives as autonomous human
beings.
   The reach of state policies vis-à-vis gender subordination is generating
important debates among Latin American researchers. In discussing the
Nicaraguan experience during the 1980s, Paola Pérez Alemán, for instance,
                           POWER AND VISIBILITY                             187
distinguished among three kinds of situations: the incorporation of women
“into the world of men,” say, in agrarian cooperatives or predominantly male
peasant organizations; the organization of women along the lines of tradi-
tional gender roles (that is, in the sphere of “reproduction”); and the creation
of organizations, particularly in communal and educational areas, that al-
lowed for greater questioning of traditional gender roles. Although the first
two types may have been important in creating spaces for women to discuss
their problems and share experiences as women, only in the third type of
situation could practical gender interests (those directly linked to questions
of survival and quality of life, in areas such as food, water, and health) and
strategic gender interests (those derived specifically from gender subordina-
tion) be articulated (Pérez Alemán 1990).
   The distinction between practical and strategic gender interests, originat-
ing in the work of Maxine Molyneux (1986), although helpful at some levels,
is also problematic. As Amy Lind (1992) maintains, implicit in this approach
is the assumption that women’s “basic needs” are separate from their “stra-
tegic needs,” and that a “practical” or a “survival strategy” cannot simultane-
ously be a political strategy that challenges the social order. This scenario
also tends to assume that most poor women are concerned only with their
“daily survival” and therefore have no strategic agenda beyond their imme-
diate economic struggles. This type of analysis overlooks the critical contri-
butions and challenges that organized poor women represent to the social
order. Like Behar (earlier), Lind reminds us that poor women also negotiate
power, construct collective identities, and develop critical perspectives on
the world in which they live. Women’s (and others’) struggles to “put food in
their mouths” might entail cultural struggles.
   In the 1990s, most feminists accept that the division between practical
and strategic gender interests is not so easily perceived. Two new strategies
are being pursued: to replace “women in development” by “gender in de-
velopment” as the organizing principle for women’s efforts within develop-
ment; and to complement the productivist approaches that are in vogue with
empowerment strategies. The first goal reflects the continued assumption on
the part of states that macroeconomic policies are gender neutral; it is in-
tended to mainstream women’s issues into the conception and design of
economic policy as a whole—to push states into recognizing the real differ-
ences that exist between women and men as social subjects, and the need to
consider the effect of macro policies on the sexual division of labor. The
empowerment approach seeks “to transform the terms under which women
are linked to productive activities in such a way that the economic, social
and cultural equality of their participation is insured” (León 1993, 17). The
result would be public policies with a gender perspective that does not sub-
ordinate empowerment to the goals of productivity. It is a question of mak-
ing sure that biological differences cease to entail gender subordination.
188                              CHAPTER 5

   In other words, the participation of women in social production is neces-
sary but not sufficient to overcome women’s subordination. Even if the new
policies provided spaces for this to happen—to the extent that they might
generate changes in the social and political relations between women and
men and by strengthening women’s organizations at all levels—only the
development of gender-based forms of consciousness and organization can
provide a firm basis for a lasting improvement of women’s condition. This
requires specific articulations, for instance, between training programs for
peasant women and the development of gender consciousness; and between
the promotion of women’s organizations and greater gender autonomy
(León 1986, 57–60). Only by becoming a new type of social subject, León
concludes, can women construct a new development model. This would be
a holistic, noneconomistic approach, more humane and just, and would
include women’s needs as perceived by women themselves; a sort of “De-
velopment as if Women Mattered” (Benería and Roldán 1987). But then,
perhaps, WID itself will have to be transformed into something different
altogether.
   One final aspect to be discussed in terms of the relation of women to the
development apparatus is whether WID does not entail a certain idea of
“liberation” for Third World women. This is another aspect of the relation-
ship between First World feminists and Third World women that is being
discussed in hopeful ways, as a way of bringing together, rather than divid-
ing, women across cultures. The critique of universalizing and Eurocentric
tendencies within the women’s movement and feminist scholarship ad-
vanced significantly during the 1980s in the United States (Spelman 1988;
Trinh 1989; Mani 1989; hooks 1990; Anzaldúa 1990). The general belief is
that the adoption of modern languages of liberation in order to look at Third
World women is problematic. “Organizations for the promotion of women’s
rights,” says an African woman quoted by Trinh T. Minh-ha (1989, 107),
“tend to . . . assimilate us into a strictly European mentality and historical
experience. The African woman, at least in the pre-colonial society, is nei-
ther a reflection of man, nor a slave. She feels no need whatsoever to imitate
him in order to express their personality.”
   As Trinh warns, however, caution must be exercised in case this probing
into the limitations of the modern languages of women’s liberation plays into
the defense of male privileges. The first precaution is to avoid assuming the
existence of pure, gendered vernacular societies, free of domination. It must
be acknowledged, nevertheless, that in many parts of Asia, Africa, and Latin
America relations between women and men are gendered in ways that re-
spond to local histories more than to modern structures. The specificity of
these relations cannot be subsumed into Western patterns. The languages
and practices of modernity, however, have permeated Third World societies
to such an extent that it might make necessary the strategic use of modern
                           POWER AND VISIBILITY                             189
languages of liberation, along with local idioms; but this use must be accom-
panied with attempts at showing the historical and culturally specific char-
acter of these languages. The fact that women in many parts of the Third
World want modernization has to be taken seriously, yet the meaning of this
modernization must not be taken for granted. Often it means something
quite different from what it means in the West and has been constructed and
reconstructed as part of the development encounter.
   The study of gender as difference (Trinh 1989) has to be told from a non-
ethnocentric feminist perspective. The difficulties are clear enough, for this
entails developing languages through which women’s oppression can be
made visible cross-culturally without reinforcing—actually disallowing—
the thought that women have to be developed and traditions revamped
along Western lines. The work of some feminist anthropologists and Third
World feminists seems to be going in this direction. Frédérique Apffel-
Marglin (1992), for instance, has reinterpreted taboos surrounding menstru-
ation in Orissa, India, as a way to challenge the discourse of development.
Developmentalists oppose these taboos in the name of liberating women
and bringing their communities “out of the past.” Apffel-Marglin’s complex
interpretation, on the contrary, explains the menstrual taboos as arising from
interrelated practices linking nature, gods and goddesses, community, and
women and men as part of the cycle of life in a gendered society that still
practices noncommodified ways of knowing. It is only from the perspective
of the commodified individual, Apffel-Marglin concludes, that many tradi-
tional practices such as the taboos of menstruation are seen as curtailing
freedom and dignity. These revised accounts, to be sure, can be challenged
from other perspectives; yet they provide a warning against the uncritical
use of Western conceptions.
   As in the work of some Third World feminists such as Vandana Shiva
(1989, 1992), there is a convergence of interests between feminism and the
resistance to modernity that needs to be further explored as part of moder-
nity’s anthropology. The possibility that the concept of woman as the subject
of liberal humanism may not be appropriate to many Third World contexts,
and the refusal to separate women and men in some Third World feminisms,
needs to be entertained. Marilyn Strathern has perhaps gone farthest in
formulating a nonethnocentric approach to feminist anthropology. For her,
“the commodity view of women as ‘naturally’ objects of men’s schemes be-
cause of their power to reproduce becomes understandable from certain
assumptions inherent in practices of Western knowledge” (1988, 316). In
terms of the concept of reproduction so central to much of feminist theory,
Strathern’s reading of the highly relational Melanesian world entails that
Melanesian women “do not make babies”; that is, “women do not replicate
raw material, babies in the form of unfashioned natural resources, but pro-
duce entities which stand in a social relation to themselves. . . . Children are
190                                  CHAPTER 5

the outcome of the interaction of multiple others” (316). In the Melanesian
society in question, people are not concerned with self-replacement at all; it
is persons in relations with others rather than individuals in and of them-
selves who are the basis of social life.
   Within this type of analogic gender, even relations such as mother-child
are not autonomous but are produced out of others. Similarly, contrary to
most appearances, it is not men’s activity that creates society or culture or
man’s values that become the values of society at large. Even more, one
cannot talk of men or women in the abstract. For Strathern, this abstract talk
derives from our unexamined notion of society:
  It is when men’s collective life is interpreted as a kind of sanctioning or author-
  itative commentary of life in general that it is assimilated to our organizing
  metaphor, “society.” It is this metaphor which prompts questions about why
  men should be in the privileged position of determining ideology or creating
  the very foundations of social order to their advantage. I have suggested that
  the forms of Melanesian collective life are not adequately described through
  the Western model of a society, and that however men are depicted it cannot be
  as authors of such an entity. . . . Melanesian social creativity is not predicated
  upon a hierarchical view of a world of objects created by natural processes upon
  which social relations are built. Social relations are imagined as a precondition
  for action, not simply a result of it. (Strathern 1988, 319, 321)

The consequences of this critique of the pillar construct of society—which
in anthropology is reflected in the assumption that all societies struggle with
the same givens of nature, and thus organized to the same ends—are enor-
mous (see Strathern 1988, 288–344). Strathern’s notion of analogic gender
also provides a corrective to Ivan Illich’s useful theory of vernacular gender,
to the extent that the latter still says little about the relational aspect of
gendered domains and practices. More generally, it points to the need to
develop new languages for examining domination, resistance, and liberation
in nonmodern or hybrid ways.
   This theoretical detour further exposes the problematic character of the
WID discourse, to which we should return to conclude this section. Mexi-
can anthropologist Lourdes Arizpe encapsulated well the logic of the WID
discourse. “Everybody,” she wrote, “seems to be nowadays preoccupied
about the campesinas, but very few people are interested in them” (1983, 3).
Women, in other words, have become a problem, a subject of preoccupation,
but according to interests defined by others. The WID discourse, by con-
ceiving of peasants as “food producers,” fragments peasant lives according to
a compartmentalization that rural people do not experience and that they
resist. Indeed, the rich lives of Third World women are reduced to the pro-
saic status of human resources for boosting food production. Hence the im-
                              POWER AND VISIBILITY                                   191
portance, as Arizpe emphasizes, of creating spaces in which rural women
can speak and be heard. We should be mindful that it is in the rearrange-
ment of visibilities and statements that power configurations are changed.
This brings us back to the question with which we started this chapter, that
of visuality.
   Why visuality in relation to women? Rey Chow provides an approxi-
mation:
  One of the chief sources of the oppression of women lies in the way they have
  been consigned to visuality. This consignment is the result of an epistemo-
  logical mechanism which produces social difference by a formal distribution of
  positions and which modernism magnifies with the availability of technologies
  such as cinema. . . . If we take visuality to be, precisely, the nature of the social
  object that feminism should undertake to criticize, then it is incumbent upon us
  to analyze the epistemological foundation that supports it. It is, indeed, a foun-
  dation in the sense that a production of the West’s “others” depends on a logic
  of visuality that bifurcates “subjects” and “objects” into the incompatible posi-
  tions of intellectuality and specularity. (1992, 105)

For Chow, this regime of visuality results in constructions that are beyond
the individual’s grasp and that turn her into a spectacle whose “aesthetic”
value increases with its/her increasing helplessness. Placing the human
body (or human groups) into a field of vision within the panoptic/enframing
logic of modern knowledge systems entails a certain dehumanization and
violence. This is patently clear in the case of media representations of
women, but also, say, of victims of famine in the Sahel, Irakis or Palestinians
in the Middle East, and even Juan Valdez arising at 5 A.M. to pick coffee in
“the Colombian Andes” which is destined to help along the work force of the
U.S. at the beginning of the day. This, too, is about pornography and scopo-
philia, where intellectuality and historical agency are placed only on the side
of the (Western) viewer, and specularity on that of the passive other. As in
the war media, the development apparatus enframes peasants, women, and
nature (next section) in a techno-gaze that “signifies the unmarked positions
of Man and White” (Haraway 1988, 581). The apparatus “allows the ‘others’
to be seen, but would not pay attention to what they say” (Chow 1992, 114).
   The articulation of the visible and the expressible allowed by the develop-
ment apparatus is of a different order altogether. This order is constructed
so that those who come under its orbit—peasants, women, nature, and a
variety of spectacularized Third World others—can “begin the long journey
into the world economy” (Visvanathan 1991, 382). The journey, however, is
far from complete, and people struggle in manifold ways to break away from
the grand avenue of progress. In the rhizomic layout that results from the
micropolitics of the social field, there might emerge (in fact, there are always
192                                CHAPTER 5

emerging) multiple articulations of statements and visibilities that differ
from those dreamed of by bureaucrats at the World Bank and planning of-
fices all over the world.


           SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT: THE DEATH OF NATURE
                    AND THE RISE OF ENVIRONMENT
                         The Gluttony of Vision and
                   the Problematization of Global Survival
The opening paragraph of the 1987 report Our Common Future, prepared by
the World Commission on Environment and Development convened by the
United Nations under the chairmanship of the former prime minister of
Norway, Gro Harlem Bruntland, starts with the following proposition:
  In the middle of the 20th century, we saw our planet from space for the first
  time. Historians may eventually find that this vision had a greater impact on
  thought than did the Copernican revolution of the 16th century, which upset
  the human self-image by revealing that the earth is not the center of the uni-
  verse. From space, we saw a small and fragile ball dominated not by human
  activity and edifice, but by a pattern of clouds, oceans, greenery, and soils.
  Humanity’s inability to fit its doings into that pattern is changing planetary
  systems, fundamentally. Many such changes are accompanied by life-threaten-
  ing hazards. This new reality, from which there is no escape, must be recog-
  nized—and managed. (World Commission 1987, 1)

   Our Common Future launched to the world the strategy of sustainable
development as the great alternative for the end of the century and the
beginning of the next. Sustainable development would make possible the
eradication of poverty and the protection of the environment in one single
feat of Western rationality. The discourse is based on cultural histories that
are not difficult to trace. Seeing the Earth from space was no great revolu-
tion, despite the commission’s claim. The vision from space belongs to the
paradigm defined by the scientific gaze of the nineteenth-century clinician.
But in the same way that “the figures of pain are not conjured away by means
of a body of neutralized knowledge; they [are] redistributed in the space in
which bodies and eyes meet” (Foucault 1975, 11), the degradation of the
Earth is only redistributed and dispersed in the professional discourses of
environmentalists, economists, and politicians. The globe and its problems
have finally entered rational discourse. Disease is housed in nature in a new
manner. And as the medicine of the pathological led to a medicine of the
social space (the healthy biological space was also the social space dreamed
of by the French Revolution), so will the “medicine of the Earth” result in
                            POWER AND VISIBILITY                             193
new constructions of the social that allow nature’s health to be preserved.
This new construction of the social is what the concept of sustainable devel-
opment attempts to bring into place.
   The Bruntland report inaugurated a period of unprecedented gluttony in
the history of vision and knowledge with the concomitant rise of a global
“ecocracy.” Some might argue that this is too harsh a judgment, so we should
carry the argument step by step. The opening paragraph makes clear an-
other important aspect of the sustainable development discourse, the em-
phasis on management. Management is the twin of gluttonous vision, partic-
ularly now when the world is theorized in terms of global systems. The
category “global problems” is of recent invention, deriving its main impetus
from the ecological fervor fostered by the Club of Rome reports of the 1970s,
which provided a distinct vision of the world as a global system where all the
parts are interrelated (Sachs 1988). Management has to be of planetary pro-
portions, because we are talking about a “fragile ball.” Carrying the baton
from Bruntland, Scientific American’s September 1989 special issue on man-
aging planet Earth reveals, at its surface, the essence of the managerial atti-
tude. Whether it is the Earth as a whole, its industrial or agricultural sys-
tems, its climate, water, or population, what is at stake for these groups of
scientists and businessmen—all of them men—is the continuation of the
models of growth and development through appropriate management strat-
egies. “What kind of planet do we want? What kind of planet can we get?”,
asks the author in the opening article (Clark 1989, 48). “We” have the re-
sponsibility to manage the human use of planet Earth. “We” “need to move
peoples and nations towards sustainability” by effecting a change in values
and institutions that parallels the agricultural or industrial revolutions of the
past. The question in this discourse is what kind of new manipulations can
we invent to make the most of the Earth’s “resources.”
   But who is this “we” who knows what is best for the world as a whole?
Once again, we find the familiar figure of the Western scientist turned man-
ager. A full-page picture of a young Nepalese woman “planting a tree as part
of the reforestation project” is exemplary of the mind-set of this “we.” It is
not the women of the Chipko movement in India, for instance—with their
militancy, their radically different forms of knowledge and practice of for-
estry, defending their trees politically and not through carefully managed
“reforestation” projects—who are portrayed, but an ahistorical young dark
woman, whose control by masculinist and colonialist sciences, as Vandana
Shiva (1989) has shown, is ensured in the very act of representation. It is still
assumed that the benevolent (white) hand of the West will save the Earth;
it is up to the fathers of the World Bank, mediated by Gro Harlem Brunt-
land, the matriarch scientist, and a few cosmopolitan Third Worlders who
made it to the World Commission, to reconcile “humankind” with “nature.”
194                               CHAPTER 5

The Western scientist continues to speak for the Earth. God forbid that a
Peruvian peasant, an African nomad, or a rubber tapper of the Amazons
should have something to say in this regard.
   But can reality be “managed”? The concepts of planning and management
embody the belief that social change can be engineered and directed, pro-
duced at will. Development experts have always entertained the idea that
poor countries can more or less smoothly move along the path of progress
through planning. Perhaps no other concept has been so insidious, no other
idea gone so unchallenged, as modern planning (Escobar 1992a). The narra-
tives of planning and management, always presented as “rational” and “ob-
jective,” are essential to developers. In this narrative, peasants appear as the
half-human, half-cultured benchmark against which the Euro-American
world measures its achievements. A similar blindness to these aspects of
planning is found in environmental managerialism. The result is that, as they
are being incorporated into the world capitalist economy, even the most
remote communities in the Third World are torn apart from their local con-
text and redefined as “resources.”
   It would be tempting to assign the recent interests in the environment on
the part of mainstream development experts and politicians to a renewed
awareness of ecological processes, or to a fundamental reorientation of de-
velopment, away from its economistic character. Some of these explanations
are true to a limited extent. The rise of the ideology of sustainable develop-
ment is related to modification in various practices (such as assessing
the viability and impact of development projects, obtaining knowledge at
the local level, development assistance by NGOs), new social situations (the
failure of top-down development projects, unprecedented social and ecolog-
ical problems associated with that failure, new forms of protest, deficiencies
that have become accentuated), and identifiable international economic and
technological factors (new international divisions of labor with the concomi-
tant globalization of ecological degradation, coupled with new technologies
to measure such degradation). What needs to be explained, however, is pre-
cisely why the response to this set of conditions has taken the form that it
has, “sustainable development,” and what important problems might be as-
sociated with it.
   Four aspects should be highlighted in this regard. First, the emergence of
the concept of sustainable development is part of a broader process of the
problematization of global survival that has resulted in a reworking of the
relationship between nature and society. This problematization has ap-
peared as a response to the destructive character of post–World War II
development, on the one hand, and the rise of environmental movements in
both the North and the South, on the other, resulting in a complex interna-
tionalization of the environment (Buttel, Hawkins, and Power 1990). What
is problematized, however, is not the sustainability of local cultures and
                           POWER AND VISIBILITY                            195
realities but rather that of the global ecosystem. But again, the global is
defined according to a perception of the world shared by those who rule it.
Liberal ecosystems professionals see ecological problems as the result of
complex processes that transcend the cultural and local context. Even the
slogan Think globally, act locally assumes not only that problems can be
defined at a global level but that they are equally compelling for all commu-
nities. Ecoliberals believe that because all people are passengers of space-
ship Earth, all are equally responsible for environmental degradation. They
rarely see that there are a great differences and inequities in resource prob-
lems between countries, regions, communities, and classes; and they usually
fail to recognize that the responsibility is far from equally shared.
   A second aspect regulating the sustainable development discourse is the
economy of visibility it fosters. Over the years, ecosystems analysts have
discovered the “degrading” activities of the poor but seldom recognized that
the problems are rooted in development processes that displaced indige-
nous communities, disrupted peoples’ habitats and occupations, and forced
many rural societies to increase pressure on the environment. Although in
the seventies ecologists saw that the problem was economic growth and un-
controlled industrialization, in the eighties many of them came to perceive
poverty as a problem of great ecological significance. The poor are now ad-
monished for their “irrationality” and their lack of environmental conscious-
ness. Popular and scholarly texts alike are populated with representations of
dark and poor peasant masses destroying forests and mountainsides with
axes and machetes, thus shifting visibility and blame away from the large
industrial polluters in the North and South and from the predatory way of
life fostered by capitalism and development to poor peasants and “back-
ward” practices such as swidden agriculture.
   Third, the ecodevelopmentalist vision expressed in mainstream sustain-
able development reproduces the central aspects of economism and devel-
opmentalism. Discourses do not replace each other completely but build
upon each other as layers that can be only partly separated. The sustainable
development discourse redistributes many of the concerns of classical de-
velopment: basic needs, population, resources, technology, institutional co-
operation, food security, and industrialism are all found in the Bruntland
report, reconfigured and reshuffled. The report upholds ecological con-
cerns, although with a slightly altered logic. By adopting the concept of sus-
tainable development, two old enemies, growth and the environment, are
reconciled (Redclift 1987). The report, after all, focuses less on the negative
consequences of economic growth on the environment than on the effects of
environmental degradation on growth and potential for growth. It is growth
(read: capitalist market expansion), and not the environment, that has to be
sustained. Furthermore, because poverty is a cause as well as an effect of
environmental problems, growth is needed with the purpose of eliminating
196                                 CHAPTER 5

poverty, with the purpose, in turn, of protecting the environment. The
Bruntland Commission purports that the way to harmonize these conflict-
ing objectives is to establish new forms of management. Environmental
managerialism becomes a panacea of sorts.
   Fourth, this reconciliation is facilitated by the new concept of “the envi-
ronment,” the importance of which in ecological discourse has grown stead-
ily in the post–World War II period. The development of ecological con-
sciousness that accompanied the rapid growth of industrial civilization also
effected the transformation of “nature” into “environment.” No longer does
nature denote an entity with its own agency, a source of life and discourse;
for those committed to the world as resource, the environment becomes an
indispensable construct. As the term is used today, environment includes a
view of nature according to the urban-industrial system. Everything that is
relevant to the functioning of this system becomes part of the environment.
The active principle of this conceptualization is the human agent and his/her
creations, while nature is confined to an ever more passive role. What circu-
lates are raw materials, industrial products, toxic wastes, “resources”; nature
is reduced to stasis, a mere appendage to the environment. Along with the
physical deterioration of nature, we are witnessing its symbolic death. That
which moves, creates, inspires—that is, the organizing principle of life—
now resides in the environment (Sachs 1992).
   The ultimate danger of accepting the sustainable development discourse
is highlighted by a group of environmental activists from Canada:
  A genuine belief that the Bruntland Report is a big step forward for the environ-
  mental/green movement . . . amounts to a selective reading, where the data on
  environmental degradation and poverty are emphasized, and the growth eco-
  nomics and “resource” orientation of the Report are ignored or downplayed.
  This point of view says that given the Bruntland Report’s endorsement of sus-
  tainable development, activists can now point out some particular environ-
  mental atrocity and say, “This is not sustainable development.” However, envi-
  ronmentalists are thereby accepting a “development” framework for discussion.
  (Green Web 1989, 6)

   Becoming a new client of the development apparatus, in other words,
brings with it more than is bargained for: it affirms and contributes to the
spread of the dominant economic worldview. This affirmation relies on the
inscription of the economic onto the ecological, an inscription that takes
place through ecosystems analysis and ecodevelopment. These perspectives
accept the scarcity of natural resources as a given, which leads their propo-
nents to stress the need to find the most efficient forms of using resources
without threatening the survival of nature and people. As the Bruntlant Re-
port bluntly put it, it is a matter of finding the means to “produce more with
less” (World Commission on Environment and Development 1987, 15). The
                             POWER AND VISIBILITY                                197
World Commission is not alone in this endeavor. Year after year, this dictum
is reawakened by the World Watch Institute in its State of the World report,
one of the chief sources for ecodevelopers. Ecology, as Wolfgang Sachs
(1988) perceptively says of these reports, is reduced to a higher form of
efficiency. Unlike the discourse of the 1970s, which focused on “the limits to
growth,” the 1980s discourse becomes fixated on the “growth of the limits”
(Sachs 1988).
   Liberal ecologists and ecodevelopmentalists do not seem to perceive the
cultural character of the commercialization of nature and life that is integral
to the Western economy, nor do they seriously account for the cultural limits
that many societies posed to unchecked production. It is not surprising,
then, that their policies are restricted to promoting the “rational” manage-
ment of resources. As long as environmentalists accept this presupposition,
they also accept the imperatives for capital accumulation, material growth,
and the disciplining of labor and nature. The epistemological and political
reconciliation of economy and ecology proposed by sustainable develop-
ment is intended to create the impression that only minor adjustments to the
market system are needed to launch an era of environmentally sound devel-
opment, hiding the fact that the economic framework itself cannot hope to
accommodate environmental considerations without substantial reform.11
Furthermore, by rationalizing the defense of nature in economic terms,
green economists continue to extend the shadow that economics casts on life
and history. These economists “do more than simply propose new strategies;
they also tell people how to see nature, society and their own actions. . . .
They promote the sustainability of nature and erode the sustainability of
culture” (Sachs 1988, 39).
   This effect is most clear in the World Bank’s approach to sustainable de-
velopment; this approach is based on the belief that, as the president of the
World Bank put it shortly after the publication of the Bruntland report,
“sound ecology is good economics” (Conable 1987, 6). The establishment in
1987 of a top-level Environment Department, and the Global Environment
Facility (GEF) (read: the Earth as a giant market/utility company under
Group of Seven and World Bank control) created in 1992, reinforced the
managerial attitute toward nature. “Environmental Planning,” said Conable
in the same address, “can make the most of nature’s resources so that human
resourcefulness can make the most of the future” (3). In keeping with 1980s
neoliberal orientation, a central role is reserved for the market. As a Harvard
economist put it at the 1991 World Bank Annual Conference on Develop-
ment Economics,
  The source of environmental degradation and sustainability is not growth at all.
  It is policy and market failures. . . . Show me a depleted resource or a degraded
  environment and I will show you a subsidy or a failure to establish the basic
198                                 CHAPTER 5

  conditions that would enable the market to function efficiently. . . . If I had to
  present the solution in one sentence, it would be this: All resources should have
  titles, and all peoples should have entitlements. (Panayatou 1991, 357, 361)

This is admittedly an extreme view, but it does reflect the tendency toward
the privatization of resources, under the benign but insidious label “intellec-
tual property rights.” This discourse—one of the hottest debates in the de-
velopment literature at the moment—seeks to guarantee control by corpora-
tions of the North of the genetic material of the world’s biological species,
the majority of which are in the South. Hence the insistence on the part of
corporations and many international organizations and governments of the
North that patents on stock currently in genetic banks or developed in the
future be allowed. Biotechnology thus introduces life fully into industrial
production, to the joy of some and the dismay of many (Hobbelink 1992).
Biotechnology “will be to the Green Revolution what the Green Revolution
was to traditional plant varieties and practices. . . . [It] will significantly
change the context within which technological change in the Third World is
conceptualized and planned” (Buttel, Kenney, and Kloppenburg 1985, 32).
   Biotechnology, biodiversity, and intellectual property rights represent a
new turn in sustainable development discourse, as we will see shortly. Shiv
Visvanathan has called the world of Bruntland and sustainable development
a disenchanted cosmos. The Bruntland report is a tale that a disenchanted
(modern) world tells itself about its sad condition. As a renewal of the con-
tract between the modern nation-state and modern science, its vision of the
future is highly impoverished. Visvanathan is particularly concerned with
the potential of sustainable development for colonizing the last areas of
Third World social life that are not yet completely ruled by the logic of the
individual and the market, such as water rights, forests, and sacred groves.
What used to be called the commons is now halfway between the market
and the community, even if economics cannot understand the language of
the commons because the commons have no individuality and do not follow
the rules of scarcity and efficiency. Storytelling and analysis must be gener-
ated around the commons in order to replace the language of efficiency with
that of sufficiency, the cultural visibility of the individual with that of com-
munity. “What one needs is not a common future but the future as com-
mons” (383). Visvanathan is also concerned with the ascendancy of the sus-
tainable development discourse among ecologists and activists. It is fitting
to end this section with his call for resistance to cooptation, somewhat remi-
niscent of Adele Mueller’s warning of the bureaucratization of feminist
knowledge:
  Bruntland seeks a cooptation of the very groups that are creating a new dance
  of politics, where democracy is not merely order and discipline, where earth is
  a magic cosmos, where life is still a mystery to be celebrated. . . . The experts
  of the global state would love to coopt them, turning them into a secondary,
                              POWER AND VISIBILITY                                  199
  second-rate bunch of consultants, a lower order of nurses and paramedics still
  assisting the expert as surgeon and physician. It is this that we seek to resist by
  creating an explosion of imaginations that this club of experts seeks to destroy
  with its cries of lack and excess. The world of official science and the nation-
  state is not only destroying soils and silting up lakes, it is freezing the imagina-
  tion. . . . We have to see the Bruntland report as a form of published illiteracy
  and say a prayer for the energy depleted and the forests lost in publishing the
  report. And finally, a little prayer, an apology to the tree that supplied the paper
  for this document. Thank you, tree. (Visvanathan 1991, 384; emphasis added)


       The Capitalization of Nature: Two Forms of Ecological Capital
In a recent article, Martin O’Connor (1993) suggests that capital is under-
going a significant change in form and is entering an ecological phase. No
longer is nature defined and treated as an external, exploitable domain;
through a new process of privatization, effected primarily by a shift in repre-
sentation, previously uncapitalized aspects of nature and society become,
themselves, internal to capital; they become stocks of capital. “Correspond-
ingly, the primary dynamic of capitalism changes form, from accumulation
and growth feeding on an external domain, to ostensible self-management
and conservation of the system of capitalized nature closed back on itself”
(M. O’Connor 1993, 8). This new form entails a more pervasive semiotic
conquest and incorporation of nature as capital, even if calling for the sus-
tainable use of resources; it appears when brute appropriation is contested,
chiefly by social movements.
   Capital’s modern form—the conventional, reckless way of appropriating
and exploiting resources as raw materials—is thus now accompanied, and
potentially being replaced, by this second, postmodern “ecological” form.
This section develops the following argument, based on the two forms of
capital in its ecological phase: (a) both forms, modern and postmodern, are
necessary to capital, given the conditions in the late twentieth century
worldwide; (b) both forms require complex discursive articulations that
make them possible and legitimate; (c) both forms take on different but in-
creasingly overlapping characteristics in the First and Third worlds and
must be studied simultaneously; (d) social movements and communities are
increasingly faced with the dual task of building alternative productive ra-
tionalities and strategies, on the one hand, and resisting semiotically the
inroads of the new forms of capital into the fabric of nature and culture, on
the other.

The modern form of ecological capital. The first form capital takes in the
ecological phase operates according to the logic of modern capitalist ratio-
nality; it is being theorized in terms of what James O’Connor calls the sec-
ond contradiction of capitalism. The starting point of Marxist crisis theory,
200                               CHAPTER 5

let it be remembered, is the contradiction between capitalist productive
forces and production relations, or between the production and realization
of value and surplus value. This first contradiction is well known to political
economists. But there is a second aspect of capitalism that although present
since its inception has become pressing only with the aggravation of the
ecological crisis and the social forms of protest generated by such a crisis.
This is the second contradiction of capitalism (O’Connor 1988, 1989, 1992).
The central insight is that we need to refocus on the role of the conditions of
production for capital and capitalist restructuring, insufficiently theorized by
Marx but placed at the center of inquiry by Polanyi (1957b) in his critique of
the self-regulating market. Why? Because it has become clear not only that
capitalism impairs or destroys the social and environmental conditions on
which it relies (including nature and labor) but also that capitalist restructur-
ing increasingly takes place at the expense of those conditions. A “condition
of production” is defined as everything that is treated as if it were a commod-
ity even if it is not produced as a commodity according to the laws of value
and the market. Labor power, land, nature, urban space, and so on, fit this
definition. Recall that Polanyi called land (that is, nature) and labor (that is,
human life) fictitious commodities. The history of modernity and capitalism,
in this way, must be seen as the progressive capitalization of production
conditions. Trees produced capitalistically on plantations can be taken as an
exemplar of this process of capitalization, which also includes the scientific
and administrative conquest of most domains of economic and social life
specific to modernity.
   The capitalization of nature is greatly mediated by the state; indeed, the
state must be seen as an interface between capital and nature, human beings
and space. The capitalization of nature has been central to capitalism ever
since primitive accumulation and the enclosure of the commons. The history
of capital is thus the history of exploitation of production conditions, includ-
ing the ways in which capital impairs or destroys its own conditions.12 Capi-
tal’s threatening of its own conditions elicits attempts to restructure those
conditions in order to reduce costs or defend profits. This restructuring
takes place through technological change and by making raw materials and
more disciplined labor available more cheaply. These changes, however,
often require a higher degree of cooperation and state intervention, as in the
case of government development plans and controls to corporations, and as
in the case of the World Bank’s insistence that countries develop “national
environmental plans” (even if for capital’s sustained profits). The existence
of more visible policies of this type means that these processes are becoming
more social and potentially the rallying points for political struggles. Lobbies
by NGOs and Third World environmental groups to control the World
Bank, for instance, are a reflection of this greater socialization of the process
of capital.
                           POWER AND VISIBILITY                             201
   Social struggles generated around the defense of production conditions—
such as occupational health and safety movements, women’s movements
around the politics of the body or basic needs, mobilization against toxic
waste dumping in poor neighborhoods of the North or poor countries in the
South—also make more visible the social character of the production (and
necessary reconstruction) of life, nature, and space. These struggles tend to
alter the social relations of reproduction of production conditions. There are
two sides to these struggles: the struggle to protect the conditions of produc-
tion and life itself in the face of capital’s recklessness and excess; and the
struggle over the policies of capital and the state to restructure production
conditions (usually via further capitalization and privatization). In other
words, social movements have to face simultaneously the destruction of life,
the body, nature, and space and the crisis-induced restructuring of these
conditions (J. O’Connor 1988).
   Struggles against poverty and exploitation can be ecological struggles to
the extent that the poor attempt to keep natural resources under communal,
not market, control and resist the crematistic valorization of nature. The
rural poor in particular, because of their different culture, practice a certain
“ecologism,” contributing to the conservation of resources (Martínez Alier
1992). Often ecological struggles are also gender struggles. Many aspects of
the destruction of production conditions—arising from deforestation and
the damming of rivers, for example, and reflected in increasingly difficult
access to food, water, and fuel, all of which are women’s tasks in many parts
of the world—affect women particularly and contribute to restructuring
class and gender relations.13 Women sometimes are able to seize these con-
ditions to struggle for the defense of production conditions and their identi-
ties. Generally speaking, women’s struggles against the capitalization of na-
ture and patriarchal control have remained largely invisible. There is a great
need to incorporate gender and women’s struggles into the theorization of
capital and nature. Many of the questions that feminists have addressed to
development are yet to be tackled by green economists and other environ-
mentalists (Harcourt 1994).
   This question is perceived to some extent as a debate between essential-
ism and materialism.14 Although critical of essentialism, some ecofeminists
(Mellor 1992; Holland-Cunz in Kuletz 1992) nevertheless highlight the
need to address “the central question of how we theorize the very real ques-
tion of the finite nature of the planet and the biological differences of women
and men” (Mellor 1992, 46). The relevance of biological differences has
been overlooked in political economy; “what is incorporated into the sphere
of ‘production’ does not just represent the interest of capital, it represents
the interest of men” (51). A feminist green socialism must start by recog-
nizing that men have stakes in controlling women’s sexuality and relations
to life and nature. Some feminists have moved toward a synthesis of mate-
202                              CHAPTER 5

rialist and essentialist perspectives, even if recognizing the limitations of
the latter. The key to this synthesis is to arrive at materialist and nonpatri-
archal formulations of the historical proximity of women and nature which
do not overlook the fact that human beings are cultural and biological enti-
ties, material and emotional at the same time (Holland-Cunz in Kuletz
1992).
   A related aspect, also undeveloped in most ecological conceptions, is the
role of culture and discourse in organizing and mediating nature and pro-
duction conditions. Behind this question is the relationship between natural
and historical processes. Mexican ecosocialist Enrique Leff believes that we
do not have yet adequate conceptualizations of the mutual inscription of
nature and history. True, as the ecological becomes part of the accumulation
process, the natural is absorbed into history and thus can be studied by
historical materialism. Yet culture still remains an important mediating in-
stance; capital’s effects and modes of operation are always shaped by the
practices of the culture in which such transformation takes place (Godelier
1986; Leff 1986a). When a culture that becomes dominant seeks to maxi-
mize not continuity and survival but material benefits, then a certain articu-
lation between the biological and the historical is obtained. For Leff, capital
accumulation requires the articulation of the sciences to the production pro-
cess, so that the truths they produce become productive forces in the eco-
nomic process. Environmental sciences participate in reinscribing nature
into the law of value; the lack of epistemological vigilance has resulted in a
certain disciplining of environmental themes which has precluded the crea-
tion of concepts useful for the formulation of alternative ecological and eco-
nomic rationalities (Leff 1986b).
   The role of sustainable development in articulating conceptions and prac-
tices regarding production conditions is clear. Production conditions are not
just transformed by capital. They have to be transformed in and through dis-
course. The sustainable development movement is a massive attempt, per-
haps not witnessed since the rise of empirical sciences (Merchant 1980), to
resignify nature, resources, the Earth, and human life itself. It is a somewhat
clumsy and shortsighted attempt, as we will see briefly when we compare it
with the reinvention of nature currently effected by biotechnology, but its
importance should not be minimized. Sustainable development is the last
attempt to articulate modernity and capitalism before the advent of cyber-
culture. The resignification of nature as environment; the reinscription of
the Earth into capital via the gaze of science; the reinterpretation of poverty
as effect of destroyed environments; and the new lease on management and
planning as arbiters between people and nature, all of these are effects of the
discursive construction of sustainable development. As more and more pro-
fessionals and activists adopt the grammar of sustainable development, the
reinvention of production conditions will be more effective. Institutions,
                            POWER AND VISIBILITY                             203
again, will continue to reproduce the world as seen by those who rule it. The
accumulation and expanded reproduction of capital also require the accu-
mulation of discourse and cultures, that is, their increased normalization.
This normalization is resisted, thus perhaps introducing a contradiction not
considered by political economists.15
   Political economy is a master narrative indebted at the cultural level to
the reality that it seeks to sublate, modern capitalism. To be sure, Euro-
centered historical materialism and feminisms provide us with illuminating
views of the conversion of nature and women into objects of work and pro-
duction; to this extent they are extremely important. At the same time, how-
ever, an effort should be made to understand social life in the Third World
(and in the West) through frameworks that do not rely solely on these intel-
lectual achievements. Highlighting the mediation of discourse in capital’s
modern form is a way to start.

The postmodern form of ecological capital. Public policy in many parts of
the Third World continues to operate on the basis of conventional develop-
ment, even if increasingly there are areas of the world sold to sustainable
development. Martin O’Connor is right, however, in pointing to a qualita-
tive change in the form of capital. If with modernity one can speak of the
progressive semiotic conquest of social and cultural life, today this conquest
is extended to the very heart of nature and life. Once modernity is consoli-
dated and the economy becomes a seemingly ineluctable reality—a true
descriptor of reality for most—capital must broach the question of the do-
mestication of all remaining social and symbolic relations in terms of the
code of production. It is no longer capital and labor per se that are at stake,
but the reproduction of the code. Social reality becomes, to borrow Baudril-
lard’s (1975) expression, “the mirror of production.”
   The rising discourse of biodiversity in particular achieves this feat. In this
discourse, nature becomes a source of value in itself. Species of flora and
fauna are valuable not so much as resources but as reservoirs of value that
research and knowledge, along with biotechnology, can release for capital
and communities. This is one of the reasons why ethnic and peasant commu-
nities in the tropical rain-forest areas of the world are finally being recog-
nized as owners of their territories (or what is left of them), but only to the
extent that they accept to treat it—and themselves—as reservoirs of capital.
Communities and social movements in various parts of the world are being
enticed by biodiversity projects to become “stewards of the social and natu-
ral ‘capitals’ whose sustainable management is, henceforth, both their re-
sponsibility and the business of the world economy” (M. O’Connor 1993, 5).
Once the semiotic conquest of nature is completed, the sustainable and ra-
tional use of the environment becomes an imperative. Here lies the underly-
ing logic of sustainable development and biodiversity discourses.
204                              CHAPTER 5

   This new capitalization of nature does not only rely on the semiotic con-
quest of territories (in terms of biodiversity reserves and new schemes for
land ownership and control) and communities (as “stewards” of nature); it
also requires the semiotic conquest of local knowledges, to the extent that
“saving nature” demands the valuation of local knowledges of sustaining
nature. Modern biology is beginning to find local knowledge systems to be
useful complements. In these discourses, however, knowledge is seen as
something that exists in the “minds” of individual persons (shamans, sages,
elders) about external “objects” (plants, species), the medical or economic
“utility” of which their bearers are supposed to “transmit” to the modern ex-
perts. Local knowledge is not seen as a complex cultural construction, in-
volving not objects but movements and events that are profoundly historical
and relational. These forms of knowledge usually have entirely different
modes of operation and relations to social and cultural fields (Deleuze and
Guattari 1987). By bringing them into the politics of science, local forms of
knowledge are recodified by modern science in utilitarian ways.
   A brief example will illustrate the logic of the two forms of capital in its
ecological phase. The Pacific Coast region of Colombia is one of the areas
with the highest biological diversity in the world. Covering about 5.4 million
hectares, it is populated by about eight hundred thousand Afro-Colombians
and forty thousand indigenous people belonging to various ethnic groups,
particularly Emberas and Waunanas. Since the early 1980s, the government
has been intent on developing the region and has formulated ambitious de-
velopment plans (DNP 1983, 1992). Capital has been flowing to parts of the
region in the form of investment in African palm oil, large-scale shrimp culti-
vation, mining, timber, and tourism. The plans and the investments operate
in the modern form of capital. They contribute to ecological degradation and
the displacement and proletarization of local people. Parallel to this devel-
opment, however, the government has also launched a more modest but
symbolically ambitious project for the protection of the region’s almost leg-
endary biological diversity (GEF-PNUD 1993). This project forms part of
the global strategy for the protection of biodiversity advanced by the World
Bank’s Global Environment Facility (GEF) and the United Nations. The
project has an innovative design, including aspects such as the systematiza-
tion of both modern and traditional knowledge of biodiversity and the pro-
motion of organizational forms by the black and indigenous communities of
the region.
   The biodiversity project obeys the logic of the second form of capital. It
has become possible not only due to international trends but also because of
increased mobilization by black and indigenous communities in the context
of the rights newly accorded to them by the constitutional reform of 1991,
which recognizes the rights of ethnic minorities to territorial and cultural
autonomy. Moreover, the project has had to accept the communities as im-
                           POWER AND VISIBILITY                             205
portant interlocutors, and several black leaders have been able to insert
themselves into the project staff. These professionals/activists are aware of
the risks involved in participating in such an enterprise, yet they believe that
the project presents a space of struggle they cannot afford to ignore. Are
these activists merely assisting capital in the semiotic conquest of nature and
communities? Are they contributing to the superficial greening of econom-
ics and communities? Or, on the contrary, or simultaneously, can they en-
gage in cultural resistance and articulate their own productive strategies?
One thing is certain: these processes are taking place in a number of coun-
tries with high degrees of biological diversity where GEF is operating. Ac-
tivists and communities in these countries are faced with the dire need to
come up with their own visions or being swept away by developmentalism
and biotechnology. It is too soon to tell what the outcome of these struggles
will be. The growing black movement in Colombia is an indication that orga-
nized communities have more power than most observers will admit, de-
spite the magnitude of the forces that oppose them.
   The tasks of articulating alternative productive strategies—autonomous,
culturally grounded, and democratic—is difficult. Worldwide, there is no
clarity about what those alternatives might look like, even if some general
principles have been put forward. For Leff, “There does not exist yet a suffi-
ciently worked out theory of sustainable development based on an ecological
rationality” (1992, 62). As we saw, the liberal sustainable development dis-
course is based, on one hand, on an economistic, not ecological, rationality.
Ecosocialism, on the other hand, has not incorporated culture as a mediating
instance between the social and the ecological. Leff ’s attempt is geared to-
ward an integration of the ecological, the technological, and the cultural in
what he terms an alternative productive rationality. For Leff, every culture
includes a principle of productivity, the basis of a production paradigm that,
in the case of many ethnic groups, “is not economistic yet pertains to politi-
cal economy” (1993, 50). The environment thus must be seen as the articu-
lation of cultural, ecological, economic, and technological processes that
must be woven together to generate a balanced and sustained productive
system.16
   The difficulties ahead in the task of building a culture-specific productive
strategy are tremendous, beyond the obvious opposition by established in-
terests. Should organized communities, for instance, put prices on biodiver-
sity resources? Develop patents? Impose “sustainable use” of forest re-
sources on their people? Conversely, can they afford not to put prices on
their resources? What would be the economic, political, and cultural conse-
quences of either course of action? Can they contribute to the deconstruc-
tion of market mechanisms through cultural resistance while playing into
the marketing of nature? The worst for these communities would be to opt
for conventional development; most already know that. To accede to post-
206                              CHAPTER 5

development, communities need to experiment with alternative productive
strategies and, simultaneously, practice semiotic resistance to capital’s and
modernity’s restructuring of nature and society. Economic decentralization,
debureaucratization of environmental management, political pluralism, cul-
tural autonomy, and ecological productivity can serve as overall criteria to
advance this type of strategy. More on this in the concluding chapter.


          Cyberculture and the Postmodern Reinvention of Nature
The discourses of biodiversity and biotechnology can be situated within the
framework of what Donna Haraway calls the postmodern reinvention of na-
ture. This reinvention is being fostered by sciences such as molecular biol-
ogy, genetics, and immunology, research trends such as the human genome
project, and artificial intelligence and biotechnology. We could be moving
from a regime of “organic” (premodern) and “capitalized” (modern) nature to
a regime of “constructed” nature effected by novel forms of science and
technology (Escobar 1994). In this regime, nature would be built by mani-
fold biopractices.17
   Haraway’s critical reading of twentieth-century science narratives such as
primatology and sociobiology intends to make explicit the connection be-
tween the content of science and its social context, a connection that is usu-
ally rendered invisible through practices of writing and reading that are
constitutive of the making of science.18 If before World War II the dominant
idioms of biology were borrowed from human engineering, personality stud-
ies, and scientific management, after the war the language of systems analy-
sis became dominant. The new conceptual tools speak of systems and cyber-
netic machines, feedback mechanisms, optimization and information theory,
population genetics, ergonomics, and sociobiology. This shift in paradigms
is linked to the logic of control appropriate to postwar capitalism. Machine
and market recur as organizing principles but couched in the language of
systems and cybernetics. Living beings are conceptualized no longer in
terms of hierarchically organized and localized organisms but in terms of
coded texts, engineered communications systems, command-control net-
works, purposeful behavior, and probabilistic outcomes. Pathology comes to
be the result of stress and communications breakdown, and the entire im-
mune system is modeled as a battlefield (Haraway 1989b, 1991).
   The language of this discourse is decidedly postmodern; it is not inimical
to the post-Fordist regime of accumulation, with its cultural order of “flexi-
ble labor” that would keep dark invaders at a distance, or quickly phagocy-
tize them if they come close enough or become numerous enough to pose
the threats of contagion and disorder. Haraway reads in these developments
the denaturalization of the notions of “organism” and “individual,” so dear to
pre–World War II modern science and political economy, and the emer-
                           POWER AND VISIBILITY                             207
gence of a new entity, the cyborg—a hybrid of organism and machine “ap-
propriate to the late twentieth century” (1991, 1)—which arises to fill the
vacuum. In the language of sustainable development, one would say that
cyborgs do not belong in/to nature; they belong in/to the environment, and
the environment belongs in/to systems.
   Taking Simone de Beauvoir’s declaration that “one is not born a woman”
to the postmodern domain of late-twentieth-century biology, Haraway states
that “one is not born an organism. Organisms are made; they are constructs
of a world-changing kind” (1989b, 10). Organisms make themselves and are
made by history. This deeply historicized account of life is difficult to accept
if one remains within the modern traditions of realism, rationalism, and or-
ganic nature. The historicized view assumes that what counts as nature and
what counts as culture in the West ceaselessy change according to complex
historical factors, although in every case nature “remains a crucially impor-
tant and deeply contested myth and reality” (1989a, 1). Bodies, organisms,
and nature are not just passive receptors of the naming power of science;
their specificity and affectivity mean that they have an active part in the
production of knowledge about them. They must thus be seen as “material-
semiotic” actors, rather than as mere objects of science preexisting in purity.
But there are other actors in the construction of organisms as objects of
knowledge, including humans and machines (visualization technologies, the
lab), medical and business practices, and cultural productions of various
kinds (narratives of science, origins, systems, and the like). Haraway refers
to this complex system that accounts for the construction of organisms as
“the apparatus of bodily production” (1989b, 1992). The apparatus reminds
us that organisms “are made in world-changing techno-scientific practices
by particular collective actors in particular times and places” (1992, 297).
   The apparatus of bodily production implies that the boundaries between
the organic, the technical, and the textual that make it up are quite perme-
able. These three domains are no longer neatly separated; any giving organ-
ism that becomes an object of science is already a mixture of the three.
Although nature, bodies, and organisms certainly have an organic basis, they
are increasingly produced in conjunction with machines, and this produc-
tion is always mediated by scientific and cultural narratives. Nature is a
co-construction among humans and nonhumans. We thus have the possibil-
ity of engaging in new conversations with and around nature, involving hu-
mans and nonhumans together in the reconstruction of nature as public
culture. If the cyborg can be seen as the imposition of a new grid of control
on the planet, it also represents new possibilities for potent articulations
among humans, animals, and machines.
   The grasping of this possibility has tremendous implications for Haraway.
To begin with, the search for natural matrices and organic wholes—based on
the dichotomies between mind and body, machine and organism, animal
208                               CHAPTER 5

and human—has to be abandoned or drastically reformed. The possibility
that the organic is not opposed to the technological must be entertained;
even more, “there are great riches for feminists in explicitly embracing the
possibilities inherent in the breakdown of clean distinctions between or-
ganism and machine and similar distinctions structuring the Western self”
(Haraway 1985, 92).19 Cyborgs are not necessarily the enemy. This also
means that socialists, feminists, and others should devote attention to the
social relations of science and technology, to the extent that they mediate
and shape the construction of ourselves, our bodies, and nature. Haraway’s
call is to embrace “the skillfull task of reconstructing the boundaries of daily
life, in partial connection with others [humans, organisms, and machines], in
communication with all our parts” (1985, 100). This requires new imagina-
tions, figurations of difference stemming from those opposed to the un-
marked category of the white male, the universal norm against which others
have to measure their achievements.
   The historicization of nature’s construction has been the object of discus-
sion by others in various traditions. Adorno’s and Benjamin’s dialectic of
nature and history, of naturalized history and historicized nature, showed
what was radically new about industrialism and modernity: the experience
of nature as commodity, that is, as an arrested form of history (to the extent
that it reflects the displacement of nature’s transiency onto commodities);
the “veil” thrown onto nature by the ideology of nature as object to be ap-
propriated (enframing); and what these authors considered the prehistoric,
barbaric state of modern history. Also adumbrated by Benjamin were the
possibility of working through this prehistory (from Marx) through a new
dialectics of seeing, of bringing about new configurations of nature and his-
tory that reveal the ways in which nature is inevitably inmersed in history,
the agency and aliveness of nature itself, the ways in which natural objects
“do not submit to language signs meekly, but have the semantic strength to
set the signs into question” (Buck-Morss 1990, 60).20
   Like Haraway, Benjamin would like us to join the technological capacity
to produce with the utopian capacity to dream, and vice versa; that is, to
transform the ruins inherited from historical nature (as in Haraway’s read-
ings of modern artifacts and discourses) and the fossils of naturalized history
(such as the body as commodity) in order to infuse new life into mythic
(fetishized) history and mythic nature (the images of cyberspaces to be cre-
ated) through a dialectics of dreaming and waking. Haraway’s language and
vision are perhaps more appropriate for our age. They also highlight aspects
that are important to other cultures, such as nature’s agency and the belief
that nature is a co-construction between humans and nonhumans (including
the mythic and the spiritual). One chief difference is the separation of hu-
mans and nature present in Haraway’s work, even if she calls on us to see
                           POWER AND VISIBILITY                             209
nature as subject. This is a reflection of a contextual difference between the
First and Third World.
   Critics of the new technologies usually paint a bleak future. But perhaps
the birth of cyberculture—as a truly postindustrial and postmodern soci-
ety—also entails a certain cultural promise for more just social configura-
tions. But the obstacles and risks ahead are clear. New knowledge and
power configurations are narrowing down on life and labor, particularly in
biotechnology. These practices are perhaps exemplified by the human ge-
nome project, an initiative intended to map the entire human genome. The
new genetics “will prove to be an infinitely greater force for reshaping soci-
ety and life than was the revolution in physics, because it will be embedded
throughout the social fabric at the micro-level by medical practices and a
variety of other discourses” (Rabinow 1992, 241). The new regime of bio-
sociality, as Paul Rabinow has named it, implies that “nature will be mod-
eled on culture understood as practice. Nature will be known and remade
through technique and will finally become artificial, just as culture becomes
natural” (241).
   This might bring with it the dissolution of modern society and of the na-
ture/culture split. Genetics, immunology, and environmentalism “are the
leading vehicles for the infiltration of technoscience, capitalism and culture
into what the moderns call ‘nature’ ” (245). According to Evelyn Fox Keller
(1992), the new genetics, besides summoning again the ghost of biological
determinism, signals the dawn of an era in which nature and culture are
radically reconceived. A new “malleability of nature” is proclaimed by mo-
lecular biology, which is seen as holding the key to greater happiness for
humankind through the promise of the cure for a panoply of genetic dis-
eases, many of which, as Keller rightly notes, are questionably labeled as
such. The “right to healthy genes” might well become the battle cry of a host
of medical reformers which will require grids of examination more pervasive
than those Foucault unveiled in his study of the birth of the clinic (1975).
   What all this means for the Third World has yet to be examined. This
examination has to start with inventing a new language to speak of these
issues from Third World perspectives. Sustainable development will cer-
tainly not do. Calls for “catching up” with the West in the production of new
technologies, lest the latter’s dominance in this domain throw the Third
World into even greater forms of dependence (Castells 1986), are also inade-
quate. The hypothetical proposition that emerging nations could skip indus-
trialization and develop postindustrial societies based on information and
biological technologies is attractive but probably unworkable at this point.
To the extent that new social practices are being constructed around the
new technologies, it is crucial for the Third World to participate in the global
conversations that generate such practices; local groups must position them-
210                               CHAPTER 5

selves in relation to the processes of material and symbolic globalization in
ways that allow them to overcome their position of subordination as actors in
the global scene.
    What are the requirements of knowledge to advance this strategy? Scien-
tific work can produce knowledge that contributes to popular causes and
interests. There are types of analyses that are helpful and at times essential
to social movements. Some agro-ecologists, for instance, plea for the need
to consider multiple perspectives, build communication between different
popular groups worldwide, and design institutions capable of accepting a
plurality of viewpoints and options (Altieri 1987). These criteria are being
proposed by social movements themselves about the work of experts. At the
theory level, there is the need to articulate a poststructuralist political econ-
omy of ecology and biology. This need goes beyond recognizing that nature
is socially constructed to insist that the constructs of political economy
and science be analyzed discursively. It reiterates the connection and evolu-
tion of bodies, organisms, and communities with the making and evolu-
tion of narratives about them. As we saw, the two forms of capital are linked
to known discourses. From this perspective, there cannot be a materialist
analysis that is not at the same time a discursive analysis.
    This chapter has shown the system of transformation of development. In-
tegrated rural development, WID, and sustainable development exhibit fea-
tures that betray their origin in a common discursive practice. This “endo-
consistency” (Deleuze and Guattari 1993) of concepts such as development
refers to the concept’s systematicity, despite the heterogeneity of the ele-
ments that inhabit the space it creates. The repeated bifurcation of devel-
opment—into discourses such as those analyzed in this chapter—reflect the
appearance of new problems, even if the new discourses exist in the same
plane of the original concept, and thus contribute to the discourse’s self-
creation and autoreferentiality. Nothing has really changed at the level of
the discourse, even if perhaps the conditions for its continued reproduction
have been altered. “Development” continues to reverberate in the social
imaginary of states, institutions, and communities, perhaps more so after the
inclusion of women, peasants, and nature into its repertoire and imaginative
geographies.

Under the title “The Lesson that Rio Forgets,” the cover picture of the issue
of The Economist that appeared the week before the Earth Summit (the
United Nations World Conference on Environment and Development held
in Rio de Janeiro in June 1992) shows an undifferentiated mass of dark peo-
ple, the “teeming masses” of the Third World. The “lesson” is population:
the expanding masses of the Third World have to be curbed if sustainable
development is to be achieved. The fact that the populations of the industri-
alized world consume a strikingly higher percentage of world resources than
                           POWER AND VISIBILITY                           211
their Third World counterparts does not enter into The Economist’s equa-
tion. By a curious optical twist, the consumption of people of the North is
rendered invisible, whereas the dark hordes of the South are consigned to a
new round of gluttonous vision.
   Worldwide, the new biotechnologies further capitalize nature by planting
value into it through scientific research and development. Even human
genes become part of the conditions of production, an important arena for
capitalist restructuring and, so, for contestation. The reinvention of nature
currently under way, effected by and within webs of meaning and produc-
tion that link the discourses of science and capital, should be incorporated
into a political economy of ecology appropriate to the new age whose dawn
we are already witnessing. Social movements, intellectuals, and activists
have the opportunity to create discourses in which the problematizations of
food, gender, and nature are not reduced to one more problem of develop-
ment, to one more chapter in the history of economic culture. Far from
Bruntland, the picture of Earth from space should serve as a basis for visions
that allows us to reawaken the awareness of life and the living, to reimagine
the relationship between society and nature, and to reconnect life and
thought at the level of myth.
                                   Chapter 6

                   CONCLUSION:
         IMAGINING A POSTDEVELOPMENT ERA

                We don’t know exactly when we started to talk about
            cultural difference. But at some point we refused to go on
             building a strategy around a catalogue of “problems” and
             “needs.” The government continues to bet on democracy
              and development; we respond by emphasizing cultural
            autonomy and the right to be who we are and have our own
            life project. To recognize the need to be different, to build
            an identity, are difficult tasks that demand persistent work
             among our communities, taking their very heterogeneity
             as a point of departure. However, the fact that we do not
             have worked out social and economic alternatives makes
             us vulnerable to the current onslaught by capital. This is
               one of our most important political tasks at present: to
                 advance in the formulation and implementation of
                     alternative social and economic proposals.
                 —Libia Grueso, Leyla Arroyo, and Carlos Rosero,
                      the Organization of Black Communities
                           of the Pacific Coast of Colombia,
                                     January 1994




                                Statistics (1980s)
THE INDUSTRIALIZED COUNTRIES, with 26 percent of the population, account
for 78 percent of world production of goods and services, 81 percent of
energy consumption, 70 percent of chemical fertilizers, and 87 percent of
world armaments. One U.S. resident spends as much energy as 7 Mexicans,
55 Indians, 168 Tanzanians, and 900 Nepalis. In many Third World coun-
tries, military expenditures exceed expenditures for health. The cost of one
modern fighter plane can finance forty thousand rural health centers. In
Brazil, the consumption of the 20 percent richest is thirty-three times that of
the 20 percent poorest, and the gap between rich and poor is still growing.
Forty-seven percent of the world’s grain production is used for animal feed.
The same amount of grain could feed more than 2 billion people. In Brazil
                                 CONCLUSION                                 213
the area planted with soybeans could feed 40 million people if sown with
corn and beans. The world’s six larger grain mechants control 90 percent of
the global trade of grain, whereas several million people have died of hunger
in the Sahel region as a result of famines during the 1980s alone. The tropi-
cal rain forest provides about 42 percent of the worlds’s plant biomass and
oxygen; 600,000 hectares of rain forest are destroyed annually in Mexico
alone, 600,000 in Colombia. The amount of coffee that producing countries
had to export to obtain one barrel of oil doubled between 1975 and 1982.
Third World workers who are in the textile and electronic industries are
paid up to twenty times less than their counterparts in Western Europe, the
United States, or Japan for doing the same job with at least the same produc-
tivity. Since the Latin American debt crisis broke in 1982, Third World debt-
ors have been paying their creditors an average of $30 billion more each year
than they have received in new lending. In the same period, the food avail-
able to poor people in the Third World has fallen by about 30 percent. One
more: the vast majority of the more than 150 wars that have been waged in
the world since 1945 have taken place in the Third World, as reflections of
superpower confrontations. Even those taking place since the end of the
cold war continue to be a reflection of the effects of the struggle for power
among the industrialized nations.
   One could continue.1 Statistics tell stories. They are techno-representa-
tions endowed with complex political and cultural histories. Within the pol-
itics of representation of the Third World, statistics such as these function to
entrench the development discourse, often regardless of the political aim of
those displaying them. Toward the end of this book, however, one should be
able to draw a different reading from these figures: not the reading that
reproduces the tale of populations in need of development and aid; nor the
reductive interpretation of these figures in terms of pressing needs that call
for the “liberation” at any cost of poor people from their suffering and mis-
ery; perhaps not even the narrative of exploitation of the South by the North,
in the ways in which this story was told up to a decade ago. Instead, one
should be able to analyze counting in terms of its political consequences, the
way in which it reflects the crafting of subjectivities, the shaping of culture,
and the construction of social power—including what these figures say
about surplus material and symbolic consumption in those parts of the world
that think of themselves as developed. Not the perverse reading, finally, of
the International Monetary Fund—insisting on “austerity measures” for the
Third World, as if the majority of people in the Third World had known
anything but material austerity as a fundamental fact of their daily exis-
tence—but a renewed awareness of the suffering of many, of the fact that
“the modern world, including the modernized Third World, is built on the
suffering and brutalization of millions” (Nandy 1989, 269).
214                              CHAPTER 6


            The Third World and the Politics of Representation
“Today something that we do will touch your life.” This Union Carbide
motto became ironically real after the December 1984 gas leak in Bhopal,
India, which affected two hundred thousand people and left at least five
thousand dead. Bhopal is not only a reminder of the connection between the
choices and power of some and the chances of others, a connection firmly
established by the global economy with a deadly appearance of normalcy; as
Visvanathan (1986) has suggested, Bhopal is also a metaphor of development
as a disater of sorts which demands that the casualties be forgotten and
dictates that a community that fails to develop is obsolescent. An entire
structure of propaganda, erasure, and amnesia on Bhopal was orchestrated
by science, government, and corporations which allowed the language of
compensation as the only avenue of expression of outrage and injustice—
and even compensation was precarious at best. If, as in the Sahelian famines,
those affected cannot be accommodated within the languages of the market,
salvation (by U.S. marines or international troops), and semisecularized
Christian hope, so much the worse for them. In these examples, the clinical,
military, and corporate gazes join their efforts to launch allegedly beneficent
and sanitized operations for the good of Mankind (with a capital M, that of
Modern Man). Restore Hope, Desert Storm, Panama, and Granada are signs
of a so-called new world order.2
   The development discourse, as this book has shown, has been the central
and most ubiquitous operator of the politics of representation and identity in
much of Asia, Africa, and Latin America in the post–World War II period.
Asia, Africa, and Latin America have witnessed a succession of regimes of
representation—originating in colonialism and European modernity but
often appropriated as national projects in postindependence Latin America
and postcolonial Africa and Asia—each with its accompanying regime of
violence. As places of encounter and suppression of local cultures, women,
identities, and histories, these regimes of representation are originary sites
of violence (Rojas de Ferro 1994). As a regime of representation of this sort,
development has been linked to an economy of production and desire, but
also of closure, difference, and violence. To be sure, this violence is also
mimetic violence, a source of self-formation. Terror and violence circulate
and become, themselves, spaces of cultural production (Girard 1977 and
Taussig 1987). But the modernized violence introduced with colonialism
and development is itself a source of identity. From the will to civilization
in the nineteenth century to today, violence has been engendered through
representation.
   The very existence of the Third World has in fact been wagered, man-
aged, and negotiated around this politics of representation. As an effect of
the dicursive practices of development, the Third World is a contested real-
                                 CONCLUSION                                 215
ity whose current status is up for scrutiny and negotiation. For some, the
Third World “can be made a symbol of planetary intellectual responsibility
. . . it can be read as a text of survival” (Nandy 1989, 275). After the demise
of the Second World, the Third and First worlds necessarily have to realign
their places and the space of ordering themselves. Yet it is clear that the
Third World has become the other of the First with even greater poi-
gnancy.3 “To survive, ‘Third World’ must necessarily have negative and pos-
itive connotations: negative when viewed in a vertical ranking system . . .
positive when undestood sociopolitically as a subversive, ‘non-aligned’
force” (Trinh 1989, 97). The term will continue to have currency for quite
some time, because it is still an essential construct for those in power. But it
can also be made the object of different reimaginings. “The Third World is
what holds in trust the rejected selves of the First and the [formerly] Second
Worlds . . . before envisioning the global civilization of the future, one must
first own up the responsibility of creating a space at the margins of the pres-
ent global civilization for a new, plural, political ecology of knowledge”
(Nandy 1989, 273, 266).
    As we will see, however, the Third World should in no way be seen as a
reservoir of “traditions.” The selves of the Third World are manifold and
multiple, including selves that are becoming increasingly illegible according
to any known idiom of modernity, given the growing fragmentation, polar-
ization, violence, and uprootedness that are taking hold of various social
groups in a number of regions.4 It is also possible, even likely, that radically
reconstituted identities might emerge from some of those spaces that are
traversed by the most disarticulating forces and tensions. But it is too soon
even to imagine the forms of representation that this process might promote.
Instead, at present one seems to be led to paying attention to forms of resis-
tance to development that are more clearly legible, and to the reconstruction
of cultural orders that might be happening at the level of popular groups and
social movements.
    Since the middle and late 1980s, for instance, a relatively coherent body
of work has emerged which highlights the role of grassroots movements,
local knowledge, and popular power in transforming development. The au-
thors representing this trend state that they are interested not in develop-
ment alternatives but in alternatives to development, that is, the rejection of
the entire paradigm altogether. In spite of significant differences, the mem-
bers of this group share certain preoccupations and interests:5 an interest in
local culture and knowledge; a critical stance with respect to established
scientific discourses; and the defense and promotion of localized, pluralistic
grassroots movements. The importance and impact of these movements are
far from clear; yet, to use Sheth’s (1987) expression, they provide an arena
for the pursuit of “alternative development as political practice.” Beyond, in
spite of, against development: these are metaphors that a number of Third
216                                CHAPTER 6

World authors and grassroots movements use to imagine alternatives to de-
velopment and to “marginalize the economy”—another metaphor that
speaks of strategies to contain the Western economy as a system of produc-
tion, power, and signification.
   The grassroots movements that emerged in opposition to development
throughout the 1980s belong to the novel forms of collective action and
social mobilization that characterized that decade. Some argue that the
1980s movements changed significantly the character of the political cul-
ture and political practice (Laclau and Mouffe 1985; Escobar and Alvarez
1992). Resistance to development was one of the ways in which Third World
groups attempted to construct new identities. Far from the essentializing
assumptions of previous political theory (for example, that mobilization was
based on class, gender, or ethnicity as fixed catagories), these processes of
identity construction were more flexible, modest, and mobile, relying on
tactical articulations arising out of the conditions and practices of daily life.
To this extent, these struggles were fundamentally cultural. Some of these
forms and styles of protest will continue throughout the 1990s.
   Imaging the end of development as a regime of representation raises all
sorts of social, political, and theoretical questions. Let us start with this last
aspect by recalling that discourse is not just words and that words are not
“wind, an external whisper, a beating of wings that one has difficulty in
hearing in the serious matter of history” (Foucault 1972, 209). Discourse is
not the expression of thought; it is a practice, with conditions, rules, and
historical transformations. To analyze development as a discourse is “to
show that to speak is to do something—something other than to express
what one thinks; . . . to show that to add a statement to a pre-existing series
of statements is to perform a complicated and costly gesture” (1972, 209).
In chapter 5, for instance, I showed how seemingly new statements about
women and nature are “costly gestures” of this sort, ways of producing
change without transforming the nature of the discourse as a whole.
   Said differently, changing the order of discourse is a political question
that entails the collective practice of social actors and the restructuring of
existing political economies of truth.6 In the case of development, this may
require moving away from development sciences in particular and a partial,
strategic move away from conventional Western modes of knowing in gen-
eral in order to make room for other types of knowledge and experience.
This transformation demands not only a change in ideas and statements but
the formation of nuclei around which new forms of power and knowledge
might converge. These new nuclei may come about in a “serial” manner.7
Social movements and antidevelopment struggles may contribute to the for-
mation of nuclei of problematized social relations around which novel cul-
tural productions might emerge. The central requirement for a more lasting
transformation in the order of discourse is the breakdown of the basic orga-
nization of the discourse (chapter 2), that is, the appearance of new rules of
                                 CONCLUSION                                  217
formation of statements and visibilities. This may or may not entail new
objects and concepts; it may be marked by the reappearance of concepts and
practices discarded long ago (new fundamentalisms are a case in point); it
may be a slow process but it may also happen with relative rapidity. This
transformation will also depend on how new historical situations—such as
the divisions of social labor based on high technology—alter what may be
constituted as objects of discourse, as well as on the relation between devel-
opment and other institutions and practices, such as the state, political par-
ties, and the social sciences.
    Challenges to development are multiplying, often in dialectical relation to
the fragmentary attempts at control inherent in post-Fordist regimes of
representation and accumulation; post-Fordism necessarily connects or dis-
connects selectively regions and communities from the world economy; al-
though always partial, disconnection not infrequently presents attractive op-
portunities from poor people’s perspectives. Some of this is going on in the
so-called informal economies of the Third World (the label is an attempt by
economic culture to maintain the hold on those realities that exist or emerge
at its limits). As local communities in the West and the Third World struggle
for incorporation into the world economy, they still might have to develop
creative and more autonomous practices that could be more conducive to
renegotiating class, gender, and ethnic relations at the local and regional
levels.
    The process of unmaking development, however, is slow and painful, and
there are no easy solutions or prescriptions. From the West, it is much more
difficult to perceive that development is at the same time self-destructing
and being unmade by social action, even as it continues to destroy people
and nature. The dialectic here tends to push for another round of solutions,
even if conceived through more radical categories—cultural, ecological, po-
liticoeconomic, and so on. This will not do. The empty defense of develop-
ment must be left to the bureaucrats of the development apparatus and
those who support it, such as the military and (not all of ) the corporations. It
is up to us, however, to make sure that the life span of the bureaucrats and
the experts as producers and enforcers of costly gestures is limited. Devel-
opment unmade means the inauguration of a discontinuity with the discur-
sive practice of the last forty years, imagining the day when we will not be
able to say or even entertain the thoughts that have led to forty years of
incredibly irresponsible policies and programs. In some parts of the Third
World, this possibility may already be (in some communities it always was)
a social reality.


          Hybrid Cultures and Postdevelopment in Latin America
It is said that during the 1980s Latin American countries experienced the
harshest social and economic conditions since the conquest. But the 1980s
218                                CHAPTER 6

also witnessed unprecedented forms of collective mobilization and theoreti-
cal renewals of importance, particularly in social movements and in the anal-
ysis of modernity and postmodernity. The specificity of the Latin American
contribution to the discussions of modernity stems from two main sources:
the social and temporal heterogeneity of Latin America modernity, that is,
the coexistence—in a coeval way, even if emerging from different cultural
temporalities—of premodern, modern, and even antimodern and amodern
forms; and the urgency of social questions, coupled with a relatively close
relation between intellectual and social life. This basis for critical intellectual
work is reflected in the forms and products of analysis, particularly in the
following areas: the linking of analyses of popular culture with social and
political struggles, for instance in the literature on social movements; the
willingness to take up the questions of social justice and of the construction
of new social orders from the vantage point of postmodernity; a novel theori-
zation of the political and its relation to both the cultural and the democrati-
zation of social and economic life; the reformulation of the question of cul-
tural identity in nonessentialist ways; and a keen interest in the relation
between aesthetics and society.
   The point of departure is a challenging reinterpretation of modernity in
Latin America. In Latin America, “where the traditions have not yet left and
modernity has not settled in,” people doubt whether “to modernize our-
selves should be our principal objective, as politicians, economists and the
publicists of the new technologies do not cease to tell us” (García Canclini
1990, 13). Neither on the way to the lamentable erradication of all traditions
nor triumphantly marching toward progress and modernity, Latin America
is seen as characterized by complex processes of cultural hybridization en-
compassing manifold and multiple modernities and traditions. This hybrid-
ization, reflected in urban and peasant cultures composed of sociocultural
mixtures that are difficult to discern, “determines the modern specificity of
Latin America” (Calderón 1988, 11). Within this view, the distinctions be-
tween traditional and modern, rural and urban, high, mass, and popular
cultures lose much of their sharpness and relevance. So does the intellectual
division of labor, of anthropology as the science of stubborn traditions and
sociology as the study of overpowering modernity, for instance. The hypoth-
esis that emerges is no longer that of modernity-generating processes of
modernization that operate by substituting the modern for the traditional
but of a hybrid modernity characterized by continuous attempts at renova-
tion, by a multiplicity of groups taking charge of the multitemporal hetero-
geneity preculiar to each sector and country.8
   Accounts of successful hybrid experiences among popular groups are be-
coming numerous. These accounts reveal the ineluctable traffic between the
traditional and the modern that these groups have to practice and the grow-
ing importance of transnational visual archives for popular art and strug-
                                 CONCLUSION                                 219
gles. The Kayapo’s use of video cameras and planes to defend their culture
and ancestral lands in the Brazilian rain forest is already becoming legen-
dary. Peasants in northern Peru are also found to combine, transforming
and reinventing them, elements of long-standing peasant culture, modern
urban culture, and translational culture in their process of political organiza-
tion (Starn 1992). The study of this complex semiotics of protest and of the
hybrid and inventive character of popular daily life presents challenging
questions to anthropologists and others. The question that arises is how to
understand the ways in which cultural actors—cultural producers, inter-
mediaries, and the public—transform their practices in the face of moder-
nity’s contradictions. Needless to say, inequalities in access to forms of cul-
tural production continue, yet these inequalities can no longer be confined
within the simple polar terms of tradition and modernity, dominators and
dominated.
   The analysis in terms of hybrid cultures leads to a reconceptualization of
a number of established views. Rather than being eliminated by develop-
ment, many “traditional cultures” survive through their transformative en-
gagement with modernity. It becomes more appropriate to speak of popular
culture as a present-oriented process of invention through complex hybrid-
izations that cut across class, ethnic, and national boundaries. Moreover,
popular sectors rarely attempt to reproduce a normalized tradition; on the
contrary, they often exhibit an openness toward modernity that is at times
critical and at times transgressive and even humorous. Not infrequently,
what looks like authentic practice or art hides, on close inspection, the com-
modification of types of “authenticity” that have long ceased to be sources of
cultural insights. If we continue to speak of tradition and modernity, it is
because we continually fall into the trap of not saying anything new because
the language does not permit it. The concept of hybrid cultures provides an
opening toward the invention of new languages.9
   Several disclaimers must accompany this theorization of popular culture.
First, it should not be imagined that these processes of hybridization neces-
sarily unmake long-standing traditions of domination. In many cases, the
harshness of conditions reduces hybridization to mundane adaptations to
increasingly oppressive market conditions. Economic reconversion over-
determines cultural reconversions that are not always felicitous. Paradoxi-
cally, however, the groups with a higher degree of economic autonomy and
“insertion” into the market have at times a better chance of successfully
affirming their ways of life than those clinging to signs of identity the social
force of which has been greatly diminished by adverse economic conditions
(García Canclini 1990). What is essential in these cases—for example, musi-
cians and producers of handicrafts such as weavers and potters who incorpo-
rate transnational motifs into traditional designs—is the mediation new ele-
ments effect between the familiar and the new, the local and that which
220                               CHAPTER 6

comes from afar, which is ever closer. This cultural hybridization results
in negotiated realities in contexts shaped by traditions, capitalism, and
modernity.
    The second qualification is that the concept of hybridization should in no
way be interpreted as the exhaustion of Third World imagery, cosmology,
and mythical-cultural traditions; despite the pervasive influence of modern
forms, the weighty presence of magic and myth in the social life of the Third
World is still extremely significant, as writers and artists continue to make
patently clear. As Taussig (1987) suggests, the vitality, magic, wit, humor,
and nonmodern ways of seeing that persist among popular groups can be
best understood in terms of dialectical images produced in ongoing contexts
of conquest and domination. At the level of daily life, these popular practices
represent a counterhegemonic force that opposes the instrumentalizing and
reactionary attempts of the church, the state, and modern science to domes-
ticate popular culture. These practices resist narrative ordering, flashing
back and forth between historical times, self and group, and alienation from
and immersion in magic.10
    This also means that cultural crossings “frequently involve a radical re-
structuring of the links between the traditional and the modern, the popular
and the educated, the local and the foreign. . . . What is modern explodes
and gets combined with what is not, is affirmed and challenged at one and
the same time” (García Canclini 1990, 223, 331). Let us be sure about one
thing: the notion of hybrid cultures—as a biological reading might suggest—
does not imply the belief in pure strands of tradition and modernity that are
combined to create a hybrid with a new essence; nor does it amount to the
combination of discrete elements from tradition and modernity, or a “sell-
out” of the traditional to the modern. Hybridity entails a cultural (re)creation
that may or may not be (re)inscribed into hegemonic constellations. Hybrid-
izations cannot be celebrated in and of themselves, to be sure; yet they
might provide opportunities for maintaining and working out cultural differ-
ences as a social and political fact. By effecting displacements on the nor-
mal strategies of modernity, they contribute to the production of different
subjectivities.
    More than the biological metaphor, hybrid cultures call forth what Trinh
T. Minh-ha calls the hyphenated condition. The hyphenated condition, she
writes, “does not limit itself to a duality between two cultural heritages. . . .
[it] requires a certain freedom to modify, appropriate, and reappropriate
without being trapped in imitation” (1991, 159, 161). It is a “transcultural
between-world reality” that requires traveling simultaneously backward—
into cultural heritage, oneself, one’s social group—and forward, cutting
across social boundaries into progressive elements of other cultural forma-
tions. Again, it is necessary to point out that there is nothing here that speaks
of the “preservation of tradition” in the abstract. Hybrid cultures are not
                                 CONCLUSION                                  221
about fixed identities, even if they entail a shifting between something that
might be construed as a constant, long-standing presence (existing cultural
practices) and something else construed as a transient, new, or incoming
element (a transnational element or force). It is also necessary to point out
that everything that is happening in the Third World can by no means be
considered a hybrid culture in the terms just specified. In a similar vein, the
progressive (or conservative) character of specific hybridizations is not given
in advance; it rests on the articulations they may establish with other social
struggles and discourses. Precisely, it is the task of critical research to learn
to look at and recognize hybrid cultural differences of political relevance, a
point to which I will return.11
   Unlike major analytical tendencies in the West, the anthropology of mo-
dernity in terms of hybrid cultures does not intend to provide a solution to
the philosophy of the subject and the problem of subject-centered reason—
as Habermas (1987) defined the project of the critical discourses on moder-
nity from Nietzsche to Heidegger, Derrida, Bataille, and Foucault—nor a
recasting of the Enlightenment project, as in the case of Touraine (1988) and
Giddens (1990) and Habermas’s own project of communicative reason. In
Habermas’s account, the Third World will have no place, because sooner or
later it too will be completely transformed by the pressures of reflexivity,
universalism, and individuation that define modernity, and because sooner
or later its “lifeworld” will be fully rationalized and its “traditional nuclei”
will “shrink to abstract elements” (1987, 344) after being fully articulated
and stabilized by and through modern discourses. In the Third World, mo-
dernity is not “an unfinished project of Enlightenment.” Development is the
last and failed attempt to complete the Enlightenment in Asia, Africa, and
Latin America.12
   Latin America’s anthropology of modernity retakes the question of the
reconstitution of social orders through collective political practice. For
some, this process has to be based on the belief that Latin Americans “have
to stop being what we have not been, what we will never be, and what we do
not have to be,” namely, (strictly) modern (Quijano 1990, 37). In the face of
worsening material conditions for most people and the rising hegemony of
technocratic and economic neoliberalism as the new dogma of modernity in
the continent, the call to resist modernization while acknowledging the exis-
tence of hybrid cultures that harbor modern forms seems utopian. There is,
indeed, a utopian content to this admonition, but not without a theory of the
history that makes it possible. This historical sense includes a cultural theory
that confronts the logics of capital and instrumental reason.13
   It is clear that the technological gap between rich and poor countries is
growing in the wake of the global economic restructuring of the 1980s and
the advent of cyberculture. Should this phenomenon be interpreted as a
“new dependency” (Castells and Laserna 1989)? Is the choice really be-
222                                CHAPTER 6

tween a dynamic renegotiation of dependency—one that may allow Latin
America to accede to the production of some of the new technologies—or
the further marginalization from the world economy with the concomitant
progressive decomposition of social and economic structures (Castells 1986;
Castells and Laserna 1989)? If it is true, as Castells and Laserna state, that
the Third World is more and more subjected to types of economic integra-
tion that are coupled with greater social disintegration; that entire regions in
the Third World are in peril (is it necessarily a peril?) of becoming totally
irrelevant to the world economy (marginalized from its benefits even if inte-
grated into its effects); that, finally, this whole state of affairs seems to bring
with it “sociocultural perversion” and political disarticulation; if all of these
processes are taking place, in sum, can one accept, with these authors, that
the answer should be “a policy capable of articulating social reform with
technological modernization in the context of democracy and competitive
participation in the world economy” (1989, 16)? Or are there other possible
perspectives, other ways of participating in the conversations that are re-
shaping the world?

      Ethnography, Cultural Studies, and the Question of Alternatives
One of the most common questions raised about a study of this kind is what
it has to say about alternatives. By now it should be clear that there are no
grand alternatives that can be applied to all places or all situations. To think
about alternatives in the manner of sustainable development, for instance, is
to remain within the same model of thought that produced development and
kept it in place. One must then resist the desire to formulate alternatives at
an abstract, macro level; one must also resist the idea that the articulation of
alternatives will take place in intellectual and academic circles, without
meaning by this that academic knowledge has no role in the politics of alter-
native thinking. It certainly does, as we will see shortly.
   Where, then, lies “the alternative”? What instances must be interrogated
concerning their relation to possible alternative practices? A first approach
to these questions is to look for alternative practices in the resistance grass-
roots groups present to dominant interventions. This was the predominant
approach to the question of alternatives during the 1980s, both in anthropol-
ogy and critical development studies, even if the relationship between resis-
tance and alternatives was not fully articulated as such. A different, perhaps
complementary approach can be gleaned from the ethnographies discussed
at the end of chapter 2. Those ethnographies sought to investigate the con-
crete forms that concepts and practices of development and modernity take
in specific communities. This type of research might be taken as a point of
departure for the investigation of alternatives from anthropological perspec-
tives. In other words, ethnographies of the circulation of discourses and
                                 CONCLUSION                                 223
practices of modernity and development provide us, perhaps for the first
time, with a view of where these communities are culturally in relation to
development. This view may be taken as a basis for interrogating current
practices in terms of their potential role in articulating alternatives. Notions
of hybrid models and communities of modelers (chapter 3) are ways of giving
form to this research strategy.
   Said differently, the nature of alternatives as a research question and a
social practice can be most fruitfully gleaned from the specific manifesta-
tions of such alternatives in concrete local settings. The alternative is, in a
sense, always there. From this perspective, there is not surplus of meaning
at the local level but meanings that have to be read with new senses, tools,
and theories. The deconstruction of development, coupled with the local
ethnographies just mentioned, can be important elements for a new type of
visibility and audibility of forms of cultural difference and hybridization that
researchers have generally glossed over until now. The subaltern do in fact
speak, even if the audibility of their voices in the circles where “the West”
is reflected upon and theorized is tenuous at best. There is also the question
of the translatability into theoretical and practical terms of what might be
read, heard, smelled, felt, or intuited in Third World settings. This process
of translation has to move back and forth between concrete proposals based
on existing cultural differences—with the goal of strengthening those differ-
ences by inserting them into political strategies and self-defined and self-
directed socioeconomic experiments—and the opening of spaces for desta-
bilizing dominant modes of knowing, so that the need for the most violent
forms of translation is diminished. In other words, the process must embrace
the challenge of simultaneously seeing theory as a set of contested forms of
knowledge—originating in many cultural matrices—and have that theory
foster concrete interventions by the groups in question.14
   The crisis in the regimes of representation of the Third World thus calls
for new theories and research strategies; the crisis is a real conjunctional
moment in the reconstruction of the connection between truth and reality,
between words and things, one that demands new practices of seeing, know-
ing, and being. Ethnography is by no means the sole method of pursuing this
goal; but given the need to unmake and unlearn development, and if one
recognizes that the crucial insights for the pursuit of alternatives will be
found not in academic circles—critical or conventional—or in the offices of
institutions such as the World Bank but in a new reading of popular prac-
tices and of the reappropriation by popular actors of the space of hegemonic
sociocultural production, then one must at least concede that the task of
conceptualizing alternatives must include a significant contact with those
whose “alternatives” research is supposed to illuminate. This is a conjunc-
tural possibility that ethnography-oriented research might be able to fulfill,
regardless of the discipline.
224                                CHAPTER 6

   Can the project of cultural studies as political practice contribute to this
project of figuration? If it is true, as Stuart Hall proposes, that “movements
provoke theoretical moments” (1992, 283), it is clear that the movement for
refiguring the Third World has generated neither the intellectual momen-
tum nor the political intention necessary for its proper theoretical moment
to arise. This moment, moreover, can be crafted not merely as a moment
pertaining to the Third World but as a global moment, the moment of cyber-
cultures and hybrid reconstructions of modern and traditional orders, the
moment of possible (truly) postmodern and posthumanist landscapes. The
Third World has unique contributions to make to these figurations and intel-
lectual and political efforts, to the extent that its hybrid cultures or “rejected
selves” may provide a vital check and different sense of direction to the
trends of cyberculture now dominant in the First World (Escobar 1994). The
shifting project of cultural studies—its “arbitrary closure,” to use Hall’s ex-
pression—must beging to take into account the various ongoing attempts at
refiguring the Third World.
   Some of this is starting to happen. Critiques of development produced in
the Third World are beginning to circulate in the West. This aspect deserves
some attention, because it raises other complex questions, beginning with
“what is the West.” As Ashis Nandy writes, the “West is now everywhere,
within the West and outside: in structures and minds” (1983, xii). There is
sometimes a reluctance on the part of some of the Third World authors who
call for the dismantling of development to acknowledge this fact—that is, to
keep on seeing strong traditions and radical resistance in places where per-
haps there are other things going on as well. But there is also a reluctance on
the part of academic audiences in the First World—particularly the progres-
sive audiences who want to recognize the agency of Third World people—to
think about how they appropriate and “consume” Third World voices for
their own needs, whether it is to provide the expected difference, renew
hope, or think through political directions.
   If Third World intellectuals who travel to the West must position them-
selves in a more self-conscious manner vis-à-vis both their Third World con-
stituencies and their First World audiences—that is, with respect to the
political functions they take on—European and American audiences must
be more self-critical of their practices of reading Third World voices. As Lata
Mani (1989) suggests, we all have to be more reflective of the modes of
knowing that are intensified because of our particular location (see also
Chow 1992). This is doubly important because theory is no longer simply
produced in one place and applied in another; in the post-Fordist world,
theorists and theories travel across discontinuous terrains (Clifford 1989),
even if, as this book has shown, there are identifiable centers of production
of dominant knowledges. But even these knowledges are far from being just
applied without substantial modifications, appropriations, and subversions.
                                 CONCLUSION                                 225
If one were to look for an image that describes the production of develop-
ment knowledge today, one would use not epistemological centers and pe-
ripheries but a decentralized network of nodes in and through which theo-
rists, theories, and multiple users move and meet, sharing and contesting
the socioepistemological space.
   At the bottom of the investigation of alternatives lies the sheer fact of
cultural difference. Cultural differences embody—for better or for worse,
this is relevant to the politics of research and intervention—possibilities for
transforming the politics of representation, that is, for transforming social
life itself. Out of hybrid or minority cultural situations might emerge other
ways of building economies, of dealing with basic needs, of coming together
into social groups. The greatest political promise of minority cultures is their
potential for resisting and subverting the axiomatics of capitalism and mo-
dernity in their hegemonic form.15 This is why cultural difference is one of
the key political facts of our times. Because cultural difference is also at the
root of postdevelopment, this makes the reconceptualization of what is hap-
pening in and to the Third World a key task at present. The unmaking of the
Third World—as a challenge to the Western historical mode to which the
entire globe seems to be captive—is in the balance.
   Despite flexibility and contradictions, it is clear that capital and new
technologies are not conducive to the defense of minority subjectivities—
minority seen here not only as ethnicity but in relation to its opposition to
the axiomatics of capitalism and modernity. Yet everything indicates at the
same time that the resurgence and even reconstitution of subjectivities
marked by multiple traditions is a distinct possibility. The informational cod-
ing of subjectivities in today’s global ethnoscapes does not succeed in eras-
ing completely singularity and difference. In fact, it relies more and more on
the production of both homogeneity and difference. But the dispersion of
social forms brought about by the deterritorialized information economy
nevertheless makes modern forms of control difficult. This might offer unex-
pected opportunities that groups at the margin could seize to construct inno-
vative visions and practices. At the same time, it must be recognized that this
dispersal takes place at the cost of the living conditions of vast numbers of
people in the Third World and, increasingly, in the West itself. This situa-
tion must be dealt with at many levels—economic, cultural, ecological, and
political.16
   Popular groups in many parts of the Third World seem to be increasingly
aware of these dilemmas. Caught between conventional development strate-
gies that refuse to die and the opening of spaces in the wake of ecological
capital and discourses on cultural plurality, biodiversity, and ethnicity, some
of these groups respond by attempting to craft unprecedented visions of
themselves and the world around them. Urged by the need to come up with
alternatives—lest they be swept away by another round of conventional de-
226                              CHAPTER 6

velopment, capitalist greed, and violence—the organizing strategies of these
groups begin to revolve more and more around two principles: the defense
of cultural difference, not as a static but as a transformed and transformative
force; and the valorization of economic needs and opportunities in terms
that are not strictly those of profit and the market. The defense of the local
as a prerequisite to engaging with the global; the critique of the group’s own
situation, values, and practices as a way of clarifying and strengthening iden-
tity; the opposition to modernizing development; and the formulation of
visions and concrete proposals in the context of existing constraints, these
seem to be the principal elements for the collective construction of alterna-
tives that these groups seem to be pursuing.17
   Postdevelopment and cyberculture thus become parallel and interrelated
processes in the cultural politics of the late-twentieth century. For what
awaits both the First and the Third World, perhaps finally transcending the
difference, is the possibility of learning to be human in posthumanist (post-
man and postmodern) landscapes. But we must be mindful that in many
places there are worlds that development, even today and at this moment, is
bent on destroying.
                                       NOTES




