                                   Chapter 4

                 THE DISPERSION OF POWER:
                TALES OF FOOD AND HUNGER

             Since disease can be cured only if others intervene with
            their knowledge, their resources, their pity, since a patient
              can be cured only in society, it is just that the illness of
                some should be transformed into the experience of
               others. . . . What is benevolence towards the poor is
                   transformed into knowledge that is applicable
                                      to the rich.
                 —Michel Foucault, The Birth of the Clinic, 1975




       THE LANGUAGE OF HUNGER AND THE HUNGER OF LANGUAGE
NO ASPECT of development appears to be as straightforward as hunger.
When people are hungry, is not the provision of food the logical answer?
Policy would be a matter of ensuring that enough food reaches those in need
on a sustained basis. The symbolism of hunger, however, has proven power-
ful throughout the ages. From famine in prehistoric times to the food riots in
Latin America during the 1980s and early 1990s, hunger has been a potent
social and political force. From the Bible to Knut Hamsun, Dickens, Orwell,
Steinbeck, and, in twentieth-century Latin America, Ciro Alegría, Jorge
Icaza, and Graciliano Ramos writers of many countries have been moved by
the individual or collective experience of hunger. Images of hunger have
also been portrayed in the cinema, never as powerfully as in the early years
of Brazil’s Cinema Novo during the first half of the 1960s. “From Arruanda
to Barren Lives,” Glauber Rocha, one of the founders of this movement,
nakedly stated, “Cinema Novo has narrated, described, poeticized, dis-
cussed, analyzed, and stimulated the themes of hunger: characters eating
dirt and roots, characters stealing to eat, characters killing to eat, charac-
ters fleeing to eat” (1982, 68); a veritable “aesthetics of hunger,” as Rocha en-
titled his manifesto, the only one appropriate to an insurrectionist cinema in
the context of neocolonialism in the Third World at the time.
   The liberties accorded to creative writing and cinema have not been
granted to society at large. Indeed, as Josué de Castro, the Brazilian physi-
cian and first director of the United Nations Food and Agricultural Organi-
zation (FAO), put it at the dawn of the development era,
                           THE DISPERSION OF POWER                                  103
  Because of its explosive political and social implications, the subject [of hunger]
  until very recently has been one of the taboos of our civilization. . . . Hunger has
  unquestionably been the most potent source of social misfortunes, but our civi-
  lization has kept its eyes averted, afraid to face the sad reality. War has always
  been loudly discussed. Hymns and poems have been written to celebrate its
  glorious virtues as an agent of selection. . . . Thus, while war became a leitmotiv
  of Western thought, hunger remained only a vulgar sensation, the repercus-
  sions of which were not supposed to emerge from the realm of the subcon-
  scious. The conscious mind, with ostentatious disdain, denied its existence.
  ([1952] 1977, 51)

   This obscurity of hunger changed dramatically after World War II, when
hunger entered irremediably the politics of scientific knowledge. Famines
in the 1960s and 1970s (Biafra, Bangladesh, the Sahel)brought massive hun-
ger to public awareness. Yet the more intractable aspects of persistent mal-
nutrition and hunger entered the scientific world a decade earlier. From the
1950s to today, an army of scientists—nutritionists, health experts, demogra-
phers, agriculturalists, planners, and so on—has been busy studying every
single aspect of hunger. This hunger of (scientific) language has resulted in
manifold strategies that have succeeded each other throughout the develop-
ment era; from food fortification and supplementation, nutrition education,
and food aid in the 1950s and 1960s to land reform, the green revolution,
integrated rural development, and comprehensive national food and nutri-
tion planning since the late 1960s, the languages of hunger have grown in-
creasingly inclusive and detailed. Whether “the nutrition problem” was
thought to be due to insufficient protein intake, lack of calories, lack of nutri-
tion education, inadequate food intake combined with poor sanitation and
health, low incomes, or inefficient agricultural practices—or to a combina-
tion of many of these factors—a battery of experts was always on call to
design strategies and programs on behalf of the hungry and malnourished
people of the Third World.
   To be blunt, one could say that the body of the malnourished—the starv-
ing “African” portrayed on so many covers of Western magazines, or the
lethargic South American child to be “adopted” for $16 a month portrayed
in the advertisements of the same magazines—is the most striking symbol of
the power of the First World over the Third. A whole economy of discourse
and unequal power relations is encoded in that body. We may say, following
Teresa de Lauretis (1987), that there is a violence of representation at play
here. This violence, moreover, is extreme; scientific representations of hun-
ger and “overpopulation” (they often go together) are most dehumanizing
and objectifying. After all, what we are talking about when we refer to hun-
ger or population is people, human life itself; but it all becomes, for Western
science and media, helpless and formless (dark) masses, items to be counted
104                              CHAPTER 4

and measured by demographers and nutritionists, or systems with feedback
mechanisms in the model of the body espoused by physiologists and bio-
chemists. The language of hunger and the hunger of language join forces not
only to maintain a certain social order but to exert a kind of symbolic vio-
lence that sanitizes the discussion of the hungry and the malnourished. It is
thus that we come to consume hunger in the West; in the process our sensi-
tivity to suffering and pain becomes numbed by the distancing effect that the
language of academics and experts achieved. To restore vividness and polit-
ical efficacy to the language becomes almost an impossible task (Scheper-
Hughes 1992).
   The situation is even more paradoxical when one considers that the strat-
egies implemented to deal with the problems of hunger and food supply, far
from solving them, have led to their aggravation. Susan George (1986) best
captured the cynicism of these strategies with the title “More Food, More
Hunger.” Countries that were self-sufficient in food crops at the end of
World War II—many of them even exported food to industrialized na-
tions—became net food importers throughout the development era. Hunger
similarly grew as the capacity of countries to produce the food necessary to
feed themselves contracted under the pressure to produce cash crops, ac-
cept cheap food from the West, and conform to agricultural markets domi-
nated by the multinational merchants of grain. Although agricultural output
per capita grew in most countries, this increase was not translated into in-
creased food availability for most people. Inhabitants of Third World cities
in particular became increasingly dependent on food their countries did not
produce.
   How can one account for this cynicism of power? This brings us again to
the question of how discourse works, how it produces “domains of objects
and rituals of truth” (Foucault 1979, 194). The discourse of development is
not merely an “ideology” that has little to do with the “real world”; nor is it
an apparatus produced by those in power in order to hide another, more
basic truth, namely, the crude reality of the dollar sign. The development
discourse has crystallized in practices that contribute to regulating the
everyday goings and comings of people in the Third World. How is its power
exercised in the daily social and economic life of countries and communi-
ties? How does it produce its effect on the way people think and act, on how
life is felt and lived?
   So far I have said little about what developers actually do in their day-to-
day work. I still have to show how the discourse of development gets dis-
persed in or through a field of practices; how it relates to concrete interven-
tions that organize the production of types of knowledge and forms of power,
relating one to the other. It is necessary to scrutinize the specific practices
through which international lending agencies and Third World govern-
ments carry out their task, bringing together bureaucrats and experts of all
                         THE DISPERSION OF POWER                            105
kinds with their Third World “beneficiaries”—peasants, poor women, urban
marginals, and the like. This will be the task of this chapter; it examines in
detail the deployment of development.
   The chapter investigates the concrete forms that the mechanisms of pro-
fessionalization and institutionalization take in the domain of malnutrition
and hunger. In particular, the chapter reviews the strategy of comprehen-
sive national Food and Nutrition Policy and Planning (FNPP), created by
the World Bank and a handful of universities and institutions in the devel-
oped countries in the early 1970s and implemented in a number of Third
World countries throughout the 1970s and 1980s. FNPP grew out of the
realization that the complex problems of malnutrition and hunger could not
be dealt with through isolated programs but that a comprehensive, multi-
sectoral strategy of planning at the national level was needed. Based on this
realization, a body of theory was produced in the above institutions, and
national food and nutrition plans were designed and implemented which
included ambitious programs that covered all areas related to food, such as
food production and consumption, health care, nutrition education, food
technology, and so on. After examining the production of FNPP theory, we
will look closely at the implementation of such a strategy in Colombia during
the period 1975–1990.
   In order to analyze the practices of development, we have to analyze what
development institutions actually do. Institutional practices are crucial not
so much because they account for most of what is earmarked as develop-
ment, but mostly because they contribute to producing and formalizing so-
cial relations, divisions of labor, and cultural forms. Thus illustrating how
development functions, the aim of this chapter, is not a simple task. It re-
quires that we investigate the production of discourses about the problem in
question; that we show the articulation of these discourses with socioeco-
nomic and technological conditions that they, in turn, help produce; and,
finally and more importantly, that we examine the actual work practices of
institutions involved with these problems. Discourse, political economy,
and institutional ethnography should be woven in order to provide an ade-
quate understanding of how development works.
   The daily practices of institutions are not just rational or neutral ways of
doing. In fact, much of an institution’s effectiveness in producing power
relations is the result of practices that are often invisible, precisely because
they are seen as rational. It is then necessary to develop tools of analysis to
unveil and understand those practices. I do this in the first part of this chap-
ter, by explaining the notion of institutional ethnography. The second part
reconstructs the birth, life, and death of FNPP, focusing on the view of
hunger that this strategy produced and the practices that actualized it. In the
third part, I summarize the political economy of the agrarian crisis in Latin
America in the period 1950–1990 and examine the response that the Colom-
106                                CHAPTER 4

bian government and the international development establishment gave to
this crisis. I focus especially on the so-called Integrated Rural Development
strategy, produced by the World Bank in the early 1970s and implemented
in Colombia from the mid-1970s to the early 1990s, with the cooperation of
the World Bank and other international agencies. Finally, in the fourth sec-
tion I propose an interpretation of FNPP as a paradigmatic case in the de-
ployment of development.
   The underlying premise of this investigation is that as long as institutions
and professionals are successfully reproducing themselves materially, cul-
turally, and ideologically, certain relations of domination will prevail; and to
the extent that this is the case, development will continue to be greatly
conceptualized by those in power. By focusing on the practices that struc-
ture the daily work of institutions, on one hand, I hope to illustrate how
power works, namely, how it is effected by institutional and documentary
processes. The emphasis on discourse, on the other hand, is intended to
show how a certain subjectivity is privileged and at the same time marginal-
izes the subjectivity of those who are supposed to be the recipients of prog-
ress. It will become clear that this marginalization produced by a given re-
gime of representation is an integral component of institutionalized power
relations.


         INSTITUTIONAL ETHNOGRAPHY: THE BUREAUCRATIZATION OF
                  KNOWLEDGE ABOUT THE THIRD WORLD
More than three-quarters of the population of the Third World lived in rural
areas at the time of the inception of development. That this proportion is
now reduced to less than 30 percent in many Latin American countries is a
striking feature in its own right, as if the alleviation of the peasants’ suffering,
malnutrition, and hunger had required not the improvement of living stan-
dards in the countryside, as most programs avowedly purported, but the
peasants’ elimination as a cultural, social, and producing group. Neverthe-
less, peasants have not disappeared completely with the development of
capitalism, as both Marxist and bourgeois economists ineluctably predicted,
a fact already hinted at in my brief account of resistance in the previous
chapter.
   The constitution of the peasantry as a persistent client category for devel-
opment programs was associated with a broad range of economic, political,
cultural, and discursive processes. It rested on the ability of the develop-
ment apparatus systematically to create client categories such as the “mal-
nourished,” “small farmers,” “landless laborers,” “lactating women,” and the
like which allow institutions to distribute socially individuals and popula-
tions in ways consistent with the creation and reproduction of modern capi-
                         THE DISPERSION OF POWER                             107
talist relations. Discourses of hunger and rural development mediate and
organize the constitution of the peasantry as producers or as elements to be
displaced in the order of things. Unlike standard anthropological works on
development, which take as their primary object of study the people to be
“developed,” understanding the discursive and institutional construction of
client categories requires that attention be shifted to the institutional appa-
ratus that is doing the “developing” (Ferguson 1990, xiv). Turning the appa-
ratus itself into an anthropological object involves an institutional ethnogra-
phy that moves from the textual and work practices of institutions to the
effects of those practices in the world, that is, to how they contribute to
structuring the conditions under which people think and live their lives. The
work of institutions is one of the most powerful forces in the creation of the
world in which we live. Institutional ethnography is intended to bring to
light this sociocultural production.
   One may note first, in following this line of analysis, that peasants are
socially constructed prior to the agent’s (planner, researcher, development
expert) interaction with them. Socially constructed here means that the rela-
tion between client and agent is structured by bureaucratic and textual
mechanisms that are anterior to their interaction. This does not deter the
agent or institution from presenting the results of the interaction as “facts,”
that is, as true discoveries of the real situation characterizing the client. The
institution possesses schemata and structuring procedures, embedded in the
institution’s routine work practices, that organize the actuality of a given
situation and present it as facts, the way things are. These structuring proce-
dures must be made invisible for the operation to be successful, in the same
way that in cinema all marks of enunciation (the director’s work, the acting,
the point of view of the camera, and so on) must be effaced to create the
impression of reality that characterizes it (Metz 1982).
   Canadian feminist sociologist Dorothy Smith has pioneered the analysis
of institutions from this perspective (Smith 1974, 1984, 1986, 1987, 1990).
Smith’s point of departure is the observation that professional discourses
provide the categories with which “facts” can be named and analyzed and
thus have an important role in constituting the phenomena that the organi-
zation knows and describes. Facts are presented in standardized ways, so
that they can be retold if necessary. In this sense, facts must be seen as an
aspect of social organization, a practice of knowing that, through the use of
ready-made categories, constructs an object as external to the knower and
independent of him or her. Because often decisions are made by centralized
organizations headed by representatives of ruling groups, the whole work of
organizations is biased in relation to those in power. “Our relation to others
in our society and beyond is mediated by the social organization of its ruling.
Our ‘knowledge’ is thus ideological in the sense that this social organization
108                                  CHAPTER 4

preserves conceptions and means of description which represent the world
as it is for those who rule it, rather than as it is for those who are ruled”
(Smith 1974, 267).
   This has far-reaching consequences, because we are constantly impli-
cated and active in this process. But how does the institutional production
of social reality work? A basic feature of this operation is its reliance on
textual and documentary forms as a means of representing and preserving a
given reality. Inevitably, texts are detached from the local historical context
of the reality that they supposedly represent.
  For bureaucracy is par excellence that mode of governing that separates the
  performance of ruling from particular individuals, and makes organization in-
  dependent of particular persons and local settings. . . . Today, large-scale orga-
  nization inscribes its processes into documentary modes as a continuous feature
  of its functioning. . . . This [produces] a form of social consciousness that is the
  property of organizations rather than of the meeting of individuals in local his-
  torical settings. (Smith 1984, 62)

   Institutions and conventional sociology see all this “a system of rational
action.” Ethnomethodologists have pointed out that organizational texts can-
not be taken as “objective” records of external reality but are to be under-
stood in relation to organizational uses and goals and in the context of their
production and interpretation (Garfinkel 1967). Instead of a system of ra-
tional action, the documentary basis of an organization is but a means to
objectify knowledge; it produces forms of social consciousness that are more
the property of organizations than of individuals trying to understand their
problems. This objectification and transcendence of local historicity are
achieved in the process of inscription, to use the term given to it by Latour
and Woolgar (1979), namely, the translation of an event or object into a
textual form. In this process, the organization’s perception and ordering of
events is preordained by its discursive scheme, and the locally historical is
greatly determined by nonlocal practices of institutions, embedded in turn
in textual practices. I quote again from Smith to sum up this point:
  Discourse creates forms of social consciousness that are extra-local and exter-
  nalized vis-à-vis the local subject. . . . Discourse develops the ideological cur-
  rency of society, providing schemata and methods that transpose local actuali-
  ties into standardized conceptual and categorical forms. . . . This movement
  between the locally historical and textually mediated discourse is characteristic
  of many contemporary social forms. (1984, 63)

  Documentary practices are thus by no means innocuous. They are em-
bedded in external social relations and deeply implicated in mechanisms of
ruling. Through them, as we will see in detail, the internal processes of
organizations are linked to external social relations involving governments,
                          THE DISPERSION OF POWER                              109
international organizations, corporations, and communities in the Third
World. They are active in directing and ordering the relations among these
various groups and must then be regarded as important constituents of social
relations, even if the text is apparently detached from the social relations it
helps to organize (the text is removed from the social context by the work of
the professional). Documentary procedures, in sum, represent a significant
dimension of those practices through which power is exercised in today’s
world—even if a dimension that has been for the most part neglected in
critical analyses.
   From the perspective of institutional ethnography, a local situation is less
a case study than an entry point to the study of institutional and discursive
forces and how these are related to larger socioeconomic processes. What is
important is to describe the actual practices organizing people’s everyday
experience, “to disclose the non-local determinations of locally historic or
lived orderliness” (Smith 1986, 9). In the case of institutions, it is necessary
to investigate how professional training provides the categories and con-
cepts that dictate the practices of the institution’s members and how local
courses of action are articulated by institutional functions; in other words,
how a textually mediated discourse substitutes for the actual relations and
practices of the “beneficiaries,” burying the latter’s experience in the matrix
that organizes the institution’s representation. Going back to my example,
what must be analyzed is how the peasant’s world is organized by a set of
institutional processes. One must also investigate how the institutional prac-
tices and professional discourses coordinate and interpenetrate different
levels of social relations; that is, how the relations between different actors
(peasants, mothers and children, planners, international agencies, agribusi-
ness corporations, and so on) are rendered accountable only through a set of
categories that originated in professional discourse; and, finally, how the
latter implicate other types of relations, such as class and gender.
   Special mention should be made of labeling as a fundamental feature of
organizations. I already alluded to the pervasive use of labels by the devel-
opment discourse in the form of client categories and “target groups,” such
as “small farmers,” “pregnant women,” “landless laborers,” “slum dwellers,”
and the like. These labels are essential to the functioning of institutions
dealing with problems in the Third World (“Third World” itself is a label).
Labels are by no means neutral; they embody concrete relationships of
power and influence the categories with which we think and act. Geof Wood
has insightfully summarized the rationale for labeling:
  Thus the validity of labels becomes not a matter of substantive objectivity but
  of the ability to use labels effectively in action as designations which define
  parameters for thought and behavior, which render environments stable, and
  which establish spheres of competence and areas of responsibility. In this way
110                                  CHAPTER 4

  labelling through these sorts of designations is part of the process of creating
  social structure. It is people making history by making rules for themselves and
  others to follow. . . . So the issue is not whether we label people, but which
  labels are created, and whose labels prevail to define a whole situation or policy
  area, under what conditions and with what effects? . . . Labels reveal more
  about the process of authoritative designation, agenda setting and so on than
  about the characteristics of the labelled. . . . In that sense, labels do in effect
  reveal this relationship of power between the given and the bearer of the label.
  (1985, 349)

   Labels determine access to resources, so that people must adjust to such
categorization to be successful in their dealings with the institution. A key
mechanism at work here is that the whole reality of a person’s life is reduced
to a single feature or trait (access to land, for instance; or inability to read and
write); in other words, the person is turned into a “case.” That this case is
more the reflection of how the institution constructs “the problem” is rarely
noticed, so that the whole dynamics of rural poverty is reduced to solving a
number of “cases” with apparently no connection to structural determinants,
much less to the shared experiences of rural people. Explanations are thus
dissociated from the nonpoor and “easily explained as deriving from charac-
teristics internal to the poor” (Wood 1985, 357); this is achieved by focusing
on a narrow target and usually involves pathologies or lacks that can be
isolated and treated through some sort of technological fix. This type of la-
beling implies not only abstraction from social practice but the action of
professional monopolies that share the interest of ruling classes. An entire
politics of needs interpretation, mediated by expert discourses, is at stake, as
Nancy Fraser (1989) has demonstrated in the context of the U.S. women’s
movement. Experts become brokers of sorts mediating the relations be-
tween communities, the state, and—in some cases—social movements.
   Labels are invented and maintained by institutions on an ongoing basis, as
part of an apparently rational process that is essentially political. Although
the whole process has at times devastating effects on the labeled groups—
through stereotyping, normalizing, fragmentation of people’s experience,
disorganization of the poor—it also implies the possibility of counterlabeling
(“nonaligned nations,” for instance, was a counterlabel to “underdeveloped
nations”), as part of a process of democratization and debureaucratization of
institutions and knowledge. To realize this possibility it is necessary to ana-
lyze closely how labels function as mechanisms of power in concrete institu-
tional instances and to counteract individuating and imposed labeling pro-
cesses with collective political practices.
   There are other important practices, besides the documentary practices
and labeling already discussed, that institutions employ and that institu-
tional ethnographies should take into account. Organizations involved with
                         THE DISPERSION OF POWER                            111
planning, for instance, follow a planning model based on certain practices
that allow them not only to construct problems in ways they can handle
but also to avoid responsibility for the plan’s implementation altogether.
Themes, agendas, “sectors,” “subdisciplines,” and so on, are created by plan-
ning institutions according to procedures presented as rational and “com-
mon-sense.” The commonsense model of planning, as Clay and Shaffer
(1984) have called this feature in their helpful analysis of public policy prac-
tices, is one major way in which policy is depoliticized and bureaucratized.
These authors unveil a whole realm, “bureaucratics,” in which politics and
bureaucratic processes are linked to ensure the maintenance of given ways
of seeing and doing. The commonsense planning model will be analyzed in
detail when we examine the National Food and Nutrition Plan of Colombia.
   It is crucial to unveil these aspects of discourse and organization by inves-
tigating the documentary practices of development institutions. We must
analyze how peasants are constituted by the work practices of development
professionals; that is, how the former’s concrete experience is elaborated
upon by the professional discourse of the latter, separated from the context
in which the peasants’ problems arise and shifted to that in which institu-
tions speak and act. This work of abstraction is a necessary condition for
development to work in the process of describing, inquiring into, interpret-
ing, and designing treatment for their clients or beneficiaries. Although most
times this process of abstraction and structuring—which goes on in large
part unconsciously—takes place at the top (international or national levels),
it inevitably works its way down to the local situation, where most of the
work is done. The local level must reproduce the world as the top sees it, so
to speak.
   In the case of hunger, local situations are subsumed under the profes-
sional discourses of agricultural economists, planners, nutritionists, exten-
sion workers, health workers, and so on. Only certain kinds of knowledge,
those held by experts such as World Bank officials and developing country
experts trained in the Western tradition, are considered suitable to the task
of dealing with malnutrition and hunger, and all knowledge is geared to
making the client knowable to development institutions. The interaction of
local field personnel (extension workers, health workers) with their clients is
conditioned by this need and automatically structured by the bureaucratic
operations already in place.1 Similarly, the interaction of national-level plan-
ners with officials from, say, the World Bank is conditioned by the need to
obtain funding and structured by World Bank routines. Needless to say, one
never finds in these accounts consideration given to peasants’ struggle and
oppression, nor accounts of how the peasants’ world may contain a different
way of seeing problems and life. What emerges instead is a view of the
“malnourished” or “illiterate peasant” as a problem to be rid of through ef-
fective development. This problem is presupposed regardless of the actual
112                                CHAPTER 4

practices of the beneficiaries; the whole process not only affects the con-
sciousness of all the actors but contributes to maintaining certain relations of
domination. These implicit operations must be made explicit.
   Specific programs must thus be seen as the result of interactions between
international organizations, universities, and research centers in both the
First and Third World, professional organizations in the Third World, and
expert discourses of various types. This interaction is reflected in and orga-
nized by documentary practices—the elaboration of program descriptions,
evaluation reports, research reports, meeting documents, scholarly papers,
and so on—that ceaselessly take place as part of a process that is largely
self-referential, to the extent that these documents are written not to illumi-
nate a given problem but to ensure their insertion into the ongoing flow of
organizational texts. Building on Dorothy Smith’s work, Adele Mueller, who
studied the bureaucratic organization of knowledge about Third World
women, summarized this problematic succinctly:
  Women in development texts do not, as they claim, describe the situation of
  Third World women, but rather the situation of their own production. The
  depiction of “Third World Women” which results is one of poor women, living
  in hovels, having too many children, illiterate, and either dependent on a man
  for economic survival or impoverished because they have none. The important
  issue here is not whether this is a more or less accurate description of women,
  but who has the power to create it and make claims that it is, if not accurate,
  then the best available approximation. . . . The Women in Development discur-
  sive regime is not an account of the interests, needs, concerns, dreams of poor
  women, but a set of strategies for managing the problem which women repre-
  sent to the functioning of development agencies in the Third World. (1987b, 4)

   For forty years, discourses and strategies to combat hunger have suc-
ceeded one another. This striking versatility, especially when seen in rela-
tion to the persistence and aggravation of the problems they are supposed to
eradicate, must be accounted for. The general questions in this regard can
be posed as follows: Why, and by what processes, did the experience of
hunger become successively land reform, green revolution, single-cell pro-
tein, integrated rural development, comprehensive food and nutrition plan-
ning, nutrition education, and so on? Why such a host of applied food and
nutrition programs, of nutritional, agricultural, and economic sciences de-
voted to this problem? What has been their impact? In response to what
local objectives did these strategies arise, and what forms of knowledge did
they produce, relating them to what types of power? We should try to iden-
tify how the system of formation that resulted in these strategies was set in
place; how all these strategies share a common space; and how they have
transformed into one another. In other words, we should describe “the sys-
tem of transformation that constitutes change” (Foucault 1972, 173).
   Hunger, it can be stated, is constituted by all of the discourses that refer
                         THE DISPERSION OF POWER                              113
to it; it is made visible by the existence of those grandiose strategies that,
through their very appearance, give the illusion of progress and change. We
should examine how strategies such as FNPP produce a specific organiza-
tion of the discursive field, and how this field is held in place by institutional
processes that determine specific courses of action, contribute to knitting
social relations, and take part in organizing a division of labor marked by
cultural, geographic, class, and gender factors. This type of analysis moves
from the specific to the general and from concrete practices to forms of
power that account for the functioning of development.
   The purpose of institutional ethnography is to unpack the work of institu-
tions and bureaucracies, to train ourselves to see what culturally we have
been taught to overlook, namely, the participation of institutional practices
in the making of the world. Institutional ethnography equips us to discern
how we inevitably live and even produce ourselves within the conceptual
and social spaces woven, as ever-so-fine spiderwebs, by the unglamorous
but effective tasks that all types of institutions perform daily. This type of
ethnographic endeavor attempts to explain the production of culture by in-
stitutions that are, themselves, the product of a certain culture.


                       BIRTH, LIFE, AND DEATH OF
                FOOD AND NUTRITION POLICY AND PLANNING
                       The Birth of a Discipline:
          Knowledge and the Bureaucratization of Policy Practice
In 1971, experts from various fields and planning officials from fifty-five
countries gathered at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) for
the first International Conference on Nutrition, National Development, and
Planning. Most of the experts came from universities, research centers, and
foundations located in developed countries, whereas most of the planners
came from the Third World. A gathering of this kind was not new. Experts
and officials from all over the world had been meeting to discuss and assess
scientific and practical progress in agriculture, health, and nutrition for at
least two decades, usually under the auspices of one or another international
or bilateral organization or foundation, such as the United Nations Food and
Agricultural Organization (FAO), the Rockefeller Foundation, the United
States Agency for International Development (U.S. AID), or the World
Health Organization (WHO). What was new was the scope of the topic to be
discussed: nutrition, national development, and planning. The meeting, in-
deed, gave official birth to a new discipline: food and nutrition policy and
planning.
   The field of international nutrition (conceived broadly as the study of
problems of malnutrition and hunger in the Third World and ways to deal
with them) had been until then the province of scientists and technical ex-
114                               CHAPTER 4

perts—medical doctors, biologists, agronomists, plant geneticists, food tech-
nologists, statisticians, nutritionists, and the like—who, by the very nature of
their expertise, maintained the problem within the bounds of strict scientific
discourse. Laboratory and clinical research had dominated the health and
biochemical aspects of nutrition, and agronomy and plant and food science
had covered the field of food production and processing. Nutrition interven-
tions per se were relatively modest until the late 1960s, being restricted for
the most part to supplementary child feeding, nutrition education, clinical
treatment of severe malnutrition, and fortification of certain foods with vita-
mins, minerals, or amino acids. On the food production side, two strategies
had been pursued: land reform and the so-called green revolution. This lat-
ter strategy had promised to free humankind from the scourge of hunger
through the application of the latest scientific and technological break-
throughs in plant sciences and agronomy. Its failure to do so was already
becoming evident in the early to mid-1970s.
   Until then, there was nothing that called for seeing nutrition as part of
national development. Nutrition and health were still under the firm control
of the medical profession. None of the strategies that medical experts pro-
posed, however, seemed to make significant inroads on the prevalence of
malnutrition and hunger, in spite of improved knowledge in food science
and in the physiology and biochemistry of nutrition. Although the food sup-
ply had increased steadily during the 1950s and 1960s, even keeping abreast
of population growth in most countries, and although a number of coun-
tries had achieved remarkable rates of economic growth in the same period,
the dream of attaining a basic level of needs satisfaction for all seemed to
be receding. During the 1960s, however, a number of nutritionists and econ-
omists had been experimenting with nutrition programs that were broader
in conception and scope, especially in India and some South American
countries, where the governments themselves, confronted with the appall-
ing reality of increasing malnutrition, were trying to come up with newer
visions. These professionals, most of whom were there either working for
U.S. AID or other major international organizations or were funded by
them, were instrumental in shaping a new approach to the problems of food
and hunger.2
   A number of these forces converged with the creation, in the fall of 1972,
of the International Nutrition Planning Program at MIT. The program, initi-
ated with a grant from the Rockefeller Foundation and later supplemented
by funds from U.S. AID, was conceived as a joint multidisciplinary under-
taking of the Department of Nutrition and Food Science and the Center for
International Studies at MIT, thus including in its ambit not only nutrition-
ists and food science and medical experts but also economists, demogra-
phers, political scientists, engineers, anthropologists, and urban studies ex-
perts. The program was reinforced in 1977 by its association with the United
Nations University’s World Hunger Program and the Harvard School of
                          THE DISPERSION OF POWER                                115
Public Health. The Harvard/MIT International Food and Nutrition Program
became the main training institute—along with Cornell University’s Inter-
national Nutrition Program—for scores of foreign students coming to the
program for advanced training in the new field of international food science
and nutrition under the sponsorship of their governments or international
organizations.3
   The new approach to the problems of malnutrition and hunger in the
Third World was being developed simultaneously at a few universities and
research centers, especially in the United States and England (with the par-
ticipation of some Third World health and nutrition experts associated with
the pilot projects mentioned earlier). The work of this relatively small num-
ber of scholars and institutions coalesced in and was given impetus by the
publication of two volumes in 1973. One of these volumes, edited by key
participants in the new field (Berg, Scrimshaw, and Call 1973), grew out of
the 1971 MIT conference.4 The second volume, Alan Berg’s The Nutrition
Factor (1973), was to play a central role in the constitution of food and nutri-
tion policy and planning. Indeed, it is possible to identify the textual origin
of the new strategy with the publication of this book, in which the author
argued forcibly that nutrition had to be regarded as an essential factor in
national development policy and planning. The limited and fragmented in-
terventions of previous decades, he maintained, were no longer sufficient in
the face of the severity of the problems affecting the Third World. “Compre-
hensive nutrition planning and analysis are sorely needed,” Berg insisted
(1973, 200).
   The new approach was christened Nutrition Planning, or, in subsequent
versions, Food and Nutrition Policy and Planning (FNPP). How this strategy
arose in the early 1970s, flourished, and was eclipsed a decade later, origi-
nating a whole body of knowledge, endless programs, and new institutions
in many Third World countries, constitutes a prime example of how devel-
opment works. “The response to malnutrition in most countries is modest,
fragmented and lacking in operational orientation,” wrote Berg of well-
accepted nutrition programs of the period, such as institutional child feed-
ing, nutrition education, production of protein-rich foods, pediatric nutri-
tion in hospitals and health centers, and food aid. “For nutrition to attain a
place in development, attention must be directed to the form and scope of
nutrition planning and programming. . . . All require radical change” (1973,
198, 200). Moreover,
  Today in other fields there are accepted planning approaches that can and
  should be adapted for nutrition purposes. . . . Malnutrition’s close relationship
  to socioeconomic forces argues for a comprehensive and systematic approach to
  planning analysis. . . . Strong leadership in nutrition programming and a vigor-
  ous, goal-oriented organization with a clear mandate are essential. (1973, 200,
  202)
116                                 CHAPTER 4

   The new professional was to be sharply distinguished from the scientific-
oriented expert, who until then had reigned uncontested over the field of
nutrition:
  In a successful nutrition activity . . . the issues move beyond the clinic, the
  laboratory, and experimental field project. Concern shifts to operations, com-
  munications, logistics, administration, and economics, and the need shifts to
  professional planners, programmers, and managers. . . . This all suggests a role
  for a new discipline or nutrition sub-discipline including professionals with
  planning and project design capabilities. Nutrition programmers, or “macro-
  nutritionists,” are needed to convert the findings of the scientific community
  into large-scale action programs. (Berg 1973, 206, 207)

   The new discipline purported to be a systematic and multidisciplinary
approach that would enable nutrition planners to design comprehensive and
multisectoral plans capable of playing a leading role in development plan-
ning. The pillars of the subdiscipline were, on one hand, the elaboration of
complex models of the factors regulating the nutritional status of a particular
population and, on the other, a series of sophisticated methodologies that
would allow planners successfully to design and implement food and nutri-
tion plans. The core of this methodology was a nutrition planning sequence,
initially summarized by Berg and Muscatt in the following way:
  The nutrition planning sequence starts with a definition of the nature, scope,
  and trends of the nutrition problem, leading to a preliminary statement of broad
  objectives. It then moves through a description of the system in which the
  nutritional condition arises. In the process of tracing causes, the planner begins
  to sense which programs and policies are relevant to the objectives. Next comes
  a comparison of the alternatives, which in turn leads to constructing an inter-
  related nutrition program. Final selection of objectives, programs and projects
  emerge after a budgetary and political process in which programs to attack
  malnutrition are pitted against other competing claims on resources and, if
  necessary, redesigned within actual budget allocations. The last step is evalua-
  tion of the actions put forth, feeding the conclusions back into subsequent
  rounds of the planning process. (Berg and Muscatt 1973, 249)

   Berg and Muscatt also offered detailed prescriptions of how to go about
carrying out the planning sequence: how to identify “the problem,” deter-
mine the “target group,” set objectives, analyze causes and alternative
courses of action, and so on. In keeping with the planning spirit of the pe-
riod, they claimed to follow a systems approach to problem identification
and solution. In other words, they not only sought to identify and combat
immediate causes but recognized the systemic nature of malnutrition and
the need to mount a concerted attack on the many factors involved in its
causation. All of the methodologies that followed the Berg and Muscatt
                         THE DISPERSION OF POWER                           117
model in the period 1973–1982 claimed to pursue a systems approach. It is
not my intent to discuss here the various models proposed, their differences,
and comparative virtues or shortcomings, which other authors have done in
a competent manner.5 Instead my intent is to discuss FNPP as a discursive
field and analyze the policy practices that it involves and their effect on the
construction of hunger.
   Food and Nutrition Policy and Planning thus emerged as a subdiscipline
in the early 1970s. The demarcation of fields and their assignment to experts
is not new; it is a significant feature of the rise and consolidation of the
modern state. What usually goes unnoticed is how a new subdiscipline intro-
duces a set of practices that allows institutions to structure policy themes,
enforce exclusions, and modify social relations. Even long-hailed panaceas
such as the green revolution, still very much alive at this time, were tacti-
cally branded as failures or insufficient as part of the process of opening a
space for FNPP, without a thorough examination of why they failed or what
they produced. Needless to say, the green revolution was not dismantled but
subsumed into the new strategy. The view of hunger that emerged from
FNPP was even more aseptic and harmless, because it was couched in the
language of planning and supported by unprecedented amounts of data ob-
tained with ever more sophisticated methodologies.
   By the beginning of the 1980s, numerous international seminars and vol-
umes had been devoted to FNPP, and nutrition and rural development
plans were being implemented in many countries of Latin America and
Asia.6 The United Nations technical agencies with competence in food and
hunger (the Food and Agricultural Organization, and the World Health Or-
ganization) had sanctified the new approach in a joint technical report (FAO/
WHO 1976) and were active, along with the World Bank and a host of inter-
national development agencies, in advising and financing the new programs.
Once again, as so many times in the past, the “international nutrition/devel-
opment community” held the cherished belief that the control of malnutri-
tion and hunger was in sight. Once again, to almost nobody’s surprise, this
realization was to be deferred, for by the middle of the decade most of the
plans produced under the spell of FNPP were being dismantled.7
   It would be too easy to explain this paradoxical situation—the persistence
of the problems of malnutrition and hunger in the face of myriad programs
carried out in their name—as a reflection of a necessary “learning process”
that institutions must go through as part of the “development effort.” But
one begins to suspect that what is at stake is not really the eradication of
hunger (even if the planners wholeheartedly desired so) but its multiplica-
tion and dispersion into an ever finer web, a play of mobile visibilities which
is hard to hold in one’s sight. As Ferguson makes clear in his study of devel-
opment in Lesotho, the failure of development projects nevertheless has
powerful effects. And because failure is more the norm than the exception,
118                                  CHAPTER 4

it is of central importance to examine at what levels and in what ways proj-
ects like nutrition, health, and rural development programs produce their
effects. This question takes us deeper into the dynamics of the creation and
implementation of these strategies.


                         FNPP in Latin America:
               The Hidden Practices of Commonsense Planning
The early 1970s were years of gestation for Food and Nutrition Policy and
Planning in various parts of the world. Interest in the formulation of national
food and nutrition policies began to grow in Latin America in 1970 among
health and agriculture ministries and among the resident representatives of
international organizations, who were aware of the new tendencies. As a
response to this growing interest, in 1971 several United Nations agencies
(FAO, WHO, the Panamerican Health Organization [PAHO], the United
Nations Children’s Fund[UNICEF], the Economic Commission for Latin
America [ECLA], and the United Nations Organization for Education, Sci-
ence and Culture [UNESCO]) created the Inter-Agency Project for the Pro-
motion of National Food and Nutrition Policies (PIA/PNAN). This project,
based in Santiago de Chile, was instrumental in spreading the new ortho-
doxy concerning food and nutrition planning in Latin America.
   The first task the PIA/PNAN accomplished was the elaboration of a Meth-
odological Guide for the Planning of Integrated National Food and Nutri-
tion Policies (PIA/PNAN 1973a). In March 1973 a meeting was convened in
Santiago to discuss the guide with a group of international and Latin Ameri-
can experts, most of whom were working with national governments or with
United Nations agencies. The purpose of the ten-day meeting was to agree
on the most acceptable planning methodology to be disseminated by the
PIA/PNAN among Latin American governments, based on the premise that
the food and nutrition problem had “its roots in a series of economic, social,
cultural, environmental and health factors which are closely intercon-
nected,” and that consequently, “a multisectoral approach [was] necessary”
(PIA/PNAN 1975a, 1).8 The Inter-Agency Project defined its approach as
follows:
  By food and nutrition policy we understand a coherent set of principles, objec-
  tives, priorities and decisions adopted by the state and carried out by its institu-
  tions with the aim of providing all of the country’s population with the amount
  of food and other social, cultural and economic elements which are indispens-
  able for adequate food and nutrition welfare. This policy should be an integral
  component of the country’s national development plan, and each country
  should strive to realize the content of this definition according to its own capa-
  bilities, resources and stage of development. (PIA/PNAN 1973b, 6)
                           THE DISPERSION OF POWER                                  119
   The Methodological Guide, accompanied by elegant flow charts, con-
tained a description of the planning process as well as detailed prescriptions
of how to go about it. The emphasis of the document was on overall food and
nutrition strategy and policy analysis, with the ultimate purpose of formu-
lating a national food and nutrition plan. The PIA/PNAN adhered to a type
of analysis in which the nutritional status of a given population was seen as
the product of a series of factors grouped under three rubrics: food supply,
food demand, and biological utilization of food, including the following
elements:
  1. Food supply: food production (according to the resource base of the country,
     types of crop, conditions of cultivation, food policy, institutional support, and
     so on); food-trade balance (import and export, foreign exchange, interna-
     tional prices, commodity agreements, food aid); commercialization of food
     (marketing, roads, storage infrastructure, prices, food processing).
  2. Food demand: demographic factors (population size and growth rate, age
     structure, spatial distribution, migration); cultural factors (general educa-
     tional level, nutrition education, cultural values and food habits, weaning
     and child-feeding practices, housing and cooking facilities); economic condi-
     tions (employment and wages, income distribution, access to means of pro-
     duction, rural versus urban location); and consumption factors (diet compo-
     sition, food subsidies).
  3. Biological utilization of food: health factors (health services, prevention and
     control of contagious diseases, immunization, health education); envi-
     ronmental factors (water supply, sanitation, sewage systems, food quality
     control).

   The basis of the PIA/PNAN model is a representation of the way in which
the various elements pertaining to the three spheres are interrelated in the
causation of malnutrition. The “explicative model of the process of malnutri-
tion in Latin America,” as the PIA/PNAN termed its approach, “describes
how these forces are interconnected in the generation of the high degree of
malnutrition that affects a great segment of the Latin American population”
(1975b, 1). Armed with this theory, the PIA/PNAN went about establishing
a presence in most Latin American countries. The first step—following a
planning sequence similar to Berg’s—was the collection of information with
the aim of preparing a diagnosis of the food and nutrition situation of the
country in question. Information was collected on all factors related to the
supply, demand, and biological utilization of food, whether from existing
data or through specially devised surveys. The instruments more commonly
used in this regard were the national food-balance sheet, which contains
estimates of the availability of different foods within the country, translated
into calories and nutrients and, after comparison with recommended stan-
dards, into aggregate “nutritional gaps”; consumer expenditure surveys;
120                                  CHAPTER 4

food consumption surveys by households; and medical and anthropometric
surveys, especially to assess the nutritional status of children. In addition,
information was collected on health, sanitation, employment, agriculture,
and demographic factors. These data were used to identify food deficits,
nutritional problems, and the adequacy of services. The result was an idea of
“the nutrition problem” in the country in question.
   A second step was to establish projections of food supply and demand.
These projections were needed in order to identify aggregate production
gaps by crop, which would be the basis of agricultural production policy.
Projections were estimated according to standard statistical and economet-
ric routines (production and demand functions, budget constraints, and so
on), taking into account economic and demographic factors (growth of GNP,
population growth rate, productivity increases, income distribution trends,
income elasticity of demand for different foodstuffs, and so on). Once projec-
tions are done,
  the next step is to consider the policies necessary to satisfy such projections. To
  this effect, the Guide introduces all the policies relevant to food production,
  commercialization and international trade; those of population, income, educa-
  tion and food aid; and those of sanitation, health and nutrition. After these are
  examined in the light of the problem diagnosis and the objectives already estab-
  lished, there comes the technical and political process of selecting the most
  appropriate policies and programs given the conditions and possibilities of the
  country. This is the time at which priorities must be decided upon and re-
  sources should be assigned. Responsibility for implementation is agreed upon,
  and a time frame is chosen. International technical and financial cooperation
  must also be decided upon. . . . Programs should be evaluated periodically after
  their implementation has proceeded for some time. (PIA/PNAN 1973b, 3, 4)

The Inter-Agency Project recommended the establishment of a special nu-
trition planning unit within the national planning office to carry out the
design. This unit, also recommended by Berg (1973) and Joy and Payne
(1975), would report to a national food and nutrition council, staffed by the
highest government officials (the president and the pertinent members of
the cabinet or their representatives). Universities, research institutes, spe-
cialized government agencies such as nutrition institutes, and, it goes with-
out saying, international consultants would provide technical support.
   How did the PIA/PNAN go about spreading its credo in Latin America?
The first move, facilitated by its status as a United Nations project, was to
contact pertinent agencies in each country and make them cognizant of the
project’s existence. Then followed a meeting with representatives from the
agencies—including the national planning office, the ministries of health,
agriculture, education, economics, and development, and the national nutri-
tion institute—in which the project’s framework and methodology were pre-
                         THE DISPERSION OF POWER                              121
sented and discussed. An important step at this point was the promotion and
creation of the special Nutrition Planing Unit, to which the PIA/PNAN was
to give financial and technical support for the task of beginning the process
of formulating a national nutrition policy. This support was supplemented in
some countries with funds and technical assistance from other agencies, par-
ticularly FAO and U.S. AID. Negotiations and advising were maintained
until the country launched its first national nutrition plan. Once the plan was
under way, the project’s involvement was restricted in most cases to sup-
porting the evaluation component of the plan; this closed the cycle of PIA/
PNAN involvement.9
   By 1975, the PIA/PNAN was conducting activities in approximately fif-
teen countries in Latin America and the Caribbean, including Colombia
(similar schemes were introduced in several Asian countries, including the
Philippines and Sri Lanka). Before I discuss the role of the PIA/PNAN in the
formulation of the Colombian National Food and Nutrition Plan, however,
it is worth pausing to examine some of the underlying assumptions of this
kind of planning discourse. The basis of the approach is the definition of the
nutrition problem. The first question to be raised in this regard is “whether
there is an objective world of problems outside the problems with which the
practices of policy claim to be concerning themselves” (Shaffer 1985, 375).
In other words, planners take their practice as a true description of reality,
uninfluenced by their own relation to that reality. Planners do not entertain
the idea that the characterization of the food and nutrition system in terms
of three spheres (supply, demand, and biological utilization) might be a spe-
cific representation with political, social, and cultural consequences. In
practice, however, “policy constructs those sorts of agendas of problems
which can be handled. It then labels the items of these agendas as problems
in particular ways. For example, people are referred to as categories of target
groups to whom items of services can be delivered” (Shaffer 1985, 375).
   Even within this type of positivist thinking, the assessment of the preva-
lence of malnutrition and hunger has been riddled with problems. Estimates
of malnutrition worldwide have ranged from two-thirds of the population to
only 10–15 percent. Policy options are influenced by the kind of estimate
chosen; in fact, the setting of norms (standards and requirements of nutri-
tional adequacy) and degrees of incidence of malnutrition is an area of active
scientific-political struggle.10 For instance, although the difficulties of calcu-
lating aggregate deficits have been amply demonstrated, emphasis at both
the international and national level is still on aggregate figures, in spite of
the fact that alternatives have been proposed. One such alternative suggests
starting with limited data and stories of how concrete individuals got to be
malnourished and then constructing a functional classification of groups of
people that relates malnutrition to the particular ecological, social, and eco-
nomic factors that condition it (Joy and Payne 1975; Pacey and Payne 1985).
122                               CHAPTER 4

This approach would call for interventions that are localized and, as the
proponents of this methodology recommended, participatory. This runs
counter to an institution like the World Bank, which operates on the basis of
the identification of large food-production deficits; aggregates of this sort can
be tackled with macro policies that incorporate the agricultural interests that
figure prominently in the Bank’s thinking.
   There are other practices that shape inquiry. Strategies such as rural de-
velopment and nutrition planning are seen “as if [they] were exogenous to
the social and political situations which, nevertheless, are held to necessitate
[them]” (Apthorpe 1984, 138). In other words, interventions are thought of
as a beneficent medicine placed by the hand of government or the interna-
tional community on a sore spot that is perceived as external. Planners are
notorious for not seeing themselves as part of the system for which they
plan. They give all of their attention to the allegedly rational techniques of
policy and planning (such as surveys, forecasting, maximizing algorithms,
and cost-benefit analyses), which, as we know, bypass local situations and
concrete historical forces. These considerations hold true despite the fact
that, as many planners know, standard methodologies are never followed
rigidly. Appeal to the method is used to avoid discussing where, when,
and what decisions were made and by whom. As Shaffer points out, this
avoidance of responsibility is an essential feature of public policy practice.
Predictably, policy practitioners are sheltered by the very institutional
mechanisms they employ. Accountability becomes impossible to enforce.
Planning, in a sense, exists without concrete social actors.
   Shaffer refers to models such as the PIA/PNAN’s as the mainstream or
“common-sense” view of planning. This view sees policy and planning as a
systematic, information-based process composed of fixed stages (problem
definition; identification and assessment of alternatives; policy formulation;
program implementation; and evaluation). The model gives the impression
that policy is the result of discrete, voluntaristic acts, not the process of
coming to terms with conflicting interests in the process of which choices
are made and exclusions effected. How the new policy and accompanying
technologies are decided upon is completely overlooked. In this way, agen-
das and decisions appear natural; decisions are seen as following automati-
cally from analysis, and it never seems that a different decision could have
been reached. Decisions are, in fact, foregone conclusions, the genesis of
which is almost impossible to identify, because the choices and debates are
hidden by the model. Further inquiry into what alternatives could have
been followed is precluded when policy is seen as the result of a rational
ends-means process.
   Another consequence of the view of planning as composed of linear stages
is the assumption that policy-making and implementation are distinct, as if
implementation were a problem for someone else (the implementing agen-
                         THE DISPERSION OF POWER                           123
cies), independent of policy. This separation is often utilized in the evalua-
tion of policy performance: the policy failed, or was ineffective, because
“politics” got in the way, or because the implementation agencies did not do
their job properly, or because of lack of funds or of trained personnel, or due
to a long list of “obstacles to implementation” which are never related to how
policy was shaped in the first place. Escape hatches such as these are used
continually to explain program failures and to call for new inputs into the
planning process. The reification of data contributes to this feature. As Hack-
ing (1991) has shown, along with particular data come administrative mea-
sures and categorizations of people that make people conform to the bureau-
cracy’s discursive and practical universe. This is more so when a situation of
scarcity of resources and/or services is supposed to exist. Another escape
hatch is the assumption that it is possible to identify what is a more or less
rational alternative, independent of politics. Rationality is reinforced by the
use of physicalist discourse (Apthorpe 1984), that is, a type of discourse that
emphasizes physical aspects (production factors, prices, medical consider-
ations). Even when social issues are taken into account, they are reduced to
the language of probability or other technical devices, such as in discussions
about income distribution.
   In sum, the very existence of models such as the PIA/PNAN’s allows gov-
ernments and organizations to structure policy and construct problems in
such a way that the construction is made invisible. Conventional analyses
focus on what went wrong with the model, or whether the model is adequate
or not. They overlook more important questions: What did institutions do
under the rubric of planning, and how did these practices relate to policy
outcomes? In other words, policy has to be seen as a practice that involves
theories about policy decisions, types of knowledge and administrative
skills, and processes of bureaucratization, all of which are deeply political.
This deconstruction of planning leads us to conclude that only by problema-
tizing these hidden practices—that is, by exposing the arbitrariness of poli-
cies, habits, and data interpretation and by suggesting other possible read-
ings and outcomes—can the play of power be made explicit in the allegedly
neutral deployment of development (Escobar 1992a).


       AGRARIAN CRISIS AND ITS CONTAINMENT THROUGH PLANNING
                       IN COLOMBIA, 1972–1992
                       The Road to Nutrition Planning
The first contact between the PIA/PNAN and the Colombian government
took place in 1971, when Colombia agreed to participate in the PIA/PNAN
project.11 A key Colombian participant in these early events recorded the
importance of the PIA/PNAN as follows:
124                                 CHAPTER 4

  Of special importance was the commitment made by the Colombian govern-
  ment to participate in the U.N. Inter-Agency Project for the Promotion of Na-
  tional Food and Nutrition Policy (PIA/PNAN), based in Santiago. This activity
  was of great importance not only because it generated an increased interest
  in food and nutrition on the part of the government, but also because it con-
  tributed technical assistance, methodological approaches and, along with
  UNICEF, limited but timely funding for some of the key activities carried out
  by the National Committee on Food and Nutrition Policy. (Varela 1979, 38)12

   The National Committee on Food and Nutrition Policy had been created
by the government in July 1972 with the purpose of making recommenda-
tions to the government regarding food and nutrition. These developments
were not solely the result of the PIA/PNAN’s influence. A major event that
had made its debut in the sad theater of hunger during those years was the
world food crisis, which led to the famous World Food Conference of No-
vember 1974. In this conference, held in Rome under the auspices of the
UN’s Food and Agricultural Organization, all the countries of the world
committed themselves to ending hunger, and major guidelines were issued
to this end, including planning approaches (see, for instance, FAO 1974a,
1974b). The conference was extremely important in motivating planners to
imagine actions of unprecedented proportions. The documents of this con-
ference found their way to the desks of planning officials in many parts of the
Third World.13
   Let us return to the account of the antecedents of the Colombian National
Food and Nutrition Plan found in the recollection quoted earlier:
  [The Plan was] the culmination of a long process of knowledge, experience and
  institutional development that spans three decades. . . . The first step goes back
  to 1942, when a group of Colombian professionals began their graduate work at
  Harvard University. There began thus a lasting and beneficial relationship with
  this university, which was to include at a later date advising by Harvard experts
  and even the realization of joint projects. (Varela 1979, 31)

   One of those projects had been a longitudinal study on the relationship
between malnutrition and psychological development, carried out jointly in
Bogotá by Colombian, North American, and West German scientists with
funds from the Ford Foundation. A similar study was carried out in Cali
during the 1970s, with the involvement of two Northwestern University
psychologists and funding from the Rockefeller Foundation and the U.S.
National Science Foundation (see McKay, McKay, and Sinisterra 1979).
The rationale for the projects on malnutrition and mental development—as
well as that of projects on malnutrition and work capacity, also in vogue
during the 1970s—was that governments would be more inclined to act
vigorously if it could be proven scientifically that malnutrition led to im-
                         THE DISPERSION OF POWER                           125
paired mental development in children and decreased work capacity in
adults. Besides these projects, several other research projects and pilot pro-
grams were under way by then in the regions surrounding Bogotá and Cali,
with active participation of U.S. and European scientists and foundations,
on topics such as primary health care, rural development, and maternal and
child nutrition.
   These projects created a public space for discussing the nutrition prob-
lem, always within the confines of science.14 Although the Rockefeller Foun-
dation had been active in public health activities in many countries of Latin
America since the late 1910s,15 nutrition research per se did not start in
Colombia until the founding of the Nutrition Institute in 1947 within the
Ministry of Hygiene (now Public Health Ministry). Nutrition activities
achieved a much greater scope with the beginning in 1954 of food supple-
mentation programs that utilized existing health and educational institutions
to distribute foods donated by international agencies (CARE and CARITAS
initially, joined in the 1960s by U.S. AID and the World Food Program). The
first attempt to coordinate and integrate nutrition activities (food supple-
mentation and nutrition education) with health and agricultural projects
(extension services, school and family gardens, technology transfer) was
the Integrated Programs of Applied Nutrition, started in the mid-1960s
with considerable support from international organizations and voluntary
agencies. Numerous nutrition surveys, health projects, and food-technology
research were also carried out on a limited scale throughout the 1960s
(Grueso n.d.).
   In spite of all of these activities, there was no overall food and nutrition
policy. Most nutrition programs were linked to international food aid, the
origin of which, as is well known, was the need of the United States to
dispose of its agricultural surplus by donating it to friendly Third World
nations (Lappé, Collins, and Kinley 1980). When the PIA/PNAN arrived in
the country, and in the wake of the world food crisis of the early 1970s,
conditions were ripe for a more encompassing and integrated strategy. Per-
haps more important than this slow institutional buildup in making possible
the new strategies were changes that had taken place in the rural sector
since about 1950, which reached a climax in the late 1960s with unprece-
dented peasant political activism and a deep crisis in agricultural produc-
tion. Out of this situation, which Colombia shared with many other Latin
American countries, the new strategies emerged.
   To make sense of Colombia’s food and nutrition policy of the 1970s and
1980s, it is necessary to analyze the broader politicoeconomic conditions
that characterized the Colombian countryside. These conditions both fa-
vored and required a new arrangement of the social, political, and economic
landscape of rural Colombia. The new strategies of nutrition and rural devel-
opment played a primary role in effecting this arrangement. In the next
126                              CHAPTER 4

section, I summarize briefly the major features of the agrarian crisis in Co-
lombia up to the early 1970s, before proceeding to my account and analysis
of the Colombian National Food and Nutrition Plan.


         The Political Economy of Food and Nutrition, 1950–1972
In 1950, about two-thirds of the Colombian population lived in rural areas,
and agriculture provided close to 40 percent of the gross domestic prod-
uct (GDP). By 1972 these numbers had declined to less than 50 percent and
26 percent respectively (in 1985, the percentage of people living in rural
areas was estimated at 30 percent). Conversely, the largest cities grew at an
annual rate of 7 percent or more, and the manufacturing sector also grew
rapidly as economic diversification continued and the country shifted from
a rural- to an urban-oriented economy. The decline of agriculture, however,
was not an even process. A closer look reveals stagnation tendencies, partic-
ularly among crops cultivated by peasants, and fast growth rates in crops
cultivated by capitalist farmers under modern conditions. It also reveals sig-
nificant social and cultural changes and massive impoverishment among
peasants. These aspects—stagnation of peasant production, impoverishment
of the peasantry, and associated social and cultural changes—formed the
background of the health, nutrition, and rural development strategies of the
1970s and 1980s.
   One of the most striking features of agrarian change in the period 1950–
1972 was the rapid growth of crops cultivated under modern capitalist con-
ditions—namely, the use of a high degree of mechanization and of chemical
inputs and technology—such as cotton, sugarcane, rice, and soybeans. As a
group, these commercial crops grew at a rate of 8.2 percent per annum for
the twenty-two years under consideration, almost five times faster than more
traditional crops—such as beans, cassava, and plantains—and about three
times faster than other crops under mixed (capitalist and traditional) condi-
tions of cultivation, including corn, coffee, potatoes, wheat, tobacco, cocoa,
and bananas. Initially, commercial agriculture based its rapid growth on the
dynamism of the domestic market arising from increasing industrial demand
for agricultural products and from some increase in family income (the result
of urbanization and industrialization). Once this demand was satisfied, it
continued its expansion primarily through export markets and thanks to the
continual replacement of traditional products by those produced mostly for
urban consumption by the growing food-processing industry. Traditional
crops, however, lay at the other end of the growth scale. If commercial crops
experienced spectacular growth rates, traditional crops became almost stag-
nant. This is the first feature of Colombian (and most Latin American) agri-
culture during the first two decades of development: spectacular growth of
the modern sector and stagnation of the traditional one.16
                         THE DISPERSION OF POWER                             127
   Let us look at how Marxist political economists explain this pattern of
uneven agricultural development. Part of the answer, in this line of analysis,
lies in the class basis of agricultural production (Crouch and de Janvry 1980).
So-called traditional foods are produced and consumed primarily by peas-
ants, although some of them are also part of the urban diet (this is the case
of beans in Colombia). Commercial crops, however, are produced by capital-
ist farmers and are intended for either urban consumption (in the case of
wage goods such as rice and sugar, rice being the staple of the urban work-
ing class), industrial or luxury consumption (soybeans, cotton, beef, mush-
rooms), or export (flowers, bananas, or coffee, which now is produced mostly
on farms between ten and one hundred hectares or larger). Social class is
thus a major determinant of production and consumption. Rice, produced
by capitalists, has had the highest growth rate in a number of Latin American
countries, whereas peasant foods have systematically had the lowest rates of
growth, with a number of crops falling somewhere in between.
   This, in turn, is a reflection of a series of historical, political, and agro-
economic determinants. On the political side, capitalist farmers have more
political influence than peasant farmers. Traditionally powerful in Colom-
bia, the landed elite have been able to retain an important degree of control
over the state apparatus, in spite of the fact that the government has put
pressure on them to modernize their methods of production. In fact, the
land reform initiated by the government in the early 1960s had the primary
objective of compelling landowners with large plots to adopt more efficient
forms of cultivation. Political influence was reflected at the time in public
policy instances, such as protectionist measures for commercial crops and
privileged access to services, research, technology, credit, and irrigation.
For instance, rice benefited from research in the best centers, was protected
from cheaper imports, and enjoyed access to credit and support prices;
at the same time, the production of wheat—a peasant crop in Colombia—
stagnated due to cheaper imports allowed by the government via food aid. In
Mexico, by , contrast, wheat, a capitalist crop, enjoyed measures similar to
those of rice in Colombia. It is not a coincidence that wheat in Mexico and
rice in Colombia were the miracle stories of the green revolution. Among the
agro-economic determinants, differential responsiveness to inputs and irri-
gation, geographical conditions, labor intensity, and demand conditions in-
fluenced why crops went capitalist or remained traditional (Crouch and de
Janvry 1980; de Janvry 1981).
   Increasing the production of food grains in Latin America—political
economists continue in their explanation—was seen as necessary in the face
of decreasing shipments of U.S. surplus grain and in order to quell what was
seen as teeming social unrest in the countryside. Development theory had
already shifted its emphasis toward agricultural modernization. The initial
result of this shift was the in/famous green revolution, called upon to neu-
128                                CHAPTER 4

tralize social upheaval, demobilize politicized peasantries, and increase pro-
duction while providing an exportable surplus. Another factor that moti-
vated the rapid expansion of the green revolution was the interest of multi-
national companies producing inputs (fertilizers, pesticides, and improved
seeds) in expanding their markets.17 De Janvry has summarized this set of
factors and the concomitant responses:
  By the mid-1960s, the export of P.L. 480 foods to Latin America was on the
  decline. Stagnation of domestic food production did not permit the food deficit
  countries to compensate for decreasing concessional imports, and the industri-
  alization strategy based on cheap food was compromised. The development of
  food production in commercial agriculture became the center of reformism.
  This was sought via the transfer of capital and technology to Latin America; a
  massive increase in research expenditures on food crops (the Green Revolu-
  tion); the strengthening of extension programs; greater availability of agricul-
  tural credit; and the entry of multinational firms into agricultural production,
  the manufacturing of inputs, and the processing and distribution of products.
  Agricultural research expenditures doubled in real terms between 1962 and
  1968 while expenditures in agricultural extension services more than doubled.
  International agricultural research centers were created for wheat and corn
  (CIMMYT in 1966 in Mexico), tropical food crops and cattle (CIAT in 1968 in
  Colombia), and potatoes (CIP in 1972 in Peru). World Bank loans for agricul-
  tural projects—principally large irrigation works—increased substantially to
  some 23 percent of total lending. And in the land reforms of this period, the
  dominant objective became economic: to increase production, principally by
  inducing (through threats of expropriation) modernization of the nonreformed
  sector. (De Janvry 1981, 199, 200)

   What was the “industrialization strategy based on cheap food,” and what
was its relevance? According to de Janvry, industrialization in the world’s
periphery depends on the availability of cheap labor, which is maintained
chiefly through the provision of cheap food and the exploitation of the peas-
antry and urban working class. The requirement of cheap labor is imposed
by the “laws of motion” of capital globally and its contradictions, in ways that
is not the point to analyze here. The result is a structural situation in which
a “modern” sector—based on a combination of multinational, state, and local
capital—coexists with a “backward,” or traditional, sector, the chief function
of which is to provide cheap labor and cheap food for the former (what de
Janvry calls functional dualism). Because the dynamic sectors of the econ-
omy produce for export or for the modern sector, there is no real need for
consolidating an internal market that would encompass most of the popula-
tion. Productivity is raised and profits are maintained without a concomitant
rise in wages; hence the “logic” of cheap labor. The social articulation that
exists in the center countries regulating wages, profits, consumption, pro-
                         THE DISPERSION OF POWER                            129
duction, and the size of the internal market does not exist in the periphery.
And because development in the periphery proceeds so unevenly among
sectors, it can be said that the periphery is not only socially but also sector-
ally disarticulated.
   What is the relation between disarticulation and the agrarian crisis? The
production of cheap food has been increasingly entrusted to the modern
sector, through both land-saving and labor-saving technologies. This was the
main objective of the green revolution. This move, however, was riddled
with contradictions. Disarticulated accumulation supposes two pressing and
competing needs: on the one hand, the need to maintain cheap food and
cheap labor required to make investment profitable; on the other hand, the
need to generate foreign exchange to import the technology and capital
goods required for the industrialization process. In this struggle between
food for domestic consumption and industrialization, on the one hand, and
foreign-exchange generating activities (that is, export agriculture), on the
other, the latter has benefited most from public resources. The result has
been the stagnation of peasant foods and the inability of the capitalist sector
to compensate for decreasing peasant production, due to biases against agri-
culture in general and to the preference granted to agriculture for export
and for industry or luxury consumption. Governments in Latin America and
other parts of the Third World have resorted to other means to maintain the
price of food low, including a variety of cheap food policies, such as price
controls and subsidies. These policies have acted as disincentives to peasant
agriculture and food production in general. In some cases, however, the
development of capitalism has been quite successful, such as rice in Colom-
bia. Fostering the development of agribusiness was another route followed,
especially the multinational kind, which was supposed to contribute to gen-
erating foreign exchange; as it is now known, this rarely happened (Burbach
and Flynn 1980; Feder 1977).
   These negative tendencies notwithstanding, in most of Latin America a
great percentage of food crops is still produced by peasants. In Colombia,
for instance, an estimated 55 percent of all food produced for direct con-
sumption in the country at the time of the inception of the Integrated Rural
Development Program (1976) was still grown by what is known as the tradi-
tional sector (DNP/DRI 1979). Yet peasants are unable to accumulate capi-
tal and are progressively drained; those who remain in production do so
increasingly only to feed themselves, and the majority are displaced from
their lands and turned into proletarian (the landless) or semiproletarian
labor (those who still have access to some land but not enough to survive).18
Peasants are then pulled in opposite directions by divergent forces: they
have to serve as a source of cheap labor yet keep producing cheap food at the
same time; and they tend to become semiproletarians while a tendency for
full proletarianization nevertheless exists. And in spite of the fact that peas-
130                               CHAPTER 4

ants in many communities have been able to resist the intrusion of commer-
cial capitalism or maneuver around it while maintaining viable small family
farms, the overall tendency, most argue, seems to be toward proletarianiza-
tion—although the persistence of the family farm has been important in
some regions of Colombia, as Reinhardt shows (1988).
   In the midst of all this, and to take account of these contradictions, inte-
grated rural development programs emerged in the early 1970s. Increased
displacement of the peasantry from their land, and semiproletarianization or
full proletarianization of rural people dictated by the logic of cheap labor,
increased exploitation of the peasants’ physical and human ecologies (degra-
dation of the resource base and increased exploitation of women and chil-
dren) and produced widespread hunger and malnutrition. In this way, ac-
cording to de Janvry, the agrarian crisis and the strategies to solve it have to
be seen as integral components of disarticulated development. Designed to
rationalize the situation of food production following the logic of cheap food,
the green revolution failed to deliver what it promised, aggravating not only
the food situation but also its social manifestations.
   Up to this point I have recounted the most widely accepted explanation
of the political economy of agrarian change in Latin America. This explana-
tion is useful only up to a point. It must be subjected, however, to the analy-
sis of economics as culture advanced in the previous chapter. De Janvry’s
functionalism reduces social life to a reflection of the “contradictions” of
capital accumulation; despite a certain dialectical analysis, the realist (never
interpretive) epistemology that this brand of analysis espouses subjects un-
derstanding of social life to some “really real” force, namely, the “laws” of
motion of capital, encoded in the main contradiction between production
and circulation, the concomitant tendency for the rate of profit to fall, and
repeated realization crises. From a poststructuralist perspective, however,
there cannot be a materialist analysis that is not at the same time a discur-
sive analysis. Everything I have said so far in this book suggests that repre-
sentations are not a reflection of “reality” but constitutive of it. There is no
materiality that is not mediated by discourse, as there is no discourse that is
unrelated to materialities. From this perspective, the making of food and
labor and the making of narratives about them must be seen in the same
light. To put it simply, the attempt at articulating a political economy of
food and health must start with the construction of objects such as nature,
peasants, food, and the body as an epistemological, cultural, and political
process.
   The discursive nature of capital is evident in various ways—for instance,
in the resignification of nature as resources; in the construction of poverty as
lack of development, of peasants as merely food producers, and of hunger as
lack of food requiring rural development; and in the representation of capital
and technology as agents of transformation. As we will see shortly and in the
next chapter, the requirements that political economists discovered rest
                         THE DISPERSION OF POWER                            131
upon the ability of the development apparatus to create discourses that
allow institutions to distribute individuals and populations in ways consis-
tent with capitalist relations. The logic of capital, whatever it is, cannot ex-
plain fully why a given group of rural people were made the targets of the
interventions we are discussing. Such a logic could equally have dictated
another fate for the same group, including its total disappearance in order to
give way to triumphant capital, which has not occurred. Analyses in terms of
political economy, finally, are too quick to impute purely economic func-
tions to development projects; they reduce the reason for these projects to
sets of interests to be unveiled by analysis. They also believe that the dis-
courses (such as integrated rural development) are just ideologies or mis-
representations of what developers are “really” up to (Ferguson 1990). With-
out denying their value, this amounts to a simplification that is no longer
satisfactory.

By the early 1970s, the contradictions of the green revolution had become
evident and the international development community—that self-appointed
group of experts and bankers always eager to renew their good intentions,
despite the catastrophic results of their previous magic formulas—was ready
to provide a new solution. The realization suddenly dawned on them—as if
fallen from the sky, a new revelation from a prophet none other than the
discourse of development itself—that the peasants (“small farmers” in their
eyes) were not so unimportant after all; that given the appropriate level of
attention, they too could be turned into productive citizens and that, who
knows, perhaps they could be made to increase their production capacity so
as to maintain the levels of cheap food required to maintain the levels of
cheap labor required for multinational corporations to continue reaping
their huge profits, which, in any case, are only their rightful retribution for
contributing so much to the development of those poor lands and peoples.
And directly from the U.S. Department of Defense, after having reorganized
the Pentagon and participated in the management of the Vietnam war, there
came to the World Bank a new president to lead the fight against the world’s
“absolute poverty,” with rural development as his favorite weapon: Robert
McNamara. And, always willing to be the first guinea pig for the experi-
ments of the international development community, Colombia started in the
mid-l970s to implement the first nationwide integrated rural development
program in the Third World. In the next section I sketch broadly the major
components of this program.


             The Colombian National Food and Nutrition Plan
We have already become acquainted with the major features of FNPP and
its progressive presence in the international scene: its appearance in the
august and authoritative quarters of North American and British campuses,
132                               CHAPTER 4

its spread through the United Nations system (including the World Bank),
and finally its safe arrival in Latin America on the wings of the PIA/PNAN.
It is worthwhile at this point to take a finer look at the process of dispersion
of this strategy in Colombia; in other words, to visualize how the Colom-
bian countryside, conceived by the apparatus in terms of traditional peasant
communities and a modern capitalist sector, was mapped by FNPP produc-
ing a system of dispersion and controls through the activities of a variety of
institutions.
   A National Committee for Food and Nutrition Policy, let it be recalled,
had been formed in July 1972 at the highest levels of government. Early in
1973, the committee entrusted a small technical group within the Depart-
ment of National Planning (DNP) with the task of formulating a national
food and nutrition policy. This Coordinating Group was headed by a Colom-
bian sociologist with a graduate degree in medical sociology from Berkeley
and staffed by two economists, one agricultural economist, one education
expert, and one international adviser, provided by the United Nations De-
velopment Programme (UNDP). The first meetings of this group—housed
within the DNP’s Division of Population and Nutrition, in turn part of the
larger Unit of Social Development—convinced its members that the first
step to take was the construction of a multicausal systems diagnosis that paid
special attention to social and economic factors, until then largely neglected.
   The first few months of intense work by the Coordinating Group saw its
fruits with the publication of its first document in July 1973, entitled Basis
for a Food and Nutrition Policy in Colombia (DNP/UDS 1973). This docu-
ment summarized and assessed the known information about the food and
nutrition situation of the country, proposing guidelines for the work ahead.
At the nutrition level, the major problems were found to be protein-calorie
malnutrition (from mild to severe, affecting perhaps two-thirds of all chil-
dren in the country),19 adult chronic undernutrition, and a series of specific
nutritional deficiencies (especially iron-deficiency anemia and vitamin A de-
ficiency). Nutritional deficiencies were identified as one of the main factors
contributing to infant mortality. At the level of food production, national
food-balance sheets showed overall production to be sufficient to feed ade-
quately the entire population of the country. A disaggregated analysis, how-
ever, revealed ample disparities, with people in lower income categories
presenting the most serious nutrient gaps.
   The Coordinating Group lucidly identified the skewed income distribu-
tion of the country as the single major factor responsible for the high inci-
dence of malnutrition, thus opening the door for a host of social questions.
Whereas the lowest 50 percent of the population received only 20 percent
of the country’s income, almost 45 percent of it went to the top 10 percent
of the population. In simple terms, people just did not have enough income
to feed themselves adequately. A recent study had shown that 40 percent of
                        THE DISPERSION OF POWER                           133
Colombians would not be able to afford a “minimum cost diet” even if they
devoted all of their income to food. Nevertheless, this situation was not all
due to income disparities. High margins of commercialization were found to
increase the cost of food dramatically, especially for urban consumers; an-
other factor influencing nutritional status, according to the Coordinating
Group’s diagnosis, was ignorance of the nutritive value of foods and negative
food habits.
   Adhering to PIA/PNAN style, the group convened a National Intersec-
toral Conference on Food and Nutrition in December 1973 at the fancy
headquarters of the International Center of Tropical Agriculture (CIAT).20
The conference had the following objectives: (1) To bring to the country’s
attention the magnitude of the nutritional problems; (2) To support the the-
sis that malnutrition is not only a medical problem but also an economic,
technological, agricultural, and social problem; and (3) To convince the lead-
ing political and technical groups of the country of the possibility of mount-
ing a food and nutrition strategy capable of revitalizing the country’s econ-
omy as a whole (Varela 1979, 39)
   The conference, funded by UNICEF, was attended by all relevant Co-
lombian institutions—including the government, universities, and private
interests—and by representatives of United Nations agencies, U.S. AID,
and the World Bank. The thrust of the conference was to demonstrate the
relationship between nutrition and agricultural production, and the role that
a planning strategy that integrated both of these aspects could have in the
solution of the “nutrition problem.” Even the medical profession complied
with the new vision, although not without resistance.21 Planners, econo-
mists, agronomists, and the medical profession were eager to capitalize on
the unprecedented expansion of state intervention in food and nutrition en-
tailed by the proposed strategy. Work in the following months was dedicated
to refining the initial diagnosis, to putting together a number of working
groups involving the various agencies that were to carry out the different
programs, and to the actual design of the plan and its programs. Objec-
tives were set, a number of food crops were selected to be included in the
plan, and negotiations were started with the World Bank and other funding
agencies.22
   Negotiations with the World Bank included furnishing the Bank (as it is
usually known) with detailed information on every step taken and the visit
to the country of at least four Bank missions before the first agreement was
signed.23 It was also a period of training and advising; a number of Colom-
bians, for instance, were sent to Mexico to study experimental integrated
rural development programs, of which there were several in Colombia as
well. This experience was influential in the formulation of the Colombian
strategy. Activities peaked with the publication and approval by the highest
authorities of the Plan Nacional de Alimentación y Nutrición (PAN) in March
134                               CHAPTER 4

1975 (DNP 1975a). The overall development plan for the 1974–1978 admin-
istrative period, modestly entitled Para Cerrar la Brecha (To close the gap)
(DNP 1975b), hailed PAN and DRI (Programa de Desarrollo Rural Inte-
grado) as the milestones of the government’s social policy. By the time the
PAN was published, however, all critical consideration of income distribu-
tion had already been dropped.24 The government, it was argued, had other
programs that were supposed to increase the income of the poor.
   Para Cerrar la Brecha purported to raise the living standard of the poorest
50 percent of the population. To meet this guideline, and as a necessary step
toward ensuring adequate targeting and evaluation of PAN and DRI, and
also responding to World Bank requirements, the PAN/DRI national group
carried out a “regionalization exercise,” which aimed at identifying the poor-
est 30 percent in the country. The national group wanted to draw a national
poverty map; to this end, data on one hundred different socioeconomic and
demographic variables were collected in each of the 930 municipalities of
the country and aggregated under three overall indicators (mean family in-
come, educational level, and access to services). The weighted index permit-
ted the ranking of rural and marginal urban areas so that a cutoff point could
be drawn separating the 30 percent poorest to benefit directly from the gov-
ernment’s social programs. In 1979, the regionalization exercise was ad-
justed and improved by a private firm under PAN contract, with the use of
new data and sophisticated statistical and computerized models (DNP/PAN
1975a, 1976a; Instituto SER 1980a).
   The regionalization exercise was without precedent in the country. In the
early 1970s, the French government had provided technical assistance to
the Department of National Statistics (DANE) on models for the collection
and use of social indicators, at a time when the DNP was becoming inter-
ested in regional information systems to rationalize its development plan.
However, in keeping with accepted development doctrine of the time—
disseminated at the highest level by Lauchlin Currie, who in 1970, already
a Colombian national, was the chief economic adviser to then-president
Misael Pastrana Borrero—these efforts were geared toward making visible
the “poles of development” (regions of actual or potential high degree of
development), rather than “the 30% poorest.” The PAN/DRI regionaliza-
tion, then, signified a tactical reversal: the machines of visibility were turned
on the poor, as the poor were becoming more and more visible.
   The National Food and Nutrition Plan had two major components: the
Integrated Rural Development Program (Programa de Desarrollo Rural In-
tegrado, DRI), which consisted of a series of programs to increase produc-
tion and the productivity of small farmers; and a set of nutrition and health
programs intended to improve food consumption and the biological utiliza-
tion of food (in keeping with DNP usage, I reserve the acronym PAN to
refer to these latter, that is, not including DRI). Although the two strategies
                        THE DISPERSION OF POWER                           135
were conceptually a unit, their implementation was divided geographically
for operational reasons. In this way, PAN’s first phase was implemented in
about half of the departamentos (provinces) of the country, those with a
higher concentration of landless and semiproletarian laborers, and DRI
was implemented in the remaining departamentos, those with a higher con-
centration of small to medium-size peasants. The explicit objectives of
PAN were to decrease protein-calorie malnutrition, especially in the tar-
get population (pregnant and lactating women and children under five) and
to contribute to the reduction of child mortality and morbidity in general.
To achieve these objectives, the plan considered three principal types of
interventions:25


               Programs to Increase the Availability of Foods
Subsidized food production and distribution. This program consisted of two
major subprograms: a food stamp program and direct food distribution. In
the first, mothers were asked to come to health centers to collect food cou-
pons that could be used as partial payment for the acquisition of certain
foods. The second program was a replacement for the external food aid pro-
grams that were being phased out. The main product distributed was an
enriched flour mix produced in the country from a plant obtained through
U.S. AID. The product is still distributed today by the Colombian Institute
for Family Welfare.
   Production incentives for small, part-time farmers (PANCOGER). This
program was intended for semiproletarians who derived most of their in-
come from wage labor but who still had access to some land. Extension,
credit, and technical assistance were provided to peasants with very small
plots (usually 0.5–3.0 hectares) to encourage them to produce crops to help
fulfill the family’s nutritional needs. Nutrition education and subsidized in-
puts were also provided.


          Programs to Improve the Biological Utilization of Food
Programs intended to improve the biological utilization of food concerned
sanitation and health. The cornerstone of the strategy was the program of
primary health care (PHC), a preexisting program that consisted of a decen-
tralized, referral health system articulated around local health centers and
the use of paramedical personnel. Water supply and sanitation facilities
were also to be constructed through this program. Primary health care strat-
egies had been in ascendance in various parts of the Third World since the
late 1960s (usually in the form of pilot projects) before becoming canonized
by the United Nations at the famous conference convened in 1978 in Alma
Ata by the World Health Organization. As in the case of FNPP, the setting
136                              CHAPTER 4

up of an institutional apparatus at the highest international levels acted as a
potent incentive for governments to embark upon ambitious projects for
restructuring the mostly urban and hospital-based health delivery struc-
tures, the cost of which they could no longer maintain. In Colombia, a novel
national health system, designed along PHC lines, had been introduced in
1976; it included a community participation component.26


                 Nutrition and Health Education Programs
Nutrition and health education programs included mass media campaigns,
interpersonal education, professional training, and school gardens. Mass
media campaigns focused on certain items, such as the use of water, the
treatment of diarrhea, and breast-feeding. Interpersonal education relied on
paraprofessionals to train communities on these and other pertinent issues,
such as the home storage of food, food habits, and weaning practices. The
professional component provided resources for training Colombian profes-
sionals both in the country and abroad.27 With PAN support, a graduate
program in nutrition planning was established at the Jesuit university in
Bogotá in the early 1980s, closely patterned after MIT’s. Finally, the school
garden program purported to teach rural children about the growth and
consumption of nutritious foods.
   Smaller programs were geared toward supporting the production of
highly nutritious, low-cost processed foods (such as texturized-vegetable-
protein products and enriched flours, pasta, and cookies) through research
and credit to agro-industrial firms. Some of these products were distributed
through the food stamps program. Finally, PAN developed a significant
evaluation program based on the design of an information system to monitor
the plan’s progress. This component was suggested by the World Bank.
   It is not easy to assess the results of these programs in relation to their
stated objectives (the reduction of malnutrition and hunger by 50 per-
cent among the target population). PAN evaluations relied on increasingly
complex and expensive surveys.28 The results of the “definitive” National
Household Survey, carried out in 1981, became available only in 1984, when
PAN was, for most practical purposes, being phased out. As a former head of
PAN’s evaluation unit put it in 1986, “A significant and overall impact evalu-
ation of the Plan has not been done, and probably never will be” (Uribe
1986, 58). One may wonder whether a significant percentage of PAN’s
budget, for which poor Colombians had to pay, did not go down the drain.
The delivery of basic health services through PHC centers was generally
deficient. Figures of numbers of people covered by PHC tended to be in-
flated; in some cases, a community was counted as covered by the program
if a census had been taken by the health promoter. Problems in the training
of paramedical personnel, resistance on the part of the medical profession to
                        THE DISPERSION OF POWER                           137
the delegation of responsibility, inadequate stocking of supplies for the cen-
ters, and skyrocketing operating costs as the number of centers multiplied
are cited as factors in the poor performance of the PHC strategy.29
   In financial terms, PAN’s budget was close to $250 million for the period
1976–1981, and DRI’s approached $300 million. DRI’s external financing
(about 45 percent of the total) was considerably greater than PAN’s. PAN’s
external financing for the period came from the World Bank ($25 million),
U.S. AID ($6 million), and UNICEF, and DRI’s originated in loans from the
Inter-American Development Bank ($65 million), the World Bank ($52 mil-
lion), and the Canadian International Development Agency ($13.5 million).
By a curious twist in the style of government financing, part of the govern-
ment’s portion of the budget came from external sources as well (the Chem-
ical Bank). About 60 percent of DRI’s first-phase budget went to production
component programs. This reflected the central priority of the program—
to increase production. External financing for DRI continued to be high
throughout the 1980s.


            The Integrated Rural Development Program (DRI)
Let us now turn our attention to the second central component of the food
and nutrition strategy, the more controversial DRI program. As we will see
in the next chapter, the philosophy of integrated rural development was
largely developed by the World Bank and taken simultaneously to many
countries in the Third World, although in this case also, as in the case of
nutrition planning, a number of pilot projects carried out in the 1960s in
various parts of the Third World (with a lesser or greater degree of foreign
funding, but always with important indigenous participation) were also in-
fluential.30 In both intention and design, Colombia’s Integrated Rural De-
velopment Program remained in its first phase (1976–1981) close to the
World Bank blueprint. Its “target population” was the sector “composed of
small units of production, conventionally known as the traditional or back-
ward sub-sector and, more recently, as the peasant economy” (DNP/DRI
1979). DRI’s primary objective was to increase food production among this
group by rationalizing the sector’s insertion in the market economy. Capital,
technology, training, and infrastructure—the “missing” factors accounting
for the backwardness of small-peasant production—were to be provided as
a package through a strategy unprecedented in both scope and style. The
intent was to bring the green revolution to the small farmers so as to turn
them into entrepreneurs in the fashion of commercial farmers, only on a
smaller scale.
   Who were these small producers who constituted the “peasant econ-
omy”? DRI identified its intended beneficiaries according to two criteria:
size of landholding and amount of income derived from farm sources. The
138                              CHAPTER 4

upper ceiling for farm size was set at 20 hectares; farms included in the
program ranged from 5 to 20 hectares. Farmers within this range were
thought to have the capacity to respond to the program’s inputs and to take
off as independent entrepreneurs as a result of the program. These farmers
constituted a sort of buffer group or “minimal agrarian petty bourgeoisie”
(de Janvry 1981). In terms of income, only those farmers who derived at least
70 percent of their family income from farming activities were considered;
these were “true” farmers. A survey of the entire rural population of the
country, coupled with complex regionalization models, allowed DRI plan-
ners to identify this population group and to select ninety-two thousand
families (20 percent of those with farms of less than 20 hectares) in several
regions to be included in the first phase of the program (1976–1981); a sec-
ond phase, to start in 1982, would reach most of the country. By 1993 (the
end of third phase), more than 600 municipalities, out of close to 1,000 in the
country, were to be covered.
   The strategy (DNP/DRI 1975a, 1975b, 1976a, 1976b) was articulated
around three main components: production, social programs, and infrastruc-
ture, with the following programs:

                           Production Component
Program of Technology Development. The aim of this program was the de-
velopment and transfer of technologies appropriate to the traditional subsec-
tor as a means of increasing production and productivity, raising family in-
come, and ensuring a more intense use of family labor.
   Credit Program. The credit program sought to finance the new costs of
production of DRI participants. The rationale was to secure sufficient capital
to obtain in a short time sizable surpluses for regional and national markets.
   Organization and Training Program. This program trained DRI partici-
pants in organizational and entrepreneurial techniques necessary to imple-
menting DRI’s integrated approach. Central to this effort was the training of
peasants in integrated farm planning, which included the technical pro-
gramming of all aspects of the production process. All farmers had to be-
come conversant with these techniques as a prerequisite for entering the
program; farmers also had to participate in local DRI committees, from the
date the program was introduced in the area to its completion.
   Natural Resources Program. DRI considered that a lasting improvement
of production would depend on “the rational exploitation of soil and water
resources,” including measures such as reforestation, soil conservation, and
aquaculture. The objective of this subprogram was to provide financial and
technical assistance for projects intended to protect and manage the envi-
ronment and—as in the case of aquaculture—provide protein alternatives to
the diet.
                         THE DISPERSION OF POWER                            139
   Marketing and Commercialization Program. DRI anticipated that as farm-
ers became more tied to the market economy as a result of the program, their
financial risks would also increase due to price fluctuations, decreased con-
trol over marketing conditions, transportation costs, and so on. DRI plan-
ners sought to control these risks by providing credit and technical assis-
tance to marketing peasant associations. This program was also intended to
lower the price of foods for the urban consumer by decreasing the commer-
cialization margins.


                         Social Program Component
The social program component included a series of education and health
programs to raise living standards in the countryside, similar to those PAN
had introduced in its project areas. In principle, PAN and PHC programs
would be available to DRI participating communities, so that strategies con-
ceived in terms of food production, consumption, and biological utilization
would have a synergistic effect.


                          Infrastructure Component
The infrastructure component included three subprograms: rural roads,
rural electrification, and water supply. They were conceived as necessary to
the improvement of living standards and commercialization networks, link-
ing rural producers more efficiently to the market.
   One of DRI’s most innovative aspects was the integration of the different
strategies at the local level. Farmers were carefully selected and followed
step by step, chiefly through the so-called integrated farm planning method-
ology, which each farmer had to follow under the guidance of DRI techni-
cians. Local-level committees were instrumental in extending and deepen-
ing the reach of the various programs. These committees were headed by
the DRI representative to the Agrarian Bank, in turn the most important
agrarian lending institution in the country. Coordination of the various strat-
egies was ensured at the regional and national levels. This was of tremen-
dous importance, as DRI relied in its first phase on thirteen different gov-
ernment institutions for the implementation of its various programs, the
actions of which had to be coordinated at all levels of the planning process.
Indeed, it is usually pointed out that perhaps the most important achieve-
ment of PAN and DRI was to make all these agencies work together for the
first time in the country, as this was seen as a great step toward rendering
state planning and intervention more rational and effective.31
   The Integrated Rural Development Program went through a series of
significant changes, conceptually and institutionally, from the end of the first
phase until the launching of the third phase in 1989. The first step at the end
140                               CHAPTER 4

of phase one (1981) was to integrate PAN and DRI administratively, only to
see the death of PAN, which took the form of a slow financial strangling
due to a lack of interest on the part of the new administration (that of Presi-
dent Belisario Betancour, 1982–1986). This was the last attempt to adhere to
the initial conceptual framework of FNPP, within which rural development
was seen as a component of the overall nutrition strategy. Indeed, the very
name of the strategy was inverted, from PAN-DRI to DRI-PAN, because the
new administration saw DRI as a more appropriate response to agrarian
problems.
   DRI’s orientation changed significantly after 1982. During the second
phase (DRI two: 1982–1989), the focus shifted to regions of greater potential
for small farm production and to advancing a successful strategy of com-
mercialization of peasant food crops. Improved commercialization and mar-
keting, identified as critical bottlenecks, became the surrogate for land redis-
tribution.32 At the level of overall agrarian policy, and in the wake of the
post-l982 debt crisis and the beginning of structural adjustment programs
under the aegis of the International Monetary Fund, the discussion ran once
again in terms of protectionism versus free market neoliberalism, with the
organized commercial groups—the cotton, coffee, rice, sugarcane, and live-
stock growers’ associations, representing capitalist farmers—playing a lead-
ing role, broadly in favor of export promotion measures.33 Because of these
changes in the macroeconomic environment, fewer and fewer resources
were available for programs during this period, so that DRI’s scale of opera-
tions was reduced drastically. In the early 1990s, as the process of economic
opening to world markets deepened, most of the agricultural sector suffered
greatly.
   The advent of Virgilio Barco’s administration (1986–1990) brought DRI-
PAN once again to the forefront as one of two key components of the govern-
ment’s overall strategy of “Fight[ing] against Absolute Poverty” (the other
being the National Rehabilitation Plan [PNR], to be implemented in zones
of intense guerrilla activity as part of the peace process initiated by Betan-
cur). DRI-PAN continued to be “the fundamental policy element used by
the state to face and solve the peasant question . . . without addressing the
issue of land ownership” (Fajardo, Errázuriz, and Balcázar 1991, 155). The
state continued to perceive the peasant problem as one of the key areas of
social conflict in the country, along with drug trafficking and guerrilla activ-
ity. Some additional small programs were also introduced in 1985, such as
the Program for the Development of Peasant Women, although female plan-
ners described the amount allocated to this program as “laughable.” More on
this program in the next chapter.
   The Technological Development Program, one of the key interventions in
DRI two, took the form of setting up model farms in various regions of the
                         THE DISPERSION OF POWER                           141
country, which varied according to the region’s socioeconomic and ecologi-
cal context (Fondo DRI 1989b). Peasant farmers’ adoption of technological
packages was found to be hampered by a number of constraints, such as the
high cost of inputs compared with the low price and inadequate marketing
conditions for peasant products, insufficient size of landholdings, low levels
of education, and “cultural backwardness” (Fondo DRI 1989a). In addition,
by the end of the 1980s planners were becoming aware that the technologi-
cal packages were unduly geared toward the maximization of the biological
productivity of crops (through the use of fertilizers, improved seeds, and the
like) and that they did not pay attention to potential increases in the produc-
tivity of natural resources, investment capacity, and the economic profitabil-
ity of the peasant economy. These factors were taken into account in the
launching of DRI three as a central component of the Plan of Integral Peas-
ant Development (1988–1993) of the Barco administration, which saw tech-
nological change as the keystone of an invigorated production strategy
(DNP/UEA 1988; Fondo DRI 1989a, 1989b). What was at stake, as always,
was the modernization of peasant practices through its economic and sym-
bolic capitalization.
   As mentioned before, DRI had included a participatory component since
its inception. Nevertheless, the decision making and the control of resources
remained at the national level, thus rendering local participation insignifi-
cant. Up to this point, DRI’s participation scheme had been more an intelli-
gent and utilitarian imposition than a strategy of empowerment for local
communities. Not only that, it assumed that participation could be learned
and effected through management techniques infused with academic con-
cepts. As most other development institutions, DRI understood partici-
pation as a bureaucratic problem to be solved by the institution, not as a
process circumscribed by complex political, cultural, and epistemological
questions. Indeed, the rhetoric of participation must be seen as a counter-
proposal to increased peasant mobilization; this was clearly the case in Co-
lombia, where peasant demands and militancy reached an all-time high in
the late 1960s and early 1970s (Zamocs 1986).
   Toward the end of the 1980s, however, the opening up of spaces for peas-
ant participation in policies such as DRI—fostered by the government’s new
commitment to decentralization at all levels—was beginning to generate
social processes of some relevance. In particular, the promotion of self-
managed development schemes, through a combination of community or-
ganizing efforts at the village, municipal, and district levels, produced what
planners referred to as an organizational opening, which made possible a
more significant peasant participation in the diagnosis, planning, and alloca-
tion of resources for the concrete projects contemplated by the program. In
theory, within DRI three the municipality and the community of benefi-
142                               CHAPTER 4

ciaries constituted the basic unit for the planning of rural development
(DNP/UEA 1988). Yet it is also clear that the government’s goal in decen-
tralizing the state apparatus is not really to promote the autonomy of local
and regional communities but rather, as Fajardo, Errázuriz, and Balcázar
put it, to open up “new spaces for capital, a solution to the fiscal crisis, and
the creation of new conditions for the management of the social and political
conflicts generated by the pattern of development” (1991, 240).
   The decentralization processes that the government started as a result
of macroeconomic, institutional, and popular pressures—extended by the
Constitutional Reform of 1991, which considers unpredecented local, re-
gional, and cultural autonomies—cannot be seen solely as an attempt at
cooptation. Indeed, they raise the complex question of the assessment of
policies such as PAN and DRI and, in general, of the analysis of the real
effects of development projects and strategies, to the extent that both rely on
and unleash socioeconomic and cultural processes that go well beyond their
intended scope and rationality. I now turn to this aspect in order to conclude
my analysis of the deployment of development.

            THE EVALUATION EXERCISE: EXPERT KNOWLEDGE
         AND THE CONTEST OVER THE NATURE OF SOCIAL CHANGE
If the efficacy of strategies such as PAN and DRI is difficult to evaluate even
on their own terms and in relation to their own objectives, there is another
aspect of the assessment of development interventions that has remained
highly intractable and has been seldom addressed. What are strategies such
as PAN and DRI really about? What happens when they are introduced in
a given social setting? How do they occupy social spaces, and what pro-
cesses—alteration of sensibilities, transformations in ways of seeing and liv-
ing life, of relating to one another—do they set in motion? In sum, to what
extent do these political technologies contribute to creating society and
culture?
   These questions should be posed and answered at many levels. As we will
see, DRI planners have moved from the straightforward evaluation exer-
cises of the earlier years regarding the performance of the program in terms
of amounts spent, increases in production, and so on, to a more ambitious
self-reflection on the nature and rationality of the strategy. These debates,
which take place in the context of concrete struggles over the instruments of
public policy, should be considered in order to make sense of the question,
what is DRI really about? The analysis, however, cannot remain there.
There is another level of reflection on the social and cultural productivity of
development strategies based on the dynamics of discourse and power
within the history and culture of modernity. Let us start with this second
angle.
                          THE DISPERSION OF POWER                                 143

               The Instrument-Effects of Development Projects
In his study of the development apparatus in Lesotho, James Ferguson
(1990, 251–77) retakes Foucault’s question of the “instrument-effects” of
political technologies such as the prison or, in our case, rural development.
Ferguson’s basic contention is that even if rural development projects in
Lesotho were for the most part a failure, their side effects—or, better, instru-
ment-effects—nevertheless had far-reaching consequences for the commu-
nities involved. Like the prison in Foucault’s case—which fails in terms of
its explicit objective of reforming the criminal and yet succeeds in producing
a normalized, disciplined society—the development apparatus shows re-
markable productivity: not only does it contribute to the further entrench-
ment of the state, it also depoliticizes the problems of poverty that it is sup-
posed to solve.
  It may be that what is most important about a “development” project is not so
  much what it fails to do but what it does do. . . . The “instrument-effect,” then,
  is two-fold: alongside the institutional effect of expanding bureaucratic state
  power is the conceptual or ideological effect of depoliticizing both poverty and
  the state. . . . If the “instrument-effects” of a “development” project end up
  forming any kind of strategically coherent or intelligible whole, this is it: the
  anti-politics machine. (Ferguson 1990, 256)

   The provision of government services is not culturally and politically in-
nocent. Services, as Ferguson adds, “serve to govern” (253). Aihwa Ong
points at a more profound effect of DRI-like strategies in her analysis of rural
development projects in Malaysia. What is at stake in these strategies, she
ventures, is an entire biopolitics: a set of policies regulating a plurality of
problems such as health, nutrition, family planning, education, and the like
which inevitably introduce not only given conceptions of food, the body, and
so on, but a particular ordering of society itself. “In the specified spheres of
social welfare, sexuality, and education, to name only a few, the everyday
lives of village Malays are being reconstituted according to new concepts,
language, and procedures” (Ong 1987, 55). In nineteenth-century Europe,
biopolitics took the form of the invention of the social alluded to in chapter
2; in important respects, the biopolitics of development continues the de-
ployment of modernity and the governmentalization of social life in the
Third World. Let us see how this worked in Colombia’s DRI strategy.
   As already mentioned, DRI subjected peasants to a set of well-coordi-
nated and integrated programs that sought to transform them into rational,
business-minded entrepreneurs. Thirteen different institutions (the number
grew with DRI two) acted on the chosen peasants, all of them in charge of
a specific aspect: credit, technical assistance, natural-resource management,
health, education, organizational skills, women, commercialization, and san-
144                                CHAPTER 4

itation. New practices were introduced: the integrated farm management
methodology that DRI and other agents utilized to make farmers accept and
follow a strict set of prescriptions; the preparation of a ficha técnica (techni-
cal register), which contained detailed information on family life, produc-
tion, and health; and individualized assistance, which also required close
coordination of most of the participating agencies. Peasants appeared as
never before under the gaze of power.
   DRI’s farm system conception (Cobos and Góngora 1977) was a normaliz-
ing mechanism: farmers had to adopt a “technological package” (improved
seeds, herbicides, chemical pest control), specialize in the production of
certain crops (usually, not more than three in a given subregion; often only
one or two), follow a rigid layout of the fields, adhere to preset cultivation
routines, prepare detailed production plans, maintain records with periodic
entries, and organize for marketing by crop. These practices were very dif-
ferent from those which peasants in many regions were accustomed to fol-
low and which included the use of organic fertilizers and pest control, un-
specialized production (traditional plots had a mixture of cash crops, food
crops, fruit trees, and small animal species), production primarily for self-
consumption, and less intense use of family labor and more intense use of
farm resources (for instance, the use of animal manure and the leaves of the
trees for compost). Studies published in Colombia (Taussig 1978; Reinhardt
1988) and elsewhere (Richards 1984; Carney and Watts 1991) attest to this
change. As Reinhardt has shown in her in-depth study of a peasant commu-
nity in Colombia, DRI farmers increasingly had to abide by the rules of
capitalist production and use their relative behavioral or technological ad-
vantages to this end as they tried to deal with the new practices.
   Rosemary Galli summarized well this aspect of DRI in her study of the
Colombian program.
  Thus the DRI peasant was surrounded by technicians and advisors. Communi-
  cation was generally through the [local committees]; however, in the case of
  ICA, SENA, the Caja, and CECORA, communication was direct. Each DRI
  family was in their special care since each family was considered a potential
  leader in the village. Yet the superficiality of this communication was symbol-
  ized by the fact that ICA was in the process of gathering minute details about
  each family’s life without the family knowing it so that DRI might design pro-
  grams to improve the quality of home life. The so-called ficha was filled out by
  the home improvement staff from their direct observations; it contained such
  data as the amount of protein consumed weekly, the kinds of clothes worn,
  family illnesses, hygiene, and patterns of recreation. The ficha was symbolic of
  the paternalism of the program. (1981, 68)

One might rightly doubt the efficacy of these operations, yet it is necessary
to recognize that on some level a sort of policing of families (Donzelot 1979)
                         THE DISPERSION OF POWER                             145
was going on. There was nothing paternalistic about this, really, but rather
a power effect, to the extent that the translation of local situations into orga-
nizational terms is a sine qua non of institutional functioning. Galli also won-
dered whether whatever benefits might have accrued to peasants could
amount to anything but “sweetening the bitter pill” of peasant poverty. Re-
gardless of the results in terms of increased income and production, DRI
introduced new mechanisms of social production and control. DRI was not
only about DRI farmers; it also concerned the creation of semiproletarians
and proletarians, the articulation of peasant production with commercial
agriculture and of the agrarian sector as a whole with the rest of the econ-
omy, particularly the foreign-exchange-generating sector. One must also ac-
knowledge, however, that when the pill is already bitter, running water,
health posts, and the like may mean real improvements in people’s living
conditions. This should be recognized, while realizing at the same time that
these changes enter into an ongoing situation of power and resistance.
   In a similar vein, rural development cannot be seen as the mere instru-
ment of social differentiation in terms of two classes. It creates a spectrum of
social and cultural strata and operates on the basis of the strata it creates. In
contrast to the extreme heterogeneity of peasant reality, DRI-type interven-
tions tend to create relatively homogeneous strata through the imposition of
certain practices. Even the characterization of people in terms of proletar-
ians, semiproletarians, small farmers, and capitalist farmers is a simplifica-
tion. As these social strata change, other power configurations change as
well: domestic relations, gender relations, and cultural relations. New ways
of individuation are brought into play as the existing division of labor is
transformed, but also new forms of resistance appear.
   Finally, it must be emphasized that bureaucratic control is an essential
component of the deployment of development. Rural development is about
a bureaucratics that seeks to manage and transform how rural life is con-
ceived and organized. Like FNPP, DRI functions as a productive technique
that through its very functioning relates certain entities in specific ways
(capital, technology, and resources), reproduces long-established cultural
fabrications (for example, the market), and redistributes forces with a signif-
icant impact on people, visibilities, and social relations. The organization of
factors that development achieved contributes to the disciplining of labor,
the extraction of surplus value, and the reorientation of consciousness. As
we will see in the next chapter, these strategies inevitably bypassesd peas-
ants’ culturally based conceptions. Beyond the economic goals, World
Bank–style integrated rural development sought a radical cultural reconver-
sion of rural life.
   The instrument-effects of the deployment of the development discourse
in cases such as PAN and DRI do not presume any kind of conspiracy; on the
contrary, they are the result of a certain economy of discourses. This econ-
146                               CHAPTER 4

omy of discourses dictates that interventions such as integrated rural devel-
opment show a significant degree of uniformity worldwide; these strategies
rely on a relatively undifferentiated and context-independent body of
knowledge and expertise; they are part of a relatively standard discursive
practice, a sort of “devspeak” and “devthink”; at a general level, they pro-
duce similar results, particularly in terms of governmentalizing social life
(Ferguson 1990, 258–60). Colombia is a typical case of this dynamics in
some repects. However, the Colombian case presents a feature rarely ana-
lyzed in the development context, namely, the high level of debate about the
policies maintained by national planners, intellectuals, and experts of vari-
ous types. This debate suggests that we need to qualify the development
encounter by looking carefully at the participation of planners in the adapta-
tion and re-creation of the strategies.


         From Documentary Reality to the Politics of Policy Reform
Like the Agrarian Reform Program of the 1960s, the implementation of PAN
and especially DRI generated heated debates within the intellectual and
policy-making community in the country. It is perhaps improper to speak of
a community here, given the variety of perspectives involved in the discus-
sions; yet a certain discursive community has been created as a result of the
debates over the nature and implementation of DRI, even more so than in
the case of the Agrarian Reform Program, when positions were extremely
polarized along political lines. Indeed, planners and intellectuals of various
political and epistemological persuasions not infrequently circulate in the
same spaces. DRI’s national planning unit has been effective in channeling
debates on the “peasant question” and its relation to the state, a question
that has a rich history of scholarly and political activity in the country. These
debates have been advanced through the celebration of well-attended na-
tional and international meetings with the participation of planners and gov-
ernment staff, as well as conservative, liberal, and dissenting intellectuals,34
and by incorporating intellectuals from various universities of the country in
the program’s evaluation exercises.
   Institutional practices, let it be remembered, rely on the creation of what
Dorothy Smith calls a documentary reality. The materiality of the planners’
practice is intimately tied to the crafting of documents. In the case of PAN
and DRI, this was and is particularly true at the national level, where the
preparation, writing, and follow-up of documents occupy a very significant
part of the planners’ day. Although established categories and professional
discourses are generally reproduced through these documentary processes,
there is also a subtle and slow displacement of entrenched categories that is
not without effects, as we will see shortly.
   I should say a few words about the planning staff before continuing with
this aspect of the discussion. During the first phase (1976–1981), PAN’s staff
                          THE DISPERSION OF POWER                              147
consisted of sixty to seventy highly qualified people, men and women
roughly equally divided, whereas DRI’s was around ninety (this does not
include the staff of the implementing agencies participating in the pro-
grams); about half of the staff were in the national headquarters in Bogotá,
and the other half in regional offices. Let us see how a high-level PAN plan-
ner saw her role and that of her peers:
  Though the original design of the Plan had been made by economists, a broad
  range of professions were needed to implement its different components.
  Teachers, communicators, physicians, nutritionists, administrators, anthropolo-
  gists, sociologists and agronomists had joined PAN since 1976. Hard working
  and highly motivated, they all shared the illusion of doing something meaning-
  ful for the country and its poorest population. But this was bound to be true
  only in the long-run, if the plan had persevered through the years and extended
  sufficiently to become a meaningful source of support to much of the poor
  population of Colombia. Traditional politicians, however, were wary of PAN
  and its technical outlook was sometimes seen as bearing the mask of an im-
  ported, technocratic perspective. No regional leader praised PAN any longer
  than was strictly needed to insure budget approval. (Uribe 1986, 58)

   This statement coincides with my observations: PAN and DRI planners
were “hard working and highly motivated,” although their level of political
awareness varied greatly, from the very naive about the rationality of state
intervention to the savvy and the cynical. The fact that politicians saw in
PAN an “imported, technocratic perspective” is not surprising; it was, de-
spite the role of national planners, in the design of the plan. The National
Planning Department (DNP) itself is known to be a highly technocratic es-
tablishment, and its effect on the country’s development has been quite
noticeable. Most professionals, however, know that the life span of any strat-
egy is short, seldom more than the four years of a president’s term (DRI’s
continuity to this date is quite exceptional in this respect). To expect effects
only in the long run, then—as much as to blame politicians for program
failure—begs the question of the conditions in which policy practice takes
place.
   As perhaps at no other time, the work ethic of PAN and DRI planners
became apparent immediately before and during the visit of World Bank
missions. One would hate to think that the hard and competent work of the
Colombian planners served as a (one more) subsidy for the World Bank, an
additional mechanism through which this institution dispersed its blueprint
and accumulated symbolic capital, but some of this clearly happened. This
realization, however, has to be accompanied by the consideration that many
of those planners would reorient their activities in a more political fashion if
the conditions for doing so existed. Actually, upon leaving the DNP, some of
them, women and men, seem to take this step by returning to universities,
research centers, or activist organizations.
148                              CHAPTER 4

   The micropolitics surrounding the production, circulation, and utilization
of development knowledge is still poorly understood. At one level, one must
consider the whole issue of the instrument-effects and the dispersion of
power that accompanies the development apparatus. But this cannot be
seen only synchronically, because the changes that policies such as DRI
undergo throughout the years must be accounted for. Strategies are modi-
fied, undermined, added on. Third World planners manifest great inventive-
ness in this regard, depending on many factors, including the stability and
permanence of the interventions (including their own jobs). Some of the
components of PAN and DRI were originally thought out in Latin America
or other parts of the Third World—through the pilot projects of the 1960s
and 1970s already mentioned—and then adapted and standardized by the
World Bank and other organizations. This was the case particularly with the
primary health care strategy.
   It would be too simple to see this process as mere appropriation, although
this undoubtedly takes place continually; it would be equally simplistic to
see the knowledge process as a mere imposition of strategies on the Third
World on the part of First World interests. The conventional view of knowl-
edge as produced in one place (the center) and applied in another (the pe-
riphery) must be reformulated. In the contemporary world, as Clifford
(1989) has suggested, theory production and use take place in a discontinu-
ous terrain, with ongoing and complex processes of appropriations and con-
testations in various directions. That both theories and theorists travel in a
socially and epistemologically discontinuous terrain is clear in the case of
the development apparatus. At the same time, however, there are also clear
centers of power and systemic instrument-effects that cannot be overlooked.
   To conclude, let us look briefly at the relevance of DRI’s learning process
to our discussion of the politics of discourse. During the first phase, evalua-
tion studies carried out internally or independently by Colombian scholars
showed uneven results: a relatively high degree of program success in some
regions, little or no success in others.35 This led to the policy reformulation
for DRI two already described: to focus on the regions having the right
concentration of the right peasants (in terms of productive potential) and to
address certain bottlenecks, particularly commercialization and marketing.
Subsequent evaluations related the success or failure of specific program
components to structural constraints, such as those reflected in insufficient
capital and size of holdings, the conceptualization of technological packages,
pressures toward proletarianization, increased exploitation of the soil, and
precarious links to markets. As the complexity of the evaluations grew, pro-
grams became more carefully conceived and targeted.
   Generally speaking, it was found throughout the 1980s that the perfor-
mance of specific components and of the program as a whole varied greatly,
given the regional, cultural, and historical heterogeneity of the peasant
                         THE DISPERSION OF POWER                           149
economy, thus calling for greater flexibility in policy and program design.
The search for a classification of peasant economies in terms of the mecha-
nisms responsible for regional differentiation resulted in the formulation of
four major types, corresponding respectively to (1) zones where the tradi-
tional peasant economy predominates; (2) zones where low-intensity cattle
ranching in large holdings predominates; (3) zones characterized by the
rapid penetration of capitalist agriculture; and (4) zones of recent coloniza-
tion. The benefits of the program were found to be significant in type 1
regions, relatively insignificant in those of type 2 (chiefly because of marked
restrictions in the access to land), and generally detrimental to peasant farms
in zones where capitalist agriculture is dominant. In type 4 zones there were
no DRI programs.
   Among the more noticeable changes evidenced in those regions with the
larger peasant presence were the following: a trend toward specialization in
production, that is, the substitution of crop arrangements characterized by
high profitability for those traditionally practiced, with concomitant im-
provements in productivity and income;36 the adoption of technological in-
novations, although not always of those initially pushed by the agencies in
charge, which tended to be capital and energy intensive; increases in pro-
duction capacity thanks to the availability of credit; increased use of family
labor on the farm itself; higher margins of commercialization of peasant
crops; and better links to the market.
   To what extent these changes entail a deeper transformation in terms of
the adoption by peasants of a capitalist rationality is still an open question,
requiring a type of ethnographic fieldwork, unavailable at this point, similar
to that of Gudeman and Rivera (1990) but conceived explicitly in the context
of the programs. Some observers believe that the logic of peasant production
in the Colombian Andes continues to be significantly different from that of
capitalist production. It is still ruled by the overall goal of subsistence and
reproduction of the farm base, thus coinciding with the observations of
Gudeman and Rivera mentioned earlier. This does not mean, however, that
under certain conditions peasants are uninterested in intensifying produc-
tion or generating surpluses. They certainly are, as DRI evaluations show,
although it is the logic of maintenance of the family farm that characterizes
the adoption of new practices and the allocation of resources. In this respect,
peasants are extremely pragmatic, always proceeding by trial and error. I
will return to the meaning of these changes for peasant culture in the next
chapter.
   As mentioned, debates over the nature of the peasantry have motivated
the creation of a loosely bound discursive or epistemic community in which
ideas and experiences are shared and debated across professional, ideologi-
cal, and political positions. Although neoclassical economists predominate
within DNP, the debate is by no means restricted to neoclassical terms.37
150                               CHAPTER 4

Even important groups of social scientists who work generally within neo-
classical paradigms practice a kind of eclecticism that makes possible a dia-
logue with, say, Marxist-inspired political economists.38 This rich dialogue
has fueled a significant learning process, translated into policy debates,
scholarly studies, and concrete recommendations for alternative interven-
tions. The best of this learning process is perhaps reflected in the work of
anthropologist and historian Darío Fajardo, who moved in the late 1970s
from the National University in Bogotá to head PAN’s evaluation unit for
several years, to return again to the university in the mid-1980s (a cycle not
uncommon in Colombian planning and intellectual circles), moving finally
to head an ecological foundation in the early 1990s without severing com-
pletely his links to the university, social movements, and the state. As insider
first and critical intellectual thereafter, Fajardo’s sustained effort of reflec-
tion on DRI and peasant issues (Fajardo 1983, 1984, 1987; Fajardo 1991;
Fajardo, Errázuriz, and Balcázar 1991) has pushed the limits of the debates
on the relation between capital, the state, and the peasant economy to levels
that could not have been anticipated by the integrated rural development
discourse of the 1970s.
   A number of themes regarding the meaning of government policy emerge
clearly from Fajardo’s work. In the first place, he emphasizes that the major-
ity of peasants and rural workers in Colombia continue to be poor and sub-
jected to “backward relations of domination”; these relations of domination
hold back the modernization of the peasant economy. Government efforts
such as DRI are not changing significantly this state of affairs, to the extent
that the bulk of financial, technological, and intellectual resources devoted
to agrarian policy is still geared toward the modern capitalist sector. This
ambiguity on the part of the government—at the same time arguably com-
mitted to rural development, yet making this policy subordinate to the needs
of commercial agriculture—accounts for the uneven and reduced results
DRI achieved so far. Indeed, agrarian policy is generally detrimental to
peasant interests. Politically, DRI seeks to improve peasant living and pro-
duction conditions without touching the terribly skewed land tenure sys-
tems still existing in the country;39 or, to put it in the context of World Bank
discourse, the problem is thought to be characterized by exclusion from
markets and state policy, not by exploitation within the market and the state,
as Fajardo believes is the case.
   This somewhat schizophrenic situation, continuing with Fajardo’s analy-
sis, is related to DRI’s reliance on outside loans, the subordination of gov-
ernment social policy to macroeconomic policy, and the effect of these two
factors on the allocation of resources to the agrarian sector, particularly the
peasant subsector. Despite recent efforts at decentralization, government
policy has failed to control the power of the capitalist sector, articulate the
various components of the regional economies, and reduce the drain of sur-
                         THE DISPERSION OF POWER                           151
plus from the peasant economy by the capitalist sector and of the agrarian
sector as a whole by urban industrial interests. A number of tasks thus be-
come fundamental to a new, truly peasant-centered development, including
the following: (1) a new agrarian reform, “because there cannot be DRI with-
out land” (Fajardo 1987, 220); (2) more explicit organizational and partici-
patory processes so that communities themselves can identify the goals of
regional development and the means to carry them out; (3) a policy of tech-
nological research and development in support of autonomous peasant pro-
duction systems; and (4) more substantial resources for credit, commercial-
ization, and integral agrarian reform programs, according to the logic of the
peasant economy.
   This proposal entails an autonomous peasant development strategy, not
unlike that proposed by Amin, already discussed, and generated by peasant
communities through their participation in the planning process. This would
allow peasants to obtain significant leverage in relation to the state and the
capitalist sector, so as to modify the social relations of production in their
favor, even if the peasant economy would have to articulate with other re-
gional and urban actors of importance. As another analyst put it, a strategy
such as this would conceive of the peasantry in terms of not lacks but possi-
bilities, that is, as a social actor in its own right; this in turn requires an
effective respect for peasants in terms of establishing new rules of the game
to satisfy peasant demands (Bejarano 1987). All this implies the strengthen-
ing of peasant organizations so that peasants can create spaces to modify the
existing balance of power.
   This proposal can have a correcting effect in relation to the depoliticizing
and bureaucratizing pressures of the development apparatus. It opens
spaces of struggle within which peasants might defend not only their eco-
nomic systems but their way of life. The strategic effects of the changes Fa-
jardo and others envisioned—one might call them specific intellectuals, in
Foucault’s sense of the term (1980c)—cannot be overlooked, even if the
proposal is in principle as modernizing as DRI. In the process of contribut-
ing to the affirmation of the peasants’ world, new possibilities for struggle
and for destabilizing the development apparatus might emerge. In fact, the
proposals are produced with clear political criteria; some of its suggestions
seem to be slowly finding their way into DRI’s machinery, generating social
processes the outcome of which is difficult to foresee. In this way, even what
today goes under the rubric of integrated rural development is not the same
as what the World Bank started to promote in the mid-1970s all over the
Third World. A more satisfactory theorization of the relevance of this differ-
ence, however, is still missing.
   The proposal does not challenge explicitly the basic tenets of the develop-
ment discourse. Particularly, it accepts a relatively conventional view of the
“peasantry,” which is problematic, as we will see in the next chapter when
152                               CHAPTER 4

I introduce a cultural analysis absent from all discussions of rural develop-
ment. This type of analysis is adumbrated by another critical intellectual
with links to DRI, Alejandro Sanz de Santamaría, who headed a team of
university researchers contracted out by DRI to evaluate the program’s per-
formance in one region.
   One of the most significant insights derived from the work of this re-
searcher (Sanz de Santamaría 1987; Sanz de Santamaría and Fonseca 1985)
is that any conventional evaluation process relies on the separation in time
and space between knowledge producers (the researchers), knowledge users
(DRI planners), and the investigated community; this separation makes
practically impossible the production of sound knowledge on which to base
policy recommendations, let alone the production of knowledge about the
community. Not only do conventional evaluations fall into “the indecency of
speaking for others”40 by necessarily abstracting from the local reality
through the use of a social science framework, but the choice of interpretive
framework is largely arbitrary. For knowledge to be useful, it must start with
the peasants’ self-understanding, and then proceed to build a system of com-
munication involving peasants, DRI functionaries, and researchers. This en-
tails, on the one hand, the integration of knowledge production, circulation,
and use and, on the other hand, the increasing constitution of the local com-
munity into a subject of its own collective action. Sanz de Santamaría sees
this political project, which exposes the totalitarian character ingrained in
conventional knowledge-producing processes, as an inevitable component
of a radical transformation of development policy. The concrete proposals
that emerged from his exercise, which met some response from DRI, seem
to indicate that there is hope for some of this to happen, although the local
elites’ violent reaction to the political process generated by the exercise
points to the difficulties in doing so.41

This brings us full circle. I started with a discussion of some features of
institutions that, although apparently rational and neutral, are nevertheless
part of the exercise of power in the modern world. The development appara-
tus inevitably relies on such practices and thus contributes to the domina-
tion of Third World people such as Colombian peasants. At the end of chap-
ter 3, and again at the end of this chapter, I identified the need for a cultural
politics that builds upon local cultures and that, engaging strategically with
the conditions of regional, national, and international political economy,
seeks to contribute to the affirmation of Third World groups and the dis-
placement of the development imaginary. In this chapter, I tentatively con-
cluded that one way of advancing this politics of cultural affirmation might
be to free up spaces within, and in spite of, existing programs such as DRI.
But this widening of spaces must be pursued from the vantage point of the
cultural imposition and instrument-effects of the development apparatus,
                          THE DISPERSION OF POWER                                 153
not only in terms of political economy, as it has been until now. Only then
will dissenting strategies have a clearer chance for life.
  In his politico-artistic manifesto “An Aesthetic of Hunger,” written in
1965, Glauber Rocha wrote the following angry words:
  Thus, while Latin America laments its general misery, the foreign onlooker
  cultivates the taste of that misery, not as a tragic symptom, but merely as an
  aesthetic object within his field of interest. . . . We [Cinema Novo filmmakers]
  understand the hunger that the European and the majority of Brazilians have
  not understood. . . . We know—since we made these sad, ugly films, these
  screaming, desperate films where reason does not always prevail—that this
  hunger will not be cured by moderate governmental reforms and that the cloak
  of technicolor cannot hide, but only aggravates, its tumors. Therefore, only a
  culture of hunger, weakening its own structures, can surpass itself qualitatively;
  the most noble cultural manifestation of hunger is violence. (Rocha 1982, 70)

As Michael Taussig (1987, 135) said, “From the represented shall come that
which overturns the representation.” He continues, commenting on the ab-
sence of the narratives of South American indigenous peoples from most
representations about them, “It is the ultimate anthropological conceit, an-
thropology in its highest, indeed redemptive, moment, rescuing the ‘voice’
of the Indian from the obscurity of pain and time” (135).
   This is to say that as much as the plain exclusion of the peasant’s voice in
rural development discourse, this conceit to “speak for the others,” perhaps
even to rescue their voice, as Taussig says, must be avoided. The fact that
violence is a cultural manifestation of hunger applies not only to hunger’s
physical aspects but to the violence of representation. The development
discourse has turned its representations of hunger into an act of consump-
tion of images and feelings by the well nourished, an act of cannibalism, as
Cinema Novo artists would have it. This consumption is a feature of moder-
nity, we are reminded by Foucault (1975, 84) (“It is just that the illness of
some should be transformed into the experience of others”). But the regimes
of representation that produce this violence are not easily neutralized, as the
next chapter will show.
