                                    Chapter 3

                   ECONOMICS AND THE
                 SPACE OF DEVELOPMENT:
              TALES OF GROWTH AND CAPITAL

                All types of societies are limited by economic factors.
             Nineteenth century civilization alone was economic in a
            different and distinctive sense, for it chose to base itself in
              a motive rarely acknowledged as valid in the history of
             human societies, and certainly never before raised to the
             level of a justification of action and behavior in everyday
             life, namely, gain. The self-regulating market system was
               uniquely derived from this principle. The mechanism
            which the motive of gain set in motion was comparable in
            effectiveness only to the most violent outburst of religious
            fervor in history. Within a generation the whole human
                    world was subjected to its undiluted influence.
                   —Karl Polanyi, The Great Transformation, 1944




                 THE ARRIVAL OF DEVELOPMENT ECONOMICS
LAUCHLIN CURRIE, a former Harvard economist and official in the Roosevelt
administration, evoked in the following way, at a testimonial dinner party in
Bogotá in 1979, the first World Bank mission, which thirty years earlier had
taken him to that same country:
  I don’t know where in my conservative Canadian background I acquired a
  reformer’s zeal, but I must admit that I had it. I just happen to be one of those
  tiresome people who can’t encounter a problem without wanting to do some-
  thing about it. So you can imagine how Colombia affected me. Such a marvel-
  ous number of practically insoluble problems! Truly an economic missionary’s
  paradise. I had no idea before I came what the problems were but that did not
  dull for a moment my enthusiasm nor shake my conviction that if only the Bank
  and the country would listen to me I could come up with a solution of sorts to
  most. I had my baptism of fire in the Great Depression. I had played some role
  in working out the economic recovery program in the New Deal for the worst
  depression the United States had ever experienced. I had been very active in
  government during the Second World War. (Quoted in Meier 1984, 130)
56                                      CHAPTER 3

   This candid recollection reveals a number of features that are at the root
of many enterprises undertaken by North Americans in colonial and post-
colonial contexts: the “reformer’s zeal” and the drive toward reform and
pedagogy; the utopian posture that finds a “missionary’s paradise” in those
lands riddled with “a marvelous number of practically insoluble problems”;
the belief that all wrongs can be corrected and all manifestations of human
conflict eradicated. In Currie’s case, these traits had been rekindled by the
recovery from the Great Depression and the reconstruction of Europe; the
same traits were shared by many of the “pioneers of development”—econo-
mists like Currie, who later became a leading figure in the field—who dis-
embarked in the Third World some time after the war full of good intentions,
armed with the tools of their profession, sometimes even with a progressive
agenda, and invigorated by the fact that their science had just been sub-
jected to the fine-tuning of the Keynesian mind.
   But we are getting somewhat ahead in the story, for at the time of Currie’s
arrival in Colombia, there was nothing resembling development economics.
Let us listen to an earlier recollection of his, again referring to the Colombia
mission discussed in chapter 2:
     When, in 1949, I was asked to organize and direct the first study mission of the
     World Bank there were no precedents for a mission of this sort and indeed
     nothing called development economics. I just assumed that it was a case of
     applying various branches of economics to the problems of a specific country,
     and accordingly I recruited a group of specialists in public finance, foreign
     exchange, transport, agriculture, and so on. I did, however, include some engi-
     neers and public health technicians. What emerged was a series of recommen-
     dations in a variety of fields. I was at pains to entitle it “the basis of a program”
     rather than a socioeconomic plan. (Currie 1967, 31; quoted in Meier 1984, 131)

   Currie’s remembrance also reminds us of one of the quintessential aspects
of modernity: the need to compose the world as a picture. If upon his arrival
in Colombia all he could perceive was problems, darkness, and chaos, it was
because Colombia refused to compose itself as a picture he could read. De-
velopment relies on setting up the world as a picture, so that the whole can
be grasped in some orderly fashion as forming a structure or system. In the
case of the economist, the picture is provided by economic theory. Currie’s
ensemble of experts needed to compose Colombia as a picture; paradoxi-
cally, all they were left with was another representation, Colombia’s “under-
developed” economy, while the “real” Colombia forever receded into the
background. The need to compose the world as a picture is central to all
theories of economic development.1
   The lack of economic theories specific to development commented on by
Currie gave way to a proliferation of theories in the 1950s. Writing in 1979,
John Kenneth Galbraith captured well the remarkable character of this
                         THE SPACE OF DEVELOPMENT                                 57
transformation. When, in 1949, he began instruction “in the economics of
poverty and economic development” at Harvard University, he was con-
fronted with the fact that
  as a different field of study, the special economics of the poor countries was
  held not to exist. In the next fifteen years in the United States these attitudes
  were decisively reversed. . . . Over a somewhat longer period, the Ford Foun-
  dation contributed well over a billion dollars between 1950 and 1975, and the
  Rockefeller, Carnegie, and some CIA-supported foundations added smaller
  amounts. . . . Intellectual interest in the problem of mass poverty had also
  greatly expanded. Seminars and courses on economic development had prolif-
  erated in universities and colleges across the land. . . . No economic subject
  more quickly captured the attention of so many as the rescue of the poor coun-
  tries from their poverty. . . . To be involved with the poor countries provided
  the scholar with a foothold in the field of study that would assuredly expand and
  endure. (1979, 26, 30; emphasis added).

   As we will see, the 1980s saw a number of encompassing analyses on the
origins and evolution of development economics by its leading pioneer fig-
ures, who, almost forty years later, looked at their record with a critical eye.
From their entrenched positions in prestigious institutions, these now-sen-
ior economists declared the demise of the old field. “Development econom-
ics is dead. May it rest in peace. It was quite exciting while it lasted, and—in
spite of the many serious problems that remain to be solved—it fared rea-
sonably well in the real world. Let us now be more realistic about our expec-
tations, recognize the limits of our discipline, and leave behind the naive
dreams of solving the world’s problems once and for all. Let us turn to the
theory that we already know well.” These are the sentences that like a nos-
talgic epitaph seem to emerge from the recent books of the pioneers of the
field.
   The death and recasting of development economics are undoubtedly
linked to the demise of neo-Keynesianism and the rise of neoliberalism.
At issue are the draconian economic reforms introduced in the Third World
during the 1980s under pressure from the International Monetary Fund,
particularly monetary and exchange controls, privatization of public en-
terprises and government services, reduction of imports, and opening to
world markets. The same approach underwrites the strategy of “market
friendly development” hailed by the World Bank in its 1991 World De-
velopment Report as the leading theme for the 1990s. This occurrence sym-
bolizes the return of neoliberal orthodoxy in development economics, par-
alleling the advance of the free market in Eastern Europe. Never mind that
as a supposedly temporary casualty of the necessary adjustment people’s
living standards have fallen to unprecedented levels. “The essential is to
press on with structural reforms,” or so the litany goes. People’s welfare
58                                CHAPTER 3

can be bracketed for a while, even if hundreds of thousands might die. Hail
the market.
   The discourse of development economics gave us successive promises of
affluence for the Third World through active intervention in the economy in
the 1950s and 1960s, planning throughout the development era, stabiliza-
tion and adjustment policies in the 1980s, and anti-interventionist “market
friendly development” for the 1990s. This chapter examines how this dis-
course could have taken place within the order of economic discourse as
a whole; how it was articulated upon a domain of institutions, economic
processes, and social relations; how the historical problematization of pov-
erty gave rise to this peculiar discourse, which developed its own kind of
historicity; how, finally, development economics effected development
through the techniques of planning to which it gave rise. The aim of the
chapter is not to decide whether the early development economists were
right or wrong, but to develop a historical, epistemological, and cultural
awareness of the conditions under which they made their choices. Even if
the economists operated in a domain of discourse that had been created not
as a result of individual acts of cognition but through the active participation
of many in a historical context, the choices they made embodied commit-
ments that had social and cultural consequences.
   The first part of the chapter suggests an approach to examining both the
economy and its science as cultural constructions, a task for which few
guideposts exist at this time.2 The second part looks at some of the notions
central to the articulation of classical and neoclassical economic discourse
before the advent of development, particularly those notions which pro-
vided the building blocks of development economics. The third section ana-
lyzes in detail the elaboration of economic development theories in the
1940s, 1950s, and 1960s; it also addresses the rise of planning as the practi-
cal side of development economics. The fourth section builds upon recent
literature on economic anthropology that posits the existence of marginal
models of the economy harbored in the practice of popular groups in the
Third World today; it discusses the need for a cultural politics that takes
seriously the existence of both mainstream economics as a dominant dis-
course and the manifold local models implicitly maintained by Third World
groups. The chapter concludes by suggesting ways of shifting economic dis-
course within the context of global political economy as a strategy to pursue
alternatives to economics and development.


                           ECONOMICS AS CULTURE
Needless to say, economists do not see their science as a cultural discourse.
In their long and illustrious realist tradition, their knowledge is taken to be
a neutral representation of the world and a truth about it. Theirs is not, as
                         THE SPACE OF DEVELOPMENT                                 59
Patricia Williams writes referring to the law in ways that are equally applica-
ble to economics, “an imposition of an order—the ironclad imposition of a
world view” (1991, 28). “At issue,” Williams continues, “is a structure in
which a cultural code has been inscribed” (1991, 19; my emphasis). This
inscription of the economic onto the cultural took a long time to develop, as
the philosopher Charles Taylor explains:
  There are certain regularities which attend our economic behaviour, and which
  change only very slowly. . . . But it took a vast development of civilization be-
  fore the culture developed in which people do so behave, in which it became a
  cultural possibility to act like this; and in which the discipline involved in so
  acting became widespread enough for this behaviour to be generalized. . . .
  Economics can aspire to the status of a science, and sometimes appear to ap-
  proach it, because there has developed a culture in which a certain form of
  rationality is a (if not the) dominant value. (Taylor 1985, 103).

   What is the cultural code that has been inscribed into the structure of
economics? What vast development of civilization resulted in the present
conception and practice of the economy? The answer to this question is
complex and can only be hinted at here. Indeed, the development and con-
solidation of a dominant view and practice of the economy in European
history is one of the most fundamental chapters in the history of modernity.
An anthropology of modernity centered on the economy leads us to question
the tales of the market, production, and labor which are at the root of what
might be called the Western economy. These tales are rarely questioned;
they are taken as normal and natural ways of seeing life, “the way things
are.” Yet the notions of economy, market, and production are historical con-
tingencies. Their histories can be traced, their genealogies demarcated, and
their mechanisms of truth and power revealed. In short, the Western econ-
omy can be anthropologized and shown to be made up of a peculiar set of
discourses and practices—very peculiar at that in the history of cultures.
   The Western economy is generally thought of as a production system.
From the perspective of the anthropology of modernity, however, the West-
ern economy must be seen as an institution composed of systems of produc-
tion, power, and signification. The three systems, which coalesced at the end
of the eighteenth century, are inextricably linked to the development of
capitalism and modernity. They should be seen as cultural forms through
which human beings are made into producing subjects. The economy is not
only, or even principally, a material entity. It is above all a cultural produc-
tion, a way of producing human subjects and social orders of a certain kind.
Although at the level of production the history of the Western economy is
well known—the rise of the market, changes in the productive forces and
the social relations of production, demographic changes, the transformation
of everyday material life, and the commodification of land, labor, and
60                                CHAPTER 3

money—analyses of power and signification have been incorporated much
less into the cultural history of the Western economy.
   How does power enter into the history of the economy? Very briefly, the
institutionalization of the market system in the eigtheenth and nineteenth
centuries also required a transformation at the level of the individual—the
production of what Foucault (1979) has called docile bodies—and the regu-
lation of populations in ways consistent with the movements of capital. Peo-
ple did not go into the factories gladly and of their own accord; an entire
regime of discipline and normalization was necessary. Besides the expulsion
of peasants and serfs from the land and the creation of a proletarian class, the
modern economy necessitated a profound restructuring of bodies, individu-
als, and social forms. This restructuring of the individual and society was
achieved through manifold forms of discipline, on the one hand, and
through the set of interventions that made up the domain of the social, to
which I have alluded, on the other. The result of this process—Homo oecon-
omicus—was a normalized subject that produces under certain physical and
cultural conditions. To accumulate capital, spread education and health, and
regulate the movement of people and wealth required no less than the estab-
lishment of a disciplinary society (Foucault 1979).3
   At the level of signification, the first important historical aspect to con-
sider is the invention of the economy as an autonomous domain. It is well
known that one of the quintessential aspects of modernity is the separation
of social life into functional spheres (the economy, the polity, society, cul-
ture, and the like), each with laws of its own. This is, strictly speaking, a
modern development. As a separate domain, the economy had to be given
expression by a proper science; this science, which emerged at the end of
the eighteenth century, was called political economy. In its classical formu-
lation by Smith, Ricardo, and Marx, political economy was structured
around the notions of production and labor. In addition to rationalizing cap-
italist production, however, political economy succeeded in imposing pro-
duction and labor as a code of signification on social life as a whole. Simply
put, modern people came to see life in general through the lens of produc-
tion. Many aspects of life became increasingly economized, including
human biology, the nonhuman natural world, relations among people, and
relations between people and nature. The languages of everyday life became
entirely pervaded by the discourses of production and the market.
   The fact that Marx borrowed the language of political economy he was
criticizing, some argue (Reddy 1987; Baudrillard 1975), defeated his ulti-
mate purpose of doing away with it. Yet the achievements of historical mate-
rialism cannot be overlooked: the formulation of an anthropology of use
value in lieu of the abstraction of exchange value; the displacement of the
notion of absolute surplus by that of surplus value and, consequently, the
                        THE SPACE OF DEVELOPMENT                             61
replacement of the notion of progress based on the increase of surplus by
that based on the appropriation of surplus value by the bourgeoisie (exploi-
tation); the emphasis on the social character of knowledge, as opposed to the
dominant epistemology, which placed truth on the side of the individual’s
mind; the contrast between a unilinear conception of history, in which the
individual is the all-powerful actor, and a materialist one, in which social
classes appear as the motor of history; a denunciation of the natural charac-
ter of the market economy and a conceptualization, instead, of the capitalist
mode of production, in which the market appears as the product of history;
and finally the crucial insight of commodity fetishism as a paradigmatic fea-
ture of capitalist society.
   Marx’s philosophy, however, faced limits at the level of the code.4 The
hegemony of the code of signification of political economy is the under-
side of the hegemony of the market as a social model and a model of thought.
Market culture elicits commitments not only from economists but also
from all those living with prices and commodities. “Economic” men and
women are positioned in civil societes in ways that are inevitably mediated,
at the symbolic level, by the constructs of markets, production, and com-
modities. People and nature are separated into parts (individuals and re-
sources), to be recombined into market commodities and objects of ex-
change and knowledge. Hence the call by critical analysts of market culture
to remove political economy from the centrality that it has been accorded in
the history of modernity and to supersede the market as a generalized frame
of reference by developing a wider frame of reference to which the market
itself might be referred (Polanyi 1957b, 270; Procacci 1991, 151; Reddy
1987).5 I suggest that this wider frame of reference should be the anthropol-
ogy of modernity.
   Anthropologists have been complicit with the rationalization of modern
economics, to the extent that they have contributed to naturalizing the con-
structs of economy, politics, religion, kinship, and the like as the fundamen-
tal building blocks of all societies. The existence of these domains as preso-
cial and universal must be rejected. Instead, “we must ask what symbolic
and social processes make these domains appear self-evident, and perhaps
even ‘natural,’ fields of activity in any society” (Yanagisako and Collier 1989,
41). The analysis of economics as culture must thus start by subjecting to
scrutiny the apparent organization of societies into seemingly natural do-
mains. It must reverse the “spontaneous impulse to look in every society for
‘economic’ institutions and relations separate from other social relations,
comparable to those of Western capitalist society” (Godelier 1986, 18).
   This task of cultural critique must begin with the clear recognition that
economics is a discourse that constructs a particular picture of the economy.
To use Stephen Gudeman’s metaphor (1986; Gudeman and Rivera 1990),
62                                      CHAPTER 3

what we usually recognize as economics is only one “conversation” among
many regarding the economy; this conversation became dominant through-
out the centuries, thanks to the historical processes already sketched. Gude-
man’s unveiling of the use in anthropology of allegedly universal economic
models is instructive:
     Those who construct universal models . . . propose that within ethnographic
     data there exists an objectively given reality which may be captured and ex-
     plained by an observer’s formal model. They utilize a “reconstructive” method-
     ology by which observed economic practices and beliefs are first restated in the
     formal language and then deduced or assessed with respect to core criteria such
     as utility, labor or exploitation. Although the particular theories used in eco-
     nomic anthropology are quite diverse, they share the assumption that one or
     another universal model exists and can be used to explain a given field data.
     According to this perspective, a local model usually is a rationalization, mystifi-
     cation or ideology; at most, it only represents the underlying reality to which
     the observer has privileged access. (1986, 28)

   Any model, however, whether local or universal, is a construction of the
world and not an indisputable, objective truth about it. This is the basic
insight guiding the analysis of economics as culture. The coming into domi-
nance of modern economics meant that many other existing conversations or
models were appropriated, suppressed, or overlooked. At the margins of the
capitalist world economy, Gudeman and Rivera insist, there existed and
continue to exist other models of the economy, other conversations, no less
scientific because they are not couched in equations or produced by Nobel
laureates. In the Latin American countryside, for instance, these models are
still alive, the result of overlapping conversations that have been carried out
for a long time. I will come back to the notion of local models in the last
section of the chapter.
   There is, then, an orientalism in economics that has to be unveiled—that
is, a hegemonic effect achieved through representations that enshrine one
view of the economy while suppressing others. The critique of economics as
culture, finally, must be distinguished from the better-known analysis of
economics as “rhetoric” advocated by McCloskey (1985). McCloskey’s work
is intended to show the literary character of economic science and the price
economics has paid for its blind adherence to the scientistic attitude of mod-
ernism. This author shows how literary devices systematically and inevitably
pervade the science of economics. His aim is to improve economics by
bringing it into the realm of rhetoric. The aim of this chapter is quite differ-
ent. Although some rhetorical analysis is used, particularly in the reading of
the economic development theories of the 1950s and 1960s, the analysis of
economics as culture goes well beyond the formal aspect of the rethoric of
                         THE SPACE OF DEVELOPMENT                                  63
economics. How did particular constructions of the economy come to exist?
How do they operate as cultural forces? What practices do these construc-
tions create, and what are the resulting cultural orders? What are the conse-
quences of seeing life in terms of such constructions?


         THE WORLD OF ECONOMICS AND THE ECONOMICS OF THE
           WORLD: THEORETICAL AND PRACTICAL ANTECEDENTS
                    OF DEVELOPMENT ECONOMICS
             “The Static Interlude” and the World of Economics
The opening paragraph of what was perhaps the most celebrated article on
economic development, written in 1954, entitled “Economic Development
with Unlimited Supplies of Labour,” and authored by W. Arthur Lewis,
reads as follows:
  This essay is written in the classical tradition, making the classical assumption,
  and asking the classical question. The classics, from Smith to Marx, all assumed,
  or argued, that an unlimited supply of labour was available at subsistence
  wages. They then enquired how production grows through time. They found
  the answer in capital accumulation, which they explained in terms of their
  analysis of the distribution of income. Classical systems thus determined simul-
  taneously income distribution and income growth, with the relative prices of
  commodities as a minor by-product. (Lewis [1954] 1958 , 400)

   Let us pause for a moment to recall some of the pertinent aspects of the
“classical tradition.” The cornerstone of the classical theory of growth was
capital accumulation (understood in its “bourgeois” sense, that is, not as a
dialectical process), associated with an increasingly specialized labor force.
Changes in capital and labor productivity were considered of paramount
importance, whereas natural resources and institutions were regarded as
constant and technical change as an exogenous variable (treated as such by
all classical economists except Marx). Classical economists also believed that
natural resources are limited; scarcity became an inescapable imperative.
The corollaries of this premise were progressive impoverishment, the stunt-
ing of growth (the theory of diminishing returns), and the possibility of
reaching a stationary state.6 This retarding effect could be offset only by
technical progress. According to the classical theory, the economy would
reach a point at which wages would rise above the subsistence minimum,
thus squeezing profits down to a point where investment would stop; aver-
age wages would then drop again, technological progress would make labor
more productive, and growth would resume, only to be once again subjected
to forces that pulled it toward a stationary state, and so forth.7
64                                CHAPTER 3

   For Ricardo, the laws that regulate the distribution of the national product
among rents, profits, and wages was the main problem of political economy.
The level of profits was crucial, because it determined the level of capital
accumulation and economic growth. His economic theory thus consisted of
a theory of rent, a subsistence theory of wages, an explanation of the impact
of diminishing returns in agriculture on the profit rate, and a labor theory of
value. One of the most important contributions of the Ricardian formulation
was precisely this theory of value. Labor became a unit common to all mer-
chandise and the source of value because it embodied the producing activity
(Dobb 1973). Labor, in fact, appeared as a transcendental that made possible
the objective knowledge of the laws of production. The economy became a
system of successive productions based on labor (the product of labor of one
process went into another). This economic concept fostered a view of accu-
mulation according to temporal sequences and, generally speaking, made
possible the articulation of economics with history. Production and accumu-
lation began to shape indelibly the modern notion and experience of history
(Foucault 1973).8
   The notion that labor is the basis of all value did not survive for long. The
“marginal revolution” of the 1870s sought to debunk the Ricardian formula-
tion by introducing a different theory of value and distribution. Interest-
ingly, the search for an absolute determinant of value was abandoned. “Pre-
vailing opinions make labor rather than utility the origin of value,”wrote
Jevons, the father of the conceptual revolution. “Repeated reflection and
inquiry have led me to the somewhat novel opinion, that value depends
entirely upon utility” (quoted in Dobb 1973, 168). Jevons defined utility as
“the abstract quality whereby an object serves our purposes, and becomes
entitled to rank as a commodity,” and the problem of the economy as the
satisfaction of “our wants to the utmost with the least effort . . . to maximize
comfort and pleasure.” As the supply of a given commodity is increased, its
utility starts to decrease until “satisfaction or satiety” is approached (Dobb
1973, 166–210).9
   A whole new sphere of economic analysis—usually referred to as neoclas-
sical economics—was built on this peculiar law. The idea that the economy
could reach a state of general equilibrium became the centerpiece of eco-
nomic theory. This idea was originally postulated by the French economist
Leon Walras as a series of simultaneous equations relating a number of eco-
nomic variables (prices and quantities of goods and services, either products
or factors of production to be bought by households and firms). According to
this theory, the free play of forces of supply and demand would tend to
establish, under competitive conditions, an equilibrium pattern in the prices
of commodities in such a way that all markets would be “cleared.” This is so
because there is a “concatenation and mutual dependence” of economic acts
                         THE SPACE OF DEVELOPMENT                                 65
among all producers and consumers, a certain “circular flow of economic
life.” Schumpeter (1934, 8) defines this circular flow of the self-regulating
market in a revealing manner:
  Hence it follows that somewhere in the economic system a demand is, so to say,
  ready awaiting every supply, and nowhere in the system are there commodities
  without complements, that is other commodities in the possession of people
  who will exchange them under empirically determined conditions for the for-
  mer goods. It follows, again from the fact that all goods find a market, that the
  circular flow of economic life is closed, in other words that the sellers of all
  commodities appear again as buyers in sufficient measure to acquire those
  goods which will maintain their consumption and their productive equipment
  in the next economic period at the level so far attained, and vice versa.10

   It was an extremely harmonious view of the economy, without politics,
power, or history; an utterly rational world, made even more abstract with
the passing of time by the increasing use of mathematical tools. Why did the
neoclassical economists abandon classical concerns such as growth and dis-
tribution? A commonsense explanation is usually put forward: Because capi-
talism became consolidated in the second half of the nineteenth century—
having achieved remarkable rates of economic growth, elevated the living
standards of the masses, and dispelled the old fears of getting to a point
where growth would no longer be possible—the analytical preoccupation
with growth seemed superfluous. The turn in analysis toward static and
short-term theoretical interests, such as the optimization of resource alloca-
tion and the decision behavior of individuals and firms, was a logical step to
follow.11 Once capitalism was decidedly working, the interest of economists
shifted to the fine-tuning of the operations of the system, including the ra-
tionalization of decisions and the coordinated performance of markets to-
ward an optimum equilibrium. The dynamic aspects of the economy thus
gave way to static considerations. It was what a development economist
aptly called the static interlude (Meier 1984, 125–28).
   Progress had not been without vicissitudes, especially toward the end of
the century (falling prices, unemployment, business losses, class struggles,
and workers’ organizations); but these problems would fade away as the
process of continued growth was not in doubt. And in spite of the fact that
by the end of the century the faith in the virtues of laissez-faire had been
shaken (especially in relation to the need to control business monopoly), in
1870 most observers believed that universal and perfect trade would reign
unhindered. It was as if, the economy having achieved some degree of ap-
parent stability, economists busied themselves with the more mundane but
theoretically exciting realm of the quotidian. This confidence was to be torn
to pieces with the Great Depression. But by the time this happened, the
66                                CHAPTER 3

great “neoclassical edifice,” built in the 1870s and furnished with impecca-
ble precision in the next one hundred years, was firmly in place, shaping the
discursive firmament of the discipline.
   For Schumpeter (1954, 891–909), however, the neoclassical revolution
left untouched many of the elements of the classical theory, including “its
sociological framework.” The general vision of the economic process was
still pretty much the same as in Mill’s time. In short, despite its rejection of
the labor theory of value, neoclassical economics inherited, and functioned
within, the basic discursive organization laid down during the classical pe-
riod. The emphasis on individual satisfaction reinforced the atomistic bias of
the discipline; more than in classical thought, the economic system was irre-
mediably identified with the market, and economic inquiry with market con-
ditions (especially prices) under which exchange takes place. The problem
of distribution was removed completely from the sphere of politics and so-
cial relations and reduced to the pricing of inputs and outputs (the marginal
productivity theory of distribution). By further isolating the economic sys-
tem, questions of class and property relations fell outside the scope of eco-
nomic analysis; analytical efforts were directed instead to the question of
optimization (Dobb 1973, 172–83). The focus on particular static equilibri-
ums, finally, militated against the analysis of macro relations and questions
of economic development from a more holistic (for example, Marxist or
Schumpeterian) perspective.
   The great “neoclassical edifice” rested on two basic assumptions: perfect
competition and perfect rationality. Perfect and universal knowledge en-
sured that existing resources would be optimally utilized, guaranteeing full
employment. “Economic man” could go about his business in peace because
he could be confident that there was a corpus of theory, namely, marginal
utility and general equilibrium, which, because it had recourse to a perfect
knowledge of things, would provide him with the information he needed to
maximize the use of his scarce resources. The underlying picture of the
neoclassical world was that of order and tranquillity, of a self-regulating,
self-optimizing economic system, a view undoubtedly related to the pom-
posity of the Pax Britannica then prevailing.
   This was, then, the neoclassical world at the turn of the century. A world,
it was believed, where theory resembled the real economy as a clock re-
sembles time; where the fundamental “niggardliness of nature” was held
at bay by those rugged individuals who were able to extract from nature
the most precious products; where the invisible hand that ensured the
smooth operation of the economy and the welfare of the majority had not
yet been burdened with the cumbersome strings of protectionism. The cri-
sis that hit the capitalist world economy from 1914 to about 1948 was to
add a number of important components to that edifice. Among them was a
new interest in growth. It might be worth recalling these events in some
                       THE SPACE OF DEVELOPMENT                            67
detail, because it was this situation that development economists found at
their doorstep when, with great excitement, they decided to build a home
for themselves.


       “The Years of High Theory” and the Economics of the World
We have seen how classical political economy underwent a significant
change with the marginalist revolution. After almost one century of Pax Bri-
tannica, the capitalist world economy entered a period of deep crisis, which
motivated a second important transformation in economic discourse. Let us
summarize the argument to be developed in this regard. Between the First
and Second World wars, a new social system began to take shape. It rested
on the dissolution of the old distinction between the state and the economy
(so dear to the neoclassical economists), the development of unprecedented
institutional arrangements, and an important reformulation of the neoclassi-
cal understanding of the economy. Historians argue that in the 1920s there
occurred a recasting of bourgeois Europe through the development of cor-
poratist forms of control of the polity and the economy and a restructuring
of the relationship between private and public power. A recentering of the
world economy also took place, shifting the center of the capitalist system to
the United States. The styles and forms of intervention in the economy de-
veloped during this period were retained and extended during the 1930s,
1940s, and 1950s, before blossoming during the development era.
   Keynesianism and a revitalized growth economics provided the under-
standing and rationalization of these processes. All these changes not only
prepared the ground for a new scale of integration of the peripheral coun-
tries (those parts of the world later known as the Third World) under Pax
Americana but provided the building blocks of a theory of economic devel-
opment which guided and justified such integration. Classical theories of
growth, improved upon by a new macroeconomics and a new mathematics
of growth, were ready to provide the fundamental elements of the new dis-
course. So were the new forms of management and planning developed in
the 1920s. After 1945, the underdeveloped world acquired a position of im-
portance in the capitalist world economy it had never had before. Neither
had there ever existed a discourse so refined to deal with it.
   The depth of the economic and social transformation that started to take
place in the first decade of the twentieth century—which saw not only the
collapse of nineteenth-century economic organization but also unprece-
dented wars and fascism—has been most forcefully and insightfully
discussed by Karl Polanyi (1957a). Polanyi finds the origins of this transfor-
mation “in the utopian endeavor of economic liberalism to set up a self-
regulating system” (1957a, 29). The demise of the assumption of the self-
regulating market was thus the first victim of the changes. The First World
68                                      CHAPTER 3

War opened the way for new methods of management and planning of eco-
nomic and social affairs. Out of the smoke and destruction of the battlefield
emerged forms of organization of industry and labor that provided the foun-
dations for a new economy after the war. This new economy was based on
the belief that the economic process could not be left to the private market
alone; the division between economic and political power became blurred.
As the state’s influence on the control of prices, labor, and resources became
greater, new mechanisms of administration and bargaining were developed.
In some countries (France, Germany, and Italy) the various interests (indus-
try, agriculture, labor, and the military) became organized into corporate
forms (Maier 1975)
   A technocratic vision of the economy emerged out of the offices of the
new engineers and professional businessmen. Taylorism, Americanism, and
Fordism took deeper roots as scientific management extended its reach in its
attempt to make the use of labor and capital ever more efficient. The intro-
duction of all of these techniques cannot be underestimated. Gramsci char-
acterized the transformation that Americanism and Fordism fostered “the
biggest collective effort to date to create, with unprecedented speed, and
with a consciousness of purpose unmatched in history, a new type of worker
and a new type of man” (quoted in Harvey 1989, 126). This was achieved in
the span of several decades, despite resistance by workers to Fordist and
Taylorist work practices in the early years. The Left’s demands for democra-
tization in the factory became entangled with the Right’s emphasis on ra-
tionalization through scientific management. In sum, the twilight of the
nineteenth-century order saw, after the dark night of the war, the birth of a
new order in which, despite many a great transformation, the old one still
breathed at ease. “Rescuing bourgeois Europe meant recasting bourgeois
Europe: dealing with unions (or creating pseudo-unions as in Italy), giving
state agencies control over the market, building interest-group spokesmen
into the structure of the state” (Maier 1975, 594).12
   With the demise of the self-regulating market, the assumption of perfect
knowledge was also discarded, especially in the late 1920s and early 1930s,
when economic theory “had to come to terms with the restless anarchy of
the world of fact.” “Until the 1930s,” wrote a student of the economic theory
of the period, “economics was the science of coping with basic scarcity. After
the 1930s, it was the account of how men cope with scarcity and uncertainty.
This was by far the greatest of the achievements of the 1930s in economic
theory” (Shackle 1967, 7). Pax Britannica had instilled in many people the
sense of a natural, irrefutable order. To continue with Shackle’s account:
     “There was,” as John Maynard Keynes says, “nothing to be afraid of.” . . . The
     most essential and powerful difference between this world and the world of the
     1930s was the loss of tranquility itself. Problems of “the price of a cup of tea” as
     Professor Joan Robinson put it, no longer counted much against the problem of
                        THE SPACE OF DEVELOPMENT                                69
  unemployment arising, so Keynes explained, from the failure of the incentive to
  invest, which failure itself was due to the sudden oppression of business minds
  by the world’s incalculable uncertainties. There was no longer equilibrium in
  fact, and there could no longer be equilibrium in theory. (1967, 289)

   Keynes was the hero of the new revolution. He demonstrated that there
could be equilibrium at levels lower than full employment—indeed, at any
level of output and employment. The theories of employment and growth
produced during “the years of high theory” (1926 to 1939, by economists
such as Keynes, Kahn, Robinson, Harrod, Myrdal, Hicks, Kalecky, Samuel-
son, and Kaldor) arose from the realization of the fundamental lack of infor-
mation that decision makers had to confront. Perfect competition became
imperfect (writing in 1926, Piero Sraffa demonstrated the existence of fac-
tors internal to the firm, called economies of scale, which made the assump-
tion of perfect competition illusory); perfect knowledge became muddled,
giving way to uncertainty; and the empty space left by the disappearance of
the concern with static conditions was soon filled by inquiry into the dynam-
ics of growth, now enshrined in the altar of theory. Because of the limitations
of knowledge, the tools to manage reality had to be sharpened; hence a new
emphasis on public policy and planning arose to fill the need for mecha-
nisms of order and control.
   The innovations in question reflected closely the events of the period:
deflation, wage reductions, and unemployment in the 1920s, economic crisis
and aggravated unemployment in the 1930s. Keynes’s prescription was for
government to propend for full employment through appropriate state
spending and through investment, fiscal, and budgetary policy. Economists
consider the theoretical achievements of this period extremely important.
For Dobb (1973, 211–27), however, the new theory did not challenge the
neoclassical theory of value; it moved within its general framework (Keynes
considered the neoclassical theory a “special case” of his General Theory).
Its radical challenge to existing views was restricted to the assumption of a
unique position of static equilibrium, which in turn entailed full employ-
ment of resources. Yet it must be admitted that Keynes’s disruption of the
terribly rational and smooth neoclassical world was important. Keynes’s suc-
cessors, however, soon summoned to their aid rationality and the mathema-
tization of economics, thus overlooking what could have been the most radi-
cal lessons of Keynes’s work (Gutman 1994).13
   Growth economics lent credence to this mode of theory construction ac-
cording to conventional rationality and model building. In the late 1930s,
and in the wake of Keynes’s General Theory, a number of economists (Har-
rod in 1939 and Domar in 1946) focused their attention on the rates of
growth of output (national production) and income as the fundamental vari-
ables to be explained by a truly dynamic theory. The mood set in for elabo-
rating a theory of growth that was as abstract and general in application as
70                               CHAPTER 3

that of general equilibrium. The key to such a theory was the relation be-
tween investment and general output—how the pace of investment governs
the level of general output, and how the acceleration of general output in
turn affects the pace of investment. Investment, it was noted, not only accel-
erates income but also generates increased productive capacity. A net addi-
tion to the capital stock brings about a corresponding increase in national
output (gross national product, or GNP); this correspondence is expressed
by what economists of the period called the capital-output ratio, which Har-
rod defined as the value of capital goods required for the production of a unit
increment of output.
   Capital for new investment must come from somewhere, and the answer
was savings. Part of the national income must be saved to replace worn-out
capital goods (equipment, buildings, materials, and so on) and to create new
ones. What mattered then was to establish the necessary “savings ratio”
(proportion of national output to be saved), which, coupled with a given
capital-output ratio, would produce the desired rate of growth of GNP.
Every economy would have a “natural rate of growth,” defined as the maxi-
mum rate allowed by the increase of population, capital accumulation, and
technological progress; because these variables could not be controlled ac-
curately, the process of growth was seen as necessarily unstable. This theory
was thus clearly consistent not only with the “classical question” and “the
classical assumption” but also with the Keynesian innovation, which related
the expansion or contraction of the economy to savings and investment. Al-
though significant variations were introduced to the original Harrod-Domar
theory, this formulation shaped the nascent development economics. The
consequences of the adoption of this theory, as we will see in the next sec-
tion, were enormous.
   Let us return for a moment to the economics of the world. The stability
allegedly achieved in the most powerful countries in the late 1920s and,
again, in the late 1930s was not without its contradictions. As a distinctive
regime of accumulation, Fordism did not reach maturity until after 1945,
when it became the basis for the postwar boom that lasted until the early
1970s. By the time Fordism started to decline, it had already become “less
a mere system of mass production and more a total way of life” (Harvey 1989,
135). It had introduced not only a new culture of work and consumption but
a new aesthetic, which built upon and contributed to the aesthetic of mod-
ernism, with its concern with functionality and efficiency.
   Let us see how Marxist-inspired political economists explain the capitalist
dynamics of the period. Fordist accumulation determined the incorporation
of the periphery in novel ways.14 The horizontal (geographic) integration of
the capitalist world economy had been largely completed by 1910, and a
process of vertical integration—for the periphery, an increase in the rate of
extraction of surplus value through means other than geographic expan-
                       THE SPACE OF DEVELOPMENT                            71
sion—began to take place. By 1913, the major core nations (England, the
United States, France, and Germany) owned about 85 percent of all capital
invested in the semiperiphery (at that point composed of Spain, Portugal,
Russia, Japan, Australia, and parts of Eastern Europe) and the periphery
(most of Latin America, Asia, and Africa). However, certain factors created
instability: increased competition from the semiperiphery (especially Russia
and Japan); increased anticore ideologies and social movements in the pe-
riphery (as the pace of foreign investment and direct military intervention
augmented); internal changes in the class structure of the core nations; and
competition among the core nations for control of the increasingly important
natural resources of the periphery.15
   The growing importance of the United States in the capitalist world econ-
omy had important repercussions for the periphery. In the case of Latin
America, trade with the United States increased dramatically, and so did
direct U.S. investment. A large borrowing program, mainly from U.S. bank-
ers, was initiated, especially during the 1920s. The 1920s marked the first
decade of “modernization” of the Latin American continent, and the period
in general (1910–1930) saw an important transition in the social and eco-
nomic structure of the larger countries of the region. The Great Depression
hit hard the Latin American economies. Imports by core nations from Latin
America were severely reduced. The large debt obligations that many coun-
tries contracted during the 1920s became an unbearable burden (a situation
not unlike that of the 1980s) and, indeed, by 1935 most of the debt was in
default. The euphoric mood the boom of the 1920s created turned somber,
out of which came the need either to adapt to depressed international condi-
tions in the best possible way (the course of action most countries of the
region took) or to proceed with the industrialization process through a strat-
egy of import substitution—that is, to produce at home what was previously
imported (the larger countries, such as Brazil, Argentina, Mexico, and Co-
lombia, took this route). The countries of the periphery were obliged to
abandon the old liberalism and implement active state policies to protect
and develop their national economies.16
   The free enterprise system was in peril after the Second World War. To
save such a system, the United States was faced with various imperatives:
to keep the existing core nations of the capitalist system together and going,
which required continuous expansion and efforts to avoid the spread of
communism; to find ways to invest U.S. surplus capital that had accumu-
lated during the war (particularly abroad, where the largest profits could
be made); to find markets overseas for American goods, given that the pro-
ductive capacity of American industry had doubled during the war; to se-
cure control over the sources of raw materials in order to meet world com-
petition; and to establish a global network of unchallenged military power as
a way to secure access to raw materials, markets, and consumers (Amin 1976;
72                               CHAPTER 3

Borrego 1981; Murphy and Augelli 1993). The pact signed at Bretton
Woods, establishing the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank,
inaugurated the new era. Keynesian theory provided guidelines to
strengthen the private sector, expand domestic and foreign markets, and
revitalize international trade under the aegis of multinational corporations.
The production process of the core states was thus newly integrated with
their political apparatuses as well as with the emerging international finan-
cial organizations.
   “The Great Transformation,” so admirably described by Polanyi, thus
marked the collapse of some of the most cherished economic principles of
the nineteenth century. Laissez-faire and old-fashioned liberalism gave way
to more efficient ways of managing economies and populations, more perva-
sive perhaps if only because they were carried out under the legitimizing
wing of science and increasingly (especially with the development of welfare
economics in the 1950s) for the “good of the people.” The “static interlude”
was over, but the new economics did little to alter the boundaries of classical
and neoclassical discourse. Theoretical refinements and sophisticated math-
ematical techniques—such as Leontieff ’s input-ouput analysis, in gestation
since the 1930s—were developed, but they did not depart significantly from
the basic discursive organization of classical economics. The imperatives the
United States faced at the end of the war placed Latin America and the rest
of the periphery in a well-demarcated space within the capitalist world
economy.
   To conclude this section, let us return to the introduction of the chapter.
I referred to a certain reformist ethos in the attitude of the pioneers of de-
velopment. This ethos was partly linked to the experience of the Great
Depression. Indeed, as the progressive Harvard economist Stephen Marglin
maintains, this experience changed economics for a generation, both in
terms of the people it attracted and the problems it sought to address. Be-
tween 1935 and 1960, some economists even thought that the end of capital-
ism was a possibility. Scholars such as Galbraith, Kuznets, Currie, and, at
the tail end of the period, Marglin acquired a political disposition toward
their subject matter and the problems they wished to confront. (One also
thinks of Latin American economists such as Raúl Prebisch, Antonio García,
Celso Furtado, and Fernando Henrique Cardoso in a similar way). Macro-
economic theory of the period also arose in the context of decolonization,
which for these economists meant the final destruction of empires. Although
the needs of empire were to bring the colonized into the market, the well-
being of the people suggested that they would be better off if left alone.17
   For a moment then there was a contradiction in the mind of some econo-
mists between the welfare of the people and interventionist policies. Only
after the Second World War would welfare and development join ranks as
compatible goals. But, Marglin insists, many of the early development econ-
                        THE SPACE OF DEVELOPMENT                             73
omists espoused a progressive agenda in the beginning years of their work.
Without disputing this perception, it is important to emphasize, as this sec-
tion has shown, that it was the whole movement of many decades that pre-
pared the ground for the final arrival of development economics. Fueled by
this momentum, development economists arrived in the Third World full of
hopes and aspirations, eager to apply the best of their knowledge to a com-
plex but exciting task. Their discourse, discussed in the next section, was
extremely influential; it continues to be an important chapter in the cultural
history of the Third World.


             THE DEVELOPMENT OF DEVELOPMENT ECONOMICS
               The Early Theories: Structuring the Discourse
The ten years between 1948 and 1958 saw the rise and consolidation of
development economics as a practice concerned with certain questions, per-
formed by particular individuals, and entrusted with given social tasks. Dur-
ing those years, development economics constructed its object, the “un-
derdeveloped economy,” out of the historical and theoretical processes
reviewed in the previous section. How this construction actually happened
needs to be analyzed in detail for our analysis of the politics of discourse and
regimes of representation.
   There were important precursors to the post–World War II concept of
economic development. As Arndt (1978, 1981) has noted, when the term
development was used before the 1930s, it was usually understood in a natu-
ralistic sense, as the emergence of something over time. Two exceptions
were Schumpeter, whose work on economic development, to be discussed
later, was published in German in 1911, and a number of historians of the
British Empire. A third exception was Marx, who derived his concept of
development from the inexorable Hegelian dialectics. The clearest forerun-
ner of the current use, mentioned in chapter 2, was the 1929 British Colonial
Development Act. In the colonial context, economic development was
not an inevitable historical process but an activity that had to be fostered by
the government. The economic system did not develop; resources had to
be developed. “Economic development in Marx’s sense derives from the
intransitive verb, in [the colonial] sense from the transitive verb” (Arndt
1981, 460).
   Arndt traces the use of economic development in the transitive sense to
Australia and to a lesser extent Canada, where economic development did
not happen spontaneously. He also mentions in passing a 1922 study by Sun
Yat-sen, a Chinese nationalist leader, proposing a massive program for the
economic development of China. But not until the middle of the 1940s was
the term applied to the economic development of “underdeveloped areas.”
74                               CHAPTER 3

The Depression and World War II had brought to the fore the questions of
full employment and growth. There was, as Arndt (1978) put it in his study
of the rise and fall of the concept of economic growth, a “return to scarcity”
and to the “general problem of poverty.” Growth started to be seen as a
remedy for poverty and unemployment rather than as an end in itself.
   The classical concern with capital accumulation became central, via con-
temporary growth theories, to the first attempts at applying known tools of
economic analysis to poor countries. The emphasis on investment implied a
focus on savings and opened the way for foreign aid and foreign investment,
because it was soon recognized that poor countries seldom possessed suffi-
cient amounts of capital to meet the investment required for rapid growth.
This conclusion was reinforced by the consideration that the growth of GNP
had to be greater than the growth of population, which was relatively high
in most countries. Moreover, a privileged arena for investment, one in which
the benefits of capital accumulation would be larger than in any other realm,
was discovered: industrialization. Industrialization would pave the way for
the modernization of the backward economies and for spreading among the
natives the proper rationality—“training labour and accustoming it to fac-
tory discipline,” as W. Arthur Lewis wrote in 1946 referring to Jamaica’s
industrialization (quoted in Meier 1984, 143); it would also be the most effi-
cient way of putting to productive use the large pool of the unemployed and
underemployed who inhabited the countryside.
   Similarly, industrialization would be the only way in which the poor coun-
tries could undo the structural disadvantage that they faced in the domain of
international trade as predominantly primary producers confronted with the
higher prices and productivity of goods coming from industrialized coun-
tries. Through industrialization, poor countries would stop producing “the
wrong things” and start producing items with a higher exchange value. That
industrialization was the key to development was as “clear as daylight,” to
quote again from Lewis’s report on Jamaica (in Meier 1984, 143). The actual
way in which industrialization was to take place constituted the core of most
development models of the 1950s. It was clear that industrialization was not
going to happen spontaneously. Deliberate efforts were required if the per-
ceived obstacles to industrialization were going to be overcome. This called
for a type of planning that ensured the right allocation of scarce resources,
corrected market prices, maximized savings, oriented foreign investment in
the right direction, and in general orchestrated the economy in terms of a
well-balanced program. Development planning was thus from the outset the
twin of development economics; this was already clear at the time of the
1949 World Bank mission to Colombia.
   In sum, the major ingredients of the economic development strategy com-
monly advocated in the 1950s were these: (1) capital accumulation; (2) delib-
erate industrialization; (3) development planning; and (4) external aid. The
underdeveloped economies, however, were thought to be characterized by
                       THE SPACE OF DEVELOPMENT                             75
a number of features that set them apart from the economies studied by
orthodox economics, which then called for modifying existing theory—what
Hirschman calls the rejection of the “monoeconomic claim” (1981). Among
these features were high levels of rural underemployment, a low level of
industrialization, a set of obstacles to industrial development, and a disad-
vantage in international trade. The first three of these captured the attention
of most theorists building their models. Initially, attention focused on the
“obstacles” that lay in the way of development, as well as in the “missing
components” that would have to be supplied to make the models work. The
models proposed characterized the effort that would have to be made to
remove obstacles and provide missing components in such a manner that
industrialization would take off with vigor and celerity.18
   Classical and neoclassical theories of growth provided the building blocks
for these models. The milestones of classical growth theory, let us remem-
ber, were capital accumulation, greater division of labor, technological prog-
ress, and trade. As we saw, postwar growth theory was influenced as well by
Keynes’s analysis of the interaction of savings and investments. It is useful
to recall the thrust of the growth argument as postulated by Harrod and
Domar. In order to grow, economies must save and invest a certain propor-
tion of their gross national product. Given a specific level of savings and
investment, the actual rate of growth will depend on how productive the
new investment is; and the productivity of investment can be measured by
the capital-output ratio. Investment creates new capacity to produce, which
must be matched, in turn, by new demand. Income thus must rise by an
equivalent proportion to ensure no idle capacity of capital goods.
   The model assumed a number of features that held reasonably well for
industrialized countries but not for underdeveloped economies. It assumed
a constant capital-output ratio, did not analyze the effect of price changes
(they were models in real terms), and presupposed constant terms of trade.
But the underdeveloped economies were found to be characterized by dete-
riorating terms of trade for their primary products (vis-à-vis manufactured
products from the industrialized countries), they were seen in need of rapid
technological change, and their prices changed continually due to the infla-
tionary bias of their economies. They also had a much lower level of savings.
The main obstacle to development was thus low capital availability; more-
over, although domestic savings could be increased, there would still be a
“savings gap,” which had to be filled with foreign aid, loans, or private for-
eign investment. Despite these differences, growth theories that had devel-
oped in the context of industrialized economies shaped economic develop-
ment models to a significant extent.
   Let us look in detail at some of the most important models. Rosenstein-
Rodan, coming from his experience with relatively depressed Eastern Euro-
pean economies in the 1920s and 1930s, argued for a “big push” in invest-
ment to mobilize the rural underemployed for the task of industrialization.
76                                       CHAPTER 3

For this author, industrialization required a large, carefully planned initial
effort in order to be successful; small, isolated efforts were very likely to
fail.19 Other models had the same thrust: either a “critical minimum effort”
was needed (Liebenstein 1957), or countries were seen as caught in a “low-
level equilibrium trap,” out which only an effort of a certain magnitude
would get them (Richard Nelson). Rostow’s historicoeconomic model (1960,
1952), which assumed that all countries went through a linear path of stages
in their transition to modernity, with one of these stages being the “take-off”
into self-sustained growth, became well known in the late 1950s and early
1960s. So did Nurkse’s “balanced growth” conception—which predicted
that a country would escape the “vicious circle of poverty” only through a
concerted application of capital to a wide range of industries—and Hirsch-
man’s (1958) notion of “backward and forward linkages” for rationalizing the
industrialization process. All of these conceptions soon found their way into
the voluminous literature coming out of the United Nations and interna-
tional lending organizations, and in the poor countries themselves, either
because theorists visited the Third World—often for long periods of time—
or through the education of Third World students in North American and
British universities, a practice that became widespread in the 1960s.20
   The models Nurkse and Lewis developed in the early 1950s were among
the most influential, and it is appropriate to examine them briefly, not from
the point of view of their economic rationality, but as cultural constructs and
central pieces in the politics of the development discourse. Nurkse’s book
(1953), written in 1952 and based on a series of lectures delivered by the
author in Rio de Janeiro a year earlier, is dedicated to analyzing the factors
associated with “the vicious circle of poverty” and the possible ways to
“break the deadlock” of such a circle. In his conception, poverty is produced
by a circular constellation of forces that links lack of food and ill health with
low work capacity, low income, and back to lack of food. This vicious circle
is paralleled by a circular relationship in the realm of the economy.
     A circular relationship exists on both sides of the problems of capital formation
     in the poverty-ridden areas of the world. On the supply side, there is the small
     capacity to save, resulting from the low level of real income. The low real in-
     come is a reflection of low productivity, which in turn is due largely to the lack
     of capital. The lack of capital is a result of the small capacity to save, and so the
     circle is complete. On the demand side, the inducement to invest may be low
     because of the small buying power of the people, which is due to their small real
     income, which again is due to low productivity. The low level of productivity,
     however, is a result of the small amount of capital used in production, which in
     its turn may be caused at least partly by the small inducement to invest. (Nurkse
     1953, 5)

   Behind this “vicious” economic circle lies implicitly the “proper” circular
view that was held to underlie a sound economy. The goal of balanced
                       THE SPACE OF DEVELOPMENT                            77
growth was innocuously stated as “enlarging the size of the market and cre-
ating inducements to invest,” for which capital was obviously essential. To
increase production of one commodity (shoes is the example Nurkse uses)
was not enough; the increase had to take place simultaneously in a wide
range of consumer goods if demand was to be sufficiently augmented. Com-
mercial policy should then seek to direct properly the additional savings and
external sources of capital in order to expand the domestic market to the
degree needed for the takeoff into self-sustained development.
   Interestingly, for Nurkse the problem of capital formation was not re-
stricted to low savings capacity; it was also due to small inducement to in-
vest. In this he was closer to Schumpeter, whom he explicitly invoked. But
neither Nurkse nor any other development economist adopted a Schumpe-
terian view; the reasons for this are revealing in terms of the politics of
discourse. Schumpeter’s Theory of Economic Development had been avail-
able in English since 1934. This book, as most of Schumpeter’s works, is
tight and unifying, with an emphasis on processual aspects. (“The argument
of the book forms one connected whole,” he writes in the introduction.) The
surprisingly small influence of this book on postwar development thinking
may have been due to several factors. To begin with, Western economists
saw this book as a theory of business cycles, not as a theory of development;
moreover, Schumpeter’s emphasis on the role of the private entrepreneur
seemed to rule out its application to poor countries, where entrepreneur-
ship was thought to be almost nonexistent, in spite of some allegations to the
contrary (Bauer and Yamey 1957). The alleged lack of entrepreneurship was
influenced by the perception of Third World people as backward and even
lazy.
   Schumpeter’s theory seemed pertinent to the concerns of the early devel-
opment economists. He was concerned not with small changes in economic
life but precisely with those revolutionary changes cherished by devel-
opment economists with their “big push” and “takeoff” theories. To ad-
here to Schumpeter’s framework, however, would have required taking seri-
ously a number of aspects that would have posed uncomfortable problems to
most economists of the period—for instance, the fact that for Schumpeter
mere growth was not development but just “changes in data,” or that “the
economic state of a people does not emerge simply from the preceding eco-
nomic conditions, but only from the preceding total situation” (Schumpeter
1934, 58). How could these views be translated into manageable models
and planning schemes?21
    W. Arthur Lewis’s model of the dual economy, as influential as Nurkse’s
model, if not more so, was originally published in 1954. The pivotal discur-
sive operation of this model was the division of a country’s economy and
social life into two sectors: one modern, the other traditional. Development
would consist of the progressive encroachment of the modern upon the tra-
ditional, the steady extension of the money economy on the vast world of
78                                     CHAPTER 3

subsistence or near subsistence. This assumption pervaded the develop-
ment view of most economists and international organizations for several
decades (witness, for instance, the quotation that opens the first chapter of
this book, excerpted from a report prepared by a committee of which Lewis
was one of five participants). From the point of view of a discursive econ-
omy, the consequences of such a dualistic construction are enormous. To
begin with, Lewis’s construction equates tradition with backwardness, a
burden to be disposed of as quickly as possible and a part of the economy
with nothing to contribute to the process of development. Had a nondualis-
tic view of the underdeveloped economy been adopted (Braudelian,
Schumpeterian, or Marxist, not to mention one based on non-Western tradi-
tions), the consequences would have been quite different, for development
would have had to involve all sectors of social life.
   There is another mechanism at work in the modern-traditional dichot-
omy. This split distances one pole from the other, making remote the second
term of the division. This feature of discourse is by no means restricted
to economics. It is deeply embedded in the social sciences and in West-
ern culture in general. In his analysis of the use of time in anthropology,
Johannes Fabian (1983) found this feature, which he calls denial of coeval-
ness, to be central to the writings about other cultures. In spite of the fact
that the ethnographer or researcher/economist is mandated to share the
time of the other—the “native,” the “underdeveloped”—in the fieldwork
experiences or in the economists’ missions, this other is nevertheless repre-
sented as belonging to another time period (even to the Stone Age in some
texts); thus time is used to construct the object of anthropology, or econom-
ics, in such a way that a specific power relation is created. By constructing
the other as living in another time period, these scientists avoid having to
take into account the other seriously; a monologue from the height of power
results. These features are borne in Lewis’s depiction of the dual economy:
     We find a few industries highly capitalized, such as mining or electric power,
     side by side with the most primitive techniques. . . . We find the same contrast
     also outside their economic life. There are one or two modern towns, with the
     finest architecture, water supplies, communications, and the like, into which
     people drift from other towns and villages which might almost belong to an-
     other planet. There is the same contrast even within people; between the few
     highly westernized, trousered, natives, educated in western universities, speak-
     ing western languages, and glorifying Beethoven, Mills, Marx or Einstein, and
     the great mass of their countrymen which live in quite other worlds. . . . Inevi-
     tably what one gets are very heavily developed patches of the economy, sur-
     rounded by economic darkness. (Lewis [1954] 1958, 408)

  In this discourse, the traditional segment is a world of economic darkness,
where new ideas are impossible, architecture is inadequate (despite the fact
                          THE SPACE OF DEVELOPMENT                                    79
that it seems adequate for its dwellers), and there are no communications
(because only the airplane, the automobile, and television count as commu-
nications)—in short, another planet. It does not matter that those aliens are
human beings as well (although those who belong to the modern sector are
apparently more human, because they speak prestigious languages, listen to
Beethoven, have memorized Einstein’s equations, and have mastered
Samuelson, Friedman, or Marx) or that they constitute about 80 percent of
the world. Their existence can be brushed aside, because they live in quite
another age bound to be swept away by the fruits of the Enlightenment and
the travails of economists. The rightness of the actions of the harbingers of
modernity is corroborated by the fact that the native elite cherishes the
modern world—even if their native side might pop up from time to time, for
instance, when they become “corrupt” or “uncooperative.”
   The economic development conception that comes out of this view is its
logical extension. “The central problem in the theory of economic develop-
ment,” writes Lewis, “is how to understand the process by which a commu-
nity which was previously saving and investing 4 or 5 per cent of its national
income or less, converts itself into an economy where voluntary saving is
running at about 12 to 15% of national income or more” (Lewis [1954] 1958,
416). “This is the central problem because the central fact of economic de-
velopment is rapid capital accumulation (including knowledge and skills
with capital),” he adds (416). The means to achieve this feat also follows: to
use the traditional sector to fuel the modern one. This would require moving
“the rural underemployed,” who, because of their large numbers, can be
removed from the countryside without reducing agricultural output (in the
economist’s jargon, this can be done because the marginal productivity of
labor in agriculture is negligible or zero). This “surplus labor” would be
hired at near-subsistence wages by the new industries set up with additional
savings and foreign capital. Both the historical “record,” as well as economic
rationality, attests to the fact that people will move as long as they can be
secured higher wages in the modern sector.
   What happened to rural people (never mind what they thought) did not
matter. From an economic perspective, these people simply did not count.
  We are interested not in the people in general, but only say in the 10 per cent
  of them with the largest incomes, who in countries with surplus labor receive
  up to 40 per cent of the national income. . . . The remaining 90 per cent of the
  people never manage to save a significant fraction of their income. The impor-
  tant question is why does the top 10 per cent save more? . . . The explanation
  is . . . likely to be that saving increases relatively to national income because the
  incomes of the savers increase relatively to the national income. The central fact
  of economic development is that the distribution of incomes is altered in favour
  of the saving class. (Lewis [1954] 1958, 416, 417)
80                                CHAPTER 3

   Not surprisingly, theories of this type led to regressive distributions of
income that reached embarrassing proportions. Not until the early 1970s did
economists fully realize this fact, especially with Albert Fishlow’s empirical
findings that the “Brazilian miracle” of the late 1960s and early 1970s
(growth rates of more than 10 percent per year maintained for a number of
years) had not only produced a more unequal distribution of income but left
low-income groups worse off in absolute terms. The second important as-
pect that should be noted is that unemployment was not eased in most cases,
nor did wages and living standards rise significantly, as theory predicted;
instead a permanent condition of surplus labor was produced, which fitted
nicely the needs of multinational corporations. Poverty and unemployment
inevitably increased, parallel to increases in the growth of GNP. These “un-
desirable” consequences, these “painful realizations”—as economists often
euphemistically call them when they look at the “development record”—
were by no means peripheral to the models used but belonged to their inner
architecture.22
   A third model of economic development, which achieved significant in-
fluence, especially in Latin America, was propounded in the late 1940s and
1950s by a group of Latin American economists working within the newly
established Economic Commission for Latin America (CEPAL) in Santiago.
CEPAL economists based their approach on the empirical demonstration of
the historical deterioration of the terms of trade against primary goods from
the countries of the periphery. The terms center and periphery (radicalized
into a theory of dependency in the 1960s) were coined by CEPAL as ele-
ments of their explanation for this phenomenon. The deterioration of the
terms of trade was seen as a reflection of the fact that the advances in techni-
cal progress were concentrated in the industrialized center. CEPAL’s doc-
trine was not unrelated to Lewis’s. Because output per worker was lower in
the periphery, and given surplus labor, the conclusion for CEPAL econo-
mists was lower capacity for capital accumulation in the periphery. Ergo, a
specific industrialization policy was needed. The lack of industrialization
severely curtailed access to foreign exchange—the crucial component for
economic growth because it determined the capacity to import capital
goods. The answer thus lay in programs of domestic industrialization that
would allow countries to manufacture at home goods that were previously
imported. Hence the name given to this strategy, “import substitution in-
dustrialization,” one of CEPAL’s trademarks.23
   CEPAL theorists also paid attention to other salient issues, such as infla-
tion, and to structural obstacles to development, particularly the sluggish-
ness of the agricultural sector and the lack of coordination among sectors of
the economy. The assessment of CEPAL theories remains a matter of con-
troversy in Latin America to this date.24 Albert Fishlow (1985), for instance,
has rightly observed the paradoxical fact that CEPAL’s strategy of import
                       THE SPACE OF DEVELOPMENT                             81
substitution industrialization aggravated precisely those factors it sought to
correct: it increased the foreign-exchange vulnerability, magnified certain
aspects of sectoral disequilibriums, and exacerbated the inflationary bias of
the growth process. Yet it is undeniable that CEPAL economists challenged
a number of tenets of orthodox economic theory (particularly the theory of
international trade), provided a more complex view of development, which
included structural considerations, and showed greater concern for the stan-
dard of living of the masses. Despite these differences, economic develop-
ment remained in essence, in the eyes of these economists, a process of
capital accumulation and technical progress. In short, as Cardoso (1977)
pointedly put it, CEPAL thinking constituted “the originality of a copy.”
   This is to say that CEPAL’s proposals were easily assimilated into the
established views, to the extent that they lent themselves to a modernization
process that international experts and national elites were eager to under-
take. Its fate was to be absorbed into the power grid of the dominant dis-
course. One may say generally that at the level of discursive regularities, the
CEPAL doctrine did not constitute a radical challenge. This does not mean,
however, that it did not have important effects. From the point of view of the
history of ideas, one should acknowledge, with Sikkink (1991), the impres-
sive contribution of the Latin American economists who articulated a partic-
ular view of developmentalism as a model in the 1940s and 1950s. The fact
that CEPAL-type developmentalism was adopted among several possible
models reflects, for Sikkink, the resourcefulness of Latin American econo-
mists and policymakers of the period in the face of rapidly changing interna-
tional and domestic opportunities and constraints.
   Marxist or neo-Marxist theories of development, finally, did not achieve
significant visibility until the 1960s, through theories of dependency, pe-
ripheral capitalism, and unequal exchange (Cardoso and Faletto 1979; Amin
1976; Emmanuel 1972). Paul Baran’s influential article of 1952 and canon-
setting book of 1957 was the starting point for most Marxist formulations.
His 1952 article (see Baran 1958), entitled “On the Political Economy of
Backwardness,” contained a diatribe against Western capitalism and the
middle and upper classes of the backward countries for having failed to
develop these countries. For Baran, the eradication of the feudal order of
backward countries and its replacement with market rationality would have
been an indication of progress. At this level he was close to the dominant
discourse. Nevertheless, his dialectical approach gave him the foresight to
denounce the inappropriateness of the policies then being proposed and to
pinpoint the need for structural changes in the political framework and the
prevailing class alliances.
   To what extent did Marxist or neo-Marxist views become circumvented,
appropriated, or subverted by the dominant discourse? Many of the con-
cepts these theories used can be described according to the conceptual basis
82                                 CHAPTER 3

of classical political economy. Even if concepts such as dependency and
unequal exchange were new, the discursive space in which they operated
was not. Nevertheless, because they functioned within a system that had a
different set of rules (that of Marxist political economy, in which concepts
such as profit and capital establish a different discursive practice), they
are—at the level of discursive strategies—a challenge to the dominant
frameworks. In sum, although they did not constitute an alternative to de-
velopment, they amounted to a different view of development and an impor-
tant critique of bourgeois development economics.25
   Cheryl Payer (1991) has offered a powerful indictment of the early theo-
ries of development economics from a contemporary angle, the debt crisis.
Payer finds the origins of the debt crisis precisely in these early models. The
early theories assumed that developing countries were “natural importers of
capital” and that only a flow of external capital could guarantee their devel-
opment. This myth was based on a number of fallacious assumptions: (1) that
foreign capital would always be an addition to domestic savings (in many
instances this was not the case: it made more sense to use grants and low-
interest loans for investment and divert domestic savings to politically ori-
ented social programs); (2) that external markets would always be available,
so that Third World countries could use the foreign exchange earned from
exports to pay off loans (more often than not, center countries levied high
tariffs against Third World products); (3) that the industrialization that
would occur due to added investment would reduce the need for imports
(this was hardly the case: countries became more dependent on imports of
capital goods—machinery—to produce locally what they previously im-
ported, thus worsening balance-of-payment problems); and (4) that foreign
capital would necessarily activate growth (as the historical experience of
countries like Norway and Australia shows, the opposite can be the case).
   The main factor economists forgot, Payer strongly states, was that loans
have to be repaid. The way they solved this predicament was to assume that
loans would always be available to pay past debt, ad infinitum, or to overlook
completely the problem of servicing the debt. Payer refers to this as the
Ponzi scheme, a scheme in which original investors are paid off with money
supplied by later investors. The underlying premise was that loans would be
invested properly and have high rates of return, thus making payment possi-
ble. This did not happen in many cases, for reasons such as those cited
earlier. It was also assumed that there were balance-of-payments stages—
again, as read from the economic history of the U.S. and the U.K.: nations
would move from being young debtors (like Third World countries in the
1950s) to mature debtors (when aid is no longer required, countries having
developed the capacity to use efficiently commercial loans) to new creditors
to, finally, mature creditors (net exporters of capital). For this theory to work,
mature creditors would have had to accept imports from debtors at a scale
they never did, thus worsening the debt problem.
                         THE SPACE OF DEVELOPMENT                                  83
   The main factor these models overlooked, however, was that the historical
context of the Third World after World War II and that of the U.S. and
England a century earlier were completely different. Although countries of
the center became industrialized at a time when they could dictate the rules
of the game and extract surpluses from their colonies (albeit not always and
not in every colonial possession), Third World countries in the postwar pe-
riod had to borrow under the opposite conditions: deterioration of the terms
of trade against the periphery, extraction of surplus by center countries, and
a position of subordination in terms of policy formulation. Said bluntly,
whereas Europe was feeding off its colonies in the nineteenth century, the
First World today feeds off the Third World, as attested by the fact that
Latin America in the 1980s paid an average of $30 billion more each year
than it received in new lending.

To sum up: The pioneers of development economics conceived of develop-
ment as something to be achieved by the more or less straightforward appli-
cation of savings, investment, and productivity increases. Their notion of
development was not, for the most part, structural or dialectical—not one in
which development could be seen as the result of the dialectical interaction
of socioeconomic, cultural, and political factors seen as a totality. As Antonio
García, a prominent Latin American economist, pointed out, the notion of
underdevelopment that these economists assumed was necessarily mecha-
nistic and fragmentary:
  It is mechanistic because it is based on the theoretical assumption that develop-
  ment is an effect induced by certain technological innovations and by certain
  mechanisms that accelerate the equation savings/investment. It is compart-
  mentalizing because it is built on a view of social life as the arithmetic sum of
  compartments (economic, political, cultural, ethical) that can be isolated at will
  and treated accordingly. (1972, 16, 17)

   The early models had an implicit standard (the prosperous, developed
countries), and development was to be measured by the yardstick of West-
ern progress. Their notion of underdevelopment occupied the discursive
space in such a manner that it precluded the possibility of alternative dis-
courses. By constructing the underdeveloped economy as characterized by
a vicious circle of low productivity, lack of capital, and inadequate industrial-
ization, development economists contributed to a view of reality in which
the only things that counted were increased savings, growth rates, attracting
foreign capital, developing industrial capacity, and so on. This excluded the
possibility of articulating a view of social change as a project that could
be conceived of not only in economic terms but as a whole life project, in
which the material aspects would be not the goal and the limit but a space
of possibilities for broader individual and collective endeavors, culturally
defined.
84                               CHAPTER 3

   It has often been said that classical political economy was the rationaliza-
tion of certain hegemonic class interests: those of a capitalist world economy
centered in England and its bourgeoisie. The same can be said of develop-
ment economics in relation to the project of capitalist modernization
launched by the core nations after the Second World War. Indeed, the set
of imperatives the United States faced after the war—the five imperatives
mentioned earlier: to consolidate the core, find higher rates of profit abroad,
secure control of raw materials, expand overseas markets for American prod-
ucts, and deploy a system of military tutelage—shaped the constitution of
development economics. Yet development economics should not be seen as
the ideological or superstructural reflection of this set of imperatives. This
interpretation would only relate a certain descriptive discourse (a set of as-
sertions about a given economy: the five imperatives) to another discourse
enunciated in the form of theoretical propositions (namely, development
economics). That is, one should avoid falling back into the division between
the “ideal” (the theory) and the “real” (the economy); instead one should
investigate the epistemological and cultural conditions of the production of
discourses that command the power of truth, and the specific mode of artic-
ulation of these discourses upon a given historical situation.
   From this perspective, the emergence of development economics was not
due to theoretical, institutional, or methodological advances. It was due to
the fact that a certain historical conjuncture transformed the mode of exis-
tence of economic discourse, thus making possible the elaboration of new
objects, concepts, and methodologies. Economics was called upon to reform
societies perceived as underdeveloped, based on a new grid for theoretical
interpretation (Keynesian and growth economics) and new technologies for
social management (planning and programming). Said differently, the fact
that the economic, political, and institutional changes of the period shaped
the consciousness and perceptions of the economists was true in a number
of ways—for instance, the need for economic expansion influenced the
economists’ concern with growth; the rising tide of multinational corpora-
tions influenced the economists’ attention to capital accumulation via indus-
trialization; and so on. Those changes, however, exerted their effect on eco-
nomic discourse through other mechanisms as well: by opening new fields
for the construction of economic objects; by conferring a new status on econ-
omists and their science; and by multiplying the sites from which the dis-
course could be produced and from which its associated practices could be
set into motion.
   Development economics made possible the elaboration of historical
events into objects of economic discourse. What we called the economics
of the world (the 1914–1948 crisis, the ensuing post–World War II situa-
tion, and the imperatives of the world economy) influenced the making
up of the world of economics. The interests and struggles that made up
those events found their way into the discourse and deployed their strategy
                       THE SPACE OF DEVELOPMENT                            85
in it. Throughout this period, then, a fundamental structure was laid down
which united a theoretical corpus, forms of diffusing it and controlling it, a
body of practices—such as planning, discussed in the next section—inter-
national organizations (in whose ambit negotiations were conducted for the
establishment of a new relation between international capital and the pe-
ripheral economies), and decision-making centers in the Third World eager
to drink from the cup of economic knowledge so that they could elevate their
peoples, once and for all, to the surface of civilization. Beyond the models
themselves, it is this system that can be properly called development
economics.
   The development economist played a special role in this new universe of
discourse. To him (he was almost invariably a male)26 belonged the expertise
that was most avidly sought; it was he who knew what was needed, he who
decided on the most efficient way to allocate scarce resources, he who pre-
sided over the table at which—as if they were his personal entourage—
demographers, educators, urban planners, nutritionists, agricultural experts,
and so many other development practitioners sat in order to mend the
world. Within this configuration, the economist retained for himself the less
mundane role of giving overall directions, because it was his truth that cir-
cumscribed the task and gave it legitimacy in the name of science, progress,
and freedom. To the latter were reserved the daily chores of social supervi-
sion and intervention, the detailed programs and projects through which
development was carried out. The system as a whole rested on the econo-
mist’s shoulders; sooner or latter, the Third World would yield its secrets to
the gaze of the economist; and this gaze, in keeping with the best Cartesian
tradition, was undeniably objective and unprejudiced.
   As the discourse of development economics became consolidated, so did
its associated institutions and practices: economic institutes and faculties
and, more important, the planning institutions. The next section introduces
briefly the discusion of planning, although a more detailed analysis of its
functioning as a field of knowledge and technique of power must await sub-
sequent chapters.


                        Managing Social Change:
                 The Constitution of Development Planning
During the 1960s, economic-growth theories occupied “an exalted position”
(Arndt 1978, 55). The challenge that growth not be equated with develop-
ment was still a decade away. The widespread belief that growth could be
planned for contributed to solidifying the growth approach. Planning had
ceased to be an affair of the socialist Left and the Soviet world. Even in
countries like England and France the need for some sort of long-term plan-
ning to orchestrate economic growth was recognized. But planning was not
just the application of theoretical knowledge; it was the instrument through
86                                     CHAPTER 3

which economics became useful, linked in a direct fashion to policy and the
state. At the practical level of planning, truth spoke for itself, because it had
been previously summoned by the discourse of the economist. What for the
planner was a field of application and experimentation, for the economist
was the locus of a systematic truth he was obliged to find and bring to every-
body’s attention.
   The first loan the World Bank made to an underdeveloped country was to
Chile, in 1948. A World Bank official called Chile’s initial loan application,
a seven-page proposal, “a completely undigested list of projects.” For World
Bank economists, this was a clear indication of how far they would have to
go to bring Latin American social scientists and government officials to the
point where they could prepare a satisfactory project proposal. One of the
early World Bank economists put it thus:
     We began to discover the problem with our first mission which went to Chile
     in 1947 to examine a proposal that we finance a power project there. The pre-
     sentation of this proposal had been made in a book handsomely bound in black
     Morocco leather. . . . But when we opened the book, we found that what we had
     really was more of an idea about a project, not a project sufficiently prepared
     that its needs for finance, equipment, and manpower resources could be accu-
     rately forecast. . . . Before the loan was finally made, members of the Bank staff
     had made suggestions about the financial plan, had contributed to the economic
     analysis of the scheme, had advised on changes of engineering, and had helped
     study measures for improving the organization of the company which was to
     carry out the scheme. When we finally made the loan, the project had been
     modified and improved, the borrowing organization had been strengthened,
     and the foundation had been laid for a power expansion program in Chile which
     has been proceeding steadily ever since. (Quoted in Meier 1984, 25)

   This telling anecdote, which Meier cites as an example of the evolving
“efforts” of the World Bank and other agencies, reveals “a power expansion
program,” although not primarily of electric power. It reveals the pressures
that Latin American social scientists and government officials faced to trans-
form radically the style and scope of their activities to fit the needs of the
development apparatus. Latin American social scientists did not know what
World Bank officials meant by project, nor were they conversant with the
new techniques (such as surveys and statistical analyses) that were becom-
ing part of the empirical social sciences in vogue in the United States. The
anecdote also highlights the importance of project preparation and planning
in general in the expansion of the development apparatus. More important,
it calls attention to the need to form cadres of social technicians who could
invent and manage the discourses, practices, and symbols of modernity
(Rabinow 1989), this time in the context of the development apparatus.
   The case of Colombia exemplifies the route followed by those countries
which embraced planning without much reservation. The Basis of a Devel-
                       THE SPACE OF DEVELOPMENT                             87
opment Program for Colombia, the report of the World Bank mission to Co-
lombia headed by Lauchlin Currie in 1949, was the first of a long list of plans
produced in the country during the last forty years. Since the late 1950s,
every national administration has formulated a development plan for the
country. The constitutional reform of 1945 introduced for the first time the
notion of planning, making possible its institutional development. With the
Currie mission, the nascent preoccupation with planning became more vis-
ible, and technical organisms for planning were established. The chronology
of planning institutions includes the Consejo Nacional de Planeación and
the Comité de Desarrollo Económico, established in 1950; the Oficina de
Planeación (1951); the Comité Nacional de Planeación (1954); the Consejo
Nacional de Política Económica y Planeación and the Departamento Ad-
ministrativo de Planeación y Servicios Técnicos (1958); the Consejo
Nacional de Política Económica y Social and the Departamento Nacional de
Planeación (1966). It also includes the creation of a Ministerio de Desarrollo
and of planning units within most of the other ministries (agriculture, health,
education, and so on).27
   Planning activities during the 1950s, however, were modest, due to a se-
ries of social and political factors that affected the country during that de-
cade and that ended with the signing of the National Front Pact in 1958. The
task of the Comité de Desarrollo Económico (September 1950–September
1951), for instance, was to advise the government regarding the recommen-
dations of the Currie report, including provisions for external financing. The
lack of qualified Colombian personnel was reflected in the fact that the first
development plan was prepared by a foreign mission and that foreign ex-
perts advised the planning organisms of the country during the first two
decades of the “age of planning,” the 1950s and 1960s (L. Currie and
A. Hirschman in the early 1950s; Lebret in 1957, 1958; Watterson, from
the World Bank, in 1963–1964; a Harvard mission, 1960–1970; a CEPAL
mission, 1959–1962; a World Bank mission, 1970; and an International
Labour Organization mission, 1970). Besides the resort to foreign experts
and advice, Colombian students were sent to university centers, especially
in the United States, where they could develop the knowledge of the new
planning techniques and the spirit and frame of mind required for the new
enterprise.
   Short-term external assistance was also regularly practiced beginning in
the early 1950s, sometimes financed by external sources. This type of as-
sistance was not always restricted to national planning advice but often
involved the design of specific projects. One such instance was the devel-
opment of the Autonomous Regional Development Corporation of the
Cauca Valley (Corporación Regional Autónoma del Cauca, CVC). An ex-
amination of the role that external assistance played in this case reveals a
number of practices of advising and planning introduced in the context of
development.
88                               CHAPTER 3

   In October 1954 the government of Colombia approved the creation of
the CVC, following a set of initiatives taken by local industrialists and agri-
cultural entrepreneurs of the Cauca Valley region. The Departmental Plan-
ning Commission had been set up a year earlier with the objective of formu-
lating a development plan for the region. In early 1954, David Lilienthal,
former chairman of the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA), visited Colombia
on an official invitation. His report of the visit, which reflected closely the
TVA’s experience, was instrumental in shaping the conception of the CVC,
the statutes of which were finally approved in July 1955. In addition, the
CVC requested the assistance of the International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development (IBRD, better known as the World Bank) in defining the
corporation’s tasks and in delineating the technical and financial procedures
for their implementation.
   The IBRD mission, composed of six members, arrived in Colombia in
February 1955 and remained there for two months. The chief of the mission
returned to Colombia in September of the same year to discuss with CVC
officials the contents of the report drafted in Washington. The report (In-
ternational Bank for Reconstruction and Development 1955) addressed a
whole range of technical issues (flood control, electric power, irrigation,
present and potential agricultural activities, agricultural programs, transpor-
tation, minerals, industry, financial considerations, and so on). It also in-
cluded provisions for future external technical assistance. Ever since, the
CVC became the most important factor in the capitalist transformation of the
fertile Cauca River Valley region, to such an extent that it became an inter-
national showcase of regional development planning.
   The establishment of the CVC exemplifies well the interests and practices
of the World Bank and other international lending organizations during the
1950s. The overall goal was dictated by development economics: to promote
growth through certain types of investment projects, resorting to foreign
financing when possible or necessary. This goal required the rationalization
of the productive apparatus, according to the methods developed in indus-
trialized nations—the well-reputed TVA in this case, which served as a
model for similar programs in various parts of the Third World, often, as in
Colombia, with Lilienthal’s direct involvement. This could be done only
through new practices concerning the everyday actions of an ever larger
number of development technicians and institutions. The importance of
these micro practices—replicated by hundreds of technicians at all levels—
cannot be overemphasized, because it is through them that development is
constituted and advanced.
   The new practices concerned many activities and domains, including,
among others, technical assessments; institutional arrangements; forms of
advice; the generation, transmission, and diffusion of knowledge; the train-
ing of personnel; the routine preparation of reports; and the structuring of
                        THE SPACE OF DEVELOPMENT                              89
bureaucracies. It is through these practices that development is effected, as
I will show in the detailed discussion of food and nutrition planning that
follows this chapter. Although the state plays a crucial role in this process, it
is not through a uniform form of intervention but through a multiplicity of
sites of intervention in the economy (economic planning, planning in agri-
culture, health, education, family planning, and project design and imple-
mentation in many arenas). Nevertheless, the progressive encroachment of
what was to become the great edifice of planning in the late 1960s cannot be
divorced from the emergence of a politics of development as a national prob-
lem. Once the basic organization of the discourses of planning and develop-
ment economics was in place in the early 1950s, it increasingly determined
the nature of social policy and thinking—even if it did not become consoli-
dated until a decade later, especially with most Latin American govern-
ments’ commitment to planning, agrarian reform, and the Alliance for Prog-
ress at the Punta del Este meeting in 1961.
   Older styles of knowledge and assistance progressively disappeared as
development economics and planning became consolidated. Pre–World
War II economic inquiry could not fulfill the demands for model building
and empirical research placed by the new science (Escobar 1989). Politi-
cally, what was at stake was a way of treating poverty and underdevelopment
in a new fashion. After 1945, the task of governments was to make poverty
useful by fixing it to the apparatus of production that planning sought to
deploy. A completely utilitarian and functional conception of poverty
emerged, linked inextricably to questions of labor and production. The new
institutions of planning were replicated at the level of cities, departments,
towns, and rural areas in relation to minute economic and welfare concerns.
Through this network of power, the “poor,” the “underdeveloped,” the “mal-
nourished,” and the “illiterate” were brought into the domain of develop-
ment; it was in them that the political technologies of development were
inscribed. Beyond the requirements of capital, development technologies
became a mechanism of social production of unprecedented reach. As we
will see, the development apparatus succeeded only partly in this task.


                    SHIFTING ECONOMIC DISCOURSE:
                LOCAL MODELS AND THE GLOBAL ECONOMY
          The 1980s: The Lost Decade and the Return to Realism
The intellectual and political climate that saw the birth of development eco-
nomics started to change in the 1960s. A number of important changes have
taken place within the discipline since then—the abandonment of the early
dirigisme and the overconcern with growth, and the successive appearance,
within the non-Marxist camp, of “growth-plus-distribution” strategies, ex-
90                               CHAPTER 3

port-led growth, international monetarism, neostructuralism, and neoliber-
alism. A certain degree of innovation and structural mutations has occurred,
although always within the confines of established economic discourse,
whose laws of formation have not changed. In the mid-1980s, a prominent
analyst saw Latin American economics as dominated by pragmatic adapta-
tions: neither a return to laissez-faire nor an invigoration of dirigisme but a
sort of eclectic practice dictated by the consideration of special problems—
particularly the debt, inflation, and the role of the state—which recombined
rather than reinvented theoretical perspectives (Fishlow 1985).
   The most drastic contextual changes took place in the 1980s, when large
parts of Asia, Africa, and Latin America saw, according to observers of many
persuasions, their worst crisis in the century. In Latin America, the 1980s
are known as the lost decade. In 1982, Mexico’s announcement that it could
not meet its debt service obligations unleashed the infamous debt crisis.
What followed is well known by now: repeated attempts at economic stabili-
zation and adjustment; austerity measures that translated into rapidly de-
clining living standards for the popular and middle classes; industrial
decline in many countries in the wake of strong neoliberal and free market
economic policies, even negative growth rates in some countries; in sum, a
reversal of development (Portes and Kincaid 1989; Dietz and James 1990).
The social and political implications of these changes were equally onerous
and menacing. Social exclusion and violence increased significantly. What
were perceived as transitions to democracy during the first half of the de-
cade became difficult to consolidate as the decade progressed. Even nature
seemed to take issue with the region, as tornadoes, erupting volcanoes,
earthquakes, and, more recently, the resurgence of cholera brought to the
region more than its usual share of nature-related but socially aggravated
hardships.
   These changes fostered a significant reassessment of development eco-
nomics. In the first half of the decade, a number of articles by leading devel-
opment economists appeared which tried to assess the experience of the last
four decades in the field.28 “Few subject areas,”read the opening paragraph
of one of them, “have undergone so many twists and transformations as has
development economics during the past thirty years” (Livingstone 1982, 3).
Although a number of initial errors were recognized, the 1980s’ assessments
emphasized considerable learning at the level of types of empirical research,
concreteness and specificity, and theoretical advances in a number of sub-
fields. Moreover, a number of competing paradigms (neoclassical, structu-
ralist, and neo-Marxist) were thought to have come into existence.
   Trenchant critiques, however, also appeared. One of the most poignant
was penned by Raúl Prebisch, CEPAL’s first director and originator of the
center-periphery conception, in referring to the application of the neoclassi-
cal economic theories to the Third World:
                          THE SPACE OF DEVELOPMENT                                     91
  In their striving after rigorous consistency . . . these [neoclassical] theories
  shelved important aspects of social, political and cultural reality, as well as of
  the historical background of collectivities. In making a tenacious effort at doc-
  trinal asepsis, they evolved their arguments in the void, outside time and
  space. . . . If the neoclassical economists were to confine themselves with build-
  ing their castles in the air, without claiming that they represent reality, that
  would be a respectable intellectual pastime, apt at times to arouse admiration
  for the virtuosity of some of its eminent exponents overseas. But the position is
  very different when an attempt is made in these peripheral countries to explain
  development without taking account of the social structure, of the time-lag in
  peripheral development, of the surplus, and of all the characteristics of periph-
  eral capitalism. . . . It is worth while to recall this at the present time, when such
  vigorous offshoots are springing up in some of the Latin American countries.
  (Prebisch 1979, 168)

   It must be borne in mind that those “vigorous offshoots” to which
Prebisch referred in 1979 were the neoliberal experiments of the authoritar-
ian regimes of the Southern Cone countries (particularly Chile and Argen-
tina), which were to become the standard approach all over Latin America
by the end of the 1980s.29 A similar critique was put forth by P. T. Bauer
from an entirely different position. For Bauer, the development economists
of the early 1950s completely misread a number of factors that characterized
the economies of the less developed countries (the problem of trade, the
alleged lack of capital and entrepreneurship, the vicious circle of poverty,
and stagnation). Based on these misreadings, a series of ideas developed
which became the core of economic development literature. “Even when
some of the elements of the core have disappeared from most academic
writings,” he concluded, “they have continued to dominate political and
public discourse, an instance of the lingering effect of discarded ideas”
(1984, 1).
   For Dudley Seers, the fact that the early theories allowed economists and
policymakers to concentrate on technical issues, leaving aside important so-
cial and political questions, contributed to their rapid adoption. An addi-
tional factor in this regard were “the professional convenience and career
interests especially in the ‘developed’ countries, where most of the theoreti-
cal advances in the field originated” (1979, 709). Albert Hirschman (1981)
analyzed the early years of the discipline from a different angle. In its initial
stages, according to him, development economics was fueled with “unrea-
sonable hopes,” a reflection of the ethnocentric behavior that has character-
ized Western societies’ attempts to deal with other cultures. In his words,
  The Western economists who looked at [Asia, Africa, and Latin America] at the
  end of World War II were convinced that these countries were not at all that
  complicated: their major problems would be solved if only their income per
92                                    CHAPTER 3

     capita could be raised adequately. . . . With the new doctrine of economic
     growth, contempt took a more sophisticated form: suddenly it was taken for
     granted that progress of these countries would be smoothly linear if only they
     adopted the right kind of integrated development program! Given what was
     seen as their overwhelming problem of poverty, the underdeveloped countries
     were expected to perform as wind-up toys and to “lumber through” the various
     stages of development single-mindedly. (1981, 24)

   These reflections were accompanied by concrete proposals in some cases.
Seers (1979), for instance, advocated the incorporation of development eco-
nomics into a broader field of development studies so that it could deal
seriously with social, political, and cultural aspects of development. For
Meier, development economics needed to move “beyond neo-classical eco-
nomics.” It is difficult to see what he meant by this, because he—as most
economists—continued to uphold the belief that “the laws of logic are the
same in Malawi as anywhere else. But the economic problems of Malawi
may still be quite different in empirical content from those in another coun-
try” (Meier 1984, 208). This same “logic” led him to assert that “the popula-
tion problem arouses more alarm than any other aspect of development”
(211). One might be tempted to read these assertions in the following man-
ner: “The laws of logic that must rule for the type of capitalist development
embodied in neoclassical economics have to be the same in Malawi as in the
United States. Only then would the problems of population, unemployment,
and so on, be solved.” Logic, for Meier, is an ahistorical fact. This is why in
his discourse the economist is much more “the guardian of rationality” than
“the trustee of the poor”; he argues that economists have to balance both
roles.
   Hollis Chenery, a leading development economist at the World Bank,
held that development economics could be recast without significant refor-
mulation. For him, “the neo-classical model has proven to be a useful start-
ing point even though it seems to require more extensive adaptation to fit
the developing countries” (1983, 859). His prescription was to adapt the
model better by conducting more empirical studies and constructing “com-
putable general equilibrium models” and more complex algorithms (859).
Chenery’s call for more empirical studies was mandated by the theoretical
framework within which such studies would be conducted; they could only
reinforce that framework. The hope was that by conducting more empirical
studies, economists would finally get it right, avoiding the question of
whether the framework itself was adequate. After all, economists such as
Prebisch, Seers, and some neo-Marxists had shown that neoclassical eco-
nomics was an inadequate theoretical apparatus for understanding the situa-
tion of poor countries.
                       THE SPACE OF DEVELOPMENT                             93
   A fundamental assumption that persisted in all of these proposals was that
there is a reality of underdevelopment that a carefully conducted economic
science can grasp progressively, pretty much following the model of the
natural sciences. In this view, economic theory was built out of a vast bloc of
preexisting reality that is independent of the theorist’s observations. This
assumption has fueled the sense of progression and growth of economic
theory in general and of development economics in particular. In economic
theory, this sense has been further legitimized by the canonization of the
most important developments—such as the innovations of the 1870s and
1930s—as veritable scientific revolutions. As a prominent economic histo-
rian put it, “Appeal to paradigmatic reasoning has quickly become a regular
feature in controversies in economics and ‘paradigm’ is now the by-word of
every historian of economic thought” (Blaug 1976, 149; see Hunt 1986 for
paradigms in development economics).30
   In Latin America and most of the Third World (as in the United States and
the United Kingdom), a mixture of approaches under the overall label neo-
liberal economics became dominant at the level of the elite as the 1980s
unfolded. Statist and redistributive approaches gave way to the liberaliza-
tion of trade and investment regimes, the privatization of state-owned enter-
prises, and policies of restructuring and stabilizing under the control of the
ominous International Monetary Fund (IMF). There was, indeed, a notice-
able policy reversal. Reagan’s “magic of the market” speech, delivered at the
North-South conference in Cancún in 1981, publicly announced this turn.
A certain reading of the experience of the “newly industrializing countries”
of East Asia in terms of the advantages of liberal exchange regimes (opening
up to the world economy), as well as the influential Berg Report for Africa
(World Bank 1981), plus rational choice critiques of the distortional effects
of government intervention, all contributed to the dismantling of the eco-
nomic development approaches that prevailed until the 1970s (Biersteker
1991). The World Bank’s “market friendly development” (1991), the institu-
tion’s strategy for the 1990s, was the final crystallization of the return of
neoliberalism. Most economists see these changes as a return to realism.
   Within economics, even the approaches to sustainable development have
been permeated by the neoliberal turn. As the 1991 World Bank Annual
Conference on Development Economics put it (Summers and Shah 1991),
the achievement of “sustainable economic growth” is seen as dependent on
the existence of “an undistorted, competitive, and well-functioning market”
(358). As before, the allegedly improved economic theory is produced by a
small elite of economists entrenched in prestigious universities and backed
by the World Bank and the IMF. In Latin America, timid attempts at pro-
posing a certain “neo-structuralism” (Sunkel 1990) have not found much
support, even if a number of countries (such as Colombia) continued to make
94                              CHAPTER 3

efforts throughout the 1980s to maintain a type of mixed economic policy,
only partly committed to neoliberalism and the free market. In the Colom-
bian case, as in most of Latin America, any resistence to neoliberalism that
could have existed had disappeared by the beginning of the 1990s. The total
opening of the economy—coupled with a new round of privatization of ser-
vices and the so-called modernization of the state—has become the order of
the day. The policies of apertura económica, as the new approach is anachro-
nistically known, is opposed from a number of fronts; yet for now the global
elites seem committed to it.31
   The assessments of development economics conducted during the 1980s,
in short, did not lead to a significant recasting of the discipline. What we
seem to be witnessing is its progressive dissolution. A break in economic
development theory may come not, as the authors of the assessments re-
viewed here assumed, from the field of economics (for example, from the
introduction of new concepts, better models, and algorithms) but from a
wider critique of the field of development. Conversely, any strategy to mod-
ify development theory and practice will have to consider current economic
thought and practices. This process of critique is yet to be done. Recent
works in anthropology and political economy provide elements toward a
more creative reformulation of economic inquiry than the recasting at-
tempted in the 1980s.

               The Cultural Politics of Economic Discourse:
                    Local Models in Global Contexts
It should be clear by now that development economics, far from being the
objective universal science its practitioners assumed it was, is, as “any
model, local or universal, a construction of the world” (Gudeman 1986, 28).
This chapter has shown in detail the nature of this construction. It is now
time to explore the consequences of this analysis in terms of its relation to
other possible constructions. If there are other constructions, how are these
to be made visible? What is their relation to dominant models? How can this
relation be modified, given the global political economy of discourses and
power that rules the interaction between the various models and their so-
ciocultural matrices?
   Economic historians and anthropologists have investigated different eco-
nomic models, either in antiquity or in “primitive” societies. Frequently,
these efforts have been marred by the epistemological traps and ethno-
centricity denounced by Polanyi, Godelier, Gudeman, and others with
which we started our discussion of economics as culture. Succinctly stated,
universal models—whether neoclassical, substantivist, or Marxist—“con-
tinuously reproduce and discover their own assumptions in the exotic mate-
rials” (Gudeman 1986, 34). In the process, they deny the capacity of people
                          THE SPACE OF DEVELOPMENT                                  95
to model their own behavior and reproduce forms of discourse that con-
tribute to the social and cultural domination effected through forms of
representation.
   One way to detect and investigate local constructions is to focus on popu-
lar groups’ forms of resistance to the introduction of capitalist practices. This
was the route followed by the ethnographies of resistance of the 1980s, such
as those by Nash (1979), Taussig (1980), Scott (1985), and Ong (1987). One
of the most unambiguous expressions of the cultural basis of resistance was
given by Taussig in his analysis of the spread of capitalist agriculture in the
Cauca River Valley in southwest Colombia. The spread of sugarcane was
met by fierce opposition by the mostly Afro-Colombian peasants of the re-
gion. There was much more at stake than material resistance. In Taussig’s
words,
  Peasants represent as vividly unnatural, even as evil, practices that most of us
  in commodity-based societies have come to accept as natural in the everyday
  workings of our economy, and therefore of the world in general. This represen-
  tation occurs only when they are proletarianized and refers only to the way of
  life that is organized by capitalist relations of production. It neither occurs nor
  refers to peasant ways of life. (1980, 3).

   Taussig invites us to see in this type of resistance a response by people “to
what they see as an evil and destructive way of ordering economic life” (17).
Other authors in disparate contexts derive similar lessons—for instance,
Fals Borda (1984) in his analysis of the introduction of barbed wire and other
technologies in northern Colombia at the turn of the century; and Scott
(1985) in his study of the fate of green revolution technologies in Malaysia.
The works of the 1980s, however, used resistance to illuminate practices of
power more than the logic of the subaltern. Several authors have paid more
attention to this latter aspect in recent years, introducing new ways of think-
ing about it (Guha 1988; Scott 1990; Comaroff and Comaroff 1991). In their
discussion of the colonial encounter in southern Africa, for example, Coma-
roff and Comaroff emphatically assert that the colonized “did not equate
exchange with incorporation, or the learning of new techniques with subor-
dination” (1991, 309); instead, they read their own significance into the colo-
nizers’ practices and sought to neutralize their disciplines. Although Afri-
cans were certainly transformed by the encounter, the lesson derived by this
more subaltern actor–oriented view of resistance is that hegemony is more
unstable, vulnerable, and contested than previously thought.
   Ranajit Guha has also called on historians to see the history of the subal-
tern “from another and historicaly antagonistic universe” (1989, 220). There
is a counterappropriation of history by the subaltern that cannot be reduced
to something else, such as the logic of capital or modernity. It has to be
explained in its own terms. Turning back to local models of the economy, do
96                                    CHAPTER 3

they exist in “another and historically antagonistic universe”? One thing is
certain in this regard: local models exist not in a pure state but in complex
hybridizations with dominant models. This is not to deny, however, that
people do model their realities in specific ways; local models are constitutive
of a people’s world, which means that they cannot be readily observed by
objectifying positivist science.
   I already introduced Gudeman and Rivera’s (1990) notion of local models
as conversations that take place in the context of dominant conversations.
Indeed, what counts most from the perspective of these authors is to in-
vestigate the articulation of local and “centric” (dominant) conversations,
including the relationship between inscriptions from the past and practices
of the present, between centric text and marginal voices, between the “cor-
poration” in the center and the “house” in the margins. Center and periph-
ery thus emerge not as fixed points in space, external to each other, but as a
continuously moving zone in which practices of doing conversations and
economies get intermingled, always shifting their relative position. Mar-
ginality becomes an effect of this dynamic. Gudeman’s earlier work (see
especially 1986) provides a view of the importance and coherence of local
models of the economy in Panama, a view further refined through work in
Colombia. For these anthropologists, the peasant model that exists today in
the Colombian Andes “is the outcome of an extensive conversation”—from
Aristotle to Smith and Marx—“that occurred over several thousand years
and continues to take place in many lands” (1990, 14). These conversations
are incorporated into local social practice, producing a local model of the
economy.32
   At the basis of the peasant model is the notion that the Earth “gives” based
on its “strength.” Humans, however, must “help” the land to give its prod-
ucts through work. There is a relation of give and take between humans and
the earth, modeled in terms of reciprocity and ultimately validated by Prov-
idence (God). The land may produce abundance or scarcity; most people
agree that the land gives less now, and that there is more scarcity. Scarcity
is thus not given a metaphysical character (the way things are) but linked to
what happens to the land, the house, and the market. If scarcity persists, it
is because the Earth needs more help, although peasants know that chemi-
cal products—as opposed to organic manure—“burn the earth” and “take
away” its force. Food crops draw their strength from the land; humans, in
turn, gain their energy and force from food crops and animal products, and
this strength, when applied as work on the land, yields more force. Work,
construed as concrete physical activity, is the final “using up” of the land’s
strength.
     This construction brings the model full circle. There is a flow of strength from
     the land to crops to food to humans to work that helps the land give more force.
                         THE SPACE OF DEVELOPMENT                                 97
  Strength is secured from the earth and used up as humans gather more. Control
  over this process is established through the house, for by using resources of the
  house to sustain their work the people gain control over the results of their
  efforts. (Gudeman and Rivera 1990, 30)

   The house has two main purposes: to reproduce itself and to increase its
“base” (its stock of land, savings, and implements). The house is not purely
a market participant; indeed, peasants in this part of the world try to mini-
mize their interaction with the market, which they see as a concrete place
rather than as an abstract mechanism. Peasants, however, are aware that
they are being increasingly pushed into the market; they interpret this fact
as a diminishing margin for maneuvering. The house model persists at the
margins, where the model of the corporation (which epitomizes the market
economy) has not become dominant. House and corporation are in a contra-
puntal relation, the latter always trying to incorporate the contents of the
former.33 The house economy is based on livelihood; the corporation’s, on
acquisition. Peasants are aware that they participate in both types of econ-
omy. They also have a theory of how they are being drained by those who
control the market.
   The local model thus includes a view of the circularity and equilibrium of
economic life, albeit very different from the classical and neoclassical view.
The peasant model can be seen as closer to the land-based model of the
Physiocrats, and the use of “force” can be related to the Marxist notion of
labor force, although “force” is applied equally to work, land, and food. Be-
yond these differences, there is a crucial distinction between both models,
arising from the fact that the house model is based on daily practice. Local
models are experiments in living; the house model “is developed through
use . . . it has to do with land, foodstuffs, and everyday life” (Gudeman and
Rivera 1990, 14, 15). This does not contradict the assertion that the peasant
model is the product of past and present conversations and their adaptation
through practice.
   More than the house model, in Latin America what one increasingly finds
is the house business. As the site of conjunction of forms, “dynamic and
multicultural yet fragile and unstable in identity” (Gudeman 1992, 144), the
house business can be interpreted in terms of metaphors of “bricolage” (de
Certeau 1984; Comaroff and Comaroff 1991) or hybridization (García
Canclini 1990). It is composed of partly overlapping domains of practices
that must be studied ethnographically. Gudeman and Rivera believe that
this general dynamic also marked the development of modern economics,
even if the latter became more and more technical with the development of
capitalism.34 The implications of this view are enormous. Not only does the
idea of a universal model of the economy have to be abandoned, it becomes
necessary to recognize that forms of production are not independent from
98                                CHAPTER 3

the representations (the “models”) of social life in which they exist. The
remaking of development must thus start by examining local constructions,
to the extent that they are the life and history of a people, that is, the condi-
tions of and for change. This brings into consideration the relation between
models and power. Gudeman and Rivera advocate a process based on “com-
munities of modelers,” in which local and dominant models are accorded a
say. But who is to belong to and organize these communities of modelers?
Again, what we have here is a confrontation of local and global power, popu-
lar and scientific knowledge. At issue is the distribution of global power and
its relation to the economy of discourses.
   There are then two levels, two vectors, that must be considered in re-
thinking development from the perspective of the economy. The first refers
to the need to make explicit the existence of a plurality of models of the
economy. This entails placing oneself in the space of local constructions. But
this by itself will not make it. Even if communities of modelers are brought
into existence as part of the process of designing development (not incon-
ceivably by the World Bank itself!), the process of inscription will not stop.
A second level of concern must be added. One must have a theory of the
forces that drive this inscription and that keep the inscribing systems in
place. What needs to be studied at these levels is the mechanisms by which
local cultural knowledge and economic resources are appropriated by larger
forces (mechanisms such as unequal exchange and surplus extraction be-
tween center and periphery, country and city, classes, genders, and ethnic
groups) and, conversely, the ways in which local innovations and gains can
be preserved as part of local economic and cultural power.
   Part of this inquiry has been advanced within political economy—particu-
larly theories of imperialism, unequal exchange, world systems, and periph-
eral capitalism. Yet these theories fall short of the task, especially because
they do not deal with the cultural dynamics of the incorporation of local
forms by a global system of economic and cultural production. A more ade-
quate political economy must bring to the fore the mediations effected by
local cultures on translocal forms of capital. Seen from the local perspective,
this means investigating how external forces—capital and modernity, gener-
ally speaking—are processed, expressed, and refashioned by local commu-
nities. Local-level ethnographies of development (such as those discussed in
chapter 1) and theories of hybrid cultures (analyzed in the conclusion) are a
step in this direction, although they tend to fall short in their analysis of the
capitalist dynamics that circumscribe the local cultural constructions.
   A political economy of global economic and cultural production must thus
explain both the new forms of capital accumulation and the local discourses
and practices through which the global forms are necessarily deployed; it
must explain, briefly put, “the production of cultural difference within a
structured system of global political economy” (Pred and Watts 1992, 18).
                        THE SPACE OF DEVELOPMENT                              99
Local communities bring their material and cultural resources to bear in
their encounter with development and modernity. The persistence of local
and hybrid models of the economy, for instance, reflects cultural contesta-
tions that take place as capital attempts to transform the life of communities.
Cultural difference partly becomes, indeed, an effect of forms of connected-
ness that are structured by global systems of economic, cultural, and politi-
cal production. They are part of what Arjun Appadurai (1991) calls global
ethnoscapes.
   In fact, global capital—as a global machine, a “worldwide axiomatic” (De-
leuze and Guattari 1987)—relies today not so much on homogenization of an
exterior Third World as on its ability to consolidate diverse, heterogenous
social forms. According to these authors, in the post-Fordist age capital re-
quires a certain “peripheral polymorphy” (436) because it actively repeals its
own limit. Here we find an expression of Gudeman and Rivera’s dialectic of
folk voice and centric text. Although the centric texts of the global economy
steadily exert their influence on manifold folk voices, the latter do not neces-
sarily join in a harmonious Western polyphony. Some of the peripheral
forms take on this dissonant role because of their inadequacy in relation to
their own national markets. This does not mean that they are less organized
by capital. At this level, capital’s task is different: to organize “conjunctions
of decoded flows as such” (451). The minority social organizations of the
tropical rain-forest areas, for instance, are not entirely coded or territorial-
ized by capital (as are the formal urban economies). Yet to the extent that the
economy constitutes a worldwide axiomatic, even these minor forms are the
target of social subjections. The global economy must thus be understood as
a decentered system with manifold apparatuses of capture—symbolic, eco-
nomic, and political. It matters to investigate the particular ways in which
each local group participates in this complex machinelike process, and how
it can avoid the most exploitative mechanisms of capture of the capitalist
megamachines.
   Let us now see if the contributions of the political economy of develop-
ment can still provide useful criteria for the two-edged process we envision,
that of making visible local constructions side by side with an analysis of
global forces. Samir Amin (1976, 1985, 1990), perhaps more eloquently than
others, has sought to provide general criteria for constructing alternative
development orders within the capitalist world economy. For Amin, the pri-
mary criterion for reaching this goal is to encourage autocentric accumula-
tion, defined as an economic model in which external relations to the world
markets are subordinated to the needs of internal capital accumulation. Au-
tocentric development supposes a radically different economic, social, and
political order. It has a series of requirements which is not the point to
analyze here—such as the equalization of income between rural and urban
areas and between modern and traditional sectors; priority for agriculture in
100                               CHAPTER 3

many countries; control of production by popular organizations and social
movements; a new role for the state; innovations in technology to meet a
new demand structure; and significant restrictions or partial delinking in
relation to international markets. The obstacles to this type of restructuring
of peripheral countries into autocentric economies are, needless to say,
enormous. In Amin’s vision, some of them might be overcome through new
forms of South-South cooperation, including the formation of regional blocs
of several countries along socialist lines.35
   Amin’s notions of polycentrism and autocentric accumulation can serve
as useful principles for guiding action at the macroeconomic and political
levels. It is necessary to emphasize, however, that Amin’s prescriptions are
written in a universalistic mode and a realist epistemology, precisely the
kinds of thinking criticized here. Nevertheless, as a description of the world
that seeks to explain a hegemonic order and that relies on a dominant lan-
guage, realist political economy cannot be overlooked in the imagining
of alternatives to that world and that language. Yet it is necessary to insist
that if the analysis in terms of political economy needs to be summoned in
this context, it must also be continuously destabilized. It has to be ac-
companied by a strategic repositioning in the domain of representation.
Forms of production and forms of representation can be distinguished only
for analytical purposes. Modifying political economies involves both mate-
rial and semiotic resistance, and material and semiotic strengthening of local
systems.
   To be sure, although the social projection of subaltern languages rests
largely with social movements, it calls for strategies to modify local, regional,
and international political economies. The primary goal of this modification,
however, should be not healthier regimes of accumulation and develop-
ment, as in Amin’s case,but to provide conditions that are more conducive to
local and regional experiments based on autonomous (hybrid) models.
Moreover, the analysis of political economy must be conducted from the
perspective of its integration with local forms, as discussed earlier. It should
also contribute to shifting the political economy of discourse production and
the multiplication of the centers of discourse. From the classical political
economists to today’s neoliberals at the World Bank, economists have mo-
nopolized the power of speech. The effects of this hegemony and the damag-
ing centrality of economics need to be exposed in novel ways. Making other
models visible is a way of advancing this task. “Mediating this communica-
tion [among modelers] or formulating a conversational community across
cultures is an important project of anthropology” (Gudeman 1992, 152). It is,
indeed,one must add,a political project of importance.
   The suggestion that we take into account people’s own models is not only
a politically correct position. On the contrary, it constitutes a sound philo-
sophical and political alternative. Philosophically, it follows the mandate of
                        THE SPACE OF DEVELOPMENT                             101
interpretive social science (Rabinow and Sullivan 1987; Taylor 1985) that we
take subjects as agents of self-definition whose practice is shaped by their
self-understanding. This self-understanding may be grasped by the re-
searcher or activist through ethnographic methods. This does not mean that
the researcher or activist has to adopt the subjects’ view or that the subjects’
view is always right. Cultural relativists have often fallen into this double
trap. It means that the interpretive social scientist has to take into account
people’s own descriptions as the starting point of theory, that is, of what has
to be explained.36

What I have been talking about in this chapter is a kind of social power
linked to the economy of goods and discourses. At the level of regimes of
representation, this power goes on for the most part unchallenged explicitly,
although it is often resisted at various levels. Social power of this kind has an
insidious way of encroaching upon the most recondite corners of social life,
even if in inconspicuous ways. This is no less true in those arenas in which
life itself is at stake, such as in the arena of food and hunger, as the next
chapter will show. I will examine in detail how today’s practices in nutrition,
rural development, and health care came into existence not as a result of
improved consciousness, scientific progress, or technological refinements
but rather as effects of power brought about by the problematization of hun-
ger in the context of the pervasive economization of subsistence.
