ETHNOGRAPHY’S VALUES: AN AFTERWORD





Guest and Daughter, Revisited


An ambivalence grips me now, some thirty years after the publication of Veiled Sentiments, about anthropology’s historic commitments to ethnography, and my own.

April 2008 and I am returning with the same mix of excitement and trepidation that always tightens my chest as we approach. The road has been widened and houses now cram the hillsides. Road signs and streetlights mark the way. We overshoot the driveway despite the familiar terrain. I am confused by a new building that obscures “our” house. Nor am I used to the stuccoed two-story structure that the house has become in the years since the Haj’s sons have married and started their own families, swelling the household. Turning back, we drive slowly down the bumpy lane and through the large metal gates into the empty walled yard, familiar from my years of living there beginning in the late 1970s.

The Haj’s eldest son comes out to greet me. His face looks puffy. Is he unshaven? I search his eyes. Are they red?

Then I see the women and children crowding the doorway to greet me. I am surprised to find not just the Haj’s wives but also his sisters, one of whom lives out west along the coast in Alamein. The other lives nearby. Wiry, energetic and funny, she had many times had us in stitches and I remember her long-ago, sage (and tongue-in-cheek) instructions on how to identify lice, something that did come in handy when my daughter was in school in New York. Along with new daughters-in-law whom I barely knew, I found several of the Haj’s daughters as well, young women who had married and no longer lived there. They all looked as if they had not slept well.

Had my foreboding been justified? About a month earlier, in New York, I’d had a dream about the Haj. A dream that had jolted me from sleep. I was worried. Now I was returning for a visit after more than a year without having been able to contact my old friends. I knew that the Haj, born in the same year as my father, would now be seventy-nine. It had already been seven sad years since I lost my own father. A photo from an earlier visit that was part of the revolving slideshow on my computer screen showed the Haj standing with his arm around my daughter, then twelve. Whenever it came up, I looked hard at him, noticing that he was old and thin, despite the twinkle in his eye and his warm smile.

The women saw the silent questioning in my eyes and told me right away: the Haj was in the hospital. He had taken a turn for the worse a few days ago, a week or so after they had brought him home from a month of treatment in Alexandria. But he was okay. The Haj’s right arm and leg were paralyzed. He could talk, they explained, but “his tongue is heavy.” He had had a stroke. They told me he had refused to take his blood pressure medicine, and had instead asked that his camel herds be brought nearby so that, in a return to his roots and his youth, he could drink camel milk every morning. He was one of the last of the Awlad ʿAli Bedouin in Egypt’s Western Desert to hold onto his camel herds, prestigious symbols of a past way of life. Just before the stroke, despite his high blood pressure and diabetes, he had agreed to mediate a tense dispute between two groups. People still came to him from miles around. He could never say no to anyone who came for help. The women blamed his stroke on this incident.

I said I had to go to see him. So, after the young men returned from Friday prayers, we set off—two of his sons, a nephew, the Haj’s two youngest daughters (whose births I remembered vividly and who startled me now with their beauty and confidence, not to mention the swishing elegance of the newly fashionable Gulf-style black robes and face veils they put on when it was time to go), and me.

Later everyone would ask me if I had come because I had heard the news. Later they told each other that I had dreamt about him. Later they told me that when the Haj heard that I had come, he insisted to his doctors that they should let him go home right away.

Some intense days followed—days of aching affection, forced cheeriness, and hidden tears. Days when I had to watch this extraordinary man, now returned home, reduced to physical helplessness, surrounded by women and young men lifting him, feeding him, hovering. No longer in intense conversation, no longer telling the young people what to do, no longer sitting cross-legged in dignity. These were days when I was reminded again of how close families are in this community. Married daughters arrived and held young grandchildren close to his face so each could plant a kiss on his cheek as he turned feebly toward them. Other daughters propped him up in bed and fed him bits of fish and salad, healthy foods that his diabetes forced him to eat when he’d rather have had his old desert favorites, dates and samna (clarified butter). People came into the room, encouraging and babying him. He would whisper for the young men, his sons and nephews. What he wanted from them was cigarettes. They delayed as long as possible but he persisted.

I could not make out what he was saying most of the time, this man who had been so articulate and sharp. He had told me stories and history, taught me poetry, and explained to me so much about Bedouin life, from customary law to the dynamics of his own marriages. As I sat next to his bed, I held his lifeless hand, looked at his grizzled face and rumpled clothes, and strained to understand him when he tried to speak. After a life of receiving respect for his gifts as a judge and mediator, a shrewd reader of changing economies, and a person of integrity and piety, as well as for his role, from a young age and then as an “elder,” as the charismatic leader of his family unit, the Haj now lay there quietly. I tried to reminisce about the past with him; he followed me with his eyes.

We still had a living bond that reminded us of some sort of lifetime together. They call it ʿishra, or living together. Being together now brought back the past and all those people we had loved and lost. The intensity was heightened because of the moment when that connection had begun. I had been a shy twenty-six-year-old with strong feelings, deep insecurities, and a desperate urge to understand their world as I lived in it, so that I could write about it. I had an unknown life path ahead of me. His wives had been in the midst of the pleasures and exasperations of raising children and dealing with a husband who was complicated, demanding, and special. Our house was always full of guests who needed to be hosted. The women and girls were exhausted by this, though also proud that everyone came to them. The Haj had been in his prime then, driving all over Bedouin territory to do deals and handle disputes. He was in demand, restless, on a bridge between a past, tougher life that had included moving goods across national boundaries, recovering scrap metal and landmines left over from World War II, and managing herds, and a future of real estate deals and agribusiness. He was still young enough to remember and share with me stories of his lost loves.

Our bond was real, even as it crossed so many of the divides some presume are unbridgeable. It crossed the divide of culture and piety, despite our mutual understanding that I was of Arab and Muslim origin—though I was what I later would describe as a “halfie.” My father was Palestinian Arab and I had spent important childhood years in Egypt and summers with relatives in Jordan. But I had grown up mostly in the United States and my mother was American. Faith in God and a sense of belonging to a moral community of Muslims were taken for granted by the Haj and the whole community—men, women, and children—in every aspect of their lives. My religious training had consisted only of some brief summer tutoring, though I have carried with me through many moves the small Qur’an with a navy plastic cover that was inscribed to me by the shaykh who taught me verses from the Qur’an. I was eight years old; he reeked of tobacco; and my father had hired him to tutor me because he had no use for him in his own work. The shaykh had been on the payroll at the UNESCO Arab Development Center in rural Egypt where my father took his first job, hired to be the local informant to the French ethnographer Jacques Berque, who had preceded my father in this position. I had never quite got the habit of religion, even though, then as now, I appreciated religious traditions and recognize them as meaningful. Later, in anthropology, I found the perfect discipline for someone in my existential state: it commands respect and encourages understanding, but does not demand full participation.

But I did somehow, and do still, participate in most ways in this aspect of life when in the Haj’s world. I speak—or try my best to speak—both their distinctive dialect of Arabic and the shared language of Muslims. Everyone entering the bedroom to greet the Haj voiced a prayer that God would make him well. His response was always “Thanks be to God.” I too found myself talking about God’s power and God’s will. I entreated God, sincerely, to heal him. People say these words in such situations and I simply translated my inchoate concern for him into this recognizable idiom, the only religious language I know. Maybe this is all it takes to place two people in the same world, if the bond of a shared life is already there.

There was a second divide between the Haj and me—one that many now make emblematic of a supposedly unbridgeable gulf between the civilized and the barbaric, the enlightened and the backward. This was the divide between those who profess women’s rights and gender equality and those who do not. Here was a man who had not allowed his daughters to go to university, even though they had wanted to, for fear that something might happen to them so far from home (though he probably also used a complex calculus that included such facts as that they had not attended good enough high schools to go to top faculties and that none of his sons had attended university either). Here was a man who lived in a household where women covered themselves in public and kept respectable distances from men—they were, after all, a proud and respected family. Here was a man who had married several wives, through circumstances that would take too long to explain here. (I analyzed these circumstances in my second ethnography, Writing Women’s Worlds.)

True, the Haj had recognized the talents, intelligence, and educational successes of his daughters by arranging for them to marry partners who, though perhaps lacking in great family status or wealth, were educated young men. True, he had shown his love and respect for his senior wife, called Gaṭīfa in Veiled Sentiments, by trusting her in all matters and, only a few months earlier, by enabling her to realize her dream of performing the pilgrimage to Mecca. He supported his wives and children well and tried to be fair. He had also sheltered many women whose family situations were bad and had used his moral authority to enforce their rights to good treatment by husbands or kin.

This was a society in which women fiercely defended a variety of rights and conducted themselves with a mixture of dignity, patience, and pride, even if gender equality was not part of the vocabulary of everyday life. Here was a society that feminists might label patriarchal by pointing to the way that women and girls were ensconced within families, though I always point out that men and boys were equally so.1 Over the years I have come to envy this family closeness, despite the limits it puts on individual freedoms. As my own parents aged and I didn’t have enough time for them, and now as I watch my children go off to make lives of their own, I often surprise myself by recalling the words the Haj’s mother once sang at her grandson’s wedding. She wished him well in a song that captured the hopes, and expectations, of this kind of social world built around family.





May they always be blessed with happiness the sons of my sons with me in their midst . . .





For girls things are different; they move away to live with their husbands, which is why they are not included in this song. But the beauty of marrying cousins, as the Awlad ʿAli know full well, is that it equalizes. Daughters get to stay close too. I had learned that from watching the Haj’s children grow up and marry. Understanding how much family ties matter helped me to appreciate the Haj’s perspective.

Our recognition of the complexities of the world we live in, combined with our years of shared conversations, memories, and affections for the people we knew in common, made this bridging possible. We had shared times, quite intensely for a few years and stretching then over thirty years. My experience of having developed these affections through fieldwork is not unique, even if it is rarely theorized. Everyone has experienced this kind of bridging because every intimate relationship demands it.

When I finally had to wrench myself away to go back to New York, we knew the goodbyes might be final. The Haj gestured for his son to come close. Protective as ever, I realized later that he had instructed him to make sure he got me safely into the transport I would be taking back to Cairo. (I would learn later that he would also counsel his sons to take good care of their sisters once he was gone.) A little later, I saw the Haj fumbling to reach his good hand into the top of his robes. Only his senior wife and one daughter were in the room now. They didn’t know what he was doing and kept asking, “What do you want?” But I knew.

I intuited that he was looking for his wallet, that he still wanted to give his “daughter” some money, to take care of her, to make sure she didn’t want for anything. I was by now a professor and the married mother of teenagers, someone he knew perfectly well traveled the world on her own. Even when I had lived with them doing fieldwork in the late 1970s and early 1980s, though I had little money and had been entrusted to them by my father, as I describe in the first chapter of Veiled Sentiments, I had been pursuing a PhD and living away from home. I was independent as no young unmarried women were in his community. (Again, I note, as no young men were either.) But in that moment when he fumbled for the wallet that was not there, I felt I was the protected and loved (and loving) daughter he saw in me. It pained me to see his masculine dignity compromised. He had no wallet and no control over anything.2



Less than a year after this visit, I again found myself coming up the same driveway, the yard now forlorn and empty. A telephone call from one of the Haj’s daughters—her cell phone to mine—had given me the news. Now living in a city further west, with a son who was starting a computer engineering course, this daughter had been about twelve when I first came to live with them. A tough girl who had taken a special interest in disciplining my unconventional forays into the men’s reception room to talk with her father’s guests, she was now the one to insist that I had to be told. Her mother and sisters had disagreed, thinking it would be too hard for me to hear the news when I was alone (since I would not be surrounded by their caring family members) and so far away. While I lived among them, many women in this community had told me stories of how someone had come to fetch them from their marital homes, explaining that a father, or mother, or brother was ill, but refraining from breaking the news of death until they had arrived among loved ones. If I had not had the uncanny feeling that had made me come for that last visit months before, they would not have had my phone number. I was touched by this inclusion. I knew I had to go.

So here I was again. The hundreds of cars that, as they later would tell me, had packed the hillside for the Haj’s funeral were gone. The men from the Western Desert, the Awlad ʿAli in their white robes, embroidered woolen vests, and for the elders, white woolen cloaks; the army officers in their uniforms; the business partners in their pressed suits; and the daughters, aunts, sisters, and cousins and all those women in their networks who celebrated together births and marriages and consoled each other in times of loss, had come and gone. The tents they had rented to receive these men and women had been taken away on trucks. Only occasionally did tears well up or did someone suddenly turn away and sob, now that my arrival reminded them of the loss. The refrains were familiar. “May God have mercy on him and forgive him.” “Everyone passes.” “God decides.”

I had in my suitcase multiple copies of a booklet I had made for them as a tribute to the Haj. What else, after all, could I contribute, as someone who had for so many years taken notes and photographs? I hadn’t had time before leaving home to dig out of boxes any of the tape recordings I had made of the Haj reciting poetry or telling me family stories, including how they had survived after the battles of World War II in their territory. I planned to prepare these to bring to them later. But I had managed to find a series of photographs. On the cover of the booklet I printed a short eulogy that tried to capture some of the Haj’s virtues along lines he would have liked—talking about his honor, his wide reputation, his good judgment, his fierce family loyalty, his faith, and something about his relationship to me as patient teacher and second father.

I would find out that local poets had also composed poetic eulogies, theirs in the more familiar dialect of the Awlad ʿAli. Unlike my stilted tribute, theirs were metered with perfect rhymes that rolled off the tongue and were already being committed to memory. They praised the same qualities in him, though their language was more religious and formulaic. They had circulated Xeroxed copies.

My booklet contained twenty color photographs of the Haj. They began with a couple from fall 1978, when I first went to live with them, and ended with a few photographs from my last visit in April, when people had competed to pose with the Haj as he lay in his bed, silent and paralyzed. There were gaps marking periods when I had not been able to visit, busy with my own family, my intense job, and, when I did come to Egypt, with new fieldwork in Upper Egypt, another part of the country.3

I had not anticipated the way they would react to these photographs. Some people didn’t want to look, for fear of grief. Others pored over the pages. The photographs they spent the most time on and talked about in detail were the early ones, not just because they loved seeing the Haj in his prime, but because these photographs contained the most information. The Haj’s senior wife was most knowledgeable. I had taken the photographs when I was in my role as “an anthropologist,” and so they were more public than private, to use the art critic John Berger’s distinction.4 They documented a past way of life. The first pages were of the Haj in the desert pastures, his rifle over his shoulder, standing with his sheep herds, or feeling the inside of a camel’s leg for sores. I had taken these pictures during the special trips they took me on when I first arrived to live with them, knowing how keen I was to see the vestiges of the old Bedouin life I had come to study. We had gone when the lambs were being weaned and branded; we had brought supplies out to the tanned men who lived outdoors and herded the Haj’s camels.

The photographs contained so much nostalgic history for the family too—of a time before the government had confiscated their hunting rifles, a time when sheep herds, not land deals, agriculture, or car franchises were their mainstay, a time when there was open land all around them and, if there had been rain, the desert pastures were green and the landscape dotted with distinctive plants, like mithnan, that they pointed out with such excitement in my photographs. Those made great brooms.

A particular favorite among the early photographs was a group shot taken in our courtyard. It documented a major oath-swearing and reconciliation that had occurred shortly after I came to live with them. They now explained to me what I had only dimly understood at the time: that some group had falsely accused the Haj of smuggling and everyone had been brought in to prove that this was a lie. Lined up around the wide bowls of rice were the Haj, his brothers, his nephews, and the other men—relatives, friends, and affines—who had stood by him in this tense event. Some were now dead. Some still neighbors.

Gaṭīfa, his senior wife, pointed with pride at the eleven huge aluminum trays of rice she had prepared for the event; no one used those kinds any more, and none of her daughters-in-law knew how to cook on an open fire. No one, she added, even knew how to churn butter in a goatskin bag, arms aching from the rhythmic swaying. She knew I had witnessed all that. She also pointed out the Haj’s brothers, bent over the bowls distributing the chunks of cooked lamb. The later photographs I had taken on my shorter visits were just portraits and were passed over quickly.

I certainly wasn’t the only one to give the family their history. They had many other sources: their phenomenal memories, their poetry, and their own documents and photographs. In the lavishly redecorated living room (which the Haj’s grown sons had proudly taken charge of, bringing in an interior designer to match the curtain fabrics to the wall color) were two new framed and enlarged black-and-white photos dating to the same day in the late 1950s or ’60s, when the Libyan king had come to visit Egypt. In one, the Haj was riding on his white horse, its tail swishing. He was one of a group of Awlad ʿAli tribesmen who had come to greet the king, their cultural ties to Libya, including dialect and poetry, being strong. Their history has it that the Awlad ʿAli were driven east from there over two hundred and fifty years ago. Gaṭīfa told me defiantly that she had insisted to everyone that these photographs were to stay hung in the living room, as they always had. She didn’t care that the more religious types nowadays said it was wrong to display portraits.

The photographs in my booklet gave them a different kind of history—a personal history. Among the ordinary portraits of the Haj (the less “anthropological”), the ones that elicited the most comment were those that showed him with other loved ones who were no longer alive: his mother and two of his brothers. We often lingered over these, and it was then that I realized how much we were bound by the shared memories of those who had been part of this family but were no longer with us. We together felt their absence.

I had not anticipated some of the stories I would hear about the Haj’s last days. He had never recovered any movement yet the women and girls told me how aware and in control he had been to the end, despite his diminished physical state and the difficulty of communicating. I had heard on my prior visit that some months before his stroke he had gathered together all the men of his extended family—his last remaining brother and first cousin and all his nephews, sons, and grandsons—to lecture them on the importance of staying united and working together.

But more than putting his house in order, he had taken charge of his own death. He had refused to take any of the daunting piles of pills he had been prescribed. He said they weren’t working. On the morning he died he had asked them to let him rest on a blanket on the floor. “And take the pillow away,” he had added. His children each came in and he looked at them, one by one. “Death has come,” he said.

He then gestured toward the hillside where they had originally lived and where most of their family and land remained. He was trying to tell them to hold the funeral and receive condolences there, knowing that only over there would there be enough room for the hundreds who would come. And they did come, for more than fifteen days. Over there, off to the side, was that barren area where they had buried his uncles, mother, brothers, and so many of those we missed now, including all the women I’d known over there, women whose sons now formed the core of the kin group.

But the story about his mental sharpness that pulled me up short was one about me. It seems that after I’d left in early April, they had discovered what he’d been trying to say when he had fumbled inside his robe. His wife explained to me what I had already guessed: he had wanted his wallet. The reason, though, was that he had had some U.S. dollars in it. Dollars were, of course, my kind of money. So perhaps his gesture was not, as I had imagined at the time, the generic protective generosity of a father toward a daughter. Instead it was a generous gesture that acknowledged who I was, specifically. I was the odd daughter who was and was not like his other daughters. I came from and lived my life in another place and world, even if we were bound by the times we had shared and the people we had cared about in common.





Observing Lives


I was not like the Haj’s other daughters in another way, one that is at the heart of the strange vocation of anthropology that called to me over forty years ago. As a child of the counterculture, I loved the way anthropology opened up different ways of being in the world, and valued them. Given my own identity as what I would later call a halfie, anthropology offered me a way to make sense of what I had experienced.

I have given a lot of thought since I wrote Veiled Sentiments to what it means for me to have come to live as a guest of the Haj’s family and to have written about them. I was engaged in a good-faith pursuit of ethnographic knowledge. I had come without much of an agenda, open to what I would find. I was most interested in women’s lives. At the time, the field of feminist anthropology was just emerging and I didn’t have much to build on. So I worked hard to understand what I was seeing and hearing. Eventually, I wrote. I trusted that sharing what I had learned would foster in my readers the same appreciation, even admiration, of the people and life-world I had come to know over the two years I had spent with them.

As a scholar I had to bend what I had learned into an intellectual project. Veiled Sentiments challenged theories of culture by showing the interplay between discourses of honor that were the stuff of ordinary social interactions and the little songs (ghinnaawas) that people cherished and shared with intimates. I had discovered a social logic in their system of morality, one that gave meaning to the social hierarchies that organized their lives and made gendered sense. I analyzed how power and resistance worked in complicated ways. The theme of honor and modesty runs through my ethnography, as it does through their lives. Veiled Sentiments tries to explain how the values that form the basis of respect and respectability work somewhat differently for men and women. But the poetry that I discovered to be so important to them also enabled me to understand that men and women were equally committed to living up to the ideals of this moral system. The discrepancy between the vulnerability and love people expressed through the ghinnaawas and the proud ways they held themselves in their daily lives were not to be analyzed in terms of hypocrisy or of frontstage and backstage. Rather, we must understand how the discrepancy works to enhance honor by revealing just how hard people struggle to live up to the moral ideals of their community.

I presumed, when I began writing in the 1980s, that my audience would consist of scholars and students of anthropology. It might extend to others who, for whatever reason, genuinely wanted to learn about this community of Bedouins, or the larger Arab world of which the Awlad ʿAli were a distinctive yet somehow quintessential part. As was the norm then, I did not imagine that those I had learned from would be the primary readers of my work. I wrote in English.

My father had explained to them when I arrived in 1978 that I had come to learn about their “customs and traditions.” Some had an inkling of what this might mean. They knew that some locals collected poetry. Many were seriously interested in genealogy. This is not surprising for a tribally organized community. The Haj even remembered an Egyptian anthropologist who had come to study Awlad ʿAli customary law in the 1960s.5 Some of the older generation had anxieties about the social transformations that were accompanying sedentarization; they were attached to these “customs and traditions.” Some interpreted my presence there as a search for cultural roots. They saw me as someone who shared their Arab and Muslim identification but was deficient in proper knowledge because I had been raised abroad. They were proud of who they were. They took seriously their responsibilities to teach me.

I saw myself differently. I had come to do fieldwork. Ever since Bronislaw Malinowski established fieldwork in the discipline’s mythic charter, the method that we clumsily describe as “participant-observation” has been at the core of anthropologists’ practice.6 Despite the minor scandal that erupted when Malinowski’s diaries were published, and despite the reflexivity that has marked anthropological work over the past thirty years—whether the early forms of the personal or psychoanalytic, the feminist, insurgent, and anticolonial or postcolonial approaches, or the more philosophical critiques—there has not been much analysis of the mysteries of fieldwork. What does it mean to share times and people—ʿishra, as I have called it here—in this peculiar way? It matters, I think, that I found myself praying for the Haj’s recovery with the same sincere wishes and words as everyone else around him.

Anthropologists tend to move between incommensurate worlds and to translate between them. As Talal Asad observed in his essay for Writing Culture, they tend to translate in one direction: from local, minor, or just non-Western languages into “strong” languages, not just English, French, or Portuguese, but the language of academic discourse.7 Even so, anthropologists are not missionaries, colonial agents, development experts, or government spies. Nor are they military personnel, as were the Human Terrain Teams the U.S. military deployed in Afghanistan and Iraq.8

Although I share the criticisms of anthropology that have shaken our discipline over the past decades—as I will elaborate below—I still insist that we must not underestimate the devotion to others that fieldwork entails. Even if undertaken for purposes beyond and outside of the immediate personal relationships of the fieldwork encounter, it requires serious give and take. As the stories about my relationship to the Haj and his family suggest, what happens in the context of fieldwork is similar to much that happens in other contexts of our lives. Fieldwork is a (rare) form of respect and care for other people.

The practice of using yourself, your whole self, as an instrument of knowledge is peculiar in the academic world that anthropologists inhabit. Anthropologists know that fieldwork produces a different kind of knowledge than do other research methods, and produces knowledge differently. Fieldwork commits you to living with people who don’t quite know what to make of you. You separate yourself from family members and friends. You separate from the other familiar worlds you inhabit (this was especially true before the days of email, the Internet, and cell phones, when I went to live with the Awlad ʿAli families in the 1970s and ’80s). You make yourself vulnerable. You subject yourself to anxieties of (in)comprehension and uncertainties about how to act. You enter a heightened state of awareness as you strive to observe-while-participating. You live in your body in new ways as you struggle with unfamiliar discomforts.

Despite my confidence in fieldwork as our core method, I have shared in the sharp political self-questioning that has convulsed the discipline, at least in the United States, in the years since I finished the fieldwork for Veiled Sentiments. As an undergraduate I had read critiques of the misuse of anthropological knowledge, partly in response to the Vietnam War, such as the articles collected in Reinventing Anthropology. But the deeper arguments—about how knowledge is never produced outside of the play of power, from the work of Michel Foucault and Edward Said—were just on the horizon.9 Clifford and Marcus’s field-defining Writing Culture would not be published until 1986, the same year I first published this book.10

What interests me here is not what has become common sense in the discipline: that the truths of ethnography are partial, as Clifford has argued, and that the process of turning experience—the participant-observation that is fieldwork—into ethnographic knowledge and writing introduces distortions premised on our positions. Rather, I am interested in what I first considered important about Pierre Bourdieu’s assessment of the process of producing “social scientific” knowledge out of “native” life. He asks us to acknowledge the peculiar power position of social scientific practice. He writes, for example:





Knowledge does not only depend, as an elementary relativism suggests, on the particular viewpoint that a “situated and dated” observer takes up vis-à-vis the object. A much more fundamental alteration—and a much more pernicious one, because being constitutive of the operation of knowing, it inevitably remains unnoticed—is performed on practice by the sheer fact of taking up a “viewpoint” on it and so constituting it as an object (of observation and analysis). And it goes without saying that this sovereign viewpoint is most easily adopted in elevated positions in the social space, where the social world presents itself as a spectacle seen from afar and from above, as a representation.11





He warns that theories of what it is to be “native” must not be confused with “native” experience. Theorizing and even ethnography (where we try to systematize and represent what we have learned from participant-observation) are different from practice.

But I have come to realize that Bourdieu misses something important about the way many of us experience fieldwork. Having devoted more sustained energy, over almost forty years, to fieldwork and ethnographic writing than to any other single activity in my life, and having held in my mind and my heart for so long specific people in the Bedouin community I wrote about in Veiled Sentiments, I think we cannot so blithely characterize our work as ethnographers as being outside and above. Living with people affects how we experience ourselves. If we are not sociopaths, we yearn to become, to one degree or another, “native,” in order to live reasonably with those whose lives we are studying.

What does it mean for anthropologists, who are the (all too) human instruments of research, to share in situations where a “native experience” that was not initially their own becomes, in the course of ʿishra, or living together, part of their (native) experience? Elizabeth Povinelli, who has spent over twenty-five years going back and forth between the United States and a precarious indigenous Australian community, the Belyuen, argues that for the anthropologist, fieldwork leads to an existential “coming to terms” with what it means to be part of incommensurate worlds.

Within anthropology, there is a small literature on native or indigenous anthropologists, defined as those who study their own societies.12 And more and more anthropologists are from the regions that were in the past the objects of anthropological study by Europeans and North Americans. My own contribution to this discussion was to introduce the shorthand “halfie” to describe the anthropologist who is partially from the world he or she is studying, such that she or he writes simultaneously from and about it.13 The term is inadequate to describe our complex identities and how we move in and out of different life-worlds. Kirin Narayan, like Bourdieu, reminds us that the “native” activity of the anthropologist is to study and write about what he or she has seen and heard.14 This practice is not shared by other communities in the same way, even though people everywhere reflect on what is going on in their worlds and lives. As do novelists. But anthropologists do so in relation to debates within the intellectual field of anthropology, and sometimes, of broader publics. All of us, whether native to a place, foreign, or in between, move in and out of the worlds of fieldwork and academic writing.

Fieldwork confronts us all with puzzling questions about how we can come to feel deeply connected to social communities whose histories we do not share and whose ideals are not fundamental to who we think we are. Povinelli confesses that as she moves regularly between her different lives in the United States—personal and academic—and in Australia, what should feel schizophrenic does not.15 She asks herself how she can feel “that’s me” when, “at home,” for example, she sees two women kissing and has a familiar name for that aspect of herself (being gay) but also can feel “that’s me” when she is out hunting crabs with her Belyuen friends. There is no name for that identity, which she thinks of as kin-being-out-in-the-world. On the one hand, she cannot “belong” in some easy way to the Belyuen community, given differences between her background, experiences, resources, and mobility and their own. But also, she notes, her friends/kin in Australia are “homophobic.” They don’t know or understand that aspect of who she feels herself so comfortably to be in the United States. Conversely, in the other worlds in which she also spends her life—socially, academically, and even within her own biological family—one presumes that people have no idea what it means to her to be “herself” as part of a kin network in a community of indigenous Australians. She considers that community to be closer kin than the family in which she grew up. To call this state being an anthropologist, I would add, does not do it justice.

My dream about the Haj and what followed in my return visit index similar investments and discomforts. In her writing, Povinelli uses her experiences of incommensurate worlds to theorize modes of thinking about persons and their relationships. Her experience, for example, enables her to question late liberal convictions that freedom and social constraint are antithetical. I too have used my experiences in a world that I came to understand as a participant-observer, guest, and daughter, to develop theories about the complexity of “culture.” In fact, I call for “writing against culture” because of these experiences.16

The definition of incommensurability, Povinelli points out further, is not just that the worlds are different but also that they are unequal. The inequalities between her worlds have led her to assist in indigenous land claims with her Belyuen kin and to search for ways to give them access to resources and publics that might generate income while preserving the value of their pasts for future generations. Her recognition of unequal worlds has also made her a lucid critic of the double binds of liberal multiculturalism in Australia in which indigenous people’s claims are made conditional on proving that they have preserved their traditions (erasing the legacy of settler violence) while renouncing traditions that are repugnant to white liberals.17

The inequality between the world that I have written for and the world in which I lived with my Bedouin hosts has led me to a different sense of responsibility. I did not come to the Awlad ʿAli in the late 1970s as an advocate for an oppressed indigenous group. I came inspired by a fascination with desert nomads that was probably instilled by my undergraduate mentor, Paul Riesman, who had worked with the cattle-herding Fulani in Burkina Faso and shared with us entrancing photographs of visiting Tuareg.18 I wanted to do anthropology in the Arab world, where I had ties, and the Bedouin were identified with a certain freedom. I expected, because of their pastoral livelihood and freedom from state authority, that women in this sort of society might be strong. I thought men and women would be more interdependent in a fully kin-based tribal community. I found some of what I sought, though it turned out that matters were much more complicated.

Most relevant for my relationship to them, however, was that they did not need me. The family I lived with was powerful within the social world of the Awlad ʿAli tribes. They were taking advantage of new economic opportunities. Their control of territory and trade allowed them to resist attempts by the Egyptian state to govern their lives. Despite what Bourdieu might have characterized as my superior position (as an educated observer/analyst from the United States), I felt myself a humble and awkward guest. They were surrounded by their own community whereas I was alone. My youth, my gender, my personality, my cultural incompetence, and my non-Egyptian status made it hard for them to place me neatly within any familiar national and social status hierarchies. I was always struck by their confident moral superiority. They were respectable. They were Bedouin. They were Muslim. Their struggles were with proximate powers, not with the distant America or “the West,” where they knew I lived. They did not feel inferior just because they lacked formal education.

Over the years, both the identities that the Awlad ʿAli embrace, as Muslim and as Arab, as well as their values, based on tribe, kinship, and honor, have become increasingly the subjects of prejudice and disdain, the former abroad and the latter even in Egypt. Some critiques of these values have come from feminism and the growing international purchase of ideals of gender equality. Some prejudices were mobilized for political purposes, with groups like the Awlad ʿAli being framed as trapped in their bad cultures, unlike those in the liberal and enlightened West; such oppositions have helped rationalize the damaging sorts of political stances toward the Middle East that we have witnessed in the decades since I wrote my ethnographies of the Awlad ʿAli.

After the publication of Veiled Sentiments, I began to pay more attention to how the ways of living exemplified by this community were being read—and misread. At first, I continued to address the problems of anthropology. I had felt that I had not been able to communicate fully the richness, dynamism, and intensity of interpersonal relations in this community. I wrote a second ethnography, published in 1993, to show how those typifications in which anthropology trafficked—about polygamy, veiling, honor codes, and patrilateral parallel-cousin marriage—did not represent life as it was actually lived by people.19

As representations of Arabs, Middle Easterners, and Muslims became more fraught and knowledge about people in these regions drew the gaze of less disinterested groups than students of anthropology or Middle East studies, I began to feel a responsibility to take on the most egregious and tendentious distortions. Since the 1990s, for example, something called “the honor crime” has become an international obsession. I was bewildered by the way it was framed, with whole regions and societies tarred as “honor societies.” Veiled Sentiments had presented this moral system through the eyes of the women, girls, and men I knew. I was suspicious of media campaigns in the West that simplified the workings of subtle and complex ways of organizing love, gender, sexuality, and marriage. Pathological breakdowns were being mistaken for the system itself. Women’s commitments were being ignored. I used my fieldwork with the Bedouin families to contest the stereotypes. In a recent book, Do Muslim Women Need Saving?, I directly challenged this emerging common sense.

Given this wider political context, I came to see myself more and more as doing what some call insurgent scholarship, or what Didier Fassin has characterized more soberly as public ethnography. That was how I felt I should take up the responsibility imposed by my having moved between incommensurate—not just different but unequal—worlds. I began to challenge some of the political deployments of cultural difference to justify Euro-American political and military interventions in the Middle East, by offering granular ethnography of women’s lives and rights in place of glib generalizations.20 I also explored the prejudices of urban educated Egyptians toward their rural compatriots in my ethnography of television-watching, Dramas of Nationhood. I hoped that my long-term ethnographic work in a village in Upper Egypt could illuminate for them the value(s) of these other life-worlds. However, my most recent visit to my Awlad ʿAli friends has forced me to question whether even these are adequate or appropriate ways to fulfill my responsibilities to them.





Why Ethnography?


If in the course of fieldwork we learn that we can feel like “ourselves” in different social contexts and use these experiences—in my case as a guest and daughter—to see and understand, each of us must still figure out what responsibilities our knowledge imposes, given the more powerful world we tend to inhabit as anthropologists and scholars. What obligations do we have to the people we have lived with when we imagine we are writing for others?

If living together is at the heart of fieldwork then perhaps we need to think more about how those with whom we live make sense of what we are doing. I have been touched by the ways my Awlad ʿAli friends have always given me the benefit of the doubt. For example, I notice that they have sought to build me up in the eyes of others who didn’t know me as well by interpreting the timing of my infrequent visits over the past couple of decades as corresponding to condolence visits. My visits did indeed coincide with the passing of the four brothers who headed the core families of this community when I first came to live with them in the late 1970s. Once, I arrived with my infant twins just as news came that the Haj’s younger brother had died from a cerebral hemorrhage. I rushed with everyone else up the hillside to console his distraught mother, wives, and daughters in a packed room of shocked wailing women. Another visit coincided with the return home from the hospital of the Haj’s older brother. He did not look at all well. I would learn that he passed away shortly after. Then had come my aching visit with the Haj, followed by my sad return after the phone call. A more recent visit responded to the first email communication I had ever received from anyone in the community: A young man had written, introducing himself as married to the Haj’s youngest brother’s granddaughter. He wanted to inform me that her grandfather had just died.

It was proper that I should come at these key moments of loss and transformation for the family. Doing so would be expected of all kin and friends. I had spent most of my time talking to women and they had been, with the exception of the Haj, my main companions and interlocutors. Each time I arrived for a visit, the first news people shared with me would be about the women who had passed since my last visit. The Haj’s wife Safiyya, who had been so unwell and sang such beautiful songs (see p. 226). Grandma Migdim, who had told such risqué folktales. Then the Haj’s intense younger sister, who had told us the funny stories about lice. She had never recovered from her grief over him. From the day her brother died, her nieces told me, she alternated between crying and laughing hysterically. She wandered around and didn’t recognize anyone. She finally passed away a few years later, ten days after her own husband’s death. “That’s how much they loved each other,” her nieces again commented. All these women left empty spaces in everyone’s lives. But it was the men who held this large family together. My visits, coinciding with the men’s deaths and illnesses, were interpreted as signs of respect and of belonging to this family, so diminished by its losses.

They appreciated these visits much as they had my first return after my marriage. I had wanted to introduce them to my husband. I had tried to quell concerns about my marrying an Englishman by having my father and aunt come along. As I describe in the first chapter of Veiled Sentiments, my father had come with me when I first arrived to do fieldwork. I wrote that he must have sensed that entrusting me to them as a daughter of an Arab would ease my entry. Now that I am a parent, though, I can see that he also must have wanted to reassure himself. Over time, they came to know that he was a prominent Palestinian. They sympathized with the plight and struggles of Palestinians. They had even begun to compare themselves to Palestinians, as the state, the military, and property developers began displacing them. It then became something of a point of pride that they had taken me in. It was proper that my father should come to thank them.

As I describe in the preface to Writing Women’s Worlds, I had insisted that we bring a sheep as an offering for my first visit with my husband. This is standard for weddings, funerals, and important occasions. I had also brought bags of candy, peanuts, fruit, combs, and other items in a long list that I had once dutifully written down in my field notes as the ritual gifts a new bride brings when her husband’s family takes her back for her first visit home. They understood the symbolism. And I meant it.

To say “I meant it” is to introduce the source of the ambivalence I now feel about what gave life to Veiled Sentiments. I have new questions about the value(s) of ethnography after seeing the children whom I held in my lap in the 1970s and 1980s now grown up, with children of their own; after losing so many beloved aunts and grandmothers; after having lived for several decades with memories of the intense experience of having shared in their everyday lives for a precious period. These questions first started to nag when I volunteered to teach a course about “the ethnographic imagination” for the undergraduate anthropology majors at my university. I didn’t anticipate how the course would unsettle me.

The history of anthropology is the history of how it has engaged with difference. The inequalities that burden the incommensurate worlds we bring together have taken on more weight in anthropology’s self-critiques over the past couple of decades. For the course, I went back to Malinowski. Living in a colonial age, he saw ethnography as some sort of resistance to the racism of the era. His first lesson for the ethnographer was that he or she must refuse the easy connections the colonial setting afforded, where the white man, like the missionary or pearl merchant in the Trobriand Islands, lives apart from the native. He counseled ethnographers to set themselves down in the midst of the everyday worlds of the people they were studying and to turn to them for human company. He was forced to spend years doing fieldwork in the Trobriand Islands because, as an Austrian citizen, he was not allowed to return to Britain when World War I broke out. He had been doing research already in New Guinea and the Australian government allowed him to stay. The results were impressive, in terms of what he was able to learn about Trobriand magic, texts, ritual, social organization, and trade.

Most striking is Malinowski’s often-cited conclusion to the programmatic essay on the methods and goals of ethnography that opens Argonauts of the Western Pacific. The goal of ethnography, he says, is “to grasp the native’s point of view, his relation to life, to realize his vision of his world. To study the hold which life has on him.”21 He concludes his five-hundred-page tome by outlining even loftier ends: “Our final goal is to enrich and deepen our own world’s vision, to understand our own nature and to make it finer, intellectually and artistically. In grasping the essential outlook of others, with the reverence and real understanding, due even to savages, we cannot but help widening our own. . . . The Science of Man, in its most refined and deepest version should lead us to such knowledge and to tolerance and generosity, based on the understanding of other men’s point of view.”22

Malinowski does not question the idea that there are profound cultural differences among groups, as we might now. He does not consider the Trobriand Islanders to be as scientific or “civilized” as he is. He does not doubt that ethnographic work is for the benefit of those who carry it out and the societies from which they come, and that it is not for the “natives.” But his words do betray a surprising respect for others and appreciation of other life-worlds.

I also went back to Pierre Bourdieu because he was more aware (after the fact) of the impact of the colonial situation on the arc of his ethnographic work in Algeria. In the introduction to The Logic of Practice, Bourdieu explains that he had fastidiously avoided looking at ritual and symbolism during his first fieldwork in Algeria in the 1950s. He studied political economy instead because he judged the ethnological work that placed the Kabyle or Berbers of Algeria in “another world” of exotic customs and rituals to be racist. He changed his mind later and turned to the study of ritual “to challenge the racist contempt which, through the self-contempt it induces in its victims, helps to deny them knowledge and recognition of their own tradition.”23 Yet this does not prevent him from then criticizing himself for his blindness to another aspect of the politics of his ethnographic work. He wonders, decades later, at the absurdity of his study of Kabyle ritual and symbolic systems in the midst of the bloody Algerian war of independence. Considering some photographs he took of decorated stone jars, he remarks that the reason the photographs were so sharp was that the French army had destroyed the roof of the house and expelled its inhabitants. He concludes that one doesn’t need “to have exceptional epistemological lucidity or outstanding ethical or political vigilance in order to question the deep-rooted determinants of a so obviously ‘misplaced’ libido sciendi.”24

Anthropology has mostly abandoned its grand scientific pretensions. I never shared them. But I did trust, when I began, that the human understanding produced through that experiential activity we call fieldwork had a higher purpose. My belief in that purpose, and in the incommensurability among life-worlds that gave it sense, has been shaken in the years since I wrote Veiled Sentiments. Critiques from various quarters have shattered the comfortable sense of virtue many felt about pursuing the classic ethnographic project that Malinowski imagined for anthropology in the early part of the twentieth century. Michel-Rolph Trouillot, an anthropologist originally from Haiti, framed the charge most pointedly when he asked whether anthropology had any purpose now that what he described as the “savage slot” that it had inherited at the birth of the profession in the nineteenth century had disappeared.25

The West, he argues, was created by constituting an “Other.” He dates that to Columbus in 1492, stumbling upon the Caribbean and initiating the conquest of America. This “Other” was Janus-faced: there were myths of the noble savage, and of utopias different from Europe, as well as myths of dark savages against which the West could define itself as rising above barbarism.

Trouillot suggests that anthropology went into crisis in the 1980s (just as Veiled Sentiments came out) because the world had changed. The lines between the West and the Rest were blurring; colonial and capitalist incursions had destroyed much difference; and global connections and flows had intensified. Westerners had learned, he notes, that “the people without history” have histories.26 Presciently, he wrote in 1991 that the “Other” had become the transnational fundamentalist. He noted that the Rest now lived in the West’s slums, not “over there.” The key transformation, however, he argues, is that the “first-person subject” from so many of the places that had been the “non-West” now speaks. Those who were only quoted in ethnographies like Malinowski’s now speak for themselves.

I included in my course the most dazzling display of anthropology’s challenge to its own historic shackling to the “savage slot.” This was a debate that took place between two titans of American anthropology, Marshall Sahlins and Gananath Obeyesekere, in the 1990s. Ostensibly about differences in the interpretation of events that occurred in Hawai’i in the eighteenth century, when Captain Cook, on his scientific voyage in the Pacific, was murdered, the debate uncovered the cracks in the foundation of anthropology’s confident role as the high-minded interpreter of “difference.”27

The first thrust was an article by Sahlins, later included his book Islands of History.28 Gananath Obeyesekere parried with The Apotheosis of Captain Cook.29 Sahlins countered with How “Natives” Think: About Captain Cook, for Example.30 The title deliberately invoked Lucien Levy Bruhl’s 1910 masterpiece of armchair anthropology, which had sought to identify the principles of thought and feeling of “natives,” so different from the scientific rationalism claimed as characteristic of modern Europe.31

The debate unmasked anthropology’s lingering attachment to the savage slot. This was not a debate about fieldwork. Both Sahlins and Obeyesekere were reconstructing the past using texts and archives. Both offered imaginative ethnographies of the Hawaiians, as well as of the British. Sahlins claimed to be solving the puzzle of why the Hawaiians killed this European, whom they had at first welcomed as a god. Hawaiian myths, beliefs, and ritual structures, he argued, explained their actions. For Obeyesekere, the stakes were different. He diligently studied the same archives, and more. His purpose was not so much to understand why Captain Cook was murdered in 1779, or to offer an alternative to mythopraxis as a theory of human action, as to contest the very propositions that “natives,” unlike Europeans, live in a world of mythic thought and view Europeans as gods.

What enabled Obeyesekere’s critique? On the one hand, he works generally with theories of human social action and the psyche that do not depend on radical difference. But he admits that his impulse to challenge Sahlins was existential. He does not believe that anyone, even a “native,” is incapable of rational assessment and action. He turns to his own experiences as a Sri Lankan who lived in a world of multiple gods, avatars, and symbols but also knew that he and everyone he knew was capable of telling different layers of reality apart. Obeyesekere’s passionate efforts to undo what he characterizes as the Western myth of the apotheosis of Captain Cook, which Sahlins is reproducing, stem from what Obeyesekere calls his own experiences of terror. He explains that, having grown up in a country engulfed in communal terror, he is sensitized to political violence. After reading the diaries and reports of Cook and his crew, Obeyesekere argues that Sahlins’s account whitewashed the violence and terror unleashed by European expansion and conquest.

In this debate, the native talks back. This is the “first-person subject” that Trouillot was referring to, come to shake anthropology’s comfortable conceit that it can interpret “natives” whether noble or savage. Obeyesekere rejects the exoticization of the Other using his tools of critical reading and thinking and his own personal experience. He demonstrates how the story of the apotheosis of Captain Cook fits perfectly into Western narratives, including that of the Christian God who dies and is resurrected. He argues that the myth that Captain Cook was taken for a god was fashioned by venerable shipboard traditions about Westerners being treated as gods by natives. He just doesn’t buy the premise. Obeyesekere concludes that Sahlins’s brilliant interpretation of what happened in Hawai’i simply affirms and extends a European imperial myth. Is this the end of anthropology as we knew it?





Ethnographic Reserve


When I was invited to prepare a thirtieth anniversary edition of Veiled Sentiments, I imagined that I would use this occasion to let readers know about the transformations that had occurred in this community. But breaches of the borders between our formerly separate worlds confused me. The situation confronting the Awlad ʿAli since the uprisings in Egypt and across the Arab world in 2011, on the one hand, and the exchanges we had when I came to assess these changes in 2015, on the other, forced me to reconsider the ethnographic impulse that had sustained my work over the years. Trouillot was right: a world that is more interconnected, where travel is not one-way and phones and the Internet collapse distances, must transform anthropology.

In a preface I wrote to the second edition of Veiled Sentiments in 2000, I described the way the cities of Alexandria and Cairo had been brought closer by a four-lane highway that also made it easier to reach my Awlad ʿAli friends. I mentioned the new industrial town that had sprung up nearby. I noted that the Mediterranean coast along which they lived had been taken over by tourist development for Egyptian elites.32 I wrote about the tighter connections that the younger generation had to Egyptian national culture, through the spread of schooling and television. One of the most important changes in Egypt, one that had already been underway in the cities when I first began my research with the Haj’s family, had begun to reach the Bedouin areas by the late 1990s. The piety movement, which validates a more self-consciously Muslim identity, was visible in new forms of dress, sites of religious education, and publically pious practices. In this community, people began to build more local mosques. Most of these changes—greater enmeshment in state institutions, more regular commerce with non-Bedouin people, familiarity with national cultural forms and trends, and public piety—were reflected in my second ethnography, Writing Women’s Worlds, through the everyday stories I told.

These trends have intensified. I had imagined writing about the grander houses the family were building, with tile floors and shiny bathrooms. Or about the large new mosque that now obscures the homes of the Haj’s family. I was thinking of describing the streets that have replaced stony paths in the landscape where clay bread ovens and bushes for drying laundry once existed. These streets connect the summer houses of urban Egyptians that now crowd the scattered dwellings that house the Bedouin families I used to visit. I thought to comment on the fashions young women have taken up for going out in public, signs of affinity with a modern urban Islamic public piety.

I had also planned to find out more about what was behind the news items about the Awlad ʿAli tribes that had appeared sporadically in the international and Egyptian press in the aftermath of the revolutionary upheavals that brought down the rulers of Egypt and Libya, Hosni Mubarak and Muammar Gaddafi. The Awlad ʿAli live on the border between Egypt and Libya. Their loyalty to the Egyptian state was suspect because of historic ties to the tribes of Libya. They also came under surveillance because voting patterns in the parliamentary elections had revealed their strong support for Islamist political parties.

I changed my mind about these plans. When I arrived in October 2015, I was greeted by the festive return of almost all of the Haj’s daughters. Most were married and living elsewhere. We had a raucous going-away party for a cousin of theirs who was flying off to Korea to get married, to an Egyptian working abroad. The women who had arrived in black face-veils, robes, and even gloves let down their hair and danced together in their gorgeous dresses of chiffon and sequins. Their children ran around with their cousins; teenage sons were affectionately teased and warmly welcomed by maternal aunts and uncles. Everyone was excited and shared news of family members, tribal affairs, and recent elections. I was surprised to find them defending different parties and taunting each other (good naturedly) for their choices. Then on my last morning, I awoke to fervent prayers and commotion. We waited anxiously for news from the hospital because one sister had gone into early labor. Gaṭīfa, the matriarch, was desperately worried. She called on God for help and a safe delivery for her daughter. After a ten-year wait and some medical assistance, this was a special pregnancy.

If I had felt that a retrospective reflection required me to assess the transformation of the community from semi-nomadic herding to a fully settled life, I now felt uncomfortable because writing about these economic and political changes would only serve to place these people, whom I had known so intimately and for so long, into some kind of general scheme—of modernization, cultural loss, globalization, Islamization, or whatever. From their point of view, these changes were simply the stuff of, or the backdrop to, what mattered—persons and family relationships. The mother who had died of cancer. The aunt with Alzheimer’s. The anxious waiting and disappointments of infertility. The exams passed. The calls to army service. The struggles to maintain moral virtues and tribal ties in the midst of an encroaching society organized along different lines and values. The uncertain futures they all faced.

What was to be gained by standing back from all this and making such general observations? For whom would I be surveying the scene and investigating what was behind the patterns? I realized on this visit that the family would soon be reading what I wrote. How would they react? There were many signs of the collapsing distance that Trouillot had noted. Already several young women had attended university in Alexandria, which the Haj had been afraid to let his older daughters do in the days when I lived with them. One of these young women had become a teacher. She had seen my book in the university library. A few years earlier she had opened her laptop for me (the only computer in the family at that time) and clicked on my university’s Anthropology Department homepage to show me.

The reservations I had about this project of updating Veiled Sentiments had already begun during my preparations for the 2015 visit. I had pledged to bring them, on that visit, not just photographs of the Haj but some of the audio tapes I had recorded. Over the years I have had requests from colleagues for samples of the songs. At first I used to send a short cassette compilation for them to use in their classes when teaching my book. I began planning to create a website to go with this new edition of Veiled Sentiments that might contain files of the songs.

I considered that this might be a service, not just to those wishing to enrich their understanding of the community through my books but to future generations of Awlad ʿAli. Wouldn’t they appreciate having access to these rich cultural forms? I even began to imagine that the website could contain links to my ethnographic writing, especially the Arabic translation of Veiled Sentiments, which is difficult to find.33 I dug out from a bottom file drawer boxes of old cassette tapes with broken plastic covers and scribbled notations. Dating from the late 1970s and 1980s, the tapes appeared not just as part of my own past, like the typed correspondence yellowing in manila folders in another drawer, but as an archive. Was it my responsibility to make it available?

I had the tapes digitized.34 Doubts began to creep in, though, as I listened to them. There were those familiar voices. I was overwhelmed with nostalgia. Each of the speakers was easily identifiable to me. In addition to poems and songs and the folktales that I had specially requested and that people were only too glad to let me record, I sometimes had captured everyday conversations. There was the occasional argument or discussion of a scandal. It dawned on me that even now, thirty-five years later, when many of the speakers had grown up or grown old or passed away, the relatives and children of those being discussed were still around. How could I make these tapes public as an archive?

I downloaded a few of the files onto a flash drive to bring to them—being careful to separate the recordings I had made of the Haj from recordings of women at weddings, telling stories, and reciting poems. This was a living community. What people said, and what they had said in the past, still mattered. Like the booklet I had brought earlier, the recordings of the Haj—telling the story of his accident while collecting scrap metal after World War II, or reciting poetry—interested everyone when I shared them with family. It was eerie to hear his voice again in his house. One or two young women disapproved, saying it was wrong to listen to the voices of those who had passed away. This is the new talk of Islamist purity. Others shushed them because they so much wanted to hear him. Some commented that the Haj’s poems, taped privately in his own room one evening, were laments for a cousin who had been killed. This death had marked a deep wound in the family, one that was known throughout the region. I realized then that these too were sentiments awkward to put out into the world. What would these songs stir up?

The Haj’s sons and nephews took the flash drive that contained his words and songs to play for others in the men’s guest room. They were not interested in the recordings of women, nor would they have dreamt of playing the wedding songs in that public context. When the Haj’s widow and an old friend and companion of the Haj’s family came to sit with me, I sought their opinion. I said that I had been wondering about putting the tapes on the Internet so that the family could access them. The friend’s first reaction was positive. “Sure, you can do that with the men’s tapes. But of course not the women’s.” The Haj’s widow concurred. She knew that I knew why this would be inappropriate, even though she didn’t know what the Internet was. Later, when I consulted with one of her daughters about posting the recordings, as well as a scan of the no longer available Arabic translation of my book (because she had just asked me if I had another copy, since someone had borrowed but never returned hers), she said no. Everyone knew that I had lived with her family and so would be able to identify people. As I was to discover, she was concerned about their reputation.

What ethical and political responsibilities flow from our becoming “natives” of more than one place? Audra Simpson, an anthropologist who sits in uneasy membership in the community of Mohawk about whom she writes, and who has made a devastating critique of the way Native Americans, and Iroquois in particular, have been fixed in time and text and harmed by the ethnographic work of Lewis Henry Morgan, has advocated “ethnographic refusal” as the proper stance.35

In doing so, Simpson turns upside down the meaning of the term as it was first introduced by Sherry Ortner.36 Ortner used the term to criticize studies of everyday forms of resistance in subaltern studies, postcolonial studies, and related fields. She accused such studies of being ethnographically thin and not taking seriously the cultural worlds within which peasants and other subaltern subjects act. She hypothesized that what lay behind this failure was a Marxist theory that denigrates religion and ideology; a fear of exposing compromising views or conflict within subaltern communities; or possibly a crisis in representation brought on by Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak’s famous question: “Can the subaltern speak?”37

Simpson instead embraces this refusal. She argues that we must resist the compulsion to reveal everything we know as ethnographers. She does so given what she shows is the history of anthropology’s complicity in undermining the sovereignty of native peoples—in the case she studies, native people in the Americas, who were its original objects of study (remember Trouillot’s “savage slot”). She advocates ethnographic refusal as a protective move against the ongoing dispossessions of settler states that use their knowledge about native communities to discipline or undermine them. Her fieldwork made her acutely aware of the way such pressures create tensions around authenticity and can produce harsh practices of exclusion within such communities.

My ambivalence upon returning to Veiled Sentiments this many years later leads me to something similar. I prefer to think of it as “ethnographic reserve.” I have reservations about what I have already revealed. I am reluctant to disclose more. Not that, in my first writing of the book, there were not things that I thought best to leave out, either because I didn’t quite understand them or because they were not relevant. A few were things that I knew it would be a betrayal of trust to publish, since I had chanced to know them only because people had so kindly included me in their lives.

When Veiled Sentiments was translated to Arabic, something I eagerly sought in order to make it more accessible, I worried that the theoretical arguments about the complexity of culture and moral systems might be lost on those unfamiliar with the ways anthropologists use the details of everyday life in distant places to answer big questions, as Clifford Geertz once put it.38 I worried that the stories of love, betrayal, and loss that I had bent to this higher anthropological purpose might seem indiscreet. I had faith then that these disclosures were redeemed somehow by the justice I had done to the ways my friends in this incommensurate world thought and lived, and the richness of their social and cultural lives. At the same time, I was pleased that I had recorded for posterity exquisite cultural forms that were dying out, but might one day be valued.

As it turned out, the sharpest criticisms of the translated book came from another angle: the political. A review in an Arabic magazine had alerted educated acquaintances of the Haj to the way I had presented Awlad ʿAli attitudes toward the Egyptian state. They had challenged him. Why did your “daughter” say we try to avoid paying taxes, carry unlicensed firearms, and try to escape state control in our legal system? His rebuttal, as he had explained to me proudly, was that this was perfectly true. Didn’t they agree? And he had taught me everything I knew.

The Awlad ʿAli Bedouin are more vulnerable politically now. They are subject to surveillance by security forces that have set up checkpoints across their region, which borders Libya. Suspected for their support for the now defeated Islamist parties in Egypt, they are subject to harassment by police and security under the new regime. I noticed that some of the young men had shaved their beards since my last visit. They admitted that this was the reason.

I wrote my second ethnography of the Awlad ʿAli because I felt that Veiled Sentiments was too formal, too anthropological. In Writing Women’s Worlds, I used intimate stories of the everyday to break apart generalizations about kinship systems and the honor code. I placed people in changing historical circumstances and showed that they argued and disagreed with each other. This was to avoid the impression of homogeneity. I had misgivings about this very revealing book, even though I knew that there was nothing like it about a Bedouin community. I knew how much ignorance there was about groups like them, both in Egypt and in the West. I compared what I had written in that second ethnography to making public the candid photographs that I loved so much but that my Bedouin friends didn’t value. They preferred formal posed portraits.

My misgivings about this have grown now. My self-imposed duty to anthropological knowledge has begun to feel hollow. Why should I satisfy readers’ curiosity about what has happened to this community? I am beginning to resent the responsibility I feel to combat, through ethnography, the negative views held by Westerners and even other Arabs who are ignorant about this way of life. I am even beginning to question my desire to contribute to future generations of Awlad ʿAli by making available my archive. The ghinnaawas I analyzed in Veiled Sentiments were recited or sung only in certain social contexts. Yet in this book the song/poems are transcribed for anyone to read. If I make the tapes public, they will be available for anyone to hear, revealing personal sentiments that were meant for certain people.

I have changed all the names, as is standard practice. But as that one young woman said to me: “Everyone knows this is our family.” My heart sank when she told me, in our first-ever Skype call, after my last visit, that there were things I shouldn’t have put in my book because they reflected badly on her family. When I pressed, her concern was not at all what I had expected and dreaded. I had always felt uncomfortable about the stories about marital disputes or the recordings of folktales that I had used to analyze gender relations. I quickly tried to defend myself, lamely pointing out that I had shown in the book how much they valued honor and how beautiful their poetry was. I didn’t dare explain to her that my ethnographies also humanized her community. It would never have crossed her mind to think they needed this.

It turned out that she was referring only to my complaints about the physical discomforts of living with them. “But everyone lived like that in those days,” I protested. My descriptions of fieldwork, which had been meant to bring to life this distant world, were now being taken out of context. Or rather, put back into context—the context of this particular family. She was worried about how the younger generation, who live much more comfortable lives now, in apartments or villas with washing machines, televisions, and carpeting, and who are literate and working as teachers, engineers, and pharmacists, for example, would react to what I had described from the 1970s. I had embarrassed her family, a family with a reputation.

The coming together of our worlds shook what little I had left of that “libido sciendi” that Bourdieu marveled at in the context of the Algerian war. Or my confidence in ethnography as that which could introduce into public debate more nuanced and serious ways of understanding social and political experiences. Toward what ends and for whom do we study human lives? Is making ethnography into an intellectual production a good way to repay the debts we incur as ethnographers? As Didier Fassin concludes in his article on public ethnography, our priority should be those with whom we have worked.39 What are the ethics of disclosing what we have learned as ethnographers now that we live in a world where borders are no longer firmly in place, where one cannot control who will read or see or hear what one has made public, where what one may have presented in good faith could be redeployed in the service of other projects, or where those who have been observed might be made vulnerable by what we reveal? Or be just plain embarrassed?

On my most recent visit a few of the women who had been my young companions when I first lived with the Haj’s family suggested we go for a walk while we waited for supper, the lamb that had been slaughtered in our honor. We walked on the new road that had been laid just behind the walls of our house. We dropped in to say hello at their brothers’ new homes. Each one insisted that lunch for us the next day would be at his place.

As we passed one walled yard, I recalled that they used to keep the Haj’s white horse there. They had let my son ride her on one visit. I asked about her. This brought to mind memories: they told me the mare used to nuzzle their father when, in his last days, they brought him out in his wheelchair to warm up in the winter sun. One day, though, she broke loose from her yard and wandered onto the main road. She was hit by a car. They hadn’t had the heart to tell their father. They dreaded the moment when he would ask where she was. They wanted to protect him from the news. He never got a chance to ask.

The ethnographic reserve I feel now is also protective. Although Veiled Sentiments opened up worlds for many and was for me a labor of love, the lofty goals of ethnographic work no longer seem so compelling. To honor our ʿishra, I do not want any longer to mediate my relationships with these families through anthropology. I hope they will value the historical record I have created of who they were and how they lived. I hope they will find the analysis true to life. Maybe even illuminating. And I hope someday they will ask me for something—maybe to work with them on something that matters to them. But in these uncertain times, it is not clear to me what good would come from more revelations, however insightful, meant for audiences that do not really include them.

I turn over in my mind the touching thing that one of the Haj’s sons said to me as I was getting ready to leave after my first visit following his father’s death. He was a handsome young man with green eyes just like his father’s, and I had a soft spot for him. I always remembered him as the quiet boy who had lived with us for a year without his own mother present. She had argued with the Haj and gone back to live in her brother’s household. It took a while for them to reconcile. The young man said to me, “Just because the Haj is gone, don’t think that this isn’t still your home.” I appreciated that. The question I have now is how best to reciprocate.





APPENDIX:

FORMULAS AND THEMES OF THE GHINNĀWA





The Awlad ʿAli ghinnāwa is a form of traditional oral poetry. Scholars of oral literature and Arab poetry would no doubt find a thorough analysis of this genre and greater attention to the textual interesting. What follows is a brief and preliminary discussion of the use of formulas and the range of themes in the ghinnāwa that will do little more than hint at the rich field awaiting analysis.

Bedouin individuals either draw poems from a cultural repertoire or compose them extemporaneously, playing with familiar themes, phrases, and structures. I thus characterize the poetic discourse as formulaic, but I mean something less rigid than the use of actual formulas, which Lord and Parry have shown to be key elements of the composition and recitation of traditional epic poetry (see Lord 1971). Since rhyme is absent and meter need not be sustained for any length, and because there is little pressure to compose rapidly during performance, complex formulas may be less essential in this genre. However, images, phrases, and themes recur. The ghinnāwa even has a specialized vocabulary, its most common and characteristic terms being ones rarely heard in ordinary speech. Some of these terms are so ubiquitous that they must be viewed as conventions or simple formulas.

Awlad ʿAli do not seem overly concerned with distinguishing between original poems and those heard and repeated, a feature characteristic of oral poetry (Lord 1971, 101). The answers I got to questions of authorship were not reliable. Often, just after someone had told me a poem was theirs I would hear it from someone else. Several people told me that “in the olden days” everyone could compose poems but that since few could now do so, most people merely repeated poems by rote. Even so, certain individuals are recognized as particularly gifted and interested in poetry. These individuals do compose original poems, remembering the date and occasion of the composition. For example, one man recited a poem to me that he said he had composed eight years earlier about a married woman whom he had loved.

Only under a few special circumstances do people self-consciously quote or repeat the poems of others. The first is in recounting well-known Bedouin love stories or romances, in which the dialogue between lovers is nearly always in poetry of the ghinnāwa form. The second is when they relate true-life events that involved the exchange of poetry. In both these cases, the poems are prefaced by the phrase “she said . . . ” or “he said . . . ”

In any case, the line between original poems and poems in the repertoire is extremely thin In individual recitations, whether at formal occasions such as weddings or in the course of ordinary conversations, people tend to recombine formulaic elements creatively or to elaborate on familiar themes within traditional constraints to create their own songs, as can be seen by comparing poems.





THE USE OF FORMULAS


The simplest variations in poems depend on the composer’s ability to substitute words and phrases to change the meaning only slightly. The following two poems, recited by different people over a year apart, illustrate this:





Oh eyes be strong

you cherish people and then they’re gone . . .



yā anẓār dīrun ʿazm

tghālī ʿarab wyfārgū . . .



It’s your fate, oh eye

you cherish people and then they’re gone . . .



maktūb yā l-ʿēn ʿalēk

tghālī ʿarab wyfārgū . . .





Similarly, substituting phrases or hemistiches can produce slight changes in meaning, as in the following two poems, the first recorded by Falls in 1906, the second by me in 1979:





Tears won’t bring your sweetheart

endure your malady patiently . . .



damiʿ mā yjīb ḥabīb

ʿala dāk yā ʿēn uṣubrī . . .



Tears won’t bring your sweetheart

pay no mind and be quiet . . .



damiʿ mā yjīb ḥabīb

blā bāl yā ʿēn isiktī . . .





Alternatively, a poem’s framework or mode of construction might be retained while the content shifts. This can be seen in the following two poems, the first recorded by me, the second by Qādirbūh (1977, 144), which are built around the idea of before and after:





Today they moved to distant camps

who before just a shout would bring . . .



il-yōm bāʿadū bid-dār

illī gabl ʿāyṭa tjībhum . . .



They patiently endured for years

what before they could not have borne a day . . .



ṣbirun yā ʿazīz snīn

illī gabl yōm ykēdhun . . .





Many poems are variations on a theme and play with a common metaphor. The following two are selected from scores revolving around the theme of the wounds of love:





The wounds, oh beloved, of your love

heal some days then open again . . .



jrūḥ yā ʿazīz ghalāk

yabran ayām wynāwidׅh ukhra . . .



My wounds were just about healed

and today oh my torment, they tore open . . .



jrūhī gabl biryanāt

wil-yōm yā ʿadhābī naggadׅhan . . .





Although these particular examples were not described as such, they would most likely be considered what Awlad ʿAli refer to as “sister songs.” One of the important forms of exchange involves answering one person’s poem with its sister, that is, another poem that plays on the same theme or picks up a key image, word, or metaphor. When one woman recited the poem that follows and was answered by another woman, people pointed this out to me as an example of sister songs.





Take the night an hour at a time

sleepless until they draw near . . .



khudhī l-lēl bis-sāʿāt

smūr nīn yā ʿēn yagrabaw . . .



Your sleeplessness in deepest night

is torment but you can bear it . . .



smūrik ʿagāb il-lēl

ʿadhāb ghēr yā ʿēn tiḥimlī . . .





Shearing songs are sometimes called sister songs, too. The annual spring sheep shearing was once a festive occasion undertaken by young men from the camps, not the specialists who now travel from camp to camp. The ghinnāwas of shearing (jallāma) differ from others in their allusions and symbolism, all tied to imagery of sheep and goats. For example, in shearing songs the words for the beloved, ʿalam and ʿazīz (see chapter 5), are replaced by the words for sheep (ghanam) and goats (miʿīz), which rhyme with them. Other words are replaced by ones that refer to such things as wolves, milk, and butter, which have much to do with sheep-herding. The true meaning of the poems usually has to do with love, and their sister songs, which must be known to fully appreciate these shearing songs, are explicit.

Perhaps even more common than responding with sister songs to the ghinnāwas of others is answering with a retort or repartee. This is the form romantic dialogues usually take, and I heard a number of such poetic conversations about various subjects. The following exchange from a love story illustrates the nature of “response” (radd) poems. The man said:





Shame on you, oh beloved

to forget me when you are eternally in my thoughts . . .



ʿēb yā ʿazīz ʿalēk

tinsīnī wnā dōm fākrik . . .





to which the girl might answer in any of various ways, including:





Fear not for your love

it’s pressed between my eyelash and eye . . .



ghalāk lā tkhāf ʿalēh

madsūs bēn ʿēnī whidbha . . .





or its sister song:





Fear not for your love

you’ll find it even after two long years away . . .



ghalāk lā tkhāf ʿalēh

ḥattā in ghibit ʿāmēn tajidu . . .





Qādirbūh (1977), Al-Ghannāy (1968), and Jibrīl (1973) all give numerous examples of love stories, told as true stories, that involve such exchanges. Most intriguing is the fact that the first two authors relate stories in which some of the poems exchanged are nearly identical, although the stories themselves are not (Qādirbūh 1977, 132—33; Al-Ghannāy 1968, 8), suggesting that not only do individuals play with formulas in their spontaneous poetizing, but even in storytelling people vary the originals in standard ways and are not terribly concerned with reproducing the poems word for word.

Sister songs and response poems are the two culturally elaborated forms of poetic wordplay, but individuals sometimes spontaneously play with poems for humorous or serious effects. By substituting incongruous words, people can make statements, often ironic, about situations. In these cases, as with the shearing songs, the meaning depends on the prior familiarity of reciter and listener with the original. For example, one day a woman was teasing her husband’s client’s wife. A large sheep herd had been brought nearby to be fattened for market, and the young client, responsible for caring for them, was forced to spend his nights outdoors with the sheep, not at home with his wife. The woman sang:





Fdׅhūla is the verdure of the eye

evening he spends with me and sleeps out in the open . . .



Fdׅhūla rabīʿ l-ʿēn

yamsā maʿāy wybāt fil-khalā . . .





Fdׅhūla is the affectionate diminutive of the man’s name, suggesting that the singer was expressing the wife’s sentiments in the poem. The wife responded to the teasing with mock anger, acting offended that she should be suspected of caring about her husband’s absence at night and, by implication, sexuality, which threatened her image as modest. Yet what made the poem so humorous was that it called up a more serious poem that followed the same form:





The heart, oh you far away

in the evening is with me and sleeps where you are . . .



il-galb yā biʿīd id-dār

yamsā maʿāy wybāt ʿindak . . .





Other poems depend for their effect and meaning on strange twists given familiar poems. In one case, by changing just one word an old woman fundamentally altered the meaning of a poem and highlighted a comment she wanted to make on a current situation. She sympathetically recited the following poem to her daughter-in-law, whose husband had just married another wife:





Thirty ships of true love

loaded with love’s dues went off course . . .



thlāthīn markab ṣōb

wāsgāt gānūn khaṭaw . . .





As I later discovered, this poem was a transformation of the “correct” or more traditional one, which was most likely known to the other listeners:





Thirty ships of true love

loaded with love’s dues and affection . . .



thlāthīn markab ṣōb

wāsgāt gānūn wghalā . . .





I translate gānūn, which literally means law, as “love’s dues” because I think this better conveys the sense of the term in this poem. Informants glossed the term gānūn in this case as wājbāt, or duties. By changing just the last word from “affection” to “mistake” (which I translated as “off course” in keeping with the seafaring imagery of the poem), she poignantly highlighted the injustice of her daughter-in-law’s situation. Instead of getting the affection due her after so many years of marriage, she had lost all.





THEMES


Although I would argue that typologies based on topics or key words tell us little, since the meaning of the poems derives primarily from their social contexts and uses, a look at common themes may give some sense of the arenas in which the ghinnāwa, as distinct from other genres of oral poetry, comes into play.

A limited number of rough categories based on central themes or metaphors emerge even from a quick scan of the corpus of poems I collected. Undue weight should not be given to this particular set, since it does not represent the fruits of systematic sampling but only of listening and recording poems that came up spontaneously or were volunteered. The categories might not be quite the same as those that would emerge from an analysis of other collections, although Jibrīl’s (1973, 71) list of “poetic pillars” on which ghinnāwas are built is close to mine. It is interesting to speculate about changes over time, however. For instance, Falls (1908) does not have a single poem about “despair” (yās), which I found to be one of the most elaborated themes, although some differences might also be attributed to gender, since most of the poems in my collection are women’s, and I suspect he has few, if any, not recited by men.

Most of the four hundred and fifty poems I collected fall into a number of overlapping categories based on theme or key image, and many of the poems combine elements. Nearly all the poems have to do with powerful sentiments arising in interpersonal relationships. In many cases, it is clear that the reference is to love relationships between men and women; more often the poems are ambiguous in reference and are used to describe sentiments that arise in all sorts of close relationships, including those between kin, friends, mothers, and children.

With the exception of wedding ghinnāwas, which express sentiments of happiness, pride, well-wishing, welcome, and family rivalry, poems expressing positive sentiments are not common. Among the most numerous and haunting are the poems about despair, usually the result of loss in love or inability to have the loved one. This sentiment is endowed with qualities of an independent entity whose character and devastating effects on the poet are explored in images as violent as the following:





I built, when despair was away,

castles it knocked down when it came . . .



banēt fī ghiyāb il-yās

gṣūr wēn mā jā hadhun . . .





Despair can also be described in images drawn from nature. In the following poem, the imagery is more consistent in Arabic than in English because the opening of a well is called an “eye.”





Blinded by the sandstorm of despair

the wells of love were plugged . . .



ʿamāhum ʿajāj il-yās

byār il-ghalā nīn in-ʿamun . . .





In the following poem, despair is vaguely anthropomorphized:





I wonder, is despair

a phantom or my companion for life . . .



zʿama yā l-yās iz-zōl

willā rafīg dīmā lkhāṭrī . . .





Sometimes intermingled with poems of despair are those about separations, moving away, long distances—experiences probably all too frequent in the lives of a nomadic people. The sentiments are those of the difficulty of parting, the longing for those far away, the sense of emptiness after loved ones have gone, and the misery of having no news. This theme may be overrepresented in my corpus, because people with whom I lived sang many to me as I prepared to depart for a break in the middle of fieldwork and later for my return home. They also sang for me, empathizing with the state they presumed I must be in, being so far from home and my own loved ones.

In ghinnāwas, sadness, whatever its cause, is customarily conveyed through imagery of tears (dmūʿ) and weeping (bkā), likened variously to cloudbursts, floods, rivulets, mirages, or described through its effects on the eyes, tangling eyelashes and causing blindness. A number of examples of this type were presented above.

Another set of poems of suffering draws on imagery of bodily ills. Withering of the body, wasting away, dizziness, headaches, and unspecified pain are some of the poetic symptoms of painful emotional experiences. Often it is not just a matter of illness, but of wounds of love, festering, healing, requiring medication, or incurable. Most of these images are familiar from the lyrics of Arab love poetry, from the pre-Islamic ode to the Andalusian muwashshaḥ (Compton 1976, 60), to parts of which the ghinnāwa has been likened (Jibrīl 1973, 114).

Helpless suffering and sadness are by no means the only sentiments that find expression in poems. There are defiant poems of anger and a sense of betrayal. People rebuke and insult others through poetry, although rarely to their faces. Much of the imagery in this type is drawn from tribal hearings where injustices can be brought up, grievances aired, claims settled, and appeals for rights made.

The Bedouins may conceive of the ʿagl as based in the heart, but they think of it as also profoundly connected to thoughts and memories and, ultimately, to worries. Many poems warn of the dangers of excessive worry and thought. Thinking and remembering are often linked in poetry to assorted maladies, especially anxiety, insomnia, restlessness, and confusion. They even lead to premature aging, as the following poem suggests:





You go grey in the prime of youth

if your mind troubles you, dear one . . .



tshīb winit fī masbāg

il-ʿagl lū shākīk yā ʿalam . . .





The last major category is that defined by philosophical or religious themes, including, but not restricted to, songs sung by the descendants of saintly lineages of Mrābṭīn at their festivals (mūlids). To comfort themselves or others in adversity, individuals often recite poems that play on themes of God’s power to change things or of the immutability of fate, destiny (naṣīb), what has been “written” (maktūb), and one’s divinely decreed lot in life (gism). Misfortune is also attributed to luck (bakht), which is considered to be ultimately God-given. Patience (ṣabr), one of the great religious virtues, is enjoined as a response to difficult situations. These poems betray the importance of the Islamic faith in the lives of Awlad ʿAli.





