7




* * *





MODESTY AND THE POETRY OF LOVE





Discourses on Love


Personal relationships, especially love relationships with persons of the opposite sex, are of great concern among the Bedouins. Indeed, they are central to the ideology of honor and modesty: love relationships pose such a threat to the system that they are the object of stringent control through symbolic manipulation. The threat of sexuality is contained primarily by transmuting it into an element of the code of morality by which individual worth is judged. Modesty, including the denial of attachment to unrelated members of the opposite sex, is construed as a moral virtue—for women, the ultimate one. Denial of sexuality is interpreted as an aspect of self-mastery and deference to those who represent the social order. Women’s closer “natural” association with sexuality saddles them with a greater need to distance themselves from it in order to gain respectability, but men, too, must deny their sexual interests if they are to assert their autonomy.

Love relationships are also central to poetic life. As noted in chapter 5, Awlad ʿAli associate the ghinnāwa more closely with romantic love than with any other theme.1 But poetry is a language of love distinct from and opposed to ordinary discourse on such matters. The same pattern of contradictory responses that characterizes individuals’ responses to loss may also be seen in their communications about love relationships. In matters of love, instead of an honorable discourse of anger counterposed to a poetic discourse of vulnerability, there is a modest discourse of detachment balanced by a poetic discourse of attachment and deep feeling. This dichotomy can be seen in the way people respond to situations of thwarted love, arranged marriages, divorces, and polygynous marriages.





Star-Crossed Lovers


Ghinnāwas are tied up with the popular cultural theme of thwarted love, both in its ordinary and in its mythic manifestations. The real trials of individual sweethearts and the mythic ones of the tragic heroes and heroines of Bedouin traditional romances or love stories usually display a tension between the wishes of individual lovers and the demands of a system that is based on kinship, arranged marriage, and the priority of patrilateral parallel cousins. Ghinnāwas are also indexically linked to romantic love, in that sweethearts exchange poems when together (although this practice was more common in the past), and when separated they sing plaintive songs to express their longing. In Bedouin romances, lovers always speak to each other in poetry.

Although Awlad ʿAli give families the unquestioned right to arrange marriages for their children, this system, like all others, has its costs. Many arranged marriages are long-lasting and not unhappy, benefiting from luck, personal maturity, support by both kin groups, preexisting bonds of affinity or kinship, and minimal demands on or expectations of the conjugal pair. Other such marriages bring only misery.

Misery arises when one partner has an aversion to the person chosen for him or her, or had wished to marry someone else and was prevented. Nāfla’s marital history, presented in chapter 3 to illustrate the limits of coercion, includes several cases of aversion. In the first arranged marriage to her cousin, she already knew the groom, had no desire to marry him, and resisted successfully. In the second one, her aversion arose as soon as she saw the groom on her wedding day. This type of aversion is so common, especially for women, who tend to have less say in their marriages, that it goes by a special term with ritualized behavioral correlates. If the girl’s family refuses to support her in her bid for a divorce or the husband’s family refuses to grant a divorce, the couple lives unhappily.

It often happens that one of the marriage partners is unhappy with an arranged marriage because there was someone else who would have been preferred. With the decreasing opportunity for contact between adolescent girls and boys, except in the large towns where they attend school together, this may be less of a problem now than in the past. At least according to informants’ tales romances and infatuations used to be prevalent. The ideal romance was secret, involving brief meetings in isolated spots, the exchange of tokens such as jewelry or other personal possessions, and most of all, the exchange of poetry.

Romances were unlikely to result in marriage for a number of reasons. Love matches are opposed in principle; they violate the ideal of family control over marriage and represent individual initiative and hence defiance of the system. To accept love matches would be to legitimize as a force in social life passion that does not derive from relationships of kinship. One man argued that romances could lead to marriage only if the couple was careful not to let anyone, especially the girl’s kin, even suspect that the two knew each other and then finagled to have the families arrange the marriage. That senior men disapprove is understandable, but even women share these views. They rationalize their disapproval by claiming that love matches never work out because if a woman marries for love she is especially vulnerable to her husband; a woman following her heart probably does so at the expense of her kin group, so, alone in her marital community and without the support of her kin, she has no recourse if mistreated nor any leverage in asserting her rights.

The person most responsible for preventing love matches is the girl’s paternal first cousin. By stepping in and claiming her for himself, a right given him by custom, he dashes any hopes a potential rival might entertain. Sometimes his claim is underpinned by a genuine wish to marry the girl; often he is put up to it by his kinsmen or does it to preserve the kin group’s honor, which is threatened by the “shameful” desires of an immodest kinswoman. This threat to the authority of kinsmen is the crux of the problem with romance.

Cousins regularly avail themselves of their right, as endless stories, fictional and real, of star-crossed lovers and thwarted love matches attest. Many men complained that they had been prevented at varying stages of the negotiations from marrying women by cousins’ interference, and many women were married to their cousins. The Haj, for example, had fallen in love with and wanted to marry three women before his present wife, but he had been prevented in each case by the girls’ cousins. He had had his first romance at the age of seventeen; his telling of the story is intriguing because he mentions the role poetry played in it. He and his father took considerable pride in this defiant romance, a significant fact but one that I will wait until the final chapter to discuss; here I will only note that people enforced the social system and thwarted those who tried to contravene it. I paraphrase his story as he told it:





It was 1950. I was in love with a girl from a Mrābiṭ tribe. Her father and mine were best friends. She was tough but beautiful. I loved her and she loved me. We would arrange meetings through friends, who took messages back and forth. We only managed meetings of a few minutes. We recited poetry to one another. I never touched her; we met just to talk. I swear it was not for anything else. We are humans, not animals. This was God-given love [min rabnā], true love.

One day, after much scheming, we managed to arrange a special rendezvous. We were out in the desert, far away from the camps. We sat together, she a few inches away [a respectable distance], and I had my rifle across my lap. Suddenly her three cousins [father’s brother’s sons] came upon us. [How did they know about the meeting?] They had been keeping an eye on her.

She nearly died of fear. She knew they would kill her, or kill me. But I had a gun and they didn’t. I asked her, “Would you feel safe if you were in your father’s house?” She said yes. So we got up and I slowly walked her toward her camp. The three cousins walked near us, watching every move. But I delivered her safely to her father’s house and had to explain everything to her father.

Her father came to see mine, told him everything that had happened. It was a big scandal. But my father was very fond of me, and her father was fond of her. He said he would be willing to give his daughter to us [in marriage]. My father was willing to pay the bride-price. No one had ever gotten away with something like this before, but they all respected me for not having run, for having bravely walked the girl home to protect her. It showed I was a real man.

But her cousins prevented the marriage. They called a tribal hearing [miʿād] to settle the problem. The conditions set were that I was never to see or talk to her again. They said I must never try to get in touch with her. Then one of these cousins married her. When he died, another of the cousins married her. She is still living with him. Her husband is now a friend of mine, so I occasionally see her. I greet her when I go to their house [a sign of familiarity].

It is all over now, even the feelings. But it lasted a long time. I was very sad at the time. My father used to ask people to recite the many poems I had composed for her and her responses because they were so beautiful.2 I married very late. I was thirty. This was because the same thing kept happening. It happened again twice. I loved someone and she loved me but it was not destined to be [naṣīb]. Each time, the cousins of the girl prevented the marriage. Finally I gave up and was willing to take any old wife.





Proud of his poetic skills, one day the Haj offered to record some ghinnāwas for me. We went over the tape together, and he gave exegeses of the twelve poems he had sung. The first was a poem he had composed about the Mrābiṭ girl, a couple of years after she had married her cousin. He explained that it referred to his despair at never being able to have her and at having nothing left of her but memories. When he thought of her, he fell ill, so he wished he could just forget her.





Thinking of them with pain

if only they would not come to mind . . .



tafākīrhun bawjāʿ

lū kān mā ʿalēnā yukhuṭrū . . .





A second poem was about a married woman he had loved. It describes the strain of trying to catch a glimpse of her from a distance, she who wasn’t free to meet him. The word he uses for married woman is common to this genre, although not used in the vernacular. It comes from the same root as hostage.





They’ve worn you out, oh eye

married loved ones with no time for you . . .



mdhāyblīnik yā ʿēn

awlāfun mrāhīn mā fdׅhaw . . .





Poetry, from this case, is clearly the medium through which sentiments of love and longing are expressed.





The groom’s female relatives dance and sing to welcome a new bride





An Arranged Marriage


Most people lead less dramatic lives; most do not pine away for those forbidden to them, and most do not die of broken hearts. People nevertheless confront difficult personal situations, which are often the consequence of the way Bedouin society structures the relations between men and women.

The complex relationship between poetry and the discourse of everyday life is reflected in the reactions of Fāyga, a young woman of about twenty-five, to her arranged marriage to a man in our community. By juxtaposing her poetic and mundane responses we can see how she grappled with conflicting feelings and motivations. Paramount in ordinary social interactions was her concern not to compromise her image as a proper Bedouin girl from a good family who knows the meaning of ḥasham—in both its senses, as sexual modesty and as propriety. As a good woman she should not resist a marriage arranged by her brothers, as this would constitute defiance. At the same time, she should express no interest in men, not even her husband, in order to preserve her image as sexually modest. She upheld these standards in her interactions with others in her husband’s household and in her conversations with me. But in her poems, especially those she recited in the first months of her marriage, she revealed shifting feelings about the marriage, feelings very different from the ones she conveyed in her public response.

Fāyga was brought as a bride for the Haj’s brother Rashīd, the man whose first wife’s angry reaction I described in the last chapter. He had decided to take a second wife—perhaps because his first wife, Mabrūka, kept giving birth to sickly children—and had heard about Fāyga from a friend. As an adult, he had arranged for the marriage himself, using his friend as a go-between. Although he claimed that he had seen her before the wedding, she insisted that she had not seen him. She and her mother had been living in a household with her older brothers, her guardians in her father’s absence, who were responsible for agreeing to the marriage. Because there had been no previous marriages between her family and Rashīd’s, and because both Fāyga and Rashīd were of high-status families that were unrelated, the negotiations had been long and the bride-price was high. There was a big wedding.

Things seemed all right at first. Fāyga, who did not know any of the women in her husband’s community, was initially shy; she rarely talked, and she ate little during the first week or two. This was normal—strangers are expected to feel uncomfortable and to taḥashsham. The women who lived in her household, her sisters-in-law, and visiting women teased her continually about sexual matters, loading their conversations with innuendos about her marital pleasures. She persistently feigned ignorance and innocence, denying any comprehension of what the women meant. They found her insistence a bit annoying, in part because it showed how estranged she felt among them, but they also recognized that they should respect her for it since she did it out of sexual modesty.

About two weeks after the wedding we had the first hints that she was unhappy with her marriage. She framed her dissatisfaction in terms that would reinforce her image as uninterested in men and sex and devoted to her kin group. She scolded the girls one night for singing wedding songs, saying, “It is wrong to sing and dance for the bride on the night before her wedding. What are people celebrating? Her separation from her loved ones?” I do not know what happened over the next three weeks, because I left for a short trip, but when I returned her attitude had worsened noticeably. One day she just started crying, allegedly because she missed her relatives. Two days later she confided in her mother-in-law that she was zāhda (had an aversion to her husband). That night, she stayed up late talking to the women, stubbornly ignoring their pleas to go to her room, where, as she well knew, her husband sat waiting for her. She dragged her heels night after night.

One afternoon she promised to help me interpret some wedding ghinnāwas, so I sat with her in her room. After a bit she began reciting new poems and songs. First she sang a long song, the gist of which was that sharing a husband was not good. Then came a short poem that seemed more like a proverb. It was on the same theme of the undesirability of polygyny:





Better death, blindness, poverty, and destitution

than a match with a married man . . .



il-mōt wil-ʿama wil-fagr

wil-ʿāza wlā ṣōb il-ghanī . . .





She then recited a series of ghinnāwas on the theme of one’s divine lot, or fate in life. When I asked at one point if a particular poem was about herself, she laughed and said it was just a song. Then she asked if it was important that it be about herself and admitted, “Yes, even this one is about me.” These poems seemed to express her dissatisfaction with the marriage that had been arranged for her. In the first she suggests agitation about something that could not be helped—presumably her choice of marriage partner:





You want, oh dear one, to be disappointed

and to fight about something not fated to be . . .



trīd yā ʿazīz tkhīb

wtʿārik ʿalē shī mā gsim . . .





In the second, she implies that her lot is so bad she would not wish it on a friend:





Without pleasures is my lot

oh God, may it not be imposed on a friend . . .



gsāmī blā ghayyāt

liṣ-ṣāḥib allāh lā yjībhun . . .





She explained the third as being about someone who wanted something she did not get. When I questioned her, she admitted that she had wanted to marry another man.





Don’t blame those who hurt you

just say it was not meant to be . . .



mā min illī yā ʿēn

ijraḥik ghēr gūlī mā gsimsh . . .





A few days later her brother-in-law, sister-in-law, and I set off to take her on a formal visit to her father.3 It was a difficult trip, taking us far into the desert where we had trouble finding our way and were caught in a sandstorm. We didn’t stay long because her brother-in-law was anxious to return. Fāyga was disappointed; she wanted to wait to see her younger brother, who had just been released from jail and was supposed to be on his way to her father’s. When we got home she said she was ill and complained that they could have dropped her off at her mother’s, where her brother was sure to come next.

After we returned from this trip she began to find fault with everything about her husband’s kin group. She complained to me and to the girls in the group that the men neglected and over-worked their women and children and that their lifestyle was appalling and unlike what she, coming from a town, was accustomed to. It is unclear whether by this she hoped merely to insult them or, more seriously, to provoke their anger so they would wish to send her home. She also began to recite a great deal of poetry that struck me as more negative than her earlier poems. The first poem she recited after her return was very depressing:





On my breast I placed

a tombstone, though I was not dead, oh loved one . . .



ʿalē ṣidērī ḥaṭṭēt

shahāyid blā mōt yā ʿalam . . .





The next day she recited a couple of poems, which I later shared with several women who interpreted them as indicating unhappiness with the marriage and a desire to end it. They suspected that Fāyga wished to marry someone else. The poems were the following:





Can it be that the eye would not want

to be happy again and its condition to clear . . .



zʿama mā trīd il-ʿēn

tazhā jdīd wyrūg ḥālhā . . .



If a new love match is not granted

the ache in my mind will continue, oh beloved . . .



in mā jdā ṣōb jdīd

ṣudāʿ l-ʿagl mā zāl yā ʿalam . . .





When I questioned her privately about these poems and her feelings about her marriage, she at first protested that she was unhappy because she found her husband ugly and old. (He was neither.) In a conversation a few days later, rather than mentioning a desire for another man—which she had all but admitted earlier in her poems and in her explanations of them—she took a different approach. She presented herself as a modest and asexual woman, professing a horror of sex, and as a good Bedouin with close ties to kin and a devotion to Islam. She said she wanted to have nothing to do with marriage.





I don’t like being married. I don’t like men. I want to go home to my family and just live there forever. It is much better to live without a man. What good is marriage? [Do you hate all men?] No, just a man who would want to “take me” [sexually]. I did not want to marry. Many people came to ask for me, but I refused to marry. I just wanted to stay with my relatives, those dear to me. I want to pray and go on the pilgrimage. And my brother’s children, I adore them.

I practically raised them. What is this marriage stuff, away from your dear ones and you can’t even go to visit them. Men, I never liked them. I’m afraid of them and I am disgusted by them [nitgarraf minhum]. [How did you feel on your wedding night?] I was afraid and so embarrassed. Oh, I got so embarrassed [kisift] and disgusted. I felt sick. I couldn’t eat. The whole first week I was disgusted and embarrassed. No, I want to go back home and never marry again.





Two days later she ran away, causing quite a stir in the community and considerable concern and speculation about her motives. The reactions of some individuals have already been described in chapter 3, referring to the unmanly way her husband, Rashīd, reacted. Fāyga was eventually persuaded to return, following negotiations and the rumored use of force by her brothers and intimidation by her mother.

Fāyga never gave a straight answer to the question of why she had left. When she did not answer, “Just because . . . ,” she insisted that her husband had suddenly looked like an evil spirit and she had fled in fright. People privately proposed a number of theories. Some said that she was merely playing hard-to-get to raise herself in her husband’s esteem and to secure a place in his affections; they assumed that she wished to displace her senior co-wife. Others thought she had left because she was jealous of his senior wife. Still others suspected sorcery or magic. There seemed to be no way to choose among the hypotheses.

Through her poems, though, what people took to be the truth came out. After her return, she complained often of illness, stubbornly defended her act to all the women who pressed and scolded her, and recited or sang many ghinnāwas. Nearly all her poems revolved around themes of putting up with bad luck and of suffering from longing for something unattainable. For the only time, I broke my promise not to reveal any of the women’s poems to men and shared some of them with her brother-in-law, who was extremely puzzled about the true state of her feelings. I had confided that she had recited some poems to me, and he begged to hear them. He listened intently and was astounded. A backer of the theory that she was merely playing games to maneuver for a better position, he changed his mind when he heard the poems, commenting as he listened, “It’s really that bad! I had not realized. She really is upset.”

When I shared yet others with my closest confidantes, they confirmed that not only was she miserable, but she probably was also in love with another man. I confronted her, and she defensively asked who had told me. I pretended I had figured it out from her poems, and then she confessed that she had wanted to marry a man from another tribe, whose marriage offer her brothers had refused because of a history of hostility between the families. She said she had not really known him but had fallen in love because she heard he was young, handsome, and wealthy.

A few basic points about the use of poetry in social life can be drawn even from this fragment of a young woman’s reaction to an arranged marriage. Ghinnāwas seem to have been the medium in which she could voice responses not culturally appropriate for a young Bedouin woman. Acquiescence to the decisions of her brothers and kinsmen, especially regarding her marriage, was proper. Respectability required the denial of romantic love or any interest in such matters. She tried to follow the correct path, or at least to present herself as conforming to these ideals. Even when she ran away, she tried to follow the customary procedure for declaring her unhappiness. But in her poems, which increased in frequency and intensity as she became more unhappy, she expressed a different set of sentiments and presented a side of her feelings not revealed elsewhere. More intriguing than the fact that she used poetry to express such sentiments was the fact that others judged that the poems reflected her reactions more accurately and dependably than did her ordinary behavior and conversation.





Marriage, Divorce, and Polygyny


The loves of youth, fulfilled or unfulfilled, pass. Individuals have to face different kinds of crises in love once they have married, settled down, and begun their adult lives. Most Awlad ʿAli marry fairly young—girls between about fifteen and twenty, boys anywhere between sixteen and thirty, depending on their financial situations. Many first marriages do not last but break up within a few months to a year because of youthful incompatibility or in-law difficulties; most people remain with their second partners.

The behavior and attitudes of spouses toward one another are powerfully shaped by the cultural ideals of modesty. Even if over time a married couple develop attachments, they rarely display their affection publicly. They spend little time together and do not engage in extended conversation, share meals, or work side by side. They politely avoid talking about each other in conversations with others, and they do not utter each other’s names. When men and women do make statements about their spouses or their marriages, they tend to express a limited range and special type of sentiment. At best they offer protestations of indifference or assertions of emotional independence. Women make jokes to suggest detachment from and lack of interest in their husbands. In situations of marital conflict, hostile insults and bitter complaints do surface, but these are always couched in material rather than emotional terms and justified by appeals to rights and duties.

Others reinforce these standards partly through teasing. I was surprised by the reception given a young woman who came running to one household crying. Shortly before, her husband had decided to take her back after “leaving” her (no longer going to sleep in her room) for two years. Now he was giving her a hard time about her chickens, which he said were messing the house; he wanted her to get rid of them. But she had been raising them for years and had used them to support her children. The women to whom she complained all concurred with one old woman who asked, “Why did you agree to go back to him? What do you want with a man? Your chickens are worth more than a husband.”

It is especially improper for an older woman to complain about losing her husband as a sexual partner. Some men argued that older couples should be like brother and sister; women thought it was “a shame in the woman’s face” (ʿēb fī wijh il-wliyya) to have sexual relations with her husband once her children were grown. One woman in our community was highly regarded for her calm response when her husband abandoned her for his second wife. Another woman, whose story will be told below, encountered criticism for admitting desire for her estranged husband.

The attachment and emotional dependence that often develop despite social and cultural deemphasis of, even disdain for, emotional closeness between husband and wife are uncovered, at least in poetry, when the relationship is threatened. Divorce can be a critical event in people’s lives. In the first few years of a marriage or before there are children, divorce, instigated by either husband or wife, rarely induces anguish. The woman returns to her family and nearly always remarries shortly thereafter. Little stigma attaches to divorce, and divorcées often command high bride-prices. Over a third of the adults in my community had been officially divorced at least once.4

But when divorce occurs after many years of marriage, it can be quite difficult. By this time a woman usually has many children and is unlikely to ask for a divorce, even if she is abused or unhappy, because she would have to leave her children behind, something most women cannot bear. Most commonly, then, at this stage in a marriage, a husband will divorce his wife after marital disputes or will “leave” her in favor of a younger wife. The wife has two choices in such situations: to return to her kin or to remain with her children. She often decides to stay with her children, and the husband is then responsible for providing her with food, clothing, and shelter. In the case of an angry divorce, they spend no time together and do not even greet one another in the camp. In a more friendly divorce or when the husband “leaves” the older woman (usually a first cousin) for a junior wife, the senior woman retains her position as head of the domestic household and continues to discuss business with her ex-husband, keep charge of his money, and share in confidential matters.

Ṣafiyya’s case illustrates the devastating personal effect of a divorce not wished for and the social and cultural pressure not to admit the pain. More important, her dual response to the divorce, in ordinary social interactions on the one hand and in poetry on the other, and the reactions of members of her community to these divergent expressions reveal something critical about the ghinnāwa’s role in social life.

One day this woman of about forty told me about her divorce. The event she described had occurred a year before I arrived in the camp where she had spent the twenty years of her married life. She said:





My youngest daughter was nursing in my arms when he left me. I was sick and tired. “The man” came up to me one afternoon as I sat by the oven. He said, “You’re divorced.” I said, “Thanks, that’s just fine by me.” He said, “You can go home to your relatives now.” I answered, “And leave my daughters here to be servants to the other women? No. I’ll stay here with my children.” For a year and a half we did not speak to each other. Now we greet each other. I didn’t want him. I don’t want anything from him except to build me a house to live in with my son—a place where I can feel at home. I didn’t care when he divorced me. I never liked him. He had taken another wife, but that didn’t bother me. I never fought with her. Why should I? These things don’t bother us.





This statement did not surprise me. Its tone of aggressive non-chalance was consistent with that expressed by other men and women when they talked about their marriages, even those uncomplicated by divorce or polygyny. As we saw in the last chapter, this type of emotional response to painful situations is characteristic.





Mother and daughter

Yet, two days later, we were sitting with several other women in her household, chatting during a lull in the busy round of domestic activities, when conversation turned to the whereabouts of her ex-husband, who was away on a trip. Suddenly she recited a short poem:





Memories stirred of the beloved

should I release, I’m flooded by them . . .



khaṭarhā sirīb ʿazīz

kēf nashā nsīl bi . . .





I remembered the first time I had met Ṣafiyya. I had arrived with another young woman, an Egyptian university student, for my first visit to the camp. Ṣafiyya had asked if either of us was married. We both replied in the negative. She leaned over and advised us earnestly, “Don’t ever get married. What would you want with marriage? Men are just sons of bitches. They do you no good.” A few months after I had begun living in the community, I showed my tape recorder to a group of women for the first time. Some volunteered to sing, including Ṣafiyya, who offered this song:





Oh eyes be strong

you cherish people and then they’re gone . . .



yā nẓār dīrun ʿazm

tghālī ʿarab wyfārgū . . .





There was no doubt in the minds of all who subsequently heard this song on tape that it referred to her ex-husband.

The incongruity between what Ṣafiyya said in ordinary language and what she expressed in poetry is striking. Her ordinary statements alternated between denials of concern about her loss and her husband’s rejection and expressions of bitterness and anger. Yet both of her poems convey the impression of sadness. The tears connoted by images of flooding and the reference to eyes are indices of sadness and suffering. The warnings to herself about the consequences of letting go and the exhortation to her eyes to be strong suggest the vigilance and effort required to control this sadness.

The reactions of other women in the community, including her co-wives, to her statements, both poetic and nonpoetic, give valuable clues to the functions of ghinnāwas. The taped song elicited both the nervous joking of people embarrassed by a display of immodesty and the sympathetic noises of people who cared, understood her situation, and were moved by her recitation. She had recited the other poem in the presence of a number of women, including her co-wives, who said nothing. When I asked her what the poem meant, one co-wife joked, “Go ask ‘the man’ when he comes home.” Ṣafiyya begged me not to.

A few months after my conversation with her, Ṣafiyya’s husband decided to take her back. She suddenly began to dress nicely, wearing kuḥl in her eyes, and she suggested that her older children sleep with their grandmother, not in her room. She joked that she was waiting for her nugūṭ (wedding gifts). Her blatant pleasure at the remarriage scandalized everyone. People gossiped and teased her. Her outraged mother-in-law exclaimed, “She wants him, she wants him! Come on, her son is already a man!” It was not as if no one had suspected her feelings—these women knew perfectly well from her poems how attached she was to the man. As long as she expressed these feelings in ghinnāwas, they had sympathized; but when she expressed them openly, outside of poetry, they began to criticize.

A number of observations about the role of poetry in matters of the heart can be drawn from this case. Sentiments of attachment to a loved one that violate the moral code, which for women centers on sexual modesty, find expression in poetry. For the most part, these poetic revelations are contradicted by public protestations of indifference and denials of attachment congruent with the cultural ideology about sexual love. When individuals slip and convey messages in the inappropriate medium, sharp criticism alerts them to their transgression, thus reinforcing the system.

The same pattern of divergent discourses on love is apparent in the responses of another woman, whose husband took a second wife. Like divorce, polygyny can be a source of anguish for Bedouin women, but concern over loss of the husband’s affection is similarly considered culturally inappropriate and personally immodest.

Polygyny among Awlad ʿAli is on the increase thanks to the influx of wealth from smuggling, the skyrocketing value of their traditional lands along the Mediterranean coast, and other economic developments. I gathered from discussions with the older members of the community that in former generations, rather than put up with a co-wife, women were more likely to divorce their husbands or make life so difficult that their husbands would be dissuaded from remarrying. Now other women scold and mollify first wives with such statements as, “Are you the only one this has ever happened to? These days it is to be expected. It happens to everyone.” Women joke that only the poor have their husbands to themselves because these men cannot afford second wives. In the community I lived in, over a third of the men married longer than two years had more than one wife. The correlation between wealth and polygyny is clear; only one of these men was not from the wealthy core families.

Reactions to a husband’s second or third marriage vary. In some cases, especially when the senior wife has been consulted or has approved or even chosen the new wife, things go smoothly. People could always point to examples of households in which co-wives were “like sisters.” My community had several such pairs of cooperative co-wives who rarely fought and appeared to be close and inseparable companions. In many other cases, however, women meet the news of their husband’s decision to take a second wife with less equanimity, and relations between co-wives are often strained or volatile.

In addition to social pressure against displaying negative responses to the prospect of sharing a husband, internal pressures for comportment in terms of sexual modesty determine many women’s public responses in this trying situation. The concern to convey indifference to the loss of the husband’s affections underlay the response of one woman whose husband was about to take another wife. One day he accused her of having stolen a ten-pound note that was missing from his pocket (he later found the note in another pocket). She was hurt by the false accusation and angry, but rather than going home to her kin in anger, as she might have done under ordinary circumstances, she forced herself to stay. She worried that people would misconstrue her motives and assume that she had left because of the husband’s upcoming marriage, not the false accusation. In households where polygyny is already a fact, women often take the offensive, seizing on violations of their rights to validate displeasure. An unhappy wife can always find some infraction on which to hang her complaints, because polygyny is clearly regulated in Bedouin society; the requirement that a husband treat his wives equally, from following a strict nightly rotation to bringing each identical gifts, right down to every bar of soap, opens vast possibilities for grievances.

And yet, if women feel compelled in mundane social interactions to mask overt signs of jealousy or feelings of betrayal—indicators of affection toward and attachment to their husbands—they can and do express those sentiments in poetry. The following case illustrates the relationship between poetic and ordinary statements about the loss of a husband’s affections, focusing specifically on the portrayal of indifference in ordinary discourse, rather than its alternative, anger.

In our first conversation after she heard the news that her husband of sixteen years was going to take a second wife, Mabrūka, Rashīd’s wife and mother of his six children, complained that her husband never bought her nice things for her room. She denied, however, that the upcoming marriage bothered her. She asserted, “Let him get married, I don’t care. But he should buy me nice things. He’s worthless, he always was. A real man asks after his family, sees to it that they have everything they need.”

As the wedding arrangements proceeded, problems arose. In the last chapter I described Mabrūka’s angry response on discovering that the gifts her husband had offered her were not equivalent to the ones he had brought the bride, and her subsequent rejection of the gifts. I also presented some of the sad poems she recited, poems that carried messages of attachment to her husband and a sense of abandonment.

Mabrūka did not attend the wedding or help with the preparations for it, as do many senior wives. When her sister arrived at the wedding and found her missing, she went to talk to her. Mabrūka calmly insisted that her help was sorely needed at the wedding of some neighbors being celebrated concurrently and that was why she hadn’t gone.

When her husband spent several days more than the customary week-long honeymoon with his new bride, Mabrūka protested that she did not care. She added that she had no intention of visiting the new bride’s household to welcome her, nor did she wish any visitors. A woman in her household reported that she had said, “Let him stay there.” I happened to be visiting her when her husband returned for the first time in the ten days since the wedding. He came with goods from the market; she was quiet, only muttering under her breath about what he had failed to buy. He took his gun to go hunting, and as he walked away, she commented to me, “It’s been ages [literally, years] since we saw him.” I asked sympathetically if she missed him. She replied abruptly, “No way. Do you think he is dear to me? I don’t even ask about him. He can come and go as he pleases.”

Moments later she recited a few poems. One suggested her consternation over the events of the recent past, brought up by his sudden appearance; another conveys a sense of betrayal:





They always left me

stuffed with false promises . . .



dīmā khallō l-ʿagl

ʿāmrāt bimwāʿīdhum . . .





In the course of this interchange Mabrūka’s mother-in-law and a close woman-friend joined us. They spontaneously added to her poems, voicing what they assumed she was experiencing. These same women had previously scolded her, or teased her, for her angry reactions, but through poetry they consoled her by showing their empathic concern. For them, the poetic discourse served as a medium in which they could recognize the legitimacy of attachment to a husband. The themes common to all the poems these women recited were those of sadness, suffering, and despair. Among the poems was one that referred explicitly to polygyny, the rich man being a euphemism for a married man.





My tears rushed down like a flood on a hill

flowing over the match of the rich man . . .



ḥdiran kēf sēl il-ʿilu

dmūʿī ʿale ṣōb il-ghanī . . .





Another one, sung by the friend, evoked a despair so powerful it could drive someone to abandon human society and to roam outdoors like an animal.





Despair of them, dear one, made you

a stray who wanders between watering places . . .



khallāk yāshum yā l-ʿēn

dׅhulīl tdūrī ʿal l-ignī . . .





As time passed, Mabrūka seemed to adjust. She still sometimes complained of illness, fevers, and bad teeth; then she had a miscarriage. She was also put in a difficult position when Fāyga ran away. But she rarely talked about her husband. She continued to recite poetry, though. The poems a few months after the marriage reflect sadness mingled with philosophical resignation to reality, as in the following:





Patience is my mourning for the loved one

and your job, oh eye, is to cry . . .



ʿazāy fī ʿazīz iṣ-ṣabr

wintī ʿalēk yā ʿēn il-bkā . . .





Another alludes to the effort it takes to control her concern:





Patience is better than thinking

if only you can manage it, oh self . . .



iṣ-ṣabr khēr min it-tafkīr

ʿalēh kān yā ʿēn tagdarī . . .





These cases confirm the strong link between poetry and matters of love, romantic or conjugal, and justify us in designating the ghinnāwa as a discourse of love. This discourse seems to be opposed to the mundane discourse of ordinary language structured by overt social values and honor-linked personal ideals. Individuals whose ordinary actions and statements conform to the modesty code, who take pains to present themselves as moral and worthy of respect, use poetry to comment on their personal fortunes and tribulations in love and to express sentiments that violate the canons of modesty. Poems are vehicles for the expression of attachments to sweethearts or spouses that, if communicated in everyday social interaction, would damage reputations and jeopardize claims to respectability and, at the individual level, would ordinarily undermine self-image and self-presentation. In the final chapter I turn to the questions raised by this observation: that contradictory discourses on love coexist, just as do the divergent discourses of honor and vulnerability explored in chapter 6.





8




* * *





IDEOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF SENTIMENT





Why do individuals in Bedouin society appear able to express through poetry the sentiments of weakness that violate the honor code and the sentiments of romantic love that violate the modesty code without incurring the opprobrium of the community or losing the self-esteem derived from embodying the moral ideals of their society? What is the significance of having two culturally constituted and sanctioned discourses available to individuals to express their interpersonal experiences? Analysis of the social contexts in which poetic recitations occur, as well as the special qualities of poetic language and form, will suggest some of the answers to the first question; uncovering the cultural meaning of the poetic discourse and its link to the social and political system will explain the rest. Only after proposing answers to these questions are we in a position to assess what the disjunction in Bedouin discourses implies about the relationship between a society’s official ideology and individual experience and to grasp why Awlad ʿAli glorify the poetic discourse that violates the ideology of honor and modesty.





The Social Contexts of Discourse


One key to the puzzle of why individuals can express certain sentiments in one medium and not in another is the social contexts in which the two discourses come into play. Except at ritual occasions, individuals share poems only with close friends, social peers, or lovers. Men share them with close kinsmen of the same generation or with lower-status men; they do not sing before senior agnates or patrons. Women recite poems to close kinswomen, women with whom they share a household, or neighbors, and because their world is less stratified, the range of categories of women with whom they share poems is greater.

One is most likely to share poetry with those individuals from whom one does not taḥashsham. As I argued earlier, ḥasham refers both to a state of embarrassment or shame and to the corresponding acts of modesty or deference. Ḥasham as the experience of shame arises in interpersonal interactions between social unequals or strangers; it is conceptualized in the idiom of exposure and manifests itself through a language of formality, self-effacement, and the cloaking of the “natural” weaknesses or sources of dependency, which includes anything having to do with bodily needs, sexuality, and so forth. Ḥasham in this sense is the correlate of social distance, being both a response to that distance and a means of maintaining it.

Poetry is the discourse of intimacy. Sharing poems, like exposing natural weaknesses, marks the absence of ḥasham between individuals. Poetry indexes social distinctions by following the lines of social cleavage. It usually does not cross the boundaries created by differential power and status, including those associated with gender. The firmest barrier is between men and women. Women are careful not to let men hear them sing, and they claim to be extremely embarrassed (yitḥashshamū) if heard.1 Women were even reluctant to share their poems with me until I assured them I would never reveal the poems to any men. Men, too, can be shy about having women hear their songs. A man I knew well volunteered to sing some of his own compositions for me but insisted that I lend him my tape recorder so he could tape them privately. But this modesty about poetry does not apply just to male-female interactions. Young men do not sing in the presence of their elders either, and in former times senior men did not attend certain of the wedding festivities, in particular those in which the young men sang, an avoidance that Peters (1965) reports among the Cyrenaican Bedouins as well.

The only exception to this barrier merely proves the rule. As described earlier, the exchange of poetry between men and women is not only acceptable but also mandatory in the special circumstances of courtship and romance. In romance, the gap between the sexes is deliberately breached and intimacy declared through this sharing of poetry. Here poetry indexes intimacy between those most distant in normal circumstances.

At the same time, sharing poetry enhances the closeness between intimates, differentiating it clearly from the social distance of nonintimates. It does so by giving this closeness the substance of secrets. In contrast to the masking and formality of the discourse of social distance, the discourse of poetry is one of self-exposure and familiarity; the sentiments of helpless vulnerability, weakness, and passion expressed in it violate the codes of honor and modesty. Insofar as the poems through which these sentiments are revealed are private and confidential, they are like secrets: secrets function to exclude those who do not share them and to closely bind those who do. Thus, categories of equals gain cohesion and divisions between nonequals are intensified, reinforcing the structures of Bedouin society.

Ordinary discourse is public, not secret. It is intended for general audiences composed of any number of categories of individuals with varying types of relationships to the self. The public world is the arena in which self-presentation is judged. As Goffman (1971, 185) puts it, this is where the individual “goes about constrained to sustain a viable image of himself in the eyes of others.” Routine interpersonal encounters have also been described as “dramas of social censorship involved in the maintenance of the public order” in which people conceal “from public attention facts about themselves (including their emotional reactions and intentions) which they experience as too dangerous to disclose” (LeVine 1982a, 297). Insofar as ḥasham can be understood as deference to those who represent the social order, it is not surprising that if ideals are flouted, as they are in poems, it will not be in the presence of the people from whom individuals taḥashsham.

For Awlad ʿAli, the discourses of honor and modesty belong in this public arena of everyday, ordinary-language interactions. In this sphere individuals strive to portray themselves as conforming to general personal ideals: they seek to appear potent, independent, and self-controlled, and they deny their sexuality, a source of both dependency and defiance of the social order. The only sentiments appropriate to this image are anger, attribution of blame, and denial of concern.

Other analysts have emphasized the social dimension of the honor discourse in Arab societies but have failed to note that it is bound by social context. Abou-Zeid (1966, 258) argues that, for Awlad ʿAli, honor is related to conformity to prevailing social norms as well as to the realization of social ideals. Bourdieu (1979, 111) notes, “The sense of honour is enacted in front of other people. Nif [point of honour] is above all that which leads a man to defend, at all costs, a certain self-image intended for others.” And Eickelman (1976, 138), speaking of propriety (tḥeshsham), says, “The locus of propriety is not so much the inner moral consciousness of a person as his public comportment with respect to those with whom he has regular face-to-face relations.” None of these analysts, however, considers discourses outside the public realm.

We might be tempted to conclude from the context-bound nature of the discourses that Awlad ʿAli individuals experience a split between public and private that corresponds to self-presentation in terms of cultural ideals on the one hand versus revelation of “inner reality” on the other. Given our own cultural assumptions about the “real self” as expressed in spontaneous impulse versus a more institutionally oriented view that considers the self “real” only when it is expressing social ideals (cf. Turner 1976), we might want to interpret the honorable and modest self-presentations in the public sphere as structured masks worn for social approval, and the poetic discourse of weakness and romantic love as simple reflections of personal experience, of real feelings shown to friends.

There are two problems with this interpretation. First, it assumes a Goffmanesque alienation of social actors from the cultural ideals of their society. Recognizing that everyday expressions are guided by the honor code set by official ideology, we might, with Goffman, take the cynical attitude that these displays of honor and modesty are just rational acts of self-presentation, that





in their capacity as performers, individuals will be concerned with maintaining the impression that they are living up to the many standards by which they and their products are judged. . . . But, qua performers, individuals are concerned not with the moral issue of realizing these standards, but with the amoral issue of engineering a convincing impression that these standards are being realized. (Goffman 1959, 251)





But this purely dramaturgical view misconstrues and devalues the meaning of social conformity in Bedouin society and underestimates the motivational power of the desire to be moral or good. Individuals in Awlad ʿAli society perceive the moral standards less as norms than as values; therefore, it is a matter of self-respect and pride that the individual achieve the standards, not an obligation.2 There exists no source of self-definition or evaluation other than the standard. Moral virtue also justifies standing in the community. Belonging is essential because there is no life outside the group, no alternative social group other than the community of agnates into which one is born or, in some cases, another community to which one attaches, composed nevertheless of other Bedouins. Thus, respectability achieved through embodiment of the code’s virtues is isomorphic with self-respect. This fusion of self-regard and the respect of others makes meaningless Goffman’s distinction between realizing moral standards and giving the impression of realizing them. For individuals in Awlad ʿAli society, conformity to the code of honor and embodying the cultural ideals set by that code for the individual are not empty acts of impression management but the stuff of morality. This is the great strength of the ideology of honor and modesty as a means for perpetuating a system of power relations: by framing ideals as values, in moral terms, it guarantees that individuals will desire to do what perpetuates the system, thus obviating the need for overt violence or force.





Protective Veils of Form


Granting the authenticity of the discourse of everyday life means that nonpoetic public expressions cannot be dismissed as mere social masks hiding spontaneous inner feelings. But a second criticism of this formulation emerges from a consideration of the form and character of the “private” discourse. Neither ghinnāwas nor the ritualized mourning laments associated with them could be characterized as original, spontaneous expressions of sentiment. Individuals reach for ready-made forms to give voice to those personal sentiments that seem to violate the cultural ideals; thus, their poetry, so intimate and expressive, is in fact culturally constituted—a highly conventional and formulaic idiom—and “crying” (bkā) is even more fixed. If anything, this discourse is, in form and content, more thoroughly circumscribed by tradition and more rigidly structured than is the discourse of everyday life. It would be hard to label one as less cultural than the other, just as neither could be labeled less social than the other.

Before taking up the significance of this cultural constraint of sentiments, I want to show how the cultural character and rigid form of poetry afford a certain amount of protection for the individual in expressing the “deviant” sentiments of dishonor and immodesty. Poetry cloaks statements in the veils of formula, convention, and tradition, thus suiting it to the task of carrying messages about the self that contravene the official cultural ideals. As noted, the ghinnāwa is a highly formulaic and stylized verbal genre. Formula renders content impersonal or nonindividual, allowing people to dissociate themselves from the sentiments they express, if revealed to the wrong audience, by claiming that “it was just a song.”3 Inherently ambiguous, formulaic poems protect the anonymity of the poet, of the addressee, and of the subject. Pronouns appear in the plural even when only one person is being referred to, and gender is rarely marked. No names are ever included, assuring that only those already intimates of the person reciting will know the true significance and referent of the poem.

Formulaic style also marks utterances as extraordinary and sets them apart. Even more than the situational markers of social context to which they are tied, formal linguistic markers clue people not to apply ordinary standards to what is conveyed in this medium. That the same individuals responded differently, depending upon the mode of expression—poetry or ordinary actions—to Rashīd’s longings for his bride and Ṣafiyya’s for her husband indicates the association of content and form. These individuals exempted the poetic statements from the same standards of honor and modesty they applied so rigorously to mundane discourse. They sympathized with the sentiments expressed in poetry but condemned the same ones when expressed nonpoetically.

Most important, formulaic language, or rather the communication of sentiment in poetry, allows individuals to frame their experiences as similar to those of others and perhaps to assert the universality of their experiences. This identification with others grants their personal expressions a semblance of social conformity despite their obvious violation of the moral code. Especially because ghinnāwas are associated with traditional romances and the tragic tales of love, every time individuals recite poems they evoke this grand and mythical world; by putting their personal experiences in poetry, individuals implicitly liken themselves to the much-admired tragic heroes and heroines of lore. They recast their own personal experiences in a grandiose and culturally valued form, thus lifting their experiences out of the realm of ordinary life, where they would be taken as signs of immodesty or individual defiance of senior kinsmen and the system they represent.

At the same time, ghinnāwas call up a world of tradition, since the tales with which they are associated are alleged to be true stories from the distant past, and many poems have long, although not always preserved, histories. The link to tradition is also found in people’s association of singing with the past, which most look back on as a golden age. In short, through association with the traditional Bedouin world, the sentiments that violate the cultural ideals of honor and modesty gain social legitimacy and seem less dangerous: poems, as part of a great cultural tradition, cannot represent rebellions against the values of society. Presented in such a conventional and formulaic idiom, the messages of personal violations of the code can hardly be perceived as idiosyncratic.4 Thus in various ways the form of the discourse shapes its capacity to carry certain types of messages. Poetry as a form provides a modest way of communicating immodest sentiments of attachment and an honorable way of communicating the sentiments of dependency.





The Meaning of Poetry


Still, the temptation to interpret individuals’ poetic statements as revelations, if veiled and indirect, of experience lingers. So does the suspicion that the discrepancy between what people say in the two media suggests hypocrisy. The analysis of how the sentiments of anger and indifference are appropriate to the ideals of the moral codes of honor and of modesty showed that sentiments have cultural meaning, that various sentiments are valued differently, and that sentiments can be used to symbolize something about the person expressing them. There is no reason to presume that the sentiments of the poetic discourse are any less meaningful in cultural terms or that their expression does not contribute to the creation of an image, if contrapuntal, of self. Like any communication, poetry is not merely expressive but also persuasive.5

Just as people’s actions and words in everyday social interactions are always directed partly toward others, so their poetic productions are directed toward an audience. Although people do sing when alone, they usually recite poems in the presence of other people or mark them for absent addressees by vocatives such as “oh beloved” (yā ʿalam). Poetry is not, any more than is the public discourse of honor, a simple reflection of the experiences and sentiments (however shaped by cultural conventions and constructions) of the person reciting. Even if the links between sentiment, on the one hand, and cultural values and the motivational power of the desire for respect and respectability through conformity to the moral code, on the other, are most evident in the ordinary statements made in public, this does not mean that poetic statements are not motivated. The question is, motivated by what? Toward what ends? The answers are complex.

I have already considered some of the functions of poetry. First, because poetic discourse indexes social intimacy, reciting poems to particular individuals communicates, and even creates, closeness. Poetry recitation is thus a strategy for bridging social distance, seen most clearly in its use in courtship. Second, by framing personal experience in poetic terms, individuals protect themselves in two ways from the criticism that accompanies violations of the moral code: in expressing personal sentiments about life experiences in the shared terms of a highly conventional and traditional form of oral lyric poetry, individuals proclaim their similarity to others and assert the universality of their experiences; and by reciting love poetry from romances, they cast their own personal experiences in culturally valued terms.

Attention to the rhetoric of poetry suggests something else about the motivations of poetic recitations. Although it is hard to generalize, because ghinnāwas vary so much in content, it can be argued that the goal of poetic presentations is to move people and thus get them to act toward one in a particular way. One of the ways this is done is through projecting an image of self by describing certain types of sentiments. Whereas the expressions of ordinary discourse are meant to win respect and respectability for the individual, achieved through conformity to Bedouin society’s officially espoused values of independence, the goals of poetic presentations are twofold: to win sympathy and to get help. In poetry, the rendering of experience in terms evocative of childhood wins sympathy and disarms moral criticism.

Awlad ʿAli themselves argue that reciting poetry moves people and brings about changes in their actions or attitudes. The dual aspect of persuasion is reflected in people’s comments on the efficacy of poetry.6 Poetry’s purpose of transforming attitudes, of moving people emotionally, is evident in statements such as “good poetry makes you cry.” Poetry’s ability to affect acts is suggested by impressive accounts of times when just hearing a poem recited by someone wronged induced the hearer to change a course of action. The model for this type of change is the love story in which a woman already mounted on her wedding camel en route to her husband’s community dismounts and runs off with an admirer who sings her a ghinnāwa. The power of poetry to bring about desired changes is alluded to in a haunting poem I heard:





I’ve lost their tracks, the loved ones

perhaps my singing will bring them . . .



dhahabit gēshun l-awlāf

kannība zinīnī yjībhun . . .





The efficacy of poetry has to do with its idiom. Poetry is associated with weakness, vulnerability, helpless dependency, and intimacy; it is a kind of self-exposure before intimates. In Bedouin society, these experiences and states of being are all closely linked with childhood, as Awlad ʿAli consider children to be by nature helpless and dependent. The unsocialized child, who does not yet have ʿagl, is free to cry in pain, to express fear, and to seek help, without criticism. Children live in a world of intimacy, held, coddled, and adored by anyone they encounter in their households and communities. Distinctions of age or gender have little meaning for them, the men showing them just as much affection as do women and older children.

By invoking in their poetry experiences associated with childhood, drawing an analogy between themselves and young children, individuals metaphorically assume an identity and imply a quality of relationship calculated to elicit a certain type of response in others. The rhetoric of poetry is, “I am like a child. Please treat me as you would a child, and judge me by the standards applied to children.” This appeal is made directly to the poems’ audiences, the intimates usually within the singer’s community, and “magically” to the absent persons who caused the pain or are the objects of desire, to whom the poems are implicitly addressed.7

This appeal first of all frames the social relationship between singer and audience, actual or potential, as one of the mutuality and complementarity characteristic of relations within the family, rather than of the antagonism and jockeying for position of independent figures. The poet seeks to evoke in his or her audience the sentiments of tender care that a dependent child inspires in its caretakers. Many poems explicitly request help or care, invoking other relationships between the helpless and powerful; for example, some appeal for medical treatment (treat me, heal my wound), and some supplicate God. At the minimum, poetic confessions of weakness seek to disarm those more powerful individuals perceived as inflicting pain or attacking the poet. A critical element in the Bedouin model of family relations, extended to relations between unequals, is the obligation of the strong to care for the weak, or at least to refrain from asserting dominance over them.

The analogy with children also serves to absolve individuals of responsibility for the statements they make in poetic form. Awlad ʿAli consider children innocent and moral. They believe, with other Muslims, that those who die in childhood automatically go to heaven. Socialization to independence, self-mastery, and recognition of one’s place in the hierarchy begins in earnest only after the child is about five and intensifies as he or she grows, reaching its peak in early adolescence. Socialization involves learning the discourse of honor; growing up, the responsibility to conform to the values of the honor code. Thus, when individuals liken themselves to children, they compel others to suspend the ordinary terms for judging moral worth, thereby undercutting criticism that might otherwise greet the poetic revelations of sentiments that violate moral conventions, particularly those applying to sexuality. The childhood idiom suggests that poetic statements are amoral, not immoral.

Poetry, however, is never a lone discourse. For the individual and his or her intimates, what is said in poetry and what is said in ordinary language always exist side by side: their interplay is essential to their meaning. The two juxtaposed discourses can be seen as commenting on each other, just as the secret comments on the manifest world (Simmel 1950, 330). Ironically, poetic discourse seems to comment on the ordinary discourse of everyday life in ways that ultimately enhance the meaning of the latter and the honor of the person reciting. One might, then, consider poetry and the expression of feeling it represents as integral to honor.

The poetic revelations of weakness and attachment to others give dimension to the tough independence affected in ordinary social interactions in at least three ways. First, by admitting the existence of an attitude toward others and a range of sentiments that lie outside the confines of the system of honor, individuals demonstrate that their conformity to the code in everyday actions is voluntary. This voluntary aspect is crucial both to honor, which is above all about autonomy, and to modesty. As Riesman argues for Fulani society, where men openly flout official morality in their continual quest for women,





this defiance enhances the value of the individual, both for his own sake and as a member of society. By acting against the moral code the individual is demonstrating that he is a free being and that his actions are not automatically determined by social rules and social pressures. But if the individual is free to disobey, then he is free to obey too and the value of his adherence to the society is thereby enhanced. (1971, 611)





By acting aggressively and proudly in ordinary life while at the same time revealing feelings of vulnerability, people show that they are choosing to act in accordance with the moral code. This factor is even more important to modesty. As I argued in chapters 3 and 4, Bedouins see coercion as stripping acts of their meaning. Like that of dependents such as young men, women’s submission is demeaning to them and worthless to their superiors unless perceived as freely given. By acting modestly with social superiors while expressing immodest feelings to intimates, they show that they are choosing to recognize those with more authority as well as the social system that gives these people their authority.

The expression of sentiments in poetry gives meaning to the discourse of everyday life in a second way. By channeling such powerful sentiments into a rigid and conventional medium and delimited social contexts, individuals demonstrate a measure of self-mastery and control that contributes to honor. Those who feel deeply but lose control, like the tragic characters who die of broken hearts or go mad from grief, are held in awe but not considered social beings; along with the loss of self-mastery, they have lost their honor and forfeited their positions as members of society. The social standing of those who express their responses to losses or other difficult personal situations in forms other than poetry confirms this interpretation. Mad people, idiots, and children all express their experiences in an unstructured way. They reveal things in inappropriate social contexts and are too explicit. People in all three categories are also considered outside society in some sense—they are not fully social beings or proper members of society. This status results not so much because they are dependent, ineffectual, or not in control of their appetites, but rather because they lack ʿagl, which in this context manifests itself as an inability to distinguish social contexts and to use appropriate cultural forms to express their sentiments. Those who express strong sentiments of attachment and vulnerability in the culturally approved way can still claim to embody the cultural ideals.

Third, by exposing this other side of experience, individuals impress on others that their conformity to the code and attainment of the cultural ideals of personhood are neither shallow nor easy. Bourdieu argues that in the Kabyle system of honor, the person who is particularly exposed to outrage but who nevertheless manages to secure respect is especially meritorious. He also argues that honor is only meaningful for the man who has “things worth defending” (1979, 119). Following this logic, it might be suggested that the greatest respect is accorded the person who, despite struggles with powerful vulnerabilities and passions, is a proper member of Awlad ʿAli society, a person with honor. One Bedouin man told me that there were three common causes of insanity, all having to do with loss: when someone dear dies, when you are rich and suddenly lose everything, and when you cannot have the one you love. These are the very things people sing about, which suggests that poetry is taken as a sign of powerful feeling creatively managed. Poetry may be so cherished by the Bedouins precisely because it allows people to express, and their intimates to appreciate, the profundity of that which must be overcome to conform to society’s values.

Expressing feelings of vulnerability and love in poetry may thus give meaning to the strength and independence individuals display in their everyday lives. Poems win for those who recite them admiration along with sympathy.





Women preparing ewes for milking





The Politics of Sentiment


It is clear that individuals are shielded from the consequences of making statements and expressing sentiments that contravene the moral system if they do so in poetry. By sharing these “immoral” sentiments only with intimates and veiling them in impersonal traditional formulas, they even demonstrate that they have a certain control, which actually enhances their moral standing. But if we turn from how individuals use poems to the poetry itself as a cultural discourse, as a set of rule-bound statements that represent a vision of reality, an even more intriguing set of questions presents itself. If the disjunction between the messages carried by the two discourses occurs not just on the individual level but on the cultural level as well, and if ordinary discourse is that generated in accordance with the values that support the dominant social and political system, then is poetry the discourse of antistructure? If poetry is associated with opposition to the system, why is it not condemned or repressed? Why is it glorified?

The ghinnāwa’s antistructural character is evident not just in the type of sentiments regularly carried by it but in its associations as well. Its closest association is with the traditional Bedouin romance. Poems are always included in love tales that celebrate the often tragic course of romance, a force usually condemned as threatening to the social system. Thwarted love, especially between a man and woman from different tribes, is the theme of the most poignant Bedouin love stories, which are recounted as true tales of the distant past.8 In a few, cousins fall in love but are prevented from marrying by the girl’s wealthy father who does not wish to let her marry his poor brother’s son; from what I could gather, those stories usually ended happily with the young nephew triumphing. More commonly, the sweethearts are unrelated, and their love is thwarted by the girl’s cousin, as in the following archetypal love story:





Once upon a time there was a boy and a girl who were in love with each other. The girl’s father’s brother’s son heard about this and was furious. He swore she would never marry the boy and claimed her [masakhā] for himself.

Now, the girl and the boy used to meet secretly to talk at the tent of an old lady, a neighbor of theirs. One day, the boy announced that he was leaving on a journey. He was going to the oasis of Siwa to get dates. He promised that after he returned, he would marry the girl. He said to her:





Happiness in my absence is a failing

and grief between us the sign of love . . .



zahā fī ghiyābī nagṣ

wil-ḥizn bēnnā mārat ghalā . . .





With that he set off with a caravan of camels. He was away for a long time. On his way back, only two days from home, he fell ill and died. He had instructed his companion earlier, “If I die on the way, please carry my body home so my family can bury me.” So his companion loaded his corpse on a camel and journeyed the rest of the way home.

When his family heard what had happened, they wailed and cried. Meanwhile, the girl had seen the camels returning to his camp but wondered, “Why don’t I hear trilling and the firing of rifles [signs of celebration]?” She ran to find out, and when she did, she wailed and cried with his kinswomen.

Her cousin discovered that she had gone to her lover’s camp and followed her. He ran in and grabbed her from among the mourners and started beating her. She tried to run away, but he chased her, beating her until she fell dead, right on the fresh grave of her sweetheart.

Her cousin was enraged. He swore at her, “Even in death you’re a slut!” He demanded that they not bury her near the boy, so they carried her about a kilometer away and buried her.

After a while, a palm tree sprang from the head of the boy’s grave, and a tree sprang from the head of the girl’s. The trees grew and grew until their fronds crossed high in the sky. The cousin grew angry when he saw this, thinking, “She still can’t keep away from him, even in death?” So he went to find a woodcutter to cut down the trees.

As the woodcutter was trying to chop down the tree that grew over her grave, the axe flew out of his hand and into his eye, blinding him. He went home and fell ill. In his sleep a vision of the boy came to him and said:





May God cut you down, oh woodcutter

you cut the rope as they were filling [at the well] . . .



allah yigṭaʿak yā najjār

gāṭiʿ dlī fī mlāhum . . .





Then he parted with the words:





Love must bring forth fruits

which join each other in their sky . . .



l-asbid min ghalā ynabbit athmār

yitʿālagun fī smāhum . . .





This story has several remarkable features. It celebrates the desires of individuals against the demands of the system, as codified in the first cousin’s right to his father’s brother’s daughter—the cousin seeks to enforce the system as the girl and her lover refuse to accept it. The heroine is both defiant and a “slut,” hence lacking in modesty; her tragic end may hold a lesson for Awlad ʿAli about the ultimate power of the system. At the same time, however, she and her sweetheart are heroic, and their defiance ends in a victory of sorts. People who listen to such tales admire the behavior of lovers and do not condemn it as immoral, and they appreciate the poetry that expresses the lovers’ feelings.

Poetry is associated with antistructure in ways other than this explicit link to romance and sexuality. People perceive poetry as un-Islamic and poetic recitation as impious, just as “crying” at funerals is considered wrong from a religious point of view (and so is not done by women who have been on the pilgrimage to Mecca). The fact that the very word “to sing” (ghannī) cannot be said in mixed-sex company suggests its antistructural quality. Another indication is that people say they taḥashsham or are embarrassed/ashamed/modest about singing in front of nonintimates, especially elders. Elders, too, avoid settings such as weddings and sheep shearings where, at least in the past, ghinnāwas were publicly sung. Even the rhetoric of poetry gives it an antistructural flavor, as if poetry were the language of the unsocialized child as opposed to the ordinary discourse of adult conformity. The final and most persuasive link is in who sings or recites ghinnāwas. Although older men occasionally recite them, ghinnāwas are most closely associated with youths and women, the disadvantaged dependents who least embody the ideals of Bedouin society and have least to gain in the system as structured. Poetry is, in so many ways, the discourse of opposition to the system and of defiance of those who represent it: it is antistructure just as it is antimorality.

The existence of dissident or subversive discourses is probably not unusual. What may be peculiar to Awlad ʿAli is that their discourse of rebellion is both culturally elaborated and sanctioned. Although poetry refers to personal life, it is not individual, spontaneous, idiosyncratic, or unofficial but public, conventional, and formulaic—a highly developed art. More important, this poetic discourse of defiance is not condemned, or even just tolerated, as well it might be given all the constraints of time and place and form that bind it. Poetry is a privileged discourse in Awlad ʿAli society. Like other Arabs, and perhaps like many oral cultures, the Bedouins cherish poetry and other verbal arts. Everyone listens attentively whenever poems are recited or sung. People memorize poems, repeat them, and are moved by them. For Awlad ʿAli, poetry represents what is best in their culture, what they consider distinctively Bedouin. Poetry is associated with the glorious past, when Awlad ʿAli lived without Egyptian government interference, migrating freely, herding sheep, riding horses, and being brave and tough.

People are thrilled by poetry. They are drawn to ghinnāwas, and at the same time they consider them risqué, against religion, and slightly improper—as befits something antistructural. This ambivalence about poetry is significant, and it makes sense only in terms of the cultural meaning of opposition. Because ordinary discourse is informed by the values of honor and modesty, the moral correlates of the ideology that upholds the Awlad ʿAli social and political system, we would expect the antistructural poetic discourse, with its contradictory messages, to be informed by an opposing set of values. This is not the case. Poetry as a discourse of defiance of the system symbolizes freedom—the ultimate value of the system and the essential entailment of the honor code.

As a declaration of autonomy, of freedom from domination by the system, poetry is cherished, even though it carries subversive messages and is associated with those denied autonomy in Awlad ʿAli society. People admire poetry in the same way they secretly admire youths’ or women’s refusals to submit to tyranny or to accept domination by the system or its representatives. In the story quoted in chapter 7 (p. 211), the Haj mentioned that his father had asked to hear the poems he had sung to the woman he was wooing, a sign of approval and admiration. The Haj’s father also indicated that he was proud of his son for having defied the system and the woman’s cousins. In the tragic romance recounted above, the heroine, although accused by her cousin of being a “slut,” was admired for her defiance. As I argued in chapter 3, docility in women, as in men, is unattractive. I remember being shocked to find out, after hearing so much about the value of ḥasham, that the women in my community considered one young girl the most outstanding in the camp: she was tough and difficult, always yelling back at her mother, refusing to do what she was told, and bossing her brothers around, and she was first in her class at school (and one of its few girls). Her mother admitted proudly that she herself had been difficult (waʿra) when young. This girl’s willful defiance, which emphatically did not apply in the sexual sense, as she was extremely proper, even hostile, toward males, was even grudgingly admired by her sometimes-exasperated father.

I argue that the ambivalence about poetry, like the ambivalence about defiance on the part of those for whom modesty is supposed to be the path to honor, may reflect a fundamental tension in the organization of Bedouin social and political life. The ambivalence may derive from an uneasy recognition that the system of hierarchy within the lineage and the family in fact violates the basic tenets of the political system based on segmenting genealogy. All those who analyze the politics of Arab tribal societies, including Caton (1984), Cole (1975), Evans-Pritchard (1949), Lancaster (1981), Meeker (1979), and Peters (1967), stress the importance of autonomy and equality as the theoretical principles on which the political system is predicated and which it is designed to maximize. These are the principles Awlad ʿAli stress in their descriptions of their own system of political organization. The values of personhood implied by the honor code are appropriate to a life in which men must be willing to fight to defend themselves or, if Meeker is right, must find appealing a potentially violent life of adventure made possible by mounted pastoral nomadism.

Yet, if we turn from external affairs between men or groups of men to internal affairs within the camp and family—from the official view of politics to the arena not usually represented in the language of power—the problem becomes clear. In this “domestic” context, the system puts control over resources and power over dependents in the hands of elder male agnates, creating an internal domination that contravenes the paramount ideals. As I have shown, this hierarchical domination is justified through the elaboration of a moral code that rationalizes the privilege of elders and dignifies the deference of dependents. The contradiction is tempered by attributing to relations of inequality the qualities of mutuality implied by the familial idiom, and by focusing on the “goodness” associated with voluntary modesty. But the contradiction is never fully resolved, because it cannot be. Poetry expresses this problem. A discourse of defiance mostly by those slighted in the system, it is exalted because a refusal to be dominated is key to Bedouin political life, and it is avoided by elders because it threatens to expose the illegitimacy of their authority.

I began this study with the proposition that it was important to look at the poetry of personal life rather than the better-known and more commonly studied poetry of the men’s world of heroism, violence, and tribal politics. Personal poetry has led us back to politics. However, it has led us to an expanded vision of politics, to include not just the system by which external relations are ordered but also the system that organizes internal relations of domination—two systems at odds. Poetry has such an important place in Awlad ʿAli culture because it reflects this collision.

It is even tempting to speculate on the connection between the demise of poetry—or, more accurately, its increasing confinement to the private world of intimates and its gradual disappearance from public ceremonial occasions—to changes in Awlad ʿAli social and political structure. As noted in chapter 2, sedentarization, an increasing involvement in the market economy, and the extension of private ownership to all sorts of resources have led both to more stable inequities in the distribution of wealth and a correspondingly more rigid social hierarchy and to a growing disparity in the positions of men and women. This institutionalization of social inequality, when combined with the increasing restriction of the political autonomy of local groups and individuals by central governmental authorities in the Western Desert, may undermine the bases for the ideology of honor that corresponded to and continued to make possible a different sort of system. If poetry was the symbol of defiance, valued because domination was not acceptable, might not the withering of poetry be related in some way to these new circumstances? Younger Bedouins listen to Egyptian radio and are becoming familiar with Egyptian popular culture; they tend not to know how to compose or recite poetry, a fact the older generations deplore. There are fewer and fewer ceremonial occasions at which traditional poetry is sung. But just as wealthy men maintain camel herds obsolete in the age of trucks, and many men lovingly burnish their shotguns though they rarely use them except to hunt the occasional wild bird, Bedouins still cling to both the ideology of honor and poetry as symbols of their noble past. It remains to be seen for how long.





Ideology and Experience


Whatever the restrictions on social contexts appropriate to the two discourses, however apt the poetic form for the content it carries, whatever the motivations of communications, and whatever the cultural meaning of the two discourses, the fact remains that the Awlad ʿAli Bedouins have at least two culturally elaborated discourses about the self and personal sentiments. The relationship of these discourses to individual experience, a topic set aside as I considered their cultural meanings, must now be taken up.

There is little doubt that the ideology of honor is the dominant or official ideology of Bedouin culture. In the last two chapters I showed how individuals’ responses to situations in their personal lives took shape in terms of this ideology, as mediated through morality. The sentiments individuals expressed in the discourse of everyday life were those that best represented the highest values in this moral system: aggressive autonomy and denial of vulnerability or longing. But the coexistence in people’s poetic expressions of a set of contrary sentiments raises questions about the extent to which the dominant ideology determines or ordinary behavior reflects individual experience.

Anthropologists commonly assume that describing the ideology or the culture is equivalent to describing the behavior and experience of members of society. Even Bourdieu, perhaps the most sophisticated theorist working on the ethnography of the Middle East, sometimes takes a position granting official ideology a totalitarian role in structuring experience. For instance:





Official language, particularly the system of concepts by means of which the members of a given group provide themselves with a representation of their social relations (e.g., the lineage model or the vocabulary of honour), sanctions and imposes what it states, tacitly laying down the dividing line between the thinkable and the unthinkable. (1977, 21)





Although we can never know the exact relationship between experience and its articulation, we can assume that there is some congruence and that an examination of cultural discourses tells us something about individual experience. The existence of two Bedouin discourses leads us to conclude that the dominant ideology of honor does not set the limits on the “thinkable and the unthinkable,” or perhaps the “feelable and unfeelable.” Nor do descriptions of the moral discourse of honor exhaust Awlad ʿAli experience.

Does poetry represent another set of values and ideals of personhood that inform individual experiences? As we saw above, the sentiments carried by the poetic discourse of defiance take much of their meaning from their opposition to the sentiments of ordinary life. In a similar way, poetry could be said to stand for the freedom to experience that which is outside the official system. What are we to make of these experiences of vulnerability and deep attachment that poetry communicates?

One possibility is that these are natural experiences that fall outside of “culture,” in the sense of that which is shaped by the dominant ideology. This position entails the assumption that by giving human existence a distinct form, any culture must necessarily sacrifice or exclude much. Thinking in hydraulic terms, one might propose that what is excluded in forming a given cultural system erupts, if not in ordinary public discourse, then somewhere else—in the Bedouin case, in poetry. This “eruption” idea would imply that official ideology not only cannot wholly determine the experiences of individuals living in a particular society but also cannot encompass the range of their experiences.

The link already discussed between the sentiments and images of poetry and those appropriate to childhood as Bedouins conceive it might be taken as evidence that the experiences conveyed in poetry represent not just extracultural eruptions, but also vestiges of precultural experience. The child is, after all, not yet socialized into the culture and is not yet motivated to conform to its values. This association with childhood might even lead us to wonder what sorts of longings for intimacy and deeply buried vulnerabilities exist in people socialized early into autonomy.

The problem with these interpretations is that they do not take into account the specific form in which such experiences are articulated, namely, a genre of traditional formulaic poetry. The experiences conveyed in poetry are no more spontaneous or acultural than the ones of ordinary discourse. They may not fit with the experiences sanctioned by the dominant ideology, but neither are they idiosyncratic, private, and unofficial. Sentiments disallowed in the honor system are more than allowed to surface here; they are given a distinctively Bedouin cultural form and sanctified, shaped and bound by the limited range of themes and metaphors of the poetic genre. These sentiments are also glorified and sanctioned by the forms in which they are articulated. Linguistic marking, both in form and performance, draws attention to them and grants them a special status. The hyperbole in the poetic expression of sentiments may also highlight the importance of the message.9

The contours of the poetic discourse, like those of the discourse of personal morality, are culturally given. Awlad ʿAli individuals are born into a society in which they hear and learn to recite ghinnāwas, providing them with a rich vocabulary for articulating certain sentiments. How much poetry actually shapes their experiences in intimate life is impossible to know, but it seems likely that the poetic conventions would lead them to experience recurrent situations in similar ways. For example, love stories might set a tone and provide a model for interpreting or framing events in people’s romantic lives. Many of the poems individuals recite apropos of their own difficulties in love come from particular love stories. By drawing poems from these grand tales of passion to express their own sentiments, individuals, in defining their situations in a particular way both for themselves and for others, might be molding their lives to the culturally shared imagery of old stories. By alluding to the stories through the use of ghinnāwas, people might be framing their wishes and situations as part of a familiar tragic and universal type. Does this affect how they experience them?

Rather than positing one monolithic cultural ideology that determines experience, it is probably fair to say that there are at least two ideologies in Bedouin culture, each providing models of and for different types of experiences.10 The danger of this formulation is that it still suggests an overly rigid cultural conditioning that risks reducing human beings to automatons. I want to suggest instead that these discourses are not templates, but rather languages that people can use to express themselves. In enabling people to express experiences, these discourses may enable them to feel those experiences. But the fact remains that it is people who make the statements.

Here I think the fact that poetry is art is relevant. Although I cannot take up the formidable questions of the role of art in society or of the relationship between art and individual experience,11 I want to make two points. First, as an art, poetry allows for a certain creativity. The canons may be confining and the metaphors and formulas of the ghinnāwa limited, but they are not imprisoning. New combinations are always possible, to give voice and perhaps life to new sentiments that go beyond what has already been said and felt. In that sense, poetry may be not just a symbol of the individual’s freedom to defy culture’s power to define and delimit experience, but also a tool to be used in that defiance.

Second, taking a cue from Bateson (1972), I will speculate on another function of poetry. In an article on Balinese art, Bateson boldly argues for a view of art (including poetry) as a corrective to a too-limited and ultimately destructive understanding of the world as provided by ordinary consciousness. He sees art as having “a positive function in maintaining . . . ‘wisdom,’” which in his terminology is the recognition of “interlocking circuits,” in contrast to the short-term goal-oriented views that make everyday life efficient (1972, 147). Setting aside his grandiose perspective and his cybernetic vocabulary, I would offer the related proposition that Awlad ʿAli’s poetry of self and sentiment be viewed as their corrective to an obsession with morality and an overzealous adherence to the ideology of honor. Taken to an extreme, this ideology, which maintains the social and political system, would foster defensive and belligerent attitudes and make nearly impossible many forms of human intimacy. Poetry reminds people of another way of being and encourages, as it reflects, another side of experience. Its message may be sanctified by the ritualized formality of its carrier.12 This vision is kept alive by those who benefit least from the system that the honor ideology maintains. And maybe the vision is cherished because people sense that the costs of this system, in the limits it places on human experience, are just too high.





* * *





