9 Rituals Part 1


How are rituals learned, represented, and transmitted?


In different parts of the world, people engage in acts that expend much time, effort, and resources without apparent benefits or inherent purpose. Catholics repeatedly kneel and bow in mass during worship, Muslims recite five daily prayers of Islam, and Apache boys lie motionless while being bitten by hordes of ants. Several questions typically follow these observations. What are rituals? What similarities underlie them? Why do people continue to learn and then repeat these behaviors across generations? Moreover, how can behavior of this kind be explained?

Ritual has long been the target of extensive scholarly inquiry, especially from the disciplines of anthropology and religious studies. For instance, German-born French anthropologist Arnold Van Gennep was the first to notice the regularity in what he called rites of passage. In these rites, initiates often go through a series of ordeals, for instance, to demark their transition from childhood to adulthood. Van Gennep characterized these types of rituals as having three phases: separation (from the group), liminality (a period in between the old and new status), and incorporation (return to the group with a new status). This theory helps to explain the typical components of transitional rituals, but it is of less utility explaining the features of rituals that occur more frequently in one’s lifetime, such as the precise placement of items during table setting (the Seder table) during Jewish Passover.

Other classic theorists have focused on particular aspects of ritual, such as the transformative power of words in the ritual. Social anthropologist Stanley Tambiah1 argued that the language, style, and performance used in rituals communicates something beyond surface-level meaning, and they serve different communicative purposes. For instance, many participants do not understand the meaning of the words they speak or hear in ritual. Indeed, in the case of Catholic exorcism, traditionally spoken in Latin, they may not even understand the language.

The cognitive science of religion (CSR) has advanced the scholarly understanding of rituals, including a general explanation of what they typically entail, and has generated testable hypotheses about broad features of rituals such as how and why rituals are learned, represented, and transmitted. CSR portrays rituals as natural behavior, bound by both cognitive and sociocultural constraints that have measurable psychological and social consequences. Cognitive scientists of religion are not primarily concerned with documenting the potential local meanings that can be attributed to the performance of rituals as were some earlier approaches to ritual in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, such as symbolism. Instead, CSR scholars tend to focus on explaining why rituals take the distinctive forms that they do and with what consequences for group cohesion, scale, and structure.





What are rituals?


Participation 1: Examples of rituals

Think about a ritual that you have participated in or watched on television, perhaps a baptism, quinceañera, graduation, wedding, or funeral. What do you think makes this a ritual and not some other type of event? Write down your answer in a few sentences.

Next, think about three rituals that you know about and complete the table below.#NameTradition or religionBrief description of a ritual

1

2

3





Examine your list. What (if anything) do you think these rituals have in common? Write down your answer in a few sentences.

Share and compare your list with another student’s list. Why do you think your responses are different or similar to the other student’s? Write down your answer in a few sentences.

This method of sharing and comparing is often how scholars in ritual studies decide what qualifies as a ritual. What do you think are the advantages and disadvantages of this method? Write down your answer in a few sentences or use bullet points.





One way to define ritual is to gather up all instances where the term “ritual” has been applied in the literature and note what they have in common. This method of collecting and comparing is how many scholars in ritual studies have decided what qualifies as a ritual. It is also how scientists determine whether an instance belongs to a category in the natural world. For example, to determine whether something is an animal (such as a cat), simply compare the features of the example (a cat) against the common features of animals. We know that animals consume organic material, breathe oxygen, can move, can reproduce sexually, and so on because scientists have collected and compared them. Scientists can even divide up naturally occurring things into different kinds based upon their inherent properties (e.g. vertebrates), which makes it easier to study them.

Unlike participation task 1 that you completed, cognitive scientists of religion do not collect and compare other people’s descriptions of rituals to come up with a definition because rituals are not naturally occurring entities. Instead, the term ritual is a socially constructed category. The label was initially employed to describe events from traditions that scholars were familiar with, and then extended to other institutions that seemed to share some features with these events.2 Consequentially, scholars have collected instances based on some common features with some, but not all, events labeled as rituals. These problems may well explain the lack of scholarly consensus about what exactly constitutes ritual.

Therefore, CSR scholars—and some other anthropologists3,4—do not approach the study of ritual by collecting instances that scholars have labeled rituals (i.e. a top-down approach), but rather, begin to assemble instances of ritual as a type of behavior (i.e. a bottom-up approach). Cognitive scientists of religion also select instances of ritualized behavior and explain similar features, based upon their potential evolutionary origins, functions, and other psycho-social repercussions. It is important to note that from this cognitive perspective, you could easily replace the word “ritual” with another, and you would still explain recurrent phenomena. What matters are the underlying patterns, not the name assigned to them. Thus, CSR scholars approach the study of rituals in much the same way they study religion more broadly (as discussed in Chapter 2: Core Assumptions).

Based on the amalgamation of research, cognitive scientists of religion scholars have begun to delineate the criteria by which general behaviors qualify as rituals.5 One compelling cultural evolutionary perspective holds that features of rituals were selected for because they promote high-fidelity transmission of behavioral group markers and inhibit individual-level innovation, ensuring group solidarity and survival over time.6,7 The main features of ritualized behavior are outlined below.





1 Actions lack a physical-causal mechanism and rationale


One reason why cognitive scientists of religion construe rituals as a special kind of behavior is that the actions lack a physical-causal mechanism.8 In other words, performers lack a direct physical explanation for the effect9 of their acts. Across cultures, people have long relied on rituals for protective and problem-solving purposes, such as fending off malice, preventing or improving health and social problems such as asthma, AIDS, unemployment, and famine.10 Even though rituals are intended to have particular effects on the world, they are not expected to do so by means that are transparent or even in principle, knowable based upon the laws of physical causality. In other words, we do not know or assume that we need to understand how particular actions produce intended outcomes in rituals.

For instance, why do people knock on wood to avoid adverse outcomes and not another kind of surface? Why do soldiers fire into the air to honor a fallen comrade and not some other action? From a physical-causal perspective, many activities in rituals seem arbitrary. They also seem to lack instrumental purpose, which is in stark contrast to how we usually behave in everyday contexts. For instance, if I am thirsty and reach for a glass of water, it becomes clear that the instrumental goal of my behavior is to quench my thirst. If I tap my forehead with my right hand three times, move the glass from one side of the table to the other, and then drink the water, then the first actions are disconnected to the overall goal of quenching my thirst. In other words, the behaviors are redundant to the goal.

Nevertheless, even when rituals are explained in the context of a particular belief, there is often no expectation of a direct causal connection between the actions and outcomes.11 In other words, people lack a rationale for why they perform particular steps within the ritual sequence and are often unaware of how these actions produce the intended outcome according to physical laws. People’s explanations for performing ritual actions in specific ways are often vague, circular, question-begging, mystery-ridden, and highly idiosyncratic.12,13

Think for a moment about how you would justify a conventional action to an alien from another planet, like common ways to greet people. The alien asks, why do you extend your hand when you encounter some people? You may google the question “why do people shake hands when they meet?” assuming that there is an explanation for this behavior that someone else knows. You may answer that it has always been done this way or that your ancestors performed this action, and so you do too, or even that it expresses pleasure to see someone. The alien may then ask why do you shake hands and not perform some other behavior? You may be dumbfounded or make up an explanation on the spot that sounds right. This lack of explicit rationale about the motivation behind ritual behaviors is why cognitive scientists do not spend their time exclusively trying to decipher local meanings of ritual behaviors.

On the first reflection, it may appear that the criteria of lacking a physical-causal mechanism and rationale is not all that special to rituals because we do not know how many behaviors that we perform every day produce outcomes. For instance, we often learn how to do things, such as flushing the toilet or driving to school, without knowing precisely how they work. In these instances, our actions are causally opaque because we lack a direct causal explanation for the effect.14 We do not know precisely how pushing the handle down causes the water to flush, or how turning the key in the ignition causes the engine to start. Nevertheless, even though we may not know how everyday appliances work, we assume that there is a physical cause that experts like plumbers and mechanics understand. Ritual behaviors are causally opaque, but unlike other daily practices, it is not appropriate to expect there to be a physical-causal rationale for the procedures. Rather, rituals belong to a particular category of behaviors in a culture, often referred to as social conventions, such as clothing fashions and social etiquette.





2 Behaviors are rigid, repetitive, redundant, and disconnected from ordinary goals


Rituals are socially stipulated group conventions.15 People often say that they perform the ritual because their ancestors did, and just like most conventions, they are motivated to reproduce the ritual as precisely as possible. Unlike habits and routines that may change over time, rituals tend to become highly standardized. People often stick strictly to a behavioral script.16 This orthopraxy is often reinforced in many religious communities. For example, a Muslim must face Mecca during the five daily prayers, and a Jew must precisely place items of the Sedar table setting at Passover. Likewise, when even the smallest detail is omitted during the ritualistic slaughter of animals (common to Islamic and Judaic traditions), the performer may abandon the ritual altogether as it has failed to achieve the intended purpose.

As some anthropologists have noted,17,18 rituals are full of actions that appear redundant and are often used repeatedly, and the exact number is crucial to the outcome of the ritual. This specificity contrasts with everyday behaviors where people do not repeat the same action, or they repeat a behavior because it produces a physical outcome, like stirring the coffee granules in boiling water until they are absorbed. Whereas in ritual, often, the number of repetitions is an end in itself and considered essential to the ritual’s success. Another associated common feature of rituals is the rigidity of the particular objects required. For example, the seeds of a rare type of fruit, water from a specific river, relics from a dead person, etc. Consider how unacceptable it would be to a congregation if a Priest forgot to bring the stipulated holy water for baptism and used a bottle of mineral water instead.

Participation 2: Identifying ritual features

Read the following description of a ritual used to find a partner in Brazil:

“Buy a new sharp knife and stick it four times into a banana tree on June 12th at midnight (i.e. Valentine’s day in Brazil, Saint Anthony’s day is on the 13th). Catch the liquid that will drip from the plant’s wound on a crisp, white paper that has been folded in two. The dripping liquid captured on the paper at night will form the first letter of the name of your future partner.19”

Indicate which aspects of the ritual are:

Rigid.

Repetitive.

Redundant and disconnected from ordinary goals.



Write down your answer to a, b, and c in a few sentences for each.





3 Ritualized behaviors do not stop when they fail to produce the intended outcome


Rituals are often performed to produce a result, yet when the outcome is not produced, people seldom stop performing the rituals in the future. This state of affairs is in stark contrast to ordinary behaviors, where people would stop doing something if it failed to produce the outcome they expected, like pressing the power button a limited number of times when the computer fails to start. Scholars have long noted this particular feature of rituals, and most famously documented by anthropologist Evans-Pritchard in his ethnography of witchcraft among the Azande in Central Africa during colonial times.20

One standard method of determining a past or future state of affairs among the Azande was to ask a question—for example, a man may want to know if his sick wife is going to die. Poison is administered to a fowl, the question is posed, and the fowl is observed to see whether it lives or dies; each outcome provided a different answer to the question. For instance, if the foul died, then the answer to the question would be yes, but if it survived, the answer would be no. Crucially, however, verdicts were not considered binding unless they were verified, and so the procedure would have to be repeated. However, often, the affirmative answer would contradict the first answer. Evans-Pritchard documented eight justifications for these contradictions, which often attributed human error to cause the outcome. For example, the amount of poison was not proportionate to the weight of the fowl. These justifications served to strengthen belief in the poison oracle efficacy.

More recently, CSR researchers Cristine Legare and André Souza demonstrated reasoning about ritual efficacy in the context of Brazilian simpatias rituals, which deal with life problems such as quitting smoking, asthma, and infidelity. While Evans-Pritchard derived his insights about the hidden logic of ritual through ethnographic participant-observation, Legare and Souza examined how people decided on the success of problem-solving rituals experimentally, integrating and applying cognitive psychological approaches to the study of ritual cognition.

Legare and Souza demonstrated that when the intended outcome of problem-based rituals does not occur, the performer is likely to blame incorrect steps of the ritual procedure and performance. For example, that he or she did not use enough poison, did not perform the ritual correctly or in the right order. The researchers empirically showcased that the more stipulations there are in a ritual, the more opportunities there are to blame something for the lack of efficacy other than concluding that the ritual does not work.21 People unconsciously judge the effectiveness of ritual actions similarly to the way they judge the effectiveness of ordinary outcomes. In particular, the more specific action is, and the more steps are involved, the more likely observers are to intuitively assume that the actions have the potential to produce the outcome, even when they do not know how, precisely, this is achieved.

These principles of reasoning about actions may also help explain why people do not quickly abandon their cultural rituals. It also may explain why rituals contain many specificities and many steps. Procedural steps mark that something extraordinary is about to happen, and they protect the ritual from being judged ineffective. Thus, rituals with more procedural steps are likely to continue to be practiced and transmitted over time.

Participation 3: Commonalities in rituals

Review your answer to the question, “What (if anything) do you think these rituals have in common?” from the first participation task in this chapter. Compare your answer to the main features of ritualized behavior, as evidenced by systematic scientific CSR research in this section. Write in a few sentences (or bullet points) how they are similar or different.



Key points

CSR construes ritual as a special kind of behavior rather than communicating a special meaning for the researcher to interpret according to the cultural context.

Rituals are socially stipulated group conventions that often entail predefined behaviors that are rigid, formal, and repeated.

People often lack a rationale for why they perform particular actions within the ritual sequence and are often unaware of how these actions produce the intended outcome according to physical laws.

Unlike ordinary behaviors, rituals are not quickly abandoned when they fail to produce the intended outcome.





Summary of the main features of ritualized behavior, according to CSR:

Actions lack a physical-causal mechanism and rationale.

Behaviors are rigid, repetitive, redundant, and disconnected from ordinary goals.

Ritualized practices do not stop when they fail to produce the intended outcome.





How are rituals learned?


Rituals are a special kind of behavior that is often reproduced and passed on throughout generations. This fact begs the obvious question, how are rituals learned? People learn and imitate ritualized behavior without fully understanding how the actions physically bring about the end goal. They do so because they unconsciously understand that rituals are a special kind of action. Research in the developmental and cognitive sciences have suggested that the unique features of ritualized action behavior make them especially likely to be reproduced and transmitted. For instance, when people hear that behaviors are part of a traditional ritual, they assume that there is a “proper” way of doing something without explicit explanations as to why particular actions should be performed. Participants also designate the correct performance of ritual actions as desirable, heighten submission and respect for leaders, and affiliation with other participants. The result of this combination is high-fidelity imitation:22 mimicking ritual behaviors as closely as possible.

Experimental research demonstrates that children’s interpretation of behavior as instrumental or conventional (i.e. ritual practice) has wide-ranging implications for what children imitate, what they transmit to others, and how they reason about objects’ functions. For example, cognitive scientists Csibra and Gergely23 found that when communicated as though it were a ritual, infants imitated an adult switching on a light with their heads, not their hands. Yet when the action was repeated without cues that it was a ritual, infants used their hands to switch on the light, presumably because it was a more efficient means (pressing with the hand) to achieve the end goal (switching on the light).

Another series of studies have demonstrated that children’s imitative fidelity is influenced by cues to interpret behavior as instrumental versus conventional.24 For example, psychologists Clegg and Legare examined children’s imitative behaviors in a necklace-making activity. They found that children in the conventional condition imitated with higher fidelity transmitted more of the modeled behavior and showed higher levels of functional fixedness than children in the instrumental condition.25 Conversely, these and other findings suggest that we are attuned to replicate behaviors when they are part of a traditional ritual.

Research with children and adults has also demonstrated that the combination of causal opacity (i.e. lacking a direct physical explanation for the effect) and social stipulation of behaviors inhibits the tendency for individuals to change aspects of the ritual. Thus, people precisely replicate the behaviors involved in a ritual, what cognitive scientists refer to as high-fidelity cultural transmission over time.26 As Legare and colleagues have argued, from an evolutionary perspective, given the variability and limitations of personal experience and intuition, and the cognitive effort involved in inferring intentions and goals, natural selection ought to favor a social learning strategy where we imitate ritual behaviors as closely as possible. In other words, what you know about the world is limited, and when uncertain about something, a sound strategy is to copy others whom you think know better. This copying strategy is especially likely when there is uncertainty in the environment, including potential hazards.27



Figure 9.1 Research in the evolutionary cognitive sciences has focused on uncovering the psycho-social foundations of children’s imitative behavior in ritual, like the Jewish child praying at the Western Wall in Israel in the photo. (Image credit: SmadarSonyaStrauss/Shutterstock.com).

The fidelity of imitative behaviors also increases when actual or threatened ostracism by the group is higher. For example, Legare and colleagues have demonstrated that young children who are excluded by their in-group are more likely to imitate the behaviors of the rituals than children who are included.28 Thus, the threat of social exclusion and loss of status motivates engagement in ritual throughout development. Performing social-group conventions, such as ritual behaviors, may serve as a bid for re-inclusion into the group.29,30,31 Throughout evolutionary history, social ostracism was akin to a death sentence, and social affiliation and one’s reputation is likely to be one of the most motivating forces to explain the participation in cultural rituals today.32 One only has to imagine the harmful and potentially detrimental reputational consequences a member of the community would suffer if they refused to participate in a traditional ritual. Consider, for example, the reputation of an American father who refused to help carry his adolescent son’s coffin on his shoulder because it was uncomfortable.

The particular action sequences and meanings of rituals are learned. Scholars in CSR have proposed that children and adults can identify, learn, and replicate ritual behaviors with little effort because they understand that rituals are a specific kind of action. This understanding is not necessarily conscious. Just like the ability to create friction between the ground and our feet gives rise to walking, and the tendency to recognize and produce sounds gives rise to language, the acquisition and participation in rituals is possible with little direct, explicit instruction because of underlying mental systems.

Key points

Rituals contain elements that inspire people to reproduce them as precisely as possible, even though they do not understand precisely how the actions physically cause the outcome.

Even young children mimic behaviors that are less an efficient means to an end goal in rituals.

Copying the behaviors of others, even without an understanding of the underlying mechanisms of their actions, can be advantageous because people often know something we do not.





How are rituals represented?


Before the 1990s, most accounts of ritual ignored the potential relationship between ritual and action representation. In the early 1990s, religious studies scholar E. Thomas Lawson and philosopher Robert McCauley first made the connection between the two, and their cognitive account of religious ritual inaugurated the cognitive science of religion.33 Lawson and McCauley explained how the representation of ritual actions is handled by the same cognitive system that processes everyday actions. They further showcased how, just like an underlying language system enables speakers to produce and understand seemingly endless sentences in their language, people extrapolate many aspects of ritual based on the form the ritual takes.

The theory’s roots began when E. Thomas Lawson was browsing a second-hand bookstore in the early 1970s and stumbled across a worn copy of Noam Chomsky’s Syntactic Structures book. As he skimmed the book, Lawson was compelled by the central argument that Chomsky was making about language, and he could not help but notice the parallels to the study of rituals. In the book, Chomsky argued that humans everywhere have an innate capacity for linguistic knowledge. In contrast to empiricists’ arguments that had come before, Chomsky was proposing that language was not acquired solely by experience but based upon a genetic component of language acquisition. This genetic component explained how children everywhere acquired language so quickly, relative to the input, and why languages tended to have similar syntactic rules. Lawson bought the book, showed it to his then-student Robert McCauley, and the two began formalizing a theory about how people represent rituals inspired by this competence theory of universal grammar.

Lawson and McCauley proposed that people have a tacit understanding of rituals based on their form. Like Chomsky, they traced this understanding to cognition, and more specifically, to a more general “action representation system,” which they proposed operates in reasoning about all actions in the world.34 Grammar contains certain kinds of words (nouns, verbs, adjectives), and words have different functions in a sentence (subject, verb, object). Likewise, all action contains “slots” or roles to make meaningful action. Specifically, the slot of agent or actor, the slot of patient or subject of the action, and the slot of an instrument(s) used in action. This is what they call the “action representation system.”

One particular conceptualization of actions are rituals, where an actor acts on a patient ACTOR→ACT→PATIENT (See Figure 9.2). In other words, when you see a person or agent capable of goal-directed behavior (i.e. an actor) acting on another person, animal, object, etc. (i.e. the patient), via an instrument (e.g. water), you represent this action as a ritual. Much like your ability to speak a language without consciously noting the formal rules, you represent an action as a ritual when three aspects of action are completed. Just as language shared some common features, Lawson and McCauley were convinced that rituals shared common features too. In 1990, they published a theory about the lowest common denominator of rituals everywhere,35 in other words, three elements (actor, act, patient) are the minimal requirements for a person to represent an action as a ritual. They later coined this theory Ritual Form Hypothesis (RFH).36

Key points

We use the same cognitive capacities to represent rituals and actions more generally.

According to RFH, ritual action involves an agent performing some action on a patient.

This cognitive theory proposes that our understanding of ritual behaviors is not exclusively derived from cultural learning but is also based upon an inherent understanding of actions.

Figure 9.2 Basic representation of ritual actions.





Participation 4: What makes a ritual religious?

Think about a religious ritual that you have participated in. What do you think makes this a religious ritual? Write down your answer in a few sentences.



So far, in the chapter, we have considered the hallmark features of cultural rituals. Ritual Form Hypothesis (RFH), developed by Lawson and McCauley, proposes that we intuitively represent a ritual as a particular type of action, but what do people think demarks a religious ritual from other kinds of rituals? For example, how would you know whether an infant was being washed or baptized? Lawson and McCauley claimed that religious rituals are an elaboration of the basic system in Figure 9.1 ACTOR→ACT→PATIENT. In particular, they defined religious rituals as acts in which (1) someone (2) does something (3) to someone or something using an instrument (4) in order to bring about some non-natural consequence (5) by an appeal to superhuman agency, i.e. ACTOR→ACT→PATIENT→NON-NATURAL CONSEQUENCE→SUPERHUMAN AGENCY.

Religions often posit agents such as ancestors and gods as superior to humans. The crucial difference between ordinary action and religious ritual, according to RFH is the participation of agents that culture adds a nonhuman-like quality to (which they call “culturally postulated superhuman agents” or CPS-agents). According to Lawson and McCauley, all religious rituals are inevitably connected sooner or later with actions in which centrally postulated agents play a role and bring about some change in the religious world. Other kinds of religious events deviate from this structure, such as priests sacrificing goats or pilgrims circling shrines. While these activities may be parts of religious rituals, the activities themselves do not constitute religious rituals, according to RFH.

It is essential here to consider again the issue of how CSR defines ritual, posed at the start of the chapter. From this cognitive perspective, the word “ritual” could be replaced with another, and people would still represent these patterns as a distinct category of events. Just like changing the name for “language” does not stop people from understanding specific configurations of speech. What matters are the configurations, not the labels.

The Ritual Form Hypothesis (RFH) explains judgments about the frequency and efficacy of ritual as based on the ritual’s form. The form includes whether the agent, action, or patient has a unique, counter-intuitive property (S-marker), a culturally postulated superhuman agent (i.e. CPS-agent) in the ritual, and where this agent fits into the formal structural description of the ritual action. For example, if the special marker is on the agent, and that agent is deemed close to the ultimate source of authority (e.g. a Priest, acting on behalf of God), then the ritual will be performed less frequently, and the consequences of the ritual are considered permanent. Whereas rituals with a special marker on the patient or instrument tend to be performed more regularly, and the implications of the ritual are less permanent. Likewise, frequency differs when the S-marker is in the actor position from when the S-marker is in the patient position.37,38 Ordination of a soon-to-be-priest by an ordained priest means that the latter priest is acting with the power of God (S-marker in actor position). Whereas in a sacrifice to a god, the God is in the receiving position, not the acting position. The first ritual will occur only once, the latter many times.

Participation 5: Comparing ritual definitions

How does your definition of a ritual compare to the ritual form hypothesis? Write down your answer in a few sentences.



Key points

According to RFH, all humans possess a basic conceptualization of actions.

One conceptualization of actions is ritual, which involves an agent, action, and patient.

Religious rituals are an elaboration of this ritual conceptualization.

Religious rituals are acts in which (1) someone (2) does something (3) to someone or something using an instrument (4) in order to bring about some non-natural consequence (5) by an appeal to superhuman agency.





Participation 6: What makes religious rituals different from other rituals?

Compare your response to the participation task at the start of the section to how rituals are designated as religious in ritual form hypothesis. Write down your answer in a few sentences.



One outcome of RFH theory is the ability to label which kinds of events people would represent as rituals and to characterize the basic cognitive structure of religious rituals. The theory also generates testable predictions about our intuitions about aspects of religious rituals based on their features. Lawson and McCauley claim that we start to make all sorts of inferences about rituals in religious systems, even those that we have little information about.39 These intuitions include many aspects of rituals. For example:

Which rituals are performed only once (e.g. confirmation in the Catholic Church), and which are repeatable (e.g. the Eucharist, aka Holy Communion)?

Which rituals are permanent (e.g. baptism) and which effects wear off naturally (e.g. pilgrimage to Lourdes)?

Why some rituals are characterized by lots of stimuli and intense emotions (e.g. the Hindu festival Thaipusam) while others seem more humdrum affairs (e.g. Quaker prayer meeting).

Which rituals are central, and which are peripheral?

Which rituals permit substitutions, and which do not.



Some claims made by the ritual form hypothesis40 include:

For a ritual to be effective, it must be performed by a qualified intentional agent.

In religious rituals, some actors, patients, and instruments (e.g. objects) are demarked as having special powers or qualities (i.e. an S-marker). As opposed to special patient and instrument rituals, special agent rituals (i.e. CPS rituals, such as when God acts) are regarded as having more permanence and are thus not repeatable. In particular, the theory proposes that rituals, where the S-marker is on the agent, are represented as exceptional types of rituals indeed. Consider agents such as Priests who are thought to be acting on behalf of God. These agents are termed “culturally postulated superhumans” (CPS) in RFH because they take the place of the ultimate religious authority in the ritual.

Typically, CPS agents can take the place of religious authority because they have been qualified to do so through some enabling rituals (e.g. ordination).

Special agent rituals have to convince participants that something profound is happening and thus will have more emotionally provocative stimuli (i.e. sensory pageantry) than other rituals in that religious system. When the ultimate source of religious authority or representatives of that authority are thought to act in the human world, then the rituals tend to be less frequent and more permanent.



These predictions make RFH an empirically tractable theory and set it apart from earlier anthropological theories that provide descriptions of what they propose people think religious rituals entail. Furthermore, with the help of other researchers, Lawson and McCauley set out to test these claims. Multiple studies with participants from a variety of mainstream religious traditions provided support for crucial predictions from the theory. These include judgments about when the correct performer (and intentions) were more important for the ritual outcome than the proper action, the level of sensory pageantry employed, and whether the ritual would be repeated or be reversed.41,42,43,44

Key points

RFH provides testable predictions about our intuitions about aspects of religious rituals based on their features.

These include the frequency of performance, the longevity of their effects and the level of sensory pageantry employed.

Many of these claims have been empirically tested.





Summary of How are rituals learned and represented?

Rituals are socially stipulated group conventions that often entail predefined behaviors that are rigid, formal, and repeated.

Rituals contain elements that predispose children and adults to mimic behaviors that are a less efficient means to an end goal.

Rituals are resilient to change.

People unconsciously recognize rituals based on their intuitive understanding of actions, and religious rituals as a specific kind of ritual.

People also generate intuitions about aspects of religious rituals based on their features.





How are rituals transmitted?


So far in the chapter, we have mainly considered how rituals are learned and represented. Next, we focus on how rituals are transmitted from one generation to the next. This question is vital because if rituals are not remembered, they will not be transmitted, and will cease to exist. One answer was proposed by the “Modes of Religiosity” (MOR) theory, developed by social anthropologist Harvey Whitehouse. MOR theory is concerned with the fundamental questions of how rituals are transmitted and how they relate to the scale and structure of the communities within which they are embedded.





Modes of religiosity (MOR)


Whitehouse’s ethnographic fieldwork in Papua New Guinea in the 1980s originally inspired the Modes of Religiosity (MOR) theory (see the case study at the end of this chapter for more information). One group (the Pomio Kivung) was a large movement with highly repetitive rituals and public speeches. Smaller breakaway movements also popped up from time to time within the Pomio Kivung and consisted of emotionally intense rituals and ordeals. Whitehouse’s theory purports to explain a set of general patterns of group formation in ritual groups around the world and across history.

Whitehouse observed that rituals tended to form into two characteristic patterns, and these patterns were also related to the transmission of religion and even socio-political organization.45 Whitehouse called these two patterns “modes of religiosity.46” At the heart of MOR’s theory is the claim that these differences are guided in part by the way crucial aspects of the religion are remembered and transmitted. Thus, memory systems constrain the types of rituals we see throughout religious communities. Characteristic of the CSR approach, MOR theory attributes a central role to human cognition.

Whitehouse described one mode as “doctrinal.” Like the mainstream Pomio Kivung, the rituals in the doctrinal mode tended to entail low sensory pageantry and low levels of emotional arousal among the participants. Rituals tended to be performed frequently, emphasizing the repetition of doctrine, as well as the meanings of the rituals (exegesis). Based on research on memory processes in psychology at the time, Whitehouse surmised that these types of ritual actions were encoded in implicit procedural memory even though doctrine and exegesis were stored in explicit memory systems. Think about driving a car or reciting a long poem; these tasks are complicated at first and require much concentration. However, eventually, they become effortless because you do them so often. Likewise, frequent repetition of ritual procedures, from genuflecting and self-crossing to collective chanting and marching, enables them to become sedimented in procedural memory. Meanwhile, the continual repetition of doctrines and narratives enable people to remember them in semantic memory as part of their long-term general knowledge. Consider Catholic mass in Ireland. If you ask any Irish Catholic what notable events happened at mass last week, they are probably more likely to scratch their heads. They will, however, be able to tell you what generally happens at mass each week and even recite scripture performed during rituals, such as The Rosary or Lord’s Prayer, effortlessly (see Figure 9.4). Details of these more typical elements are often shared in semantic memory by large numbers of religious adherents.



Figure 9.3 Harvey Whitehouse’s career began by carrying out immersive fieldwork in Papua New Guinea using conventional ethnographic methods. He later teamed with other researchers in adjacent fields and focused on uncovering the psycho-social foundations of rituals. Today, he carries out surveys and experiments alongside qualitative methods in the field, as depicted in the recent picture taken in a small village on the island of Tanna, Vanuatu. (Image credit: Veronika Rybanska).

These cognitive features of the doctrinal mode have important consequences for cultural transmission. Since the doctrinal mode codifies religious teaching in oratory and text, it is capable of spreading rapidly and efficiently to large populations. Moreover, frequent repetition makes it easy to spot deviations from the orthodoxy stored in semantic memory. At the same time, reliance on implicit scripts for routinized rituals suppresses exegetical reflection, making innovation less likely. All these factors contribute to the stabilization of homogenized regional traditions.47 However, since semantic memory for the group’s identity markers is not anchored in personally lived experiences, doctrinal group alignments do not tap into a personal agency. Social psychologists refer to “identification” as a depersonalizing form of affiliation to the group, in which activation of the social identity makes the personal self less salient.48



Figure 9.4 Example of how ritual frequency gives rise to other psycho-socio-political aspects in the doctrinal mode.

Further, this combination of features also enables the emergence of specialist religious leaders and large anonymous communities with centralized authority. The emphasis on an elaborated body of teachings encourages the rise of experts and orators and the need for policing, although partly met by peer pressure and normative tightness, also fosters the emergence of priestly hierarchies. Figure 9.4, shows some of the ways in which all these different elements are connected.

The second mode, “imagistic” describes the splinter groups that Whitehouse witnessed in Papua New Guinea. This mode is characterized by the coalescence of different features than the doctrinal mode (see Figure 9.5). Rituals in the imagistic mode tend to be infrequent and are characterized by high sensory pageantry. These experiences are highly salient among the participants, which makes them stored as vivid, episodic flashbulb-like memories. Consider a meaningful, emotional, and infrequent event in your life, such as childbirth, marriage, perhaps a tragedy, or even where you were during a significant event, like when Princess Diana died in a fatal car crash in Paris or the 9/11 terrorist attacks against the U.S. You are likely to remember the details of the event, and with the case of painful personal experiences, primarily reflect that the events unfolded the way they did for a reason.

These kinds of personal experiences also have significant consequences for social cohesion. Whitehouse and colleagues have argued that the imagistic mode involves the establishment of personally salient episodic memories that come to form part of the essential autobiographical self. When such memories are shared with a group, it creates a fusion of personal and group identities, increasing group cohesion. Whitehouse further proposes that these kinds of salient rituals, which characterize the imagistic mode, are not accompanied by elaborate doctrine learned from elders or priests. Instead, they often lead people to privately reflect on the meaning of the ritual based upon their personal experiences.

Whitehouse calls this individualized process of meaning-making “spontaneous exegetical reflection” (SER). This pathway to religious knowledge discourages the emergence of centralized leadership and instead binds together small groups of people who have gone through the rituals together. Examples of these types of rituals include rites of passage—such as initiation rituals to demark a change in people’s social status, common in small-scale traditional societies.49 These rituals typically include traumatic ordeals, such as extended periods of isolation, piercing, burning, and scarification.50



Figure 9.5 Example of how ritual frequency gives rise to other psycho-socio-political aspects in the imagistic mode.





Modes of Religiosity (MOR) theory and Ritual Form Hypothesis (RFH)


You may have noticed some overlap between the claims about rituals in this section by Modes of Religiosity (MOR) theory and Ritual Form Hypothesis (RFH) that we covered in the previous section. Much of CSR in the late 1990s and early 2000s was dominated by these two theories of religious rituals and their implications for the understanding of ritual transmission. MOR and RFH share many underlying assumptions, but they differ on a few crucial predictions. One key difference is that MOR emphasizes the frequency of ritual performance as the key to understanding the diversity of rituals. In other words, rituals tend to cluster into two forms (i.e. doctrinal and imagistic modes) that differ in frequency because they are constrained by mnemonic factors (i.e. how people tend to remember and transmit religion).


Table 9.1 Summary of some of the central claims of modes of religiosity (partly based on the more extensive summary by Justin Barrett51 and Whitehouse52).

# Doctrinal mode Imagistic mode

1 Frequent repetition of doctrinal information activates semantic memory for religious teaching and implicit memory for routinized ritual procedures. Infrequent repetition with high sensory pageantry rituals creates episodic memories for events.

2 Implicit memory for rituals reduces individual reflection and innovation regarding the meaning of ceremonies, increasing acceptance of authoritative interpretations (i.e. orthodoxy). Episodic memory for rituals generates spontaneous exegetical reflection (SER), which means that people have idiosyncratic and different understandings of the rituals.

4 Larger bodies of knowledge required of participants and the presence of religious leaders/authority are mutually reinforcing. Diversity of understanding the meanings of rituals discourages central leadership.

5 The presence of religious leaders/teachers helps to enforce orthodoxy. Lacking central leadership and lack of orthodoxy are mutually reinforcing.

6 The presence of orthodoxy checks in a religious community encourages the centralization of power structures. Participants in rituals with high sensory pageantry tend to experience intense social cohesion and identity fusion.

7 Semantic memory for religious teachings encourages anonymous communities. Strong social cohesion and episodic memories for rituals encourage exclusive religious communities.

8 Religious leaders can facilitate the spread of the tradition to other populations (e.g. via proselytism and missionization). Religious traditions based on locally shared ritual experiences are hard to spread.



By contrast, RFH proposes that the ritual form is the independent variable that underpins frequency, namely the reference to, and place of the special S-marker, especially the presence and location of the CPS agent in the structure of the ritual. In short, the S-marker determines the frequency. There are also differences in the scope of the theories. While RFH explains how humans represent and constrain rituals, especially where a superhuman agent is evoked in the ritual structure, the modes theory includes broader predictions about the consequences of varying the frequency and emotionality of collective rituals for the scale and structure of social groups.

Participation 7: Levels of analyses

In Chapter 4 (Methods) we discussed methodological pluralism and interdisciplinary research paradigms (Table 4.1, Table 4.2, and Figure 4.3).

Re-read Chapter 9, and read the case study at the end of this chapter also.

Summarize the different kinds of research methods used (e.g. developmental, historical, experimental).

Outline the different levels of analyses (e.g. psychological, cultural).

Share and compare your answer to another student’s.





Research case study: Modes of Religiosity (MOR) theory of religious transmission

Social anthropologist Harvey Whitehouse formalized his theory of “modes of religiosity” based on two years of ethnographic fieldwork in Papua New Guinea in the late 1980s.53 Whitehouse noticed that there were two different types of religious activity and transmission in the Pomio Kivung, a religious movement in East New Britain Province, encompassing thousands of people in many villages. Pomio Kivung followers would frequently gather to perform rituals and listen to preachers reiterate laws. Yet there were also smaller splinter groups that periodically emerged every five years or so in particular villages and then dissolved. The rituals of these splinter groups were much more emotionally intense and quite often unpleasant.

When he returned to the libraries of Cambridge, Whitehouse discovered that the patterns he had observed in Papua New Guinea were not unique. It seemed that rituals in other parts of the world also tended to conform to two characteristic patterns. These ritual patterns were also related to the transmission of religion and even socio-political organization.54 As we discussed earlier in the chapter, Whitehouse dubbed one package of ritual elements as “imagistic” and the other “doctrinal,” and these two packages of rituals and associated socio-political features Modes of Religiosity (MOR).55

Like other generalizing theories about religion and socio-political organization in the social sciences, MOR is ambitious. MOR theory is, however, distinctive compared to other theories about religious dynamics that are broad in scope for at least seven reasons:





1 MOR fractionates the category of ritual into distinct, empirically tractable components


Like other CSR approaches, MOR theory fractionates the category of ritual into distinct cognitive and behavioral patterns that appear cross-culturally, such as causally opaque action, and euphoric and dysphoric arousal. These components can be investigated independently and empirically as having particular psycho-social effects, such as on cohesion and cooperation.





2 MOR attributes a central role to human cognition in the formation of religious practices


Like other theories in the cognitive science of religion, MOR attributes human psychology with a critical role in underpinning religious forms. For instance, at the heart of MOR is the theory that the differences in two characteristic packages of rituals and socio-political features of communities are guided in part by the way crucial aspects of the religion are recalled and transmitted. Memory systems constrain the types of rituals we see throughout religious communities. In the doctrinal mode, frequent repetition of doctrinal information activates semantic memory for religious teaching and implicit memory for routinized ritual procedures. In the imagistic mode, infrequent repetition with high sensory pageantry rituals creates episodic memories for events.





3 MOR specifies the mechanisms connecting ritual participation with identity fusion in the imagistic mode and identification in the doctrinal mode


Most social scientists endorse some version of the claim that participating in collective rituals promotes social cohesion, yet lack an explanation of how, precisely, participation gives rise to social solidarity. Later formulations of MOR theory also emphasized the effect of rituals on measurable forms of group alignment. For example, Whitehouse and colleagues have shown how those with shared collective identity who undergo emotionally intense (e.g. painful rituals) may experience the fusion of personal and group identities, resulting in a visceral sense of oneness with the group. Identity fusion results from specific kinds of rituals typically found in kin-like groups around the world, from tribes in Papua New Guinea to Libyan insurgents and Muslim fundamentalists in Indonesia.56

By contrast, doctrinal modes of ritual practice promote shared social norms through instruction, are stored in semantic memory, and result in intuitions of shared group membership and trustworthiness based on identification, a depersonalizing form of group alignment. These later formulations are where current research inspired by MOR has focused, and we will turn to this in more detail when we consider the group-level effects of ritual participation in the next chapter.





4 MOR generates testable hypotheses concerning the relationships between psychological and social-level variables


Like many anthropological theories, MOR was inspired by ethnographic insights based upon Whitehouse’s first-hand experience of participant observation in Papua New Guinea. However, unlike most social anthropologists, Whitehouse used his ethnographic observations to generate a set of testable hypotheses. He attempted to explain the underlying patterns in divergent modes of religiosity in Papua New Guinea and other places around the world by partnering with psychologists and other scientists to develop and test these hypotheses experimentally, comparatively, and longitudinally.





5 Many aspects of MOR have received empirical support from a variety of methodologies


Whitehouse and other researchers have tested the purported relationships in MOR theory, and many aspects of the theory have received support. Support includes data derived from neurophysiological studies57,58 and psychological experiments with children59,60,61 and adults.62 For example, concerning the connection between sensory pageantry, emotional arousal, memory, and perceived ritual efficacy. For instance, experiments with adults have demonstrated that high arousal rituals do tend to generate spontaneous exegetical reflection (SER) about the meaning of the rituals.63

Broader claims about the association between socio-political conditions that facilitate different forms of religion are understandably more difficult to test. Whitehouse invited archaeologists and historians to consider how detailed case studies might support or refute his theories. These attempts at goodness-of-fit between MOR and real-world data have been met with mainly positive reviews64,65 ethnographic,66 archaeological and historical records,67,68,69,70 and data from computer simulation modeling has provided some support.71 Building on these quantitative methods, further evidence for core predictions of the theory continues to appear.72,73





6 MOR is adaptable in response to data


MOR qualifies as a scientific theory because it is responsive to change based upon empirical findings. For example, due to scholarly feedback, MOR has undergone many clarifications and modifications. For instance, based on historical data, the modes are presented as less discrete and more continuum-like than was initially proposed.74





7 MOR is grounded in an evolutionary account


MOR draws upon individual and group-level evolutionary processes to explain the recurrent features of religion. For instance, based upon a selectionist model, the theory assumes that memorable rituals are more likely to survive than those that are not. Evolutionary theory also underpins other aspects of MOR. For instance, one explanation for identity fusion in imagistic ritual experiences focuses on evolved coalitionary psychology and tribal instincts. Namely, groupmates with whom we share important life events are perceived as “psychological kin” because the human brain is predisposed for sacrificial behavior towards close kin. This strategy is genetically adaptive, yet in specific contexts, such as shared ritual experiences, we unconsciously misattribute the strategy to non-kin, where it facilitates pro-group behavior irrespective of genetic relatedness.





Questions


In your own words, summarize the claims of Modes of Religiosity theory (MOR).

Compare and contrast the Modes of Religiosity theory (MOR) to Ritual Form Hypothesis (RFH) in the previous section. Note similarities and differences between them. You can use bullet points, diagrams, sentences, or anything else that helps you answer the question.

What do you think demarks this research on rituals as typical of the CSR approach to ritual?

What are the implications of MOR on the religion-as-irrational thesis proposed by new atheists (covered earlier in the chapter)?

What do you think are the real-world implications of MOR theory on explaining rituals around the world?



Further reading

Whitehouse, Harvey. Modes of religiosity: A cognitive theory of religious transmission. Rowman Altamira, 2004.

Whitehouse, Harvey, Jonathan A. Lanman “The ties that bind us: Ritual, fusion, and identification.” Current Anthropology 55, no. 6 (2014): 1–22.

Atkinson, Quentin D., and Harvey Whitehouse. “The cultural morphospace of ritual form: Examining modes of religiosity cross-culturally.” Evolution and Human Behavior 32, no. 1 (2011): 50–62.

Whitehouse, Harvey, and James Laidlaw, eds. Ritual and memory: Toward a comparative anthropology of religion. Vol. 6. Rowman Altamira, 2004.





Discussion questions

Go through this chapter again and note down all of the contributions of CSR to the study of ritual.

Read the section in this chapter again, “What are rituals?” and compare it to the section in “What is religion?” in Chapter 2: Core Assumptions. How are they similar or different? Write down your answer in a few sentences.

Imagine that you entered a competition to teach kids a new ritual. The winner is judged by the number of children who successfully perform the behavior. Based on what you have learned in this chapter, describe the features of the action, and describe what you would tell the children about the behavior.

Do you think that all CSR theories on rituals (e.g. RFH, MOR) have implications on whether or not they work? Write down your answer in a few sentences.





Chapter summary


Rituals are a trademark of human behavior. Although they are not unique to religion, rituals are especially common among religious communities. CSR has shed light on many important questions, including questions of what demarks a ritual from other actions, what people think makes a ritual religious, and how psychological and social factors explain why rituals are similar and different. Scholars have also tackled the crucial questions of how rituals are learned, represented, and transmitted. When taken together, research and theories in CSR help to demonstrate that rituals are not for the naïve or religious fanatics, but that these behaviors are a product of being human.





Selected further reading


Articles


Atkinson, Quentin D., and Harvey Whitehouse. “The cultural morphospace of ritual form: Examining modes of religiosity cross-culturally.” Evolution and Human Behavior 32, no. 1 (2011): 50–62.

Legare, Cristine H., and André L. Souza. “Evaluating ritual efficacy: Evidence from the supernatural.” Cognition 124, no. 1 (2012): 1–15.

McCauley, Robert N. “Ritual, memory, and emotion: Comparing two cognitive hypotheses.” In Religion in mind: Cognitive perspectives on religious belief, ritual, and experience, ed. J. Andresen, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, Ch. 5, 114–151.





Books


McCauley, Robert N., and E. Thomas Lawson. Bringing ritual to mind: Psychological foundations of cultural forms. Cambridge University Press, 2002.



Notes

1 Tambiah, Stanley Jeyaraja. “The magical power of words.” Man 3, no. 2 (1968): 175–208.

2 Stocking, George W. After Tylor: British social anthropology, 1888–1951. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1995.

3 Humphrey, Caroline, and James Laidlaw. The archetypal actions of ritual: A theory of ritual illustrated by the Jain rite of worship. USA: Oxford University Press, 1994.

4 Rappaport, R. A. Ritual and religion in the making of humanity. Cambridge, U.K., New York: Cambridge University Press, 1999.

5 Liénard, Pierre, and Pascal Boyer. “Whence collective rituals? A cultural selection model of ritualized behavior.” American Anthropologist 108, no. 4 (2006): 814–827.

6 Watson-Jones, Rachel E., and Cristine H. Legare. “The social functions of group rituals.” Current Directions in Psychological Science 25, no. 1 (2016): 42–46.

7 Legare, Cristine H., and Mark Nielsen. “Imitation and innovation: The dual engines of cultural learning.” Trends in Cognitive Sciences 19, no. 11 (2015): 688–699.

8 Whitehouse, Harvey. “The coexistence problem in psychology, anthropology, and evolutionary theory.” Human Development 54, no. 3 (2011): 191.

9 E.g. see Legare, Cristine H., and Rachel E. Watson‐Jones. “The evolution and ontogeny of ritual.” In The handbook of evolutionary psychology, 2015.

10 Legare, Cristine H., Rachel E. Watson-Jones, and Andre L. Souza. “A cognitive psychological account of reasoning about ritual efficacy.” In Advances in religion, cognitive science, and experimental philosophy, 2016, 85.

11 Sørensen, J. A cognitive theory of magic. Lanham, MD: Rowman Altamira Press, 2007.

12 E.g. Bloch, Maurice. “Symbols, song, dance, and features of articulation: Is religion an extreme form of traditional authority?” European Journal of Sociology/Archives Européennes de Sociologie 15, no. 1 (1974): 54–81; Boyer, Pascal. Religion explained: The evolutionary origins of religious thought. No. 170. Basic Books, 2001.

13 Sperber, Dan. (1975). Rethinking Symbolism. (A.L. Morton.). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

14 E.g. see Legare, Cristine H., and Rachel E. Watson‐Jones. “The evolution and ontogeny of ritual.” In The handbook of evolutionary psychology, 2015.

15 Legare, Cristine H., and André L. Souza. “Evaluating ritual efficacy: Evidence from the supernatural.” Cognition 124, no. 1 (2012): 1–15.

16 Herrmann, Patricia A., Cristine H. Legare, Paul L. Harris, and Harvey Whitehouse. “Stick to the script: The effect of witnessing multiple actors on children’s imitation.” Cognition 129, no. 3 (2013): 536–543.

17 E.g. Tambiah, Stanley Jeyaraja. “A performative approach to ritual.” In Proceedings of the British Academy London 65 (1979): 113–169.

18 E.g. Humphrey, Caroline, and James Laidlaw. The archetypal actions of ritual: A theory of ritual illustrated by the Jain rite of worship. Oxford University Press, USA, 1994.

19 Scharf, R. (2010, February 18). “How to get a husband the Brazilian way.” http://deepbrazil.com/2010/02/18/how-to-find-a-husband-the-brazilian-way/.

20 Evans-Pritchard, E.E. Witchcraft, oracles, and magic among the Azande (Vol. 12). London: Oxford, 1937.

21 Legare, Cristine H., and André L. Souza. “Evaluating ritual efficacy: Evidence from the supernatural.” Cognition 124, no. 1 (2012): 1–15. Cited in Legare, Cristine H., and André L. Souza. “Evaluating ritual efficacy: Evidence from the supernatural.” Cognition 124, no. 1 (2012): 1–15.

22 Whitehouse, Harvey. “The coexistence problem in psychology, anthropology, and evolutionary theory.” Human Development, 54: 191–199.

23 Csibra, Gergely, and György Gergely. “Natural pedagogy.” Trends in Cognitive Sciences 13, no. 4 (2009): 148–153.

24 Legare, Cristine H., Nicole J. Wen, Patricia A. Herrmann, and Harvey Whitehouse. “Imitative flexibility and the development of cultural learning.” Cognition 142 (2015): 351–361.

25 Clegg, Jennifer M., and Cristine H. Legare. “Instrumental and conventional interpretations of behavior are associated with distinct outcomes in early childhood.” Child Development 87, no. 2 (2016): 527–542.

26 Legare, Cristine H., and Mark Nielsen. “Imitation and innovation: The dual engines of cultural learning.” Trends in Cognitive Sciences 19, no. 11 (2015): 688–699.

27 Henrich, Joseph, and Francisco J. Gil-White. “The evolution of prestige: Freely conferred deference as a mechanism for enhancing the benefits of cultural transmission.” Evolution and Human Behavior 22, no. 3 (2001): 165–196.

28 Watson-Jones, Rachel E., Harvey Whitehouse, and Cristine H. Legare. “In-group ostracism increases high-fidelity imitation in early childhood.” Psychological Science 27, no. 1 (2016): 34–42.

29 Watson-Jones, Rachel E., Harvey Whitehouse, and Cristine H. Legare. “In-group ostracism increases high-fidelity imitation in early childhood.” Psychological Science 27, no. 1 (2016): 34–42.

30 Legare, Cristine H., and Rachel E. Watson‐Jones. “The evolution and ontogeny of ritual.” In The handbook of evolutionary psychology, 2015: 1–19.

31 Legare, C.H., H. Whitehouse, N.J. Wen, and P.A. Herrmann. “Imitative foundations of cultural learning.” Cognition (2012).

32 Gruter, Margaret, and Roger D. Masters. “Ostracism as a social and biological phenomenon: An introduction.” (1986): 149–158.

33 Lawson, E. Thomas, and Robert N. McCauley. Rethinking religion: Connecting cognition and culture. Cambridge University Press, 1990.

34 Lawson, E. Thomas, and Robert N. McCauley. Rethinking Religion: Connecting cognition and culture. Cambridge University Press, 1990.

35 Lawson, E. Thomas, and R. McCauley. “Rethinking religion: Connecting culture and cognition.” Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990.

36 McCauley, Robert N., and E. Thomas Lawson. Bringing ritual to mind: Psychological foundations of cultural forms. Cambridge University Press, 2002.

37 Whitehouse, H. “Theoretical challenges.” In Whitehouse, H. Modes of religiosity: A cognitive theory of religious transmission. Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira Press, 2004.

38 McCauley, R.N. “Ritual, memory, and emotion: Comparing two cognitive hypotheses.” In Religion in mind: Cognitive perspectives on religious belief, ritual, and experience. Ed. J. Andresen, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001.

39 McCauley, Robert N., and E. Thomas Lawson. Bringing Ritual to Mind: Psychological foundations of cultural forms. Cambridge University Press, 2002.

40 Barrett, J.L. “Bringing data to mind: Empirical claims of Lawson and McCauley’s theory of religious ritual.” In T. Light and B. C. Wilson eds., Religion as a human capacity: A festschrift in honor of E. Thomas Lawson. Leiden: Brill, 2004.

41 Barrett, J.L. “Smart gods, dumb gods, and the role of social cognition in structuring ritual intentions.” Journal of Cognition and Culture 2 no. 3 (2002): 183–193.

42 Barrett, J.L., and Lawson, E.T. “Ritual intentions: Cognitive contributions to judgments and ritual efficacy.” Journal of Cognition and Culture 1, no. 2 (2001): 183–201.

43 Malley, B., and Barrett, J.L. “Can ritual form be predicted from religious belief? A test of the Lawson-McCauley hypothesis.” Journal of Ritual Studies 17, no. 2 (2003): 1–14.

44 Sørensen, J.P., Liénard, P., and Feeny, C. “Agent and instrument in judgments of ritual efficacy.” Journal of Cognition and Culture 6, nos. 3–4, (2006): 463–482.

45 Whitehouse, H. Arguments and icons: Divergent modes of religiosity. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000.

46 Whitehouse, H. Modes of religiosity: A cognitive theory of religious transmission. Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira Press, 2004.

47 Whitehouse, Harvey. Arguments and icons: Divergent modes of religiosity: Divergent modes of religiosity. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000.

48 Whitehouse, Harvey and Jonathan A. Lanman “The ties that bind us: Ritual, fusion, and identification.” Current Anthropology 55, no. 6 (2014): 000–000.

49 Van Gennep, Arnold, and Gabrielle L. CAFFEE. The rites of passage. Translated by Monika B. Vizedomand and Gabrielle L. Caffee, et al. Routledge & Kegan, Paul, 1960.

50 For further examples, see Whitehouse, Harvey. “Rites of terror: Emotion, metaphor, and memory in Melanesian initiation cults.” Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute (1996): 703–715.

51 Barrett, J.L. “In the empirical mode: Evidence needed for the modes of religiosity theory.” In H. Whitehouse and R. N. McCauley eds., Mind and religion: Psychological and cognitive foundations of religiosity. Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira Press, 2005.

52 Whitehouse, Harvey. Modes of religiosity: A cognitive theory of religious transmission. Rowman Altamira, 2004, 66–70.

53 Whitehouse, H. Inside the cult: religious innovation and transmission in Papua New Guinea. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995.

54 Whitehouse, H. Arguments and icons: Divergent modes of religiosity. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000.

55 Whitehouse, H. Modes of religiosity: A cognitive theory of religious transmission. Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira Press, 2004.

56 Whitehouse, Harvey. “Dying for the group: Towards a general theory of extreme self-sacrifice.” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 41 (2018).

57 Apps, Matthew A.J., Ryan McKay, Ruben T. Azevedo, Harvey Whitehouse, and Manos Tsakiris. “Not on my team: Medial prefrontal cortex responses to ingroup fusion and unfair monetary divisions.” Brain and Behavior 8, no. 8 (2018): e01030.

58 Cho, Philip S., Nicolas Escoffier, Yinan Mao, April Ching, Christopher Green, Jonathan Jong, and Harvey Whitehouse. “Groups and emotional arousal mediate neural synchrony and perceived ritual efficacy.” Frontiers in Psychology 9 (2018): 2071.

59 Watson-Jones, Rachel E., Cristine H. Legare, Harvey Whitehouse, and Jennifer M. Clegg. “Task-specific effects of ostracism on imitative fidelity in early childhood.” Evolution and Human Behavior 35, no. 3 (2014): 204–210.

60 Watson-Jones, Rachel E., Harvey Whitehouse, and Cristine H. Legare. “In-group ostracism increases high-fidelity imitation in early childhood.” Psychological Science 27, no. 1 (2016): 34–42.

61 Legare, Cristine H., Nicole J. Wen, Patricia A. Herrmann, and Harvey Whitehouse. “Imitative flexibility and the development of cultural learning.” Cognition 142 (2015): 351–361.

62 Kapitány, Rohan, Christopher Kavanagh, Harvey Whitehouse, and Mark Nielsen. “Examining memory for ritualized gesture in complex causal sequences.” Cognition 181 (2018): 46–57.

63 Richert, R., Whitehouse, H., and Stewart, E. eds. Memory and analogical thinking in high-arousal rituals. Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira Press, 2005.

64 Whitehouse, H.; Martin, L.H. Theorizing religions past: Historical and archaeological perspectives. Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira Press.

65 Whitehouse, Harvey, and James Laidlaw, eds. Ritual and memory: Toward a comparative anthropology of religion. Vol. 6. Rowman Altamira, 2004.

66 Atkinson, Quentin D., and Harvey Whitehouse. “The cultural morphospace of ritual form: Examining modes of religiosity cross-culturally.” Evolution and Human Behavior 32, no. 1 (2011): 50–62.

67 Hodder, Ian, ed. Religion in the emergence of civilization: Çatalhöyük as a case study. Cambridge University Press, 2010.

68 Whitehouse, Harvey, Camilla Mazzucato, Ian Hodder, and Quentin D. Atkinson. “Modes of religiosity and the evolution of social complexity at Çatalhöyük.” Religion at work in a Neolithic society (2014): 134–158.

69 Gantley, Michael, Harvey Whitehouse, and Amy Bogaard. “Material Correlates Analysis (MCA): an innovative way of examining questions in archaeology using ethnographic data.” Advances in Archaeological Practice 6, no. 4 (2018): 328–341.

70 Whitehouse, H.; Martin, L.H. Theorizing religions past: Historical and archaeological perspectives. Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira Press.

71 Whitehouse, Harvey, Ken Kahn, Michael E. Hochberg, and Joanna J. Bryson. “The role for simulations in theory construction for the social sciences: Case studies concerning divergent modes of religiosity.” Religion, Brain & Behavior 2, no. 3 (2012): 182–201; Whitehouse, Harvey, Jonathan Jong, Michael D. Buhrmester, Ángel Gómez, Brock Bastian, Christopher M. Kavanagh, Martha Newson et al. “The evolution of extreme cooperation via shared dysphoric experiences.” Scientific Reports 7 (2017): 44292.

72 Gantley, Michael, Harvey Whitehouse, and Amy Bogaard. “Material correlates analysis (MCA): An innovative way of examining questions in archaeology using ethnographic data.” Advances in Archaeological Practice 6, no. 4 (2018): 328–341.

73 Whitehouse, Harvey, Pieter François, Patrick E. Savage, Thomas E. Currie, Kevin C. Feeney, Enrico Cioni, Rosalind Purcell, et al. “Complex societies precede moralizing gods throughout world history.” Nature 568, no. 7751 (2019): 226.

74 Whitehouse, Harvey, and James Laidlaw, eds. Ritual and memory: Toward a comparative anthropology of religion. Vol. 6. Rowman Altamira, 2004.





10 Rituals Part 2


What are the functions of rituals?


Rituals are puzzling aspects of human behavior because they continue across generations with little change, often evoke powerful emotions and commitments, and yet the reasons why people perform them are not always obvious, even with contextual information. For example, consider the initiation system of the Orokavia of northern Papua, which includes periods of isolation for participants for up to seven years. During this time, they must not be seen or heard beyond their place of confinement, on pain of death. Other aspects of the ritual include being blindfolded by hoods, and herded together in the village, brutally attacked by senior men.1 How can ritual behavior of this kind be explained? What function, if any, do rituals like this serve in human social groups?

A long tradition of research in the anthropological and sociological literature argues that rituals survive despite their costs because they serve important individual and social functions, such as reducing anxiety, promoting shared beliefs, and creating social cohesion. However, they lack precise and testable hypotheses concerning the mechanisms connecting ritual participation with group cohesion and cooperation.2 The cognitive science of religion (CSR) builds upon, expands, and refines these earlier functionalist explanations of ritual behavior. CSR scholars often research evolutionary, biological, psychological, and cultural forces that shape ritual behavior. Some scholars can even propose and pinpoint fundamental mechanisms that mediate the relationship between ritual participation and outcomes. They observe and measure these outcomes using a variety of tools in diverse contexts, such as experiments in the laboratory and physiological measurements of local people in field sites around the world.

In this chapter, we consider the benefits of ritual from functionalist perspectives, which include, but are not limited to, research in the cognitive-evolutionary sciences. The functions of rituals in this chapter are divided into two types, effects on the individual and the group. In the real world, these two types of benefits are not mutually exclusive. A ritual can affect the person as an individual and also as a member of a group. This division is employed in the chapter because it helps to explain the different kinds of theories that social scientists employ.





What do rituals do for the individual?


Individuals often engage in their own idiosyncratic form of ritualistic behavior. In a casino, for example, people often perform rigid routines around gambling. They may insist on being in a particular seat, arrange their slot boards a certain way on the table, and even perform some seemingly arbitrary action—like kissing coins before putting them into the slot machine. Another arena where individuals often perform idiosyncratic ritualistic behaviors is in sports. Some players eat only certain foods before a game, sleep in particular clothes and even wear specific underwear. These behaviors are observed even among experts. Many world-famous athletes engage in pregaming rituals, such as now-retired major league baseball player Nomar Garciaparra, who relentlessly strapped and unstrapped his gloves before a game.3 Interestingly, observational studies suggest that better performers tend to exhibit more ritualistic behavior.4

These ritualistic behaviors continue to a large extent because of the effects they have, even if people are not consciously aware of them. Rituals serve critical psychological functions, such as the reduction of anxiety in the face of uncertainty, emotional regulation, and the improvement of mental well-being more generally. Especially when the stakes are high, and the outcome is uncertain, ritual behavior gives people a sense of control over their environment.

One of the earliest descriptions of the association between anxious uncertainty and rituals is the observations of fishing behaviors among the Trobriand Islanders in Melanesia in the early 1900s by one of the most important 20th-century anthropologists, Bronislaw Malinowski. Malinowski observed that the extent to which Trobriand fishermen engaged in rituals was associated with the unpredictability of the terrain and the likelihood of obtaining fish. When the men fished in the calm waters of a lagoon, they did not perform any rituals. Yet when the men fished in turbulent, shark-infested waters, and when the likelihood of catching fish was highly uncertain, they performed rituals for their safety and protection. Malinowski asserted that rituals functioned to relieve people of their anxiety over uncertainty when the outcome was beyond human control5 and important.

Malinowski’s work remains the cornerstone of anxiety reduction explanation of ritual behavior. However, until relatively recently, quantitative evidence for these conjectures was scarce. Research in the psychological sciences has now begun to emerge to support these claims. For instance, research has found a relationship between the extent to which athletes and fishermen engage in rituals and the unpredictability of their jobs.6,7 Psychologists have also reported that participating in a set of ritualized behaviors after writing about the death of a loved one increased people’s feelings of control and lessened their feelings of grief, whereas sitting in silence did not.8 Other researchers have reported the emergence of rituals among diverse populations facing uncontrollable conditions. These populations include gamblers, consumers, test-taking students, targets of warfare, puzzle solvers, and athletes.9 Other research with nonhuman animals and young children has found that once you introduce unpredictability to the environment, spontaneous ritual behavior emerges.10

Anthropologists Pascal Boyer and Pierre Lienard greatly enhanced the anxiety reduction account of ritual by taking into account the cognitive mechanisms involved in ritualized behavior. They explained features that people intuitively recognize as ritualized.11,12 These behaviors include:

Compulsion: it would be dangerous not to act.

Rigidity: adherence to a particular way of acting.

Goal-demotion: action-sequences performed are divorced from their common goals.

Internal repetition and redundancy: repeated enactments of identical sequences within the same ritual.

A restricted range of themes: such as pollution and purification, danger and protection, order, and boundaries.



Boyer and Lienard’s model of ritualized behavior explains behaviors that are found in childhood, features of obsessive-compulsive disorder, and many collective cultural behaviors. They propose that perceived threats (such as psychological distress and contamination) activate mental security systems, which results in security-related behavior.13 Boyer and Lienard’s theory, like many in CSR also evokes evolutionary considerations. Specifically, Boyer and Lienard propose that ritualized behavior spontaneously emerges because it triggers an evolved “Hazard Precaution System” geared towards the detection of and reaction to inferred fitness threats. Throughout human history, these threats to our survival were ubiquitous, and include predation, intrusion by strangers, contamination, contagion, social offense, and harm to offspring. Anxiety is lowered by subjectively containing it through scripted action. In particular, rituals tend to be parsed into smaller steps. Participants focus on the activity they are performing, not on the goal of each behavior, which swamps working memory. Thus, attention is readily deployed towards the concern to perform the actions correctly. These behaviors eliminate unwanted thoughts. These effects are at least temporary, while the acts are performed, and so the actions are repeated over and over in a bid to reduce anxiety.

Boyer and Lienard argue that ritualized behavior is a by-product of the activation of systems that are triggered in response to perceived danger in the environment (e.g. hazard precaution). Their account suggests that we perform rituals, especially when this precaution system is activated and that rituals are compelling because of their temporary anxiety-relieving effects. Furthermore, the authors propose an evolutionary account of the spread of cultural rituals. They claim that all else being equal, these rituals that activate the Hazard Precaution System will be more attention-grabbing and compelling in comparison to other types of rituals, and thus will tend to be transmitted.14

Experimental and observational research in CSR supports the anxiety reduction aspect of Hazard Precaution theory. For instance, religious studies scholar Martin Lang and colleagues found support for the first crucial step in this anxiety-reduction process, that ritual is a natural response to anxiety. More specifically, they found that anxiety significantly predicted the number of movements participants made while cleaning an object. The task involved cleaning an object and the time spent cleaning.15 Lang and colleagues explained these findings in light of the entropy reduction model of ritual. Specifically, to cope with uncertainty, participants adopted familiar and predictable behavioral sequences and performed them repetitively to gain a sense of predictability and control over the situation.

Naturalistic studies of religious women in Israel during the 2006 Lebanon War by evolutionary anthropologist Richard Sosis and colleagues also support these claims about the relationship between ritual and anxiety.16 Sosis and colleagues found that psalm recitation was associated with lower rates of anxiety among women who remained in the north during the war, and who faced the uncertainty of warfare. The researchers also found no relationship between this recitation ritual and stress among women who relocated outside the war zone and had additional stressors that they could control, such as finding new schools. Sosis and colleagues proposed that psalm recitation reduces anxiety caused by the uncontrollable conditions of war, but it is ineffective at combating more mundane, controllable stressors. In sum, according to these accounts, ritualized behavior results in regained feelings of control or containment of anxiety in the face of potential hazards.

More recently, in a controlled field study among the Marathi Hindu community in Mauritius, Xygalatas, and colleagues demonstrated that ritual actually does reduce anxiety.17 In their research, 75 participants first experienced anxiety induction through public speaking. They were asked to either perform their habitual ritual in a local temple (ritual condition) or sit and relax (control condition). The results revealed that participants in the ritual condition reported lower perceived anxiety after the ritual treatment. Crucially, they also displayed lower physiological anxiety, which was assessed as heart-rate variability. This research provides experimental vindication of Malinwoski’s anecdotal insights and Sosis’ correlational evidence about the role of ritual behavior on anxiety reduction. Other scholars have asserted that rituals serve similar functions for the social group, and we will turn to these group-level functionalist theories next.

Participation 1: Personal rituals

Make a note of any personal rituals that you perform, for example, before an exam, such as using the same pen or equipment, sitting in the same seat, or arranging your papers and pens in a particular way.

Which theories covered so far in this chapter help to explain your behavior? Write your answer in a few sentences.





Summary of What do Rituals do for the individual?

Ritualistic behaviors often continue because of the unconscious effects they have on the performer.

Rituals serve critical psychological functions, such as the reduction of anxiety in the face of uncertainty.

Hazard Precaution Theory proposes that ritualized behavior emerges when the mind detects threats in the environment. By performing habitual behaviors repeatedly people gain a sense of control over the situation.

According to Hazard Precaution Theory, ritualized behavior is a by-product of the activation of threat detection systems.





What do rituals do for the group?


Anthropologists have long noted that rituals confer tangible benefits to the social group. Importantly, these benefits exceed their costs, which helps to explain why people engage in such time-consuming, elaborate, and often expensive practices. The postulated benefits of rituals include reaffirming the social order, reinforcing core group values, and redefining social relationships at a time of social uncertainty and change.18 Yet, the evidence for these functionalist theories is limited. It is almost exclusively observational, depends mainly upon ethnographic case studies, and the mechanisms that drive these effects are underspecified. For example, theories propose that rituals promote solidarity, but do not specify how. Other anthropological theories of ritual focus on explaining the local details of rituals embedded in specific contexts and are thus less effective as a means to explain the effects of rituals in other contexts.

Cognitive scientists of religion often adopt an evolutionary approach to explain why people perform cultural rituals. From one evolutionary perspective known as behavioral ecology, ritual behaviors appear at first to be especially perplexing. Behavioral ecologists note that humans and other animals have limited resources. Time and energy spent doing one activity detract from other activities that people could be doing, including those that contribute to their survival, such as foraging for food or mating. Yet living in groups is an adaptive problem. Throughout human history, living in groups has been essential to our survival as a species. Our ancestral past was characterized by small nomadic groups that were entirely dependent on each member to survive. It discouraged predators, allowed for coordinated caretaking of children and food collection and preparation, and aided technological innovation, to name a few. Yet group-living also has many challenges.

On the one hand, to reap the benefits of living in a group, you have to cooperate. Yet how do you know whom to trust? Members of groups often cheat or engage in social loafing—they are free-riders because they reap the rewards of the group without equivalent contributions. For example, think about a student in your group project who did next to nothing and got the same grade as you. Throughout our evolutionary history, it was crucial to survival to have group members who were loyal to the group and who cooperated. Some CSR theorists propose that rituals evolved to solve this problem of whom to trust. Specifically, they argue that rituals serve to identify group members, enable people to demonstrate their commitment to the group’s values, facilitate cooperation between group members, and increase social cohesion.19





Social cohesion


One way to increase trust is to facilitate social cohesion among groups of people. Sociologist Émile Durkheim famously proposed that collective rituals produce a feeling of belonging, assimilation, and create a sense of collective unity20 that he called “collective effervescence.”

Think about a Christian evangelical megachurch worship service, a faith-healing ritual, or political rallies. The type of electricity and exaltation generated by the closeness of people in these rituals is what Durkheim meant by the term collective effervescence. Durkheim’s claim has initiated a plethora of research in the social sciences. Many studies demonstrate an association between group ritual participation and positive social outcomes such as social cohesion and cooperation.21 These associations suggest but do not prove that ritual participation causes social cohesion. Further, Durkheim’s theory does not say much about the mechanisms through which collective effervescence occurs. Recent research by CSR scholars provides crucial data to refine this theory.

Consider again the Modes of Religiosity theory (MOR) that we covered in the last chapter. To recap, social anthropologist Harvey Whitehouse encountered two different types of movements during his fieldwork in Papua New Guinea, and he proposed that the patterns he observed applied to different contexts around the world. One of these modes is the imagistic mode. This mode is characterized by infrequent rituals, high sensory pageantry, and emotional arousal, episodic recall, and strong social cohesion. Examples of these types of rituals include rites of passage—such as initiation rituals to mark a change in people’s social status, common in small-scale traditional societies,22 just like the initiation system of the Orokavia of northern Papua described at the beginning of this chapter. These rituals typically include traumatic ordeals, such as extended periods of isolation, piercing, burning, and scarification.23

Whitehouse recently turned his attention to understanding one aspect of the imagistic mode in more detail. He was especially interested in understanding how imagistic rituals promote strong, relational bonds with in-group members. Drawing from social psychological theories, Whitehouse and colleagues proposed that intense and arousing group rituals involve the establishment of personally salient episodic memories that come to form part of the essential autobiographical self. When such memories are shared with a group, it creates the conditions for participants to fuse their personal identities with the group. In other words, the boundary between personal and group identity becomes porous. For instance, for a fused revolutionary insurgent, making their battalion salient would also activate their personal identity.

Whitehouse proposes that these imagistic rituals exploit the tendency to fuse with kin.24 Feeling connected to and protecting kin is a sound adaptive strategy for the survival of one’s genetic material. These kin connections are based in part upon shared experiences with family members. Rituals that create intense emotions as part of shared physiological experiences endowed with similar meanings may well recreate these feelings in a short period, and indeed, between us and non-genetic kin (see Figure 10.1).

This fusion of individual and group identities has significant consequences for group cohesion. For example, when another group member is threatened, it prompts the same defensive reactions as a personal attack or attack on one’s kin. Highly fused individuals are more likely to fight, sacrifice, and die for their group than those who simply identify as a member of the group.25

Consistent with this, a series of studies found that encouraging fused persons to focus on shared core characteristics of members of their country increased their endorsement of making extreme sacrifices for their country, whether participants were from China, India, the United States, or Spain.26

Whitehouse and colleagues have also conducted investigations that test the imagistic pathway to fusion. They have used data from controlled psychological experiments and ethnographic, archaeological, and historical records27 to explain the dynamics of social cohesion in a broad range of groups, including among martial arts practitioners28 and soccer fans,29 sectarianists in Northern Ireland,30 and those affected by the Boston bombing.31 For example, in one study, the researchers surveyed Libyan revolutionary battalion members who fought against Gaddafi’s regime in 2011. They found that the civilians-turned-fighters were very highly fused with their fellow fighters.32 Furthermore, many frontline fighters reported feeling more fused with their battalion than their family. One interpretation of these findings is that fighting together, and other emotionally intense experiences associated with frontline combat, may have fostered and strengthened fusion within the group. Whitehouse and colleagues propose that their theory of identity fusion can explain other forms of self-sacrifice. These include suicide terrorism, gang-related violence, and other forms of extreme pro-group action.33

Anthropologist Dimitris Xygalatas and colleagues’ research on rituals has further refined the understanding of the relationship between rituals and social cohesion. Xygalatas’ research is distinctive because of his methods. Often psychologists conduct quantitative experiments in the lab—and are accused of lacking real-world applicability. Anthropologists do qualitative research in a geographical area of interest, are accused of lacking control over their study and in ritual studies, assuming people know why they perform rituals. Xygalatas combines the best of these two methods by conducting quasi-experimental studies (often including physiological monitoring) in naturalistic field settings. In other words, after spending time getting to know the people and gaining their trust, he brings the lab and equipment to the people he is interested in understanding. This methodology includes videotaping sacred ceremonies, distributing questionnaires before and after peak ritual events, and village communities have even permitted his research team to hook them up to heart rate monitors, motion detectors, and health monitors.



Figure 10.1 Pathways to group fusion.34

Most of Xygalatas’ research focuses on extreme rituals such as those involving fire-walking and body piercing.35 These rituals often last for days and include many bloody ordeals, including self-mutilation, by covering the body in hooks or inserting large objects through the mouth. They are labeled as extreme and dysphoric rituals by Xygalatas and colleagues because of the exceptionally high levels of physiological arousal that they have recorded during participation, indicating stress and pain.36,37



Figure 10.2 CSR scholars are interested in the effects of participating in high-intensity rituals, like the extreme piercing in Phuket, Thailand, as part of the Phuket Vegetarian Festival or Nine Emperor Gods Fest. Inflicting and experiencing pain in a ritual setting may serve psychological and social functions. (Image credit: Phuketian.S/Shutterstock.com).

Extreme rituals are particularly interesting because people engage in these painful, costly rituals when they could be doing other things with their time. In one series of studies, Xygalatas and colleagues found that people donated more money to their temple after participating in a high-intensity Hindu ritual compared with a low-intensity ritual. Furthermore, the level of experienced pain correlated with the amount of donation.38 These findings suggest that rituals that induce suffering lead to a stronger sense of group cohesion.

Much like the runners’ high experienced in a marathon, Xygalatas and colleagues propose that ritual participants may well experience a firewalkers’ high.39 This state is characterized by physiological changes (i.e. the endogenous release of opioids) that offset pain but also makes them happier, ecstatic, and more amenable to bonding with their fellow participants. Indeed, people who participate in exhausting ritual ordeals report the same feelings of euphoria and bliss as marathon runners do. Yet, what about people who observe but do not participate in communal rituals? Do they receive any benefits?

In another series of studies, Xygalatas and colleagues examined the heart rates of people during an annual ritual in Spain. At the rural village of San Pedro Manrique, a fire-walking ceremony takes place at midnight on the summer solstice in an area built specifically for the ceremony, which accommodates 3,000 spectators, around six times the number of people in the village. Before the ceremony, those who will fire-walk are accompanied by fellow villagers who proceed throughout the village. The ceremony culminates in the fire-walk, which lasts around half an hour. One by one, the participants walk across a seven-meter bed of red-hot coals (with surface temperatures of 677°C!), usually carrying a loved-one on their backs.

The Xygalatas team found that performers had exceptionally high (often dangerously high) heart rates. Even more impressive, related spectators (but not unrelated ones) had synchronized heart rates during the ritual. When the researchers mapped the social network of the area, they found that social proximity predicted physiological synchrony. In other words, people’s heart rates synchronized more closely with those of their friends and relatives during the ritual, even if they were not interacting directly with them. It seems that rituals are likely to strengthen the bonds between people via shared physiological states. Yet this effect is most potent between those who already hold an affiliation. It does not generalize to strangers.40

Research by developmental and cross-cultural psychologist Legare and colleagues supports this interpretation of the relationship between in-group members, ritual actions, and social cohesion, and we covered some of this research in the previous chapter.41 For example, in one series of studies, researchers examined the impact of ritual participation versus another activity on children’s in-group and out-group affiliation.42 The researchers found that the experience of participating in a ritual, rather than group activity alone, increases in-group affiliation. The results provide insight into the early developing preference for in-group members and are consistent with the proposal that rituals facilitate in-group cohesion. They also suggest that humans are psychologically prepared to engage in ritual as a means of in-group affiliation. Other theories in CSR further extend these findings.

Key points

A long tradition of research in the anthropological and sociological literature argues that collective rituals enable participants to affiliate with group members by creating a sense of collective unity.

Cognitive scientists of religion extend and refine these theories by adopting an evolutionary approach to explain why people perform cultural rituals.

Research in CSR has further refined the understanding of the relationship between rituals and social cohesion using data from controlled psychological experiments, quasi-experimental field experiments, and the ethnographic, archaeological, and historical records.

Researchers in CSR have examined the physiological, psychological, and social mechanisms through which group affiliation occurs in rituals.





Costly signaling


Costly signaling theory may explain the function of ritualized behaviors in human social groups. The starting point of this theory is the observation that many rituals include costly practices. These costs take many forms, such as calories, time, pain, and money. Costly signaling theory construes some costly actions, especially those that have the additional properties of being honest and hard to fake, as sending a message to the receiver. The message includes information about reliability (i.e. honesty) of the signal and promoting trustworthiness of members of the group, ultimately facilitating group cooperation and survival.

Versions of costly signaling theory explain the occurrence of honest, hard-to-fake signaling behaviors in many domains, including conspicuous consumption in market economics and animal behavior. Perhaps the most famous example of the latter is the peacock’s tail. Peacock females (i.e. peahens) cannot judge a male’s genetic quality directly, so they attend to signals that the males provide. Males advertise their genetic condition by their bright feathers and long flamboyant tails. These features are costly—they are energetically expensive to produce and maintain, and the bird is more noticeable to predators—but their costliness ensures their reliability.

Another often-cited example of costly signaling in behavioral ecology is stotting behavior (i.e. continuously jumping high) by gazelles when approached by predators, such as lions, in their natural habitat. This behavior sends a signal to the predator about the animal’s speed and energy. The gazelle is effectively saying to the lion, “don’t waste your time chasing me; I will get away.” This behavior discourages the predator, who selects a non-stotting target. In return, the gazelle is free from the demands of being pursued by the predator.

Evolutionary anthropologists and archaeologists have argued that natural selection has favored high-cost behaviors as a mechanism of honest signaling in human contexts. In cultures where the costs of dishonest signaling are high, receivers will tend to interpret costly actions as honest signaling. For example, if organizing a social event such as a feast requires massive coordination efforts, then a successful feast could provide evidence of the host’s social support and status.



Figure 10.3 A running Springbok jumping high in South Africa. (Image credit: Johan Swanepoel/Shutterstock.com).

Sosis has extended the costly signaling theory to explain the function of ritualized behaviors in human social groups, of which there are many examples. Consider ultra-Orthodox Jews who spend hours per day worshipping at the Western Wall in Jerusalem. Or, the Shiite Muslims in Karbala, Iraq, who beat their backs with chains to mark the killing of one of their saints. Or young Christian men in Bulgaria who dive into icy waters to retrieve the crucifix to mark the feast of Epiphany Monday. Sosis notes that many ritual behaviors are also hard-to-fake and costly, consuming participants’ time, energy, and commitment.43 These behaviors may serve as a communicative signal that the performer is a genuine cooperator and, therefore, a trustworthy member of the group. In other words, some rituals promote group cohesion by requiring members to engage in behavior that is too costly to fake. They also prevent free-riders from joining the group.

Sosis has provided naturalistic, historical, and experimental support for aspects of this costly signaling theory. For instance, he found that communities such as 19th-century religious communes that required more commitments from their members (e.g. ritual attendance, resource sharing), tended to have more trust between group members compared to those that had fewer responsibilities. They also tended to survive longer.44 Sosis found a similar pattern on extant communes in Israel known as kibbutzim, where religious kibbutzim exhibited greater trust and cooperation between members than secular kibbutzim.45

Likewise, research by anthropologist Montserrat Soler supports the claim that ritual effectively predicts willingness to cooperate with other group members and that others are more likely to then cooperate. Soler studied adherents of Candomblé, an African diasporic religion organized in autonomous congregations primarily located in low-income urban areas in northeast Brazil. She found that those who reported higher levels of religious commitment behaved more generously in a public goods economic game and experienced more cooperation within their religious community.46 Other researchers have found that low-status individuals seek costlier forms of ritual participation. For example, they put more needles through their bodies,47 and people who engage in costlier rituals reap more cooperative benefits.48

Costly signaling theory has the potential to explain why many people in religious communities participate in costly ritual behavior. Yet signaling systems are complex. Not all signals are honest, or hard-to-fake, and not all honest and hard-to-fake signals are costly. To understand the function of a signal, therefore, necessitates an understanding of the situation, including aspects such as the context, signaler’s attributes, receiver’s interpretations, and responses, and signal costs.49 To investigate the function of a signal in a ritual requires expert knowledge of the culture, which anthropologists are especially equipped to provide.

Key points

Many rituals include behaviors that are costly and judged by others as a reliable signal of commitment to the group.

One consequence of performing costly ritual behaviors is that it distinguishes participants as genuine cooperators.

Research supports this account of the relationship between practices and group affiliation in rituals.





Credibility enhancing displays (CREDs)


Evolutionary anthropologist Joseph Henrich has proposed an additional group-level function that ritual participation serves. Namely, it increases the credibility of the performer, which in turn means that the ideas and behaviors of the group are more likely to spread and survive.50 Henrich starts with the following problem: people are biased to follow the ideas and practices of prestigious people in a group, yet how do we know that we can trust that what people say is their sincere belief? Acting and failing to act on an idea serve as crucial markers of true faith to others. For instance, if I tell you that the blue mushrooms are not poisonous, but during a ritual ceremony, I do not eat them, then my behavior would make you doubt my sincere belief.

Conversely, if I did eat the blue mushrooms, then you would be more likely to accept that the mushrooms were not poisonous. We take exceptionally costly actions to entail and lend credence to beliefs, especially when those beliefs are said to be sincerely held religious convictions, for example, the Ten Commandments in the Bible. Consider further suicide attacks and martyrdom in religious traditions such as Al Qaeda, Hamas, or Hezbollah. The act of dying for your beliefs communicates both commitments to the faith and the strength of belief in the afterlife. These behaviors are influential communicative acts. In short, actions speak louder than words. In this sense, costly rituals can be credibility enhancing displays (CREDs) of one’s commitment to the values and ideals of the group.

The history of group dynamics demonstrates why skepticism about whom to trust would be inherent when people unite. The history of groups has been marred with scandal, including, but not limited to, those committed by religious leaders. Consider, for example, the 2017 case of Pentecostal church leaders in Rwanda who were arrested for the mismanagement of church finances.51 By contrast, consider ascetic leaders who donate their money to charity and live humbly. If both leaders preach the value of social responsibility, you are, of course, more likely to believe and transmit the belief system of the person who “walks the walk.” For instance, anthropologists Manvir Singh and Joseph Henrich found that shamans who observe costly prohibitions are regarded as more cooperative, greater believers, and more supernaturally powerful than others.52

Researchers in CSR have also begun to investigate what happens to a person’s faith when they detect religious hypocrisy. Social anthropologist Jon Lanman and colleagues have proposed that failing to act in line with stated beliefs or acting in a way that contradicts those beliefs constitutes credibility undermining displays (CRUDs). These undermining displays, Lanman argues, help to explain the rejection of religion.53 However, disengagement from religion may well depend on other factors, such as the extent to which the individual was entrenched in the belief system.54 Recent research on the U.S. Catholic clergy abuse scandals supports these claims. For instance, the scandals result in a significant and long-lasting decline in religious participation in the zip code where the scandal occurs, and in charitable contributions for the Catholic church more generally.55

The theory of CREDs is related to costly signaling but is also distinct from it. Costly signaling communicates something that already exists (i.e. your commitment to values) through behaviors such as fasting, abstinence, and participation in painful rituals. Ritual practices are time-consuming and elaborate and act as credibility enhancing displays for those performing them, which provide salient behavioral manifestations of commitment and foster the cultural transmission of these commitments to others.56 If I do something based on my belief, then you are also likely to copy that behavior and accept that my faith is true.

Key points

Actions speak louder than words.

People risk social ostracism for not participating in rituals.

Ritual actions enhance the credibility of the performer.

Credible leaders and participants are more likely to spread their ideas and behaviors successfully.

Those who fail to act in accord with their stated beliefs discourage others from believing what they say.





Social complexity


Scholars in CSR have suggested that aspects of religion functions enable the rapid expansion and increasing complexity of societies.57 One explanation (that we covered in Chapter 7:, Supernatural Agents), is known as the “moralizing gods” hypothesis. This hypothesis proposes that the belief in morally concerned supernatural agents culturally evolved to facilitate cooperation among strangers in large-scale societies. This purported effect is partly due to the principle that “watched people are nice people.” When people believe God is watching, for instance, they are less likely to breach normative rules.58 One challenge to this moralizing gods hypothesis comes from Whitehouse and colleagues. They place ritual, not details of beliefs about deities, as a critical variable facilitating the complexity and expansion of society.

Consider again the Modes of Religiosity theory (MOR) that we covered in the last chapter. To recap, at the core of MOR theory is a hypothesis about the causal links between ritual performance and features of social morphology, such as the scale, structure, and cohesiveness of ancient groups. Recently, Whitehouse and colleagues have investigated causal links between ritual performance in the doctrinal mode, (characterized by frequent rituals, low sensory pageantry, and semantic recall, and the evolution of social complexity) and the evolution of social complexity using systematic comparisons of archaeological and historical data around the globe.

Whitehouse and colleagues’ findings challenge the moralizing gods hypothesis because they propose that moralizing gods follow, rather than precede substantial increases in social complexity.59 Whitehouse and colleagues argue that doctrinal rituals, by contrast, play a crucial role in the rise of agriculture and the initial emergence of large-scale civilizations, by facilitating the standardization of religious traditions across large populations.60,61 Their results suggest that ritual practices were more important than the belief in moralizing gods to the initial rise of social complexity even if moralizing gods may have subsequently helped much larger-scale empires to flourish and spread. Both the moralizing gods hypothesis and MOR theory accord a central role to aspects of religion in shaping the emergence and survival of modern societies.

Participation 2: Evolutionary theories of rituals

Refer back to Tables 3.4 and 3.6 in Chapter 3 (Research Questions) for accounts of the origin and function of religion.

Go through this chapter again and list all theories about the origins and functions of rituals. Label the accounts as by-product or adaptations and specify who benefits (individual, group).

Compare your answer to another student’s and note whether you arrived at the same, or different, conclusions.





Key points

CSR scholars have proposed relationships between religion and expansion and the increasing complexity of society.

The moralizing gods hypothesis proposes that belief in moralizing gods played a causal role in the emergence of large-scale, complex societies.

Research by Whitehouse and colleagues challenges the moralizing gods hypothesis and instead proposes that doctrinal rituals served to enable large-scale, complex societies.





Summary of What do rituals do for the group?

Rituals serve critical social functions, such as reducing anxiety, promoting shared beliefs, and creating social cohesion in groups.

People are psychologically prepared to engage in ritual as a means of in-group affiliation.

Ritual participation creates a sense of collective unity through multiple means.

Costly behaviors showcase a commitment to the group and promote trust.

Ritual behaviors enhance the credibility of the performers.

Those who do not participate in ritual risk being outcast from the social group.

Some scholars argue that doctrinal rituals facilitate the rise and spread of complex societies.





Research case study: Mortuary rituals

Mortuary practices are among the most ubiquitous features of human cultural traditions, and they highlight the extent to which people engage in ritualistic behaviors. Even early modern humans in the Paleolithic era did not merely discard their dead, but deliberately buried them deep in the ground, manipulated their bodies into certain positions, accompanied with flowers, tools, and other artifacts. The ethnographic record evidences the dazzling array of conventional practices undertaken when a member of the community dies. The number of different mortuary practices is apparent in the treatment of the corpse before disposal. Bodies are washed, anointed, dismantled, clothed, wrapped, viewed extensively, embraced, shouted at, danced over, among other practices. How can we understand these behaviors?

Anthropologists have long documented rich accounts of mortuary practices. They have traditionally tended to focus on how rituals are practiced in particular regions, explaining unique aspects of these practices regarding the meanings they hold for people, such as shared ideas about the process of death and identity of the dead and the afterlife. Classical anthropological theories contend that mortuary rituals are a product of shared insights about the self, process of death, the identity of the dead in the afterlife, and the identity of the living. The researcher aims to decode such meanings. Yet mortuary practices are functionally opaque; that is to say, there is no apparent physical-causal relationship between the actions and the goal. Just like other rituals, people’s explanation for actions following a death is often vague. Like most collective rituals, they do not convey coded meanings except in the vaguest sense. Despite archaeological and cross-cultural findings on mortuary burials, for instance, there is little consensus over the extent to which—if at all— practices are related to afterlife beliefs.

Other explanations about why people perform mortuary rituals have looked beyond the details of local belief systems to explain their recurrence throughout history and across cultures. Along with anthropologists Daniel Fessler and Maya Marin, we systematically compared ethnographic accounts of mortuary practices in a global database. We did this by having Research Assistants collect excerpts of rituals from the database. Then other researchers completed a questionnaire about aspects of the rituals, enabling them to quantify and statistically analyze the results.

We found that there were similarities. For instance, most often the bereaved (e.g. kin) participated in the preparation of the corpse. They tended to engage in moderately intimate tactile contact with the body (i.e. whether they viewed them, touched them), and members of the existing community—but not members of other communities, attended the ritual. From these findings and drawing from evolutionary insights and clinical research, which suggest that seeing and touching the corpse is the most effective means to realizing the person is dead, my colleagues and I conducted a series of interviews with people who had been recently bereaved. We investigated the possibility that people who had seen the corpse were less likely to mistakenly see or hear the person in the environment because they had cognitively processed the person as dead, just like they would be participating in mortuary rituals.

This research supports and extends functionalist theories, which claim that rituals serve important individual and group functions following the death of a group member. Based on the studies of myself and my colleagues, we proposed that by exposing the bereaved to the corpse, mortuary rituals have benefits to the individual. Specifically, they shorten and regulate the period of grief-induced disability, regain feelings of control in the face of both psychological threat (i.e. distress) and actual threat (i.e. contamination danger posed by corpses). As rituals are typically communal, and often expensive, they also serve important social functions. They help the bereaved individual to identify group members who can support them.

Additionally, they enable the bereaved individual and others to demonstrate their commitment to the group via costly signaling (especially those who handle the corpse). They also facilitate the formation of new social bonds that are essential to psychological well-being (and survival in our ancestral past). This research suggests that mortuary rituals are not for the dead but serve the living.





Questions


In your own words, summarize the claims the researchers (White and colleagues) are making.

Based on your experience of mortuary rituals (or those you have seen on TV), do you agree or disagree with these claims?

What are the differences and similarities between this research and previous research on mortuary rituals?

What do you think demarks this research as typical of the CSR approach to religion?

What do you think are the real-world implications of this theory on modern funerary practices?



Further reading

Murray, D., Fessler, Daniel M.T., Kerry, N., White, C. and Marin, M. (2017). “The kiss of death: Three tests of the relationship between disease threat and physical contact within traditional cultures.” Evolution and Human Behavior 38, no. 1, 63–70.

White, Claire, Maya Marin, and Daniel M.T. Fessler. “Not just dead meat: An evolutionary account of corpse treatment in mortuary rituals.” Journal of Cognition and Culture 17, no. 1–2 (2017): 146–168.

White, C. and Fessler, Daniel M.T. “An evolutionary account of vigilance in grief.” Evolution, Medicine, and Public Health 1 (2018): 34–42.

White, C. Mortuary Practices. In Barrett, Justin L. (Ed.) Oxford university handbook on the cognitive science of religion. Oxford University Press, 2021.





Chapter summary


Scholars have tackled the crucial question of why people perform rituals. In this chapter, we have covered some functions that rituals serve, often based on evolutionary considerations. These include theories about how rituals serve to facilitate social groups, which were essential for our survival as a species. When taken together, research and theories in CSR help to demonstrate that rituals are not for the naïve or religious fanatics, but that these behaviors are a product of being human.

Discussion questions

Think about a time that you or another person you know have been socially isolated, such as being ignored or not included in a group activity, or imagine such an event. Consider how you felt, or how you would feel. Do you think that these feelings would motivate you to participate in rituals that promote the group’s beliefs? Explain in a few sentences.

Which theory of rituals covered in the last two chapters do you find the most compelling? Why? Answer in a few sentences.

What are the main contributions of CSR to the study of ritual? Explain in a few sentences.

What are the assumptions of evolutionary theories of ritual? For example, do some propose that cultural rituals evolved because of their fitness-enhancing effects (i.e. an adaptation)? Alternatively, cultural rituals are a by-product of something else? Answer in a few sentences.





Selected further reading


Articles


Henrich, Joseph. “The evolution of costly displays, cooperation, and religion: Credibility enhancing displays and their implications for cultural evolution.” Evolution and Human Behavior 30, no. 4 (2009): 244–260.

Sosis, Richard. “Religious behaviors, badges, and bans: Signaling theory and the evolution of religion.” In Where God and science meet: How brain and evolutionary studies alter our understanding of religion 1 (2006): 61–86.

Watson-Jones, Rachel E., and Cristine H. Legare. “The social functions of group rituals.” Current Directions in Psychological Science 25, no. 1 (2016): 42–46.





Books


Xygalatas, Dimitris. The Power of Rituals. Profile Books (forthcoming 2021).



Notes

1 Whitehouse, Harvey. “Rites of terror: Emotion, metaphor and memory in Melanesian initiation cults.” Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute (1996): 703–715.

2 Whitehouse, Harvey, Jonathan A. Lanman, Greg Downey, Leah A. Fredman, William B. Swann Jr, Daniel H. Lende, Robert N. McCauley et al. “The ties that bind us: Ritual, fusion, and identification.” Current Anthropology 55, no. 6 (2014): 1–22.

3 http://articles.latimes.com/2006/sep/30/entertainment/et-nomar30.

4 Foster, David J., Daniel A. Weigand, and Dean Baines. “The effect of removing superstitious behavior and introducing a pre-performance routine on basketball free-throw performance.” Journal of Applied Sport Psychology 18, no. 2 (2006): 167–171.

5 Malinowski, Bronislaw, and Robert Redfield. Magic, science and religion and other essays: Selected, and with an Introduction by Robert Redfield. 1948.

6 Malinowski, Bronislaw, and Robert Redfield. Magic, science and religion and other essays: Selected, and with an Introduction by Robert Redfield. 1948.

7 Whitson, Jennifer A., and Adam D. Galinsky. “Lacking control increases illusory pattern perception.” Science 322, no. 5898 (2008): 115–117.

8 Norton, Michael I., and Francesca Gino. “Rituals alleviate grieving for loved ones, lovers, and lotteries.” Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 143, no. 1 (2014): 266.

9 For a list of this research, see Sosis, Richard, and W. Penn Handwerker. “Psalms and coping with uncertainty: Religious Israeli women’s responses to the 2006 Lebanon War.” American Anthropologist 113, no. 1 (2011): 40–55.

10 Skinner, B.F. “‘Superstition’ in the Pigeon.” Journal of Experimental Psychology 38 (1948): 168–172.

11 Boyer, P., and Liénard, P. (2006). “Why ritualized behaviour? Precaution systems and action parsing in developmental, pathological, and cultural rituals.” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 29, 595–613.

12 Rappaport, Roy A. Ritual and religion in the making of humanity. Vol. 110. Cambridge University Press, 1999.

13 Boyer, Pascal, and Pierre Liénard. “Precaution systems and ritualized behavior.” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 29, no. 6 (2006): 635–641.

14 Why do they spread? Liénard, P., and Boyer, P. “Whence collective rituals? A cultural selection model of ritualized behavior.” American Anthropologist 108, no. 4 (2006): 814–827.

15 Lang, Martin, Jan Krátký, John H. Shaver, Danijela Jerotijević, and Dimitris Xygalatas. “Effects of anxiety on spontaneous ritualized behavior.” Current Biology 25, no. 14 (2015): 1892–1897.

16 Sosis, Richard, and W. Penn Handwerker. “Psalms and coping with uncertainty: Religious Israeli women’s responses to the 2006 Lebanon War.” American Anthropologist 113, no. 1 (2011): 40–55.

17 Lang, M., J. Krátký, and D. Xygalatas. “The role of ritual behaviour in anxiety reduction: An investigation of Marathi religious practices in Mauritius.” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 375, no. 1805 (2020): 20190431.

18 E.g. Durkheim, Émile. The elementary forms of religious life (1912, 1995); Goody, Jack. Death and the ancestors: A study of the mortuary customs of the LoDagaa of West Africa. Routledge, 2013; Hertz, Robert. “A contribution to the study of the collective representation of death.” Death and the right hand. 1901. Reprint. R. Needham and C. Needham eds. Glencoe, Illinois: The Free Press, 1960; van Gennep, Arnold. The rites of passage. 1909. Reprint, Paris: 1960.

19 Watson-Jones, Rachel E., and Cristine H. Legare. “The social functions of group rituals.” Current Directions in Psychological Science 25, no. 1 (2016): 42–46.

20 Durkheim, Émile. The elementary forms of the religious life. New York: Free Press, 1915.

21 Hobson, Nicholas M., Juliana Schroeder, Jane L. Risen, Dimitris Xygalatas, and Michael Inzlicht. “The psychology of rituals: An integrative review and process-based framework.” Personality and Social Psychology Review (2017): 11.

22 Van Gennep, Arnold, and Gabrielle L. Caffee. The rites of passage. Translated by Monika B. Vizedomand and Gabrielle L. Caffee, et al. Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1960.

23 For further examples, see Whitehouse, Harvey. “Rites of terror: Emotion, metaphor, and memory in Melanesian initiation cults.” Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute (1996): 703–715.

24 Whitehouse, Harvey, Jonathan A. Lanman, Greg Downey, Leah A. Fredman, William B. Swann Jr, Daniel H. Lende, Robert N. McCauley et al. “The ties that bind us: Ritual, fusion, and identification.” Current Anthropology 55, no. 6 (2014): 000–000.

25 Whitehouse, Harvey. “Dying for the group: Towards a general theory of extreme self-sacrifice.” Behavioral and Brain Sciences (2018): 1–64.

26 Swann Jr, William B., Michael D. Buhrmester, Angel Gomez, Jolanda Jetten, Brock Bastian, Alexandra Vazquez, Amarina Ariyanto et al. “What makes a group worth dying for? Identity fusion fosters perception of familial ties, promoting self-sacrifice.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 106, no. 6 (2014): 912.

27 Whitehouse, Harvey, Jonathan A. Lanman, Greg Downey, Leah A. Fredman, William B. Swann Jr, Daniel H. Lende, Robert N. McCauley et al. “The ties that bind us: Ritual, fusion, and identification.” Current Anthropology 55, no. 6 (2014): 000–000.

28 Kavanagh, Christopher M., Jonathan Jong, Ryan McKay, and Harvey Whitehouse. “Positive experiences of high arousal martial arts rituals are linked to identity fusion and costly pro‐group actions.” European Journal of Social Psychology 49, no. 3 (2019): 461–481.

29 Newson, Martha, Michael Buhrmester, and Harvey Whitehouse. “Explaining lifelong loyalty: The role of identity fusion and self-shaping group events.” PloS one 11, no. 8 (2016).

30 Jong, Jonathan, Harvey Whitehouse, Christopher Kavanagh, and Justin Lane. “Shared negative experiences lead to identity fusion via personal reflection.” PloS one 10, no. 12 (2015).

31 Buhrmester, Michael D., William T. Fraser, Jonathan A. Lanman, Harvey Whitehouse, and William B. Swann Jr. “When terror hits home: Identity fused Americans who saw Boston bombing victims as ‘family’ provided aid.” Self and Identity 14, no. 3 (2015): 253–270.

32 Whitehouse, Harvey, Brian McQuinn, Michael Buhrmester, and William B. Swann. “Brothers in Arms: Libyan revolutionaries bond like family.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111, no. 50 (2014): 17783–17785.

33 Whitehouse, Harvey. “Dying for the group: Towards a general theory of extreme self-sacrifice.” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 41 (2018).

34 Adapted from, Whitehouse, Harvey. “Dying for the group: Towards a general theory of extreme self-sacrifice.” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 41 (2018).

35 E.g. Fischer, Ronald, and Dimitris Xygalatas. “Extreme rituals as social technologies.” Journal of Cognition and Culture 14, no. 5 (2014): 345–355.

36 Xygalatas, Dimitris, Uffe Schjoedt, Joseph Bulbulia, Ivana Konvalinka, Else-Marie Jegindø, Paul Reddish, Armin W. Geertz, and Andreas Roepstoff. “Autobiographical memory in a fire-walking ritual.” Journal of Cognition and Culture 13, no. 1–2 (2013): 1–16.

37 Xygalatas, D., S. Khan, M. Lang, R. Kundt, E. Kundtová-Klocová, J. Kratky & J. Shaver. Effects of extreme ritual practices on health and well-being (forthcoming).

38 Xygalatas, Dimitris, Panagiotis Mitkidis, Ronald Fischer, Paul Reddish, Joshua Skewes, Armin W. Geertz, Andreas Roepstorff, and Joseph Bulbulia. “Extreme rituals promote prosociality.” Psychological Science 24, no. 8 (2013): 1602–1605.

39 Fischer, Ronald, Dimitris Xygalatas, Panagiotis Mitkidis, Paul Reddish, Penny Tok, Ivana Konvalinka, and Joseph Bulbulia. “The fire-walker’s high: Affect and physiological responses in an extreme collective ritual.” PloS one 9, no. 2 (2014): e88355.

40 Xygalatas, Dimitris, Panagiotis Mitkidis, Ronald Fischer, Paul Reddish, Joshua Skewes, Armin W. Geertz, Andreas Roepstorff, and Joseph Bulbulia. “Extreme rituals promote prosociality.” Psychological Science 24, no. 8 (2013): 1602–1605; Fischer, Ronald, Dimitris Xygalatas, Panagiotis Mitkidis, Paul Reddish, Penny Tok, Ivana Konvalinka, and Joseph Bulbulia. “The fire walker’s high: Affect and physiological responses in an extreme collective ritual.” PloS one 9, no. 2 (2014).

41 Watson-Jones, Rachel E., Harvey Whitehouse, and Cristine H. Legare. “In-group ostracism increases high-fidelity imitation in early childhood.” Psychological Science 27, no. 1 (2016): 34–42; Legare, Cristine H., and Rachel E. Watson‐Jones. “The evolution and ontogeny of ritual.” The handbook of evolutionary psychology (2015): 1–19; Legare, C.H., H. Whitehouse, N.J. Wen, and P.A. Herrmann. “Imitative foundations of cultural learning.” Cognition, (2012).

42 Wen, Nicole J., Patricia A. Herrmann, and Cristine H. Legare. “Ritual increases children’s affiliation with in-group members.” Evolution and Human Behavior 37, no. 1 (2016): 54–60.

43 Sosis, Richard. “The adaptive value of religious ritual: Rituals promote group cohesion by requiring members to engage in behavior that is too costly to fake.” American Scientist 92, no. 2 (2004): 166–172.

44 Sosis, Richard, and Eric R. Bressler. “Cooperation and commune longevity: A test of the costly signaling theory of religion.” Cross-Cultural Research 37, no. 2 (2003): 211–239.

45 Sosis, Richard, and Bradley J. Ruffle. “Religious ritual and cooperation: Testing for a relationship on Israeli religious and secular kibbutzim.” Current Anthropology 44, no. 5 (2003): 713–722.

46 Soler, Montserrat. “Costly signaling, ritual, and cooperation: Evidence from Candomblé, an Afro-Brazilian religion.” Evolution and Human Behavior 33, no. 4 (2012): 346–356.

47 D. Xygalatas, P. Maňo, V. Bahna, E. Kundtová-Klocová, R. Kundt, and J. Shaver (forthcoming) Social status and costly signaling in an extreme ritual.

48 Bird, Rebecca Bliege, and Eleanor A. Power. “Prosocial signaling and cooperation among Martu hunters.” Evolution and Human Behavior 36, no. 5 (2015): 389–397.

49 Barker, Jessica L., Eleanor A. Power, Stephen Heap, Mikael Puurtinen, and Richard Sosis. “Content, cost, and context: A framework for understanding human signaling systems.” Evolutionary Anthropology: Issues, News, and Reviews 28, no. 2 (2019): 86–99.

50 Henrich, Joseph. “The evolution of costly displays, cooperation, and religion.” Evolution and Human Behavior 30, no. 4 (2009): 244–260.

51 http://ktpress.rw/2017/05/pentecostal-leaders-face-jail-for-mismanaging-church-finances/.

52 Singh, Manvir, and Joseph Henrich. “Why do religious leaders observe costly prohibitions? Examining taboos on Mentawai shamans.” Evolutionary Human Sciences 2 (2020).

53 Lanman, Jonathan A. “The importance of religious displays for belief acquisition and secularization.” Journal of Contemporary Religion 27, no. 1 (2012): 49–65.

54 Turpin, H., Lanman, J., and Andersen, M. “CREDs, CRUDs, and Catholic scandals: Experimentally examining the effects of religious paragon behavior on co-religionist belief.” Religion, Brain, and Behavior (2018).

55 Bottan, Nicolas L., and Ricardo Perez-Truglia. “Losing my religion: The effects of religious scandals on religious participation and charitable giving.” Journal of Public Economics 129 (2015): 106–119.

56 Henrich, Joseph. “The evolution of costly displays, cooperation, and religion: Credibility enhancing displays and their implications for cultural evolution.” Evolution and Human Behavior 30, no. 4 (2009): 244–260.

57 Whitehouse, Harvey, Pieter Francois, and Peter Turchin. “The role of ritual in the evolution of social complexity: Five predictions and a drum roll.” Cliodynamics: The Journal of Quantitative History and Cultural Evolution (2015).

58 Norenzayan, Ara, Azim F. Shariff, Will M. Gervais, Aiyana K. Willard, Rita A. McNamara, Edward Slingerland, and Joseph Henrich. “The cultural evolution of prosocial religions.” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 39 (2016).

59 Whitehouse, Harvey, Pieter François, Patrick E. Savage, Thomas E. Currie, Kevin C. Feeney, Enrico Cioni, Rosalind Purcell et al. “Complex societies precede moralizing gods throughout world history.” Nature 568, no. 7751 (2019): 226–229.

60 E.g. Hodder, Ian, ed. Religion in the emergence of civilization: Çatalhöyük as a case study. Cambridge University Press, 2010.

61 Atkinson, Quentin D., and Harvey Whitehouse. “The cultural morphospace of ritual form: Examining modes of religiosity cross-culturally.” Evolution and Human Behavior 32, no. 1 (2011): 50–62.





11 Conclusion




The standard assumption in the social sciences and humanities has been that only social and cultural methods can explain social and cultural facts. Of course, the possibility of a cognitive science of religion depends upon showing that cognitive explanations of social-cultural facts are not only possible but have already happened.

(Lawson, 20001)



The cognitive science of religion (CSR) began in earnest with a handful of scholars who wanted to “science up” the study of religion. Today, scholars of many disciplinary backgrounds contribute to the scientific understanding of religion. Over the past two decades or so, CSR has made tremendous progress in understanding the cognitive basis of religious ideas and behaviors, such as:

Gods and other supernatural agents.

The design and origin of the natural world.

Life before, or after, death.

Beliefs about supernatural causes of illness.

The origins of the natural world, a creator deity.

The forms and functions of prayer.

Teleological reasoning about life events.

Assumptions about continued existence in the afterlife.

Representations of the self and others during spirit possession.

Ideas about continued personal identity in reincarnation.

The relationships between religiosity and prosociality.

The recurrent features of rituals, ritualized actions, and their representation.

Religious activity that occurred before the emergence of state societies.



These findings also have practical implications outside of academia, including among laypeople and religious devotees. These include:

Best practices for educating children about science and religion.

Showcasing the positive individual and group effects of ritual performance.

Informing debates and policy on sacred values, self-sacrifice, and religious conflict.

Providing data to enrich conversations about the relationship between religion and morality.

Highlighting how religious tolerance can be made easier by showcasing the similarities in religious traditions and spiritual movements.

Increasing religious tolerance by countering popular misconceptions that religious people are irrational and that scientists are rational.

Explaining how and why religion endures throughout history and across cultures.

Accounting for the prevalence of atheism.



As CSR expands, so too does the number of scholars, methods, and approaches. Scholars often cite examples of projects to explain what CSR entails. These examples include research on our sensitivity toward detecting human-like beings in the environment; the minimally counterintuitive (MCI) theory of religious transmission (ADD); and discrepancies between theological correctness—ideas based upon the official theological doctrine of a given tradition—and theological incorrectness—deviations from official religious dogma, which often emerge during real-time cognitive processing. These examples showcase a small, yet important spectrum of what CSR has to offer. As this book demonstrates, the breadth of research deemed as falling under the scope of CSR runs wide.

Today, newcomers remain as committed to the central tenets of CSR as early pioneers. These commitments include attributing an active role of the human mind in the acquisition, processing, and transfer of religious ideas and behaviors, and the importance of a scientific approach to religion. Many theories, even those regarded as central to CSR, have been challenged and revised in light of new evidence. Prominent examples include:

The extent to which theories concerning transmission biases such as agency detection device (ADD, formerly HADD, the cognitive system deemed responsible for detecting human-like beings in the environment2) explain belief in supernatural agents.

The extent to which theories concerning transmission biases such as minimally counterintuitive theory (MCI, that all else being equal, concepts that minimally tweak our intuitive assumptions about the world will be remembered more accurately and transmitted) explain belief in supernatural agents.3

The relationship between theological correctness and folk concepts of religion.4

The cognitive mechanisms and structure of common representations of the afterlife and supernatural agents.5



In addition to testing and revising established theories in CSR, new theories are being proposed and debated. For example, the explanation for “Big Gods” by psychologist Ara Norenzayan and colleagues, which concerns the relationship between the cultural prevalence of moralizing gods and the transition to large-scale societies6 (see Chapter 8: Morality). Some theorists interpret these changes as undermining CSR. In contrast, others argue that the continuous revision of theories is not a weakness, but rather, the hallmark of a genuinely scientific approach to the study of religion. For instance, in disagreements, the burden of proof is upon scholars to defend and provide evidence for their theory among alternatives. As psychologist Justin Barrett (2011: 232) put it, reassessment emphasizes “empirical fortification and/or falsification of claims” in CSR.7

The culture of CSR has, however, changed since it was established as a subfield. Early pioneers had a strong foothold in the philosophy of science. While they fought for the possibility of hypothesis testing, they had less experience in experimental methods than many who have joined the ranks today. Consequentially, CSR now enjoys more rigorous methodologies and a plethora of experimental techniques.

The demographic makeup of cognitive scientists of religion has also changed. For instance, the early scholars in CSR were predominantly male. Today, more female scholarship is included in publications, and some pioneers have made a concerted effort to redress this balance. For example, the Journal of Cognition and Culture, edited by E. Thomas Lawson, featured an issue titled “New Voices in Cognition and Culture,” which included exclusively female authors.8 Overall, however, women remain underrepresented. For example, a 15-chapter book outlining what CSR has achieved to date Religion Explained: The Cognitive Science of Religion After Twenty-Five Years contains two female co-authors and 21 male contributors.9 Likewise, even though much insightful and robust empirical research on children’s developing religious cognition has been conducted by female scholars (e.g. see Chapters 5 and 7), they remain notably absent from many overviews on the cognitive science of religion in journals and books. Likewise, a more concentrated effort is needed to provide opportunities and represent scholars from ethnic minorities in the subfield.

The overall aims of CSR have also shifted. Fresh from the cognitive revolution and inspired by developments in linguistics, CSR began with the idea that the study of religion could reach the same predictive power of the natural sciences, and that religion could be explained through precise mathematical models. CSR has moved towards a more balanced bio-cultural approach to explain religion through a combining what is known about evolution, brain, cognition, and culture,10 with evolution as the unifying conceptual framework.

This more balanced approach has shifted CSR towards stronger forms of interdisciplinarity. For instance, much early work in the subfield was produced by individual scholars, whereas today, the team-based research paradigm is common. Furthermore, this approach is now less opportunistic and reflects more of a coordinated attempt to integrate specific methodologies and research cultures.

There is now a more concentrated effort to combine both the values of scientific measurement with contextual sensitivity. CSR continues to foster an integrative culture of collaboration from scholars both in the humanities and sciences and across methodologies. CSR scholars need both well-designed studies cross-culturally replicated in contexts where researchers have extensive knowledge about local populations (or collaborate with those who hold such knowledge). These skills are essential to all scholars studying human activity. As anthropologist Dimitris Xygalatas puts it, “the process may be an upward climb, but the view from the top is worth all the sweat.11”

In this chapter, we review the philosophical, theological, and practical implications of the approach, including whether CSR theories speak to questions about whether or not religion (or a specific religion) is true. Finally, we turn to a critical evaluation of the approach, including misconceptions of CSR, key strengths and limitations, and future directions.

Key points

CSR has grown exponentially over the past two decades and continues to expand.

We now understand more about the cognitive basis of religious ideas and behaviors.

CSR research also has practical implications.

CSR continues to adopt different methods, revise theories, and challenge findings within the social-cognitive sciences, including those previously upheld in CSR.





Philosophical and theological implications of CSR


Since the 1990s the number of empirical projects in CSR has grown exponentially. As research has grown, so too has the amount of attention paid to the implications of the approach. In this section, we review these implications.





Philosophical and theological questions in response to CSR research


The philosopher Justin McBrayer has provided an overview of the philosophical and theological issues that often arise as a result of theories and research in CSR.12 He divides these into three categories, outlined below:





1 The nature and success of explanations of religion in CSR


The first type of issue concerns the nature and success of explanations of religion in CSR. We have already covered some of these throughout this chapter and in Chapter 1 (Introduction). They include questions about whether, and how, research supports theories about religion (e.g. does research support an MCI theory of religious transmission?13 Is the belief in “Big Gods” adaptive?14), the type of conclusions reached (e.g. can we conclude that religion is intuitive or natural?15), and the nature and success of empirical explanations of religion in general (e.g. what are the strengths and weaknesses of a reductionist account of religion?16)





2 Metaphysical implications of explanations of religion in CSR


The second type of issue concerns the metaphysical implications of explanations of religion in CSR. These include implications for the nature of humanity and the nature of the divine (e.g. does research reveal a bias towards some conceptions of the divine?) Philosophers of religion, in particular, have begun to consider these implications in detail.17 For instance, philosopher Helen De Cruz and colleagues have applied the findings of CSR to an array of important issues. These issues include the compatibility of CSR findings with philosophers of religion, who have often made claims about the nature of religion (including the naturalness of religion) and how religious thought relates to other beliefs. For instance, the question of whether religious and scientific theories are compatible.18

CSR has focused mostly on the content biases that underlie the successful transmission of religious concepts. One claim by De Cruz is that there is more continuity between cross-culturally widespread religious ideas and official theological beliefs than recognized. Therefore, CSR also has implications for the acquisition and transmission of theological beliefs that ought to be further explored.19





3 Epistemic questions about the implications of CSR explanations of religion for the truth, rationality, or justification of religious beliefs


The third type of implication is epistemic. They include questions about the implications of CSR explanations of religion for the truth, rationality, or justification of religious beliefs: especially the question of whether religious beliefs are reasonable, justified, or warranted.20 These types of issues have attracted the most attention from outside of CSR. For instance, in their popular books on religion, philosopher Daniel Dennett21 and evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins22 cite the work of CSR as supporting the conclusion that religion is part of an irrational cognitive delusion that should be eradicated, even though these ideas about religion are not part of the research agendas of CSR scholars. Further, adding fuel to the fire, CSR scholars often attract broad readership with controversial questions and phrases as titles, such as “Is God an accident?23” “Religion is natural,24” Religion explained,25 and Born believers.26 The content of these works portrays a more careful treatment of such issues, but casual readers seldom have the patience to digest these more nuanced points.

Key points

Three kinds of philosophical and theological issues arise from CSR:The nature and success of explanations of religion in CSR.

Metaphysical implications of explanations of religion in CSR.

Epistemic questions about the implications of CSR explanations of religion for the truth, rationality, or justification of religious beliefs.





Religious and theological implications of CSR


At least three responses stem from CSR research to questions about the relationship between CSR and religious belief in general:





1 Typically developing humans everywhere are likely to engage in religious concepts and activities


One basic claim is that religion is cognitively natural. That is to say, the predispositions that give rise to cross-culturally recurrent religious ideas and practices arise with minimal instruction and, once introduced, spread rapidly. This “naturalness-of-religion” thesis (coined by Justin Barrett27) implies that popular religion is at the heart of human activity, and typically developing humans everywhere are likely to engage in religious concepts and activities. By contrast, atheism does not emerge as easily since it goes against the grain of our inherent biases. When it does, it evokes much more cognitive effort to sustain consistency in ideas about the world. Thus, it is harder to sell than theism.28 New research on atheism in the future, such as the “Understanding Unbelief” program by sociologist Lois Lee and anthropologist Jon Lanman in the UK is likely to build upon and refine these claims. The same can be said of some theological concepts that are complex and based on ideas that counter our intuitions, and indeed of many scientific concepts.29 The level of difficulty and likelihood of acquisition and transmission of an idea or behavior does not determine which is true.





2 Religion is here to stay


A related issue is the relevance of CSR to secularization theory. Broadly speaking, secularization theory predicts that societies will transform from close identification with religious values and institutions toward nonreligious values and institutions. Historically, secularization theory has not borne out. Rather, religion has changed rather than dissipated. For example, more people in the U.S. now identify as spiritual but not religious than previously documented, and affiliates of organized world religions have declined in this context.

Findings from CSR speak to predictions about the future of religion. Specifically, they render the hypothesis that religion is going to go away implausible. First, the definition of religion in CSR is more inclusive of ideas and practices beyond the “big five” traditions, so while the number of people affiliated with institutionalized forms of religion may decline, this does not equate to the disappearance of religiosity. From the perspective of the evolutionary cognitive sciences, religion, as broadly construed, is here to stay because humans have a psychological propensity to engage in such ideas and behaviors.





3 The cognitive science of religion cannot determine whether religion is true or false


The third response from cognitive scientists of religion on the relationship between CSR and religious beliefs comes from the methodological framework employed to study religion. Cognitive scientists of religion abide by the commitment to methodological naturalism, which is the basic idea that only the “human side” of religious ideas and experiences can be studied in naturalistic terms. CSR scholars are interested in understanding how and why humans respond to ideas that are deemed religious, rather than decipher whether or not those ideas are true or false (i.e. ontological status).

Researchers naturally have their commitments and dispositions towards religion. In CSR, these dispositions are many and varied. Even though some scholars may offer their personal opinions on the reality of religion in their writings, this does not mean that CSR, in general, supports their opinion. Most importantly, when scholars conduct research, they bracket personal opinions. Research in CSR is guided by methods in science in much the same way that it governs other research outside of religious domains. Some doubt that a scientific study of religion will always be subject to the influence of religious concerns,30 while others have argued that a non-confessional and scientific approach to the study of religion in CSR is not only possible but has already occurred.31





The general stance of CSR on whether or not religion is true


CSR does not support any doctrinal view or a particular religion. That the approach is neutral about religion may be disappointing to those who want to undermine religion or provide scientific support for their beliefs. To date, most scholars in CSR engaged in deriving primary research do not engage extensively in debates about the relationship between their theories and findings to the truism of religion (there are, of course, exceptions to this32), although they often include qualifiers. For example, cognitive scientists of religion often point out that the goal of the research is to uncover human tendencies that predispose us to religion. However, predispositions are not antithetical to the existence of religious phenomena, such as supernatural agents, and nor do they provide evidence that phenomena do exist. For example, Barrett has argued that cognitively natural beliefs are “epistemically innocent until proven guilty.33” Similarly, others clarify that evolutionary theories speak to the question of the adaptive function of religion, which is separate from questions about the existence of religious phenomena.





1 Controversy in the neurosciences and evolutionary sciences


Researchers in the neurosciences and evolutionary sciences have been confronted with questions about whether a natural explanation of religious cognition makes a difference to the epistemic status of religious belief. Some misinterpret neuroscientific findings to mean that religion is “all in the mind,” and therefore, a cognitive delusion or false belief. Others presume (or indeed, fear) that CSR is essentially “explaining religion away,” with the associated claim that a natural explanation of religion makes the existence of anything supernatural superfluous.34 Others have interpreted the idea that religion is natural and rooted in our evolutionary heritage as meaning that religion is true. As anthropologist Pascal Boyer (2008: 1038) put it, “some people of faith fear that an understanding of the processes underlying belief could undermine it. Others worry that what is shown to be part of our evolutionary heritage will be interpreted as good, true, necessary, or inevitable.35”

These interpretations are often compounded by sensationalist accounts of work conducted by researchers in the study of religion. Such accounts are often referred to as “neurotheology.36” Most notably is the idea that there is a specialized area of the brain dedicated to religious experience, often referred to as the “god spot” (based on the findings of Michael Persinger’s helmet studies),37 and that finding the source of religious experience negates the need for any other account. As neuropsychologist Uffe Schjoedt remarks, since religious behavior encompasses widely different thoughts and practices, it must be assumed to have different content and corresponding mental correlates. The aim of the neuroscientific research, as Schjoedt rightly points out, is to describe the basic neural processing employed by participants in religious practices,38 not to localize God. Likewise, as Barrett points out, such research says next to nothing about whether religious beliefs are warranted or not.39

Researchers in CSR have, however, acknowledged that a theistic and anti-theistic reading of research is possible. However, such readings require much more precise and sophisticated work than sweeping generalizations. One important consideration is that the approach is diverse regarding the theories of the mind and the evolutionary origins and functions of religion, and therefore it is practically impossible to be informed about CSR and conclude that CSR provides support for or against the reality of religious beliefs. It is possible, however, to take individual cognitive and evolutionary theories within CSR and to compare and contrast their potential implications. This type of treatment is best achieved with precision and insight and likely to be the focus of future scholarly work.

Summary of philosophical and theological implications of CSR

There are three types of philosophical and theological issues that often arise as a result of theories and research in CSR:

The nature and success of explanations of religion in CSR.

Metaphysical implications of explanations of religion in CSR, such as implications for the nature of humanity and the nature of the divine.

Epistemic questions about the implications of CSR explanations of religion for the truth, rationality, or justification of religious beliefs.



At least two responses follow from CSR research to questions about the relationship between CSR and religious belief in general:

Normally developing humans everywhere are likely to engage in religious concepts and activities.

The cognitive science of religion cannot determine whether religion is true or false.



CSR does not support any doctrinal view or a particular religion. That the approach is neutral about religion. Research in the neurosciences and evolutionary sciences have been especially plagued with questions about whether a natural explanation of religious cognition makes a difference to the epistemic status of religious belief. These interpretations are often compounded by sensationalist accounts of work conducted by researchers in the study of religion. Researchers in CSR have, however, acknowledged that a theistic and anti-theistic reading of research is possible. This type of treatment may be the focus of future scholarly work.





Evaluation, implications and future directions


Over the past two decades or so, CSR has made many advancements in the study of religion. However, many important questions about religion remain. In what follows, we review the strengths and limitations of the approach and the potential future directions that the approach could take.





The role of evolution in religion


As discussed in Chapter 1 (Introduction), evolutionary processes capture the ultimate mechanisms. Many contemporary scientists consider accounting for them as necessary for developing a more comprehensive explanation of religion. However, the evolutionary approach to religion is still relatively new. It began to influence a cognitive approach to religion following the publication of The Adapted Mind in 199240 by evolutionary scholars Barkow, Tooby, and Cosmides. Most assume that evolutionary sciences are, or should be, essential to a cognitive explanation of religious phenomena and that understanding the evolutionary causality behind the origins of ideas and behaviors of the executive committee leads to a better explanation of religion overall. For instance, in 2020 members of the Executive Committee voted to change the name of the organization “The International Association for the Cognitive Science of Religion” (IACSR) to “the International Association for the Cognitive and Evolutionary Sciences of Religion (IACESR)”.





1 Disagreements over the unit of selection and mechanisms of cultural change in evolutionary accounts


Many cognitive scientists of religion differ according to their endorsement of particular theories and research on the evolutionary origins of religious ideas and behaviors, including the unit of selection—i.e. genetics, individuals, groups, and mechanisms of cultural change.

Recently, scholars have proposed that CSR be situated more firmly within existing frameworks of cultural evolution. These frameworks emphasize that human thinking and behavior are powerfully shaped both by genetic and cultural inheritance (also known as “dual-inheritance theory41” or gene-culture coevolution).

At the crux of these arguments is the case that cognitive biases (as shaped by our evolutionary heritage and contemporary environments) alone do not explain the spread of religious ideas and behaviors. Scholars must account for context biases (which are also shaped by our evolutionary heritage and contemporary environments). In short, human cognition is the result of dual inheritance from interacting genetic and cultural streams of evolution. One advantage of the dual-inheritance theory as a framework for studying religion is that it deals with more complex interactions between cognitive and cultural phenomena. Nevertheless, it also incurs the cost of research designs, having to take into consideration a more abundant number of possibilities.





2 Disagreements over the origin, function, and role of evolution in religion


There is also an ongoing debate about the origin, function, and exact role of evolution in religious ideas and behaviors—notably whether it enhanced survival. The dominant position in the field historically has been that religious beliefs and behaviors are a by-product of cognitive processes and behaviors that evolved for other purposes.42 More recently, however, a growing number of scholars are challenging this view. They propose that religious beliefs and behaviors evolved due to their (historical and current) adaptive advantages to individuals and groups because of the psychological and material benefits,43 such as extending human cooperation and coordination.44 These debates are likely to continue over the coming years. Theories about the role of evolution in religious thought and behavior are likely to be both articulated and revised in light of new data.





3 The difficulty in deciphering between competing evolutionary accounts


One problem that confronts evolutionary scientists is difficulty in testing their theories and competing hypotheses. To date, one of the most reliable means of testing evolutionary theories is through systematic, cross-cultural studies. They afford researchers the opportunity to investigate whether and how intuitive responses emerge. Intuitive responses are likely to be based on universal mechanisms, constraints, traits, etc., which may have been selected for during evolution.

The implications of such results for the study of religion would be magnified when data is derived from outside western cultures, suggesting that findings are not a product of Judeo-Christian or WEIRD traditions (i.e. Western, Educated, Industrialized, Rich, and Democratic). CSR has derived fewer data from western samples than compared to the rest of the behavioral sciences. Nevertheless, there is still a need for more cross-cultural data to make claims about how humans typically tend to think and behave, and to compare and contrast these from different cultural inputs.45 Future research addressing the role of cognitive biases in the context of Eastern traditions, such as the work in CSR of religious studies scholar Edward Slingerland and colleagues46 and psychologist Melanie Nyhof and colleagues,47 would be especially fruitful.





4 Future research possibilities in evolutionary studies of religion


Other avenues to test evolutionary theories include simulation modeling. This is where researchers are developing large-scale agent-based models to predict and explain religious dynamics both past and present (such as the Institute for the Bio-Cultural Study of Religion’s “Modeling Religion Project”; Masaryk University’s “Generative Historiography of Religion Project”). Another promising development is the emergence of new databases specifically tailored for questions concerning cognition, the environment, and religion, such as the Historical Database of Sociocultural Evolution48 and the Database of Religious History (DRH), which is collecting quantifiable data directly from historians and other specialists.49

In the future, even closer ties between the evolutionary sciences and CSR are likely to be forged. As theories about evolutionary processes and the relationship between evolution and cultural processes develop (recent noteworthy examples include books by anthropologists Clark Barrett50 and Joseph Henrich51), theories in the cognitive science of religion are likely to follow suit. One promising avenue of research is on religion and mental health. Traditionally, the psychology of religion has been concerned with questions of individual differences and the health outcomes of belief. Yet, research and theories are not typically formulated with modern evolutionary theory in mind. By contrast, religious studies scholar Joseph Bulbulia has accumulated research (informed by evolutionary theory) on the beneficial impact of religious participation on human health and well-being.52

Key points

The evolutionary approach to religion is still relatively new.

There are disagreements in evolutionary approaches.

They include disagreements over:The unit of selection and mechanisms of cultural change in evolutionary accounts.

The origin, function, and role of evolution in religion.





It is sometimes difficult to adjudicate between different evolutionary accounts, but this is likely to change in the future as new methods and data become available.





The mind and models of cognition


As we covered in Chapter 1 (Introduction), CSR began with a handful of scholars who were influenced by a modular view of the mind (i.e. that the mind is composed of innate neural structures or modules, which have distinct established evolutionary functions). This idea was proposed by evolutionary scholars Barkow, Tooby, and Cosmides in The Adapted Mind in 1992.53 Even though CSR has been critiqued for endorsing a nativist (i.e. that ideas are hardwired at birth), modular view of the mind, there are disagreements over the models of cognition involved in religious thought—which includes whether, and to what extent, the mind is modular. These debates are likely to continue.

Some scholars, such as philosopher Mitch Hodge,54 have called for greater consideration of the view of the mind and the type of cognitive processing that arises from empirical results on topics such as the structure and mechanisms involved in belief in the afterlife. Others have considered the more basic question of how narrowly or broadly cognition is construed in CSR in general. Whether it consists of internal rules and representations (i.e. in the head); or, also includes a broader concept where cognition is regarded as embodied (i.e. in the body), extended, and distributed (i.e. across minds in the environment, often referred to as situated or distributed cognition).55 These latter formulations focus on the interaction between brain, body, and environment in the formation of and reception to, ideas and behaviors. For instance, religious studies scholar Armin Geertz has argued that CSR has been focused on a narrow view of cognition as individual minds and has overlooked the role of the body and environment.56

Geertz has proposed a biocultural theory of religion, which is based on an expanded view of cognition that is anchored in the brain and body, dependent upon culture, and extended and distributed beyond individual minds.57 For instance, techniques used in religious practices often manipulate the body, such as kneeling, standing and dancing in rituals, inducing drugs or fasting, and enduring painful ordeals. Geertz proposes that understanding which manipulations are at play in religion, and how they implement cultural values, alter emotional states, and interact with cognitive processing can enrich our understanding of religion. Religion is embedded, enacted, extended, and embodied, and CSR scholars are striving to examine each of these aspects.

Geertz is not the only scholar to propose broadening the scope of cognition and culture in CSR. Anthropologist Benjamin Purzycki has argued that CSR needs to take more account of cultural factors in shaping religious representations. He considers the interaction of individuals and their environment as an ecological system, focusing, for example, on how people represent supernatural agents when they face local problems.58

Key points

There are disagreements in CSR and the socio-cognitive sciences more generally over the models of cognition involved in religious thought.

Recently, CSR scholars have called for more attention to be paid towards the models of cognition in religious thought.





Methods and theories underlying the scientific study of religion


Scholars in traditional approaches to the study of religion have differed in their responses to CSR. Their reception has ranged along a continuum—from enthusiasm to skepticism, and antagonism. As we covered in Chapter 1 (Introduction), the history of CSR makes some resistance to the approach from some corners almost inevitable. As religious studies scholar E. Thomas Lawson (2000: 47) put it, “A cognitive approach to … religion is capable of arousing intense suspicion … the standard assumption in the social sciences and the humanities has been that only social and cultural methods can explain social and cultural facts.” The approach started by challenging some of the most fundamental assumptions that were standard fare in the study of religion at the time, including cultural determinism and cultural relativism.

One criticism that is often associated with those who commit cultural relativism is that CSR tries to “explain away” the specialness of religion, or as we have covered previously in this chapter, fears that cognitive approaches reduce religious experience to the mind. As we discussed in Chapter 1 (Introduction), religion was often construed among scholars as sui generis (i.e. unique) and could not be reduced or compared to anything other than itself. At the heart of these critiques is a reaction against reductionism. To a greater extent, a reaction against a scientific approach to the study of religion since reductionism is a cornerstone of the scientific method. Cognitive scientists of religion have proposed that explanations of religion are necessarily reductive.59

As we discussed in Chapter 1 (Introduction), CSR engages in the form of methodological reductionism that first fractionates religion to study the different components, while acknowledging the complexity and interaction of many levels and not reducing an explanation of religion to any one level. There is often an underlying assumption in critiques of CSR that scholars are proposing a form of ontological reductionism. This type of reasoning can be identified in writing as preceded with a “nothing but” phrase. That religion is “nothing but” supernatural agents is “nothing but” the processes of the human mind. As scholars in CSR point out, especially philosopher Robert McCauley,60 this is a misunderstanding of the approach. Others, such as religious studies’ scholar Edward Slingerland, have implied that the misconception may also partially stem from a fear that explaining religion away makes the study of religion from those outside of science redundant. This view is not shared by cognitive-evolutionary scholars who research CSR.61

Key points

CSR is sometimes met with enthusiasm and by others with skepticism among those trained in traditional approaches to the study of religion.

Some religious scholars assume that CSR scholars employ ontological reductionism.





The conceptualization of religion in CSR


As discussed in Chapter 2 (Core Assumptions), another critique that sometimes emerges from scholars of religion is that CSR does not have a clear conceptualization of religion because scholars do not engage in extensive debates about what does or does not constitute religion.62 As discussed, such debates over how to define religion have characterized the study of religion since the field’s inception, and CSR scholars take a bottom-up approach to characterizing and investigating religious phenomena. It is a truism that, to date, CSR has focused most on explaining common representations of, and responses to, supernatural agents over other recurrent features of religious systems. The focus to date is likely a product of two factors.

First is the influence of scholars such as anthropologist Stewart Guthrie. Second is the ubiquity and accessibility of the phenomena and the comparative ease with which scholars can investigate these phenomena. This focus has been interpreted as endorsing a Tylorian minimalist view of religion as supernatural agents. It is often coined as Tylorian because of the association with the classical scholar, Edward Tylor, who proposed that religion was the belief in supernatural agents and that people came to their convictions about religion by cold, laborious processes of thinking. However, this view does not adequately characterize the approach. First, CSR researchers have addressed many other phenomena falling under the category of religion, including those captured in this book. Indeed, some have studied phenomena that may be considered outside of what mainstream scholars would classify as religion, such as magic63 and even atheism.64 Second, as discussed in more detail below, CSR proposes that religious ideas and behaviors emerge as culturally transmitted ideas that people find intuitively plausible, not the high-level conscious deliberation of the individual about the truth value of different religions.





Religious belief


A related question that we have encountered throughout the book is whether, and to what extent, CSR explains belief. As discussed in Chapter 2 (Core Assumptions), CSR construes beliefs as reflective elaborations on intuitions about the world. They emerge in part due to their foundation on ideas and behaviors that people find intuitively plausible and inherently appealing, and because they have been culturally transmitted.

CSR has veered away from explaining the process of belief formation for individuals within a particular tradition. Likewise, the approach has been more concerned with explaining why and how general trends in religion emerge cross-culturally than those that differ from those trends (i.e. statistical outliers), and how individuals differ from one another. Research on explaining individual differences in religiosity is more characteristic of the work conducted in the field of psychology of religion. Nevertheless, recent research in CSR does account for individual predictors of tendencies that underpin religious beliefs, such as the detection of agency in the environment.65

Historically, however, CSR has focused more on explaining the acquisition and transmission of religious beliefs in groups of people rather than explaining differences between individuals. This endeavor requires an understanding of both intuitive cognitive processes and the socio-cultural and historical environment within which ideas about religion are communicated.

Debates still abound on what the precise nature of religious beliefs entail, such as whether they are factual beliefs influenced by processing fluency,66 or are attitudes of a different type altogether.67 As psychologists Cristine Legare and Susan Gelman have suggested, one truism is that beliefs are often immune to argumentation and refutation.68 As the anthropologist Tanya Luhrmann has noted, understanding the socialization and learning processes are crucial to explaining how people come to believe, such as the articulated belief among some contemporary American evangelicals that God can speak to them.69 Ideas like these are not a matter of merely receiving and accepting information but rather, require complex cognitive processes, in this case, to perceive God as around, able and willing to hear and engage in a conversation with believers. As anthropologist Pascal Boyer put it, “belief is hard work,”.70

The contribution of CSR to understanding belief is the clarity with which scholars distinguish between propositional beliefs and intuitions. As early pioneers of CSR proposed, religious representations are much more compelling, attention-grabbing, and memorable when they are associated with intuitive content. As cultural transmission is a selective process, ideas that are based on intuitions about the world have a competitive advantage, which can explain why they become widespread. However, beliefs that build upon these intuitive ideas, and counterintuitive ideas, may also have a competitive advantage over other ideas in the culture based on additional cognitive and socio-cultural factors. As anthropologist Harvey Whitehouse showcased in his theory of religious dynamics, known as Modes of Religiosity, MOR (see Chapter 9:, Rituals Part 1), these include the extent to which ideas are repeated, and behaviors are performed (which enhances recall) and the extent to which prestigious individuals (e.g. elders, religious leaders) accept and promote such ideas.

Key points

CSR has grown exponentially over the past two decades and continues to expand.

We now understand more about the cognitive basis of religious ideas and behaviors.

CSR research also has practical implications.

CSR continues to adopt different methods, revise theories, and challenge findings within the social-cognitive sciences, including those previously upheld in CSR.





The role of cognition and culture in explaining religion


Theories and research within CSR differ in the extent to which they embrace both cognition and culture to explain the transmission of religious ideas and beliefs. As outlined in Chapter 1 (Introduction), CSR aimed to redress the balance in the study of religion, which was skewed in favor of idiosyncratic and interpretative accounts by including explanatory, scientific reports. Cognitive scholars did not want to hijack the study of religion but rather to integrate research in the sciences to understand better and explain religion. The emphasis placed on explanatory endeavors may have led some to the conclusion that CSR neglects the role of the socio-cultural environment and historical factors in affecting the forms and transmission of religious ideas and beliefs, but this is an unfair characterization.

As outlined in Chapter 1 (Introduction) of this book, cognitive scientists of religion did not perceive culture as hovering above cognition or cognition as isolated from culture. Scholars have demonstrated a deep commitment to understanding how cognitive biases manifest themselves in particular socio-cultural contexts. This commitment is achieved by drawing on their specialist knowledge and often spending extended periods in the field conducting ethnographic research. Examples of this type of research are mentioned throughout this book.

While their general theories are outlined, due to word constraints, the richness of their contextual observations and considerations are not portrayed, although these can be found in their manuscripts. These include detailed ethnographic accounts of how religion is expressed in particular contemporary traditions, including: Chapter 7 (Supernatural Agents) anthropologist Emma Cohen on spirit possession in an Afro-Brazilian religious tradition, The Mind Possessed71 (Cohen, 2008); Chapter 9 (Rituals Part 1) Harvey Whitehouse’s account of rituals and religious dynamics in Papua New Guinea Inside the Cult72 (Whitehouse, 1995); anthropologist Brian Malley’s work with North American fundamentalist Baptists73 (Malley, 2004); and anthropologist Dimitris Xygalatas’ account of fire-walking rituals in Northern Greece, The Burning Saints: Cognition and culture in the fire-walking rituals of the Anastenaria74 (Xygalatas, 2014).

A more reasonable and evidence-based claim is that, on the whole, CSR has contributed more to understanding the role of cognition in the transmission of ideas and beliefs than on the part of socio-cultural and historical contexts in shaping them. Such a stronghold in cognition in CSR is inevitable given the motivation of early pioneers to redress the balance in cultural studies towards cultural explanations of religion. Indeed, perhaps the greatest insight of CSR is that religion is shaped and constrained by implicit, panhuman intuitions about the way the world works, and that these intuitions derive from many distinct psychological systems.

As we discussed in Chapter 7 (Supernatural Agents), many scholars in CSR have proposed that cognitive biases are necessary, but not sufficient, to explain belief formation. Some have extended this claim to recommend that the general model of transmission potential—such as minimally counterintuitive theory (MCI)—needs to take account of context biases, including the cultural context, to provide a more comprehensive explanation of religious beliefs. Few would doubt this. However, many theories (such as MCI) are general models intended to provoke further research by applying them to specific contexts with an understanding of the cultural and historical context within which religious ideas are communicated.

Researchers have already made headway in specifying how cognitive biases that predispose humans towards religious belief interact with each other, their relationship to cultural input, and how they are accounted for by individual differences. For instance, psychologist Aiyana Willard and social anthropologist Ara Norenzayan investigated the relationship between cognitive tendencies such as mentalizing, mind-body dualism, teleological thinking, anthropomorphism, and cultural exposure to religion to predict belief in God, paranormal beliefs, and belief in life’s purpose.75

The results of Willard and Norenzayan’s analyses demonstrated in more precise terms how these tendencies relate to one another and the direction of influence. For example, they concluded that cognitive biases come first and are followed by beliefs and not the other way around. They also reported results that would be expected of cultural explanations of religion, such as greater exposure to religious attendance predicts more belief in God. However, they also reported other unexpected findings. For example, the relationship between Christianity and anthropomorphism suggested that high rates of Christianity in a community might suppress anthropomorphic tendencies in individuals. In the future, research that addresses similar questions and interaction effects of individual differences, cognitive biases, and cultural input is likely to provide a much more specific explanation of religion.

Key points

Theories and research within CSR differ in the extent to which they embrace both cognition and culture to explain the transmission of religious ideas and beliefs.

CSR has contributed more to understanding the role of cognition in the transmission of ideas and beliefs than on the part of socio-cultural and historical contexts in shaping them. However, they also take account of the cultural context in their explanations.

Researchers have showcased how cognitive biases interact with each other, their relationship to cultural input, and how they are accounted for by individual differences.





The role of experience, the body, emotions, and motivation in religious belief and behavior


Some scholars have argued that CSR ought to engage more with the role of affect to explain belief acquisition, experience, and processing of information about religion.76 Historically, the field of psychology of religion has engaged extensively in the relationship between affective processing and religious concepts (especially towards the Christian God), and some classic CSR theories, such as minimally counterintuitive theory (MCI), take little account of emotional processing.77 However, cognitive scientists of religion do not treat people like emotionless computers, and many CSR theories have focused on motivational and affective aspects of religiosity. These include the behavioral effects of fear of supernatural punishment,78 emotional commitments required in some ritual displays,79 the alleviation of anxiety in ritual performance,80 the mnemonic and cohesive impact of emotional arousal,81 and the motivational attractiveness of particular depictions of life after death as contributing towards their transmissive success.82

This engagement with motivational and affective aspects of religiosity is set to continue. For example, scholars have proposed a revised explanation of the tendency to engage in anthropomorphic reasoning across cultures depending on individual dispositions and the cultural environment. One prediction from this model is that people who desire social contact and affiliation, and those in cultures with exposure to anthropomorphic representations (such as computers and electronic devices) will tend to anthropomorphize nonhuman agents.83 The results of studies testing these predictions will clarify the role of motivation and affect in cognitive processing, both between individuals and across cultures.

Key points

Historically, CSR has engaged less extensively in the relationship between affective processing and religious concepts than other approaches, such as the psychology of religion.

CSR now engages more with the role of affect and religion than previously, and this is set to continue.





Phenomenology of religious experience


Many venerated figures in the study of religion, most notably William James, have brought attention to the fact that religious belief is also based on religious experience. Religious belief is a metacognitive process (i.e. thinking about thinking), and individual experiences also feature in how one thinks about beliefs. As anthropologist Tanya Luhrmann rightly highlights, people pay attention to specific events and experiences and code them as significant (and disattend to others) partly as a result of popular ideas in the cultural milieu.84 In addition to the underlying cognitive scaffolding of intuitions that CSR scholars have showcased, belief formation is also based on personal experiences and those that are deemed meaningful. So, what does CSR have to say about experience and belief?

Historically, CSR has had less to say about the phenomenology of religious experience. In other words, what it feels like for an individual to experience an episode of possession, or to sense the presence of a loved one who has recently died. However, this is changing. Some scholars have incorporated recent theories in the cognitive sciences to address religious experiences. The most notable is religious studies scholar, Ann Taves, in her foundational book on religious experience Religious experience reconsidered: A building-block approach to the study of religion and other special things,85 and in subsequent work on religion.86 Along with others, including the anthropologist Michael Kinsella and psychologist Tamsin German and members of the Religion, Experience, and Mind Lab Group at UC Santa Barbra, Taves and colleagues are undertaking a mixed-methods study on near-death experiences (NDEs) and the role of shared experiences in the formation of new social movements.87

The “Quantifying Religious Experience Project” at the Institute for the Bio-Cultural Study of Religion’s lab at Boston University (led by philosopher and theologian Wesley Wildman) will make significant headway in understanding religious experiences.88 This project aims to investigate the phenomenology of religious experiences across traditions (e.g. the Catholic nun’s experience of God through contemplative prayer, the Hindu’s feeling of the presence of Shiva). Crucially, the project does not rely on narrative accounts of beliefs. Narrative accounts are notoriously imprecise as a basis of comparison between experiences across religious traditions. Instead, researchers will compare experiences using the latest techniques in cognitive psychology and quantitative research, such as an inventory of consciousness that is culturally independent. This research, and others like it, will lead to a better understanding of the experiential dimensions of cognitive processing and the processes by which people come to attribute meaning to their experiences.

One potential area of collaboration in the future is between descriptive accounts of individual experiences and neuroscientific findings on brain activation to enrich the understanding of religious experience. Most research on religious experiences has taken place among those versed in the neurocognitive sciences, where researchers are employing the latest brain imaging technologies to understand the neural correlates activated in religious cognition and experiences. There is a growing interest among neuroscientists in how ritual, trance, meditation, and other altered states of consciousness affect brain functioning and development. Here, neuroscientist Patrick McNamara has done much to showcase the subject in an informed manner to a general audience.89

Some exciting new findings are now coming out of these methods in CSR research. For instance, Schjoedt and colleagues have made headway in uncovering the basic neural processing employed by participants in religious practices. For example, they found differences in brain activation when believers and non-believers listened to some speakers, including a reputable Christian known for his healing powers. Only Christians showed significant differences in brain activation when they listened to the renowned Christian healer, most notably, Christians who rated the healer as more charismatic had less brain activation than those who rated the leader as less charismatic. In other words, the more charismatic they regarded the leader, the more passively they listened to the speaker. Schjoedt and colleagues concluded that they suspend or hand over their critical faculty to the trusted person. Further, the suspension of downregulation of neural activity in these brain regions may be an earmark of followers’ susceptibility to charismatic authority.90

Consider another example, discussed in Chapter 10 (Rituals Part 2). Anthropologist Dimitris Xygalatas and colleagues studied fire-walking rituals in a small Spanish village of San Pedro Manrique. They measured the relationship between firewalkers’ and spectators’ heart rates. One important finding was that arousal levels between ritual performers and spectators were similarly high for people who knew each other, but dissimilar among ritual performers and strangers. These findings have implications for synchrony in arousal, empathic arousal in social relationships, and social cohesion during religious rituals. For example, they demonstrated that the effects of arousal are mainly a product of existing social relations and not exclusively on mirroring and empathy. These insights were only possible using a combination of physiological measures, relationship mapping, and self-report measures. This research is radically interdisciplinary, and future studies in CSR, which combine ethnographic research, scientific methods, and technologies, are likely to be equally insightful.

Key points

Religious belief is also based on religious experience.

Historically, CSR has had less to say about the phenomenology of religious experience, but this is changing.





Summary of evaluation, implications, and future directions





1 The role of evolution in religion


Most cognitive scientists of religion consider an evolutionary approach as essential to a cognitive explanation of religious phenomena. They disagree over the unit of selection, mechanisms of cultural change and the origin, function, and precise role of evolution in religion. These debates will continue over the coming years, and theories about the role of evolution in religious thought and behavior will be articulated and revised in light of new data. In the future, even closer ties between the evolutionary sciences and CSR are likely to be forged.





2 The mind and models of cognition


CSR began with a handful of scholars who were influenced by a modular view of the mind. Currently, there are disagreements over the models of cognition involved in religious thought—which includes whether, and to what extent, the mind is modular. These debates are likely to continue. Some have called for considerable attention over the view of the mind and the type of cognitive processing that is implied by theories in CSR. In the future, more consideration is likely to be given to discussions of the mind, as well as theories that consider embodied and extended cognition and the ecological environment in shaping religious thought and behavior.





3 Methods and theories underlying the scientific study of religion


CSR engages in the form of methodological reductionism that first fractionates religion in order to study the different components while acknowledging the complexity and interaction of many levels and not reducing an explanation of religion to any one level. Some feel threatened by scientific approaches to religion and make the assumption that CSR endorses ontological reductionism. However, this is a misunderstanding of the approach.





4 The conceptualization of religion in CSR


Another critique that sometimes emerges from scholars of religion is that CSR does not have a clear conceptualization of religion. CSR scholars do not propose a general theory of religion but take a bottom-up approach to characterize and investigate religious phenomena.





5 Religious belief


A related question is whether, and to what extent, CSR explains belief. CSR has veered away from explaining the process of belief formation for individuals within a tradition. It has been primarily concerned with explaining why and how general trends in religion emerge cross-culturally than those that differ from those trends, and how individuals differ from one another. The main contribution of CSR to understanding belief is the clarity with which scholars distinguish between propositional beliefs and intuitions.





6 The role of cognition and culture in explaining religion


CSR has contributed more to understanding the role of cognition in the transmission of ideas and beliefs than on the role of socio-cultural and historical contexts in shaping them. CSR scholars acknowledge that cognitive biases are necessary, but not sufficient, to explain belief formation. An understanding of contextual biases is also required. In the future, research that addresses interaction effects between individual differences, cognitive biases, and cultural input is likely to provide a much more specific explanation of religion.





7 The role of experience, the body, emotions, and motivation in religious belief and behavior


Some scholars have proposed that CSR ought to engage more with the role of affect to explain belief acquisition, experience, and processing of information about religion. Cognitive scientists of religion do not treat people like emotionless computers, and many CSR theories have focused on motivational and affective aspects of religiosity. This engagement with motivational and affective aspects of religiosity is set to continue.





8 Phenomenology of religious experience


Historically, CSR has had less to say about the phenomenology of religious experience. However, this is changing. New research will lead to a better understanding of the experiential dimensions of cognitive processing and the processes by which people come to attribute meaning to their experiences.





Chapter summary


CSR is a progressive research program, and researchers have proposed many—often diverse—theories about different religious phenomena. Despite differences in the details, all champion the promise of the methods and theories, and findings of the cognitive sciences to produce insight into religion, and all maintain that religious thought and action harness ordinary forms of cognition. Although tremendous progress has been made towards understanding the cognitive basis of religious ideas and behaviors, there is still much work to be done. CSR has proposed that science can explain religion. However, it does not pretend to exhaustively explain everything that might be called religion (provocative book titles aside) and acknowledges that all explanations of religion are partial explanations. Research in the cognitive sciences has only scratched the surface of the vast repertoire of the cross-culturally recurrent phenomena that have been deemed as “religious.” In many ways then, research findings are the start, rather than the endpoint, of explaining religion.

Discussion questions

What do you think are the main strengths of CSR?

Which criticisms of CSR do you agree and disagree with? Why?

Do you think CSR has any implications for whether religious concepts (such as supernatural agents) exist? Why?

Can you think of any practical implications of CSR not addressed in this chapter?





Selected further reading


Articles


Cohen, Emma, Jonathan A. Lanman, Harvey Whitehouse, and Robert N. McCauley. “Common criticisms of the cognitive science of religion—answered.” Bulletin of the Council of Societies for the Study of Religion 37, no. 4 (2008): 112–115.

McBrayer, Justin. “Explanations of religion”. In Oxford Bibliographies in Philosophy, Duncan Pritchard ed., 2018.





Books


Barrett, Justin L. Cognitive science, religion, and theology: From human minds to divine minds. Templeton Press, 2011.

De Cruz, Helen, and Johan De Smedt. A natural history of natural theology: The cognitive science of theology and philosophy of religion. MIT Press, 2014.



Notes

1 Lawson, E. Thomas. “Towards a cognitive science of religion.” Numen 47, no. 3 (2000): 338–339.

2 E.g. Willard, Aiyana K. “Agency detection is unnecessary in the explanation of religious belief.” Religion, Brain & Behavior 9, no. 1 (2019): 96–98.

3 E.g. Willard, Aiyana K., Joseph Henrich, and Ara Norenzayan. “Memory and belief in the transmission of counterintuitive content.” Human Nature 27, no. 3 (2016): 221–243.

4 E.g. De Cruz, Helen. “Cognitive science of religion and the study of theological concepts.” Topoi 33, no. 2 (2014): 487–497.

5 E.g. Hodge, K. Mitch. “Descartes’ mistake: How afterlife beliefs challenge the assumption that humans are intuitive Cartesian substance dualists.” Journal of Cognition and Culture 8, no. 3–4 (2008): 387–415.

6 E.g. Baumard, Nicolas, and Pascal Boyer. “Empirical problems with the notion of ‘Big Gods’ and of prosociality in large societies.” Religion, Brain & Behavior 5, no. 4 (2015): 279–283.

7 Barrett, Justin L. “Cognitive science of religion: Looking back, looking forward.” Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion 50, no. 2 (2011): 229–239.

8 “New Voices in Cognition and Culture.” The Journal of Cognition and Culture 17, 5 (2017).

9 Martin, Luther H., and Donald Wiebe, eds. Religion explained? The cognitive science of religion after twenty-five years. Bloomsbury Publishing, 2017.

10 Xygalatas, Dimitris. “Bridging the gap: The cognitive science of religion as an integrative approach.” In Evolution, cognition, and the history of religion: A new synthesis, Brill, 2018, 255–272.

11 Xygalatas, Dimitris. “Bridging the gap: The cognitive science of religion as an integrative approach.” In Evolution, cognition, and the history of religion: A new synthesis, Brill, 2018, 255–272, 265.

12 McBrayer, Justin. “Explanations of religion.” In Oxford Bibliographies in Philosophy, Duncan Pritchard ed., 2018.

13 Purzycki, Benjamin, and Willard, Aiyana. “MCI theory: A critical discussion.” Religion, Brain & Behavior 6, no. 3 (2015): 207–248.

14 Schloss, Jeff, and Murray, Michael. “Evolutionary accounts of belief in supernatural punishment: A critical review.” Religion, Brain & Behavior 1, no. 1 (2011): 46–99.

15 Pyysiainen, Ilkka. “Religion-naturally: Religion, theology, and science.” In Is religion natural? Evers, Dirk et al. London: T&T Clark International, 2012, 67–84.

16 Slingerland, Edward. “Who’s afraid of reductionism? The study of religion in the age of cognitive science.” Journal of the American Academy of Religion 76, no. 2 (2008): 375–411.

17 E.g. Van Eyghen, Hans, Rik Peels, and Gijsbert B. Van den Brink. New developments in the cognitive science of religion: The rationality of religious belief. 2018.

18 De Cruz, Helen, and Johan De Smedt. A natural history of natural theology: The cognitive science of theology and philosophy of religion. MIT Press, 2014; De Cruz, Helen, Ryan Nichols, and James R. Beebe, eds. Advances in religion, cognitive science, and experimental philosophy. Bloomsbury Publishing, 2017.

19 De Cruz, Helen. “Cognitive science of religion and the study of theological concepts.” Topoi 33, no. 2 (2014): 487–497.

20 E.g. Jong, Jonathan, and Visala, Aku. “Evolutionary debunking arguments against theism, reconsidered.” International Journal for Philosophy of Religion 76: 243–258.

21 Dennett, Daniel Clement. Breaking the spell: Religion as a natural phenomenon. Vol. 14. Penguin, 2006.

22 Dawkins, Richard, and Lalla Ward. The god delusion. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, 2006.

23 Bloom, Paul. “Is God an accident?” Atlantic Monthly 296, no. 5 (2005): 105.

24 Bloom, Paul. “Religion is natural.” Developmental Science 10, no. 1 (2007): 147–151.

25 Boyer, Pascal. Religion explained: The human instincts that fashion gods, spirits, and ancestors. Random House, 2002.

26 Barrett, Justin L. Born believers: The science of children’s religious belief. Simon and Schuster, 2012.

27 Barrett, Justin L. “Exploring the natural foundations of religion.” Trends in Cognitive Sciences 4, no. 1 (2000): 29–34.

28 https://www.nature.com/articles/4551038a.

29 E.g. see McCauley, Robert N. Why religion is natural and science is not. Oxford University Press, 2011.

30 Martin, Luther H., and Donald Wiebe. “Religious studies as a scientific discipline: The persistence of a delusion.” Journal of the American Academy of Religion 80, no. 3 (2012): 587–597.

31 E.g. see Slingerland, Edward. “Back to the future: A response to Martin and Wiebe.” Journal of the American Academy of Religion 80, no. 3 (2012): 611–617; McCauley, Robert N. “A cognitive science of religion will be difficult, expensive, complicated, radically counter-intuitive, and possible: A response to Martin and Wiebe.” Journal of the American Academy of Religion 80, no. 3 (2012): 605–610; Taves, Ann. “A response to Martin and Wiebe.” Journal of the American Academy of Religion 80, no. 3 (2012): 601–604.

32 Notably Justin Barrett. E.g. Barrett, Justin L., and Roger Trigg. The roots of religion: Exploring the cognitive science of religion (Ashgate Science and Religion Series). Ashgate Publishing Group, 2014.

33 E.g. Barrett, Justin L. Cognitive science, religion, and theology: From human minds to divine minds. Templeton Press, 2011.

34 Van Eyghen, Hans. “Two types of ‘explaining away’: Arguments in the cognitive science of religion.” Zygon 51, no. 4 (2016): 966–982.

35 Boyer, Pascal. Religion explained. Random House, 2008, 1038.

36 “Neurotheology: A science of what?” In McNamara, P. ed. (2006) Where God and science meet, Volume 2, The neurology of religious experience. Westport, Connecticut: Praeger: 81–104.

37 E.g. see www.independent.co.uk/news/science/belief-and-the-brains-god-spot-1641022.html.

38 Schjoedt, Uffe. “The religious brain: A general introduction to the experimental neuroscience of religion.” Method & Theory in the Study of Religion 21, no. 3 (2009): 310–339.

39 Barrett, Justin L. “Is the spell really broken? Bio-psychological explanations of religion and theistic belief.” Theology and Science 5, no. 1 (2007): 57–72.

40 Barkow, Jerome H., Leda Ed Cosmides, and John Ed Tooby. The adapted mind: Evolutionary psychology and the generation of culture. USA: Oxford University Press, 1992.

41 Henrich, Joseph, Robert Boyd, and Peter J. Richerson. “Five misunderstandings about cultural evolution.” Human Nature 19, no. 2 (2008): 119–137; Henrich, Joseph, and Richard McElreath. “Dual-inheritance theory: The evolution of human cultural capacities and cultural evolution.” In Oxford handbook of evolutionary psychology. 2007.

42 E.g. see Boyer, Pascal. “Cognitive constraints on cultural representations: Natural ontologies and religious ideas.” In Mapping the mind: Domain specificity in cognition and culture (1994): 391–411.

43 E.g. see Wilson, David Sloan. Darwin’s Cathedral: Evolution, religion, and the nature of society. University of Chicago Press, 2010.

44 E.g. see Bulbulia, Joseph. “Religious costs as adaptations that signal altruistic intention.” Evolution and Cognition 10, no. 1 (2004): 19–38.

45 Henrich, Joseph, Steven J. Heine, and A. Noranyazan. “The weirdest people in the world.” Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 2010.

46 Slingerland, Edward, Ryan Nichols, Kristoffer Neilbo, and Carson Logan. “The distant reading of religious texts: A ‘big data’ approach to mind-body concepts in early China.” Journal of the American Academy of Religion (2017): lfw090.

47 Roazzi, Maira Monteiro, Carl N. Johnson, Melanie Nyhof, Silvia Helena Koller, and Antonio Roazzi. “Vital energy and afterlife: Implications for cognitive science of religion.” Paidéia (Ribeirão Preto) 25, no. 61 (2015): 145–152.

48 Turchin, Peter, Harvey Whitehouse, Pieter Francois, Edward Slingerland, and Mark Collard. “A historical database of sociocultural evolution.” Cliodynamics 3, no. 2 (2012).

49 Slingerland, Edward, and Brenton Sullivan. “Durkheim with data: The database of religious history.” Journal of the American Academy of Religion 85, no. 2 (2017): 312–347.

50 Barrett, H. Clark. The shape of thought: How mental adaptations evolve. Oxford University Press, 2014.

51 Henrich, Joseph. The secret of our success: How culture is driving human evolution, domesticating our species, and making us smarter. Princeton University Press, 2015.

52 Bulbulia, Joseph. “Nature’s medicine: Religiosity as an adaptation for health and cooperation.” Where God and science meet 1 (2006): 87–121.

53 Barkow, Jerome H., Leda Ed Cosmides, and John Ed Tooby. The adapted mind: Evolutionary psychology and the generation of culture. USA: Oxford University Press, 1992.

54 Hodge, Mitch K., Sousa, Paulo and White, Claire (manuscript in preparation). Proposed cognitive mechanisms and representational structures of afterlife beliefs: A review.

55 E.g. see Donald, Merlin. A mind so rare: The evolution of human consciousness. W.W. Norton & Company, 2001; Hutchins, Edwin. Cognition in the wild. MIT Press, 1995.

56 Geertz, Armin W. “Too much mind and not enough brain, body, and culture: On what needs to be done in the cognitive science of religion.” Historia Religionum 2, no. 2 (2010): 1000–1017.

57 Geertz, Armin W. “Brain, body and culture: A biocultural theory of religion.” Method & Theory in the Study of Religion 22, no. 4 (2010): 304–321.

58 Purzycki, B.G., and McNamara, R.A. “An ecological theory of gods’ minds.” In De Cruz, Helen, and Nichols, Ryan eds. Advances in religion, cognitive science, and experimental philosophy. New York: Continuum, 2016, 143–167.

59 E.g. Slingerland, Edward. “Who’s afraid of reductionism? The study of religion in the age of cognitive science.” Journal of the American Academy of Religion 76, no. 2 (2008): 375–411; cf to Van Slyke, James A. The cognitive science of religion. Routledge, 2016.

60 McCauley, Robert N. “Explanatory pluralism and the cognitive science of religion: Or why scholars in religious studies should stop worrying about reductionism.” In Mental culture: Classical social theory and the cognitive science of religion (2013): 11–32.

61 Slingerland, Edward. “Who’s afraid of reductionism? The study of religion in the age of cognitive science.” Journal of the American Academy of Religion 76, no. 2 (2008): 375–411.

62 E.g. Dawes, Greg, and James Maclaurin, eds. A new science of religion. Routledge, 2012.

63 Sørensen, Jesper. A cognitive theory of magic. Rowman Altamira, 2007.

64 Lanman, Jonathan. “On the non-evolution of atheism and the importance of definitions and data.” Religion, Brain & Behavior 2, no. 1 (2012): 76–78.

65 Barnes, Kirsten, and Nicholas J.S. Gibson. “Supernatural agency: Individual difference predictors and situational correlates.” International Journal for the Psychology of Religion 23, no. 1 (2013): 42–62.

66 Levy, Neil. “Religious beliefs are factual beliefs: Content does not correlate with context sensitivity.” Cognition 161 (2017): 109–116.

67 Van Leeuwen, Neil. “Religious credence is not factual belief.” Cognition, 133, no. 3 (2014): 698–715.

68 Legare, Cristine H., and Susan A. Gelman. “Bewitchment, biology, or both: The co‐existence of natural and supernatural explanatory frameworks across development.” Cognitive Science 32, no. 4 (2008): 607–642.

69 Luhrmann, Tanya M. When God talks back: Understanding the American evangelical relationship with God. Vintage, 2012.

70 Boyer, Pascal. “Why ‘belief’ is hard work: Implications of Tanya Luhrmann’s When God talks back.” HAU: Journal of Ethnographic Theory 3, no. 3 (2013): 349–357.

71 Cohen, Emma. The mind possessed: The cognition of spirit possession in an Afro-Brazilian religious tradition. Oxford University Press, 2007.

72 Whitehouse, Harvey. Inside the cult: Religious innovation and transmission in Papua New Guinea. Oxford University Press on Demand, 1995.

73 Malley, Brian. How the Bible works: An anthropological study of evangelical Biblicism. Rowman Altamira, 2004.

74 Xygalatas, Dimitris. The burning saints: Cognition and culture in the fire-walking rituals of the Anastenaria. Routledge, 2014.

75 Willard, Aiyana K., and Ara Norenzayan. “Cognitive biases explain religious belief, paranormal belief, and belief in life’s purpose.” Cognition 129, no. 2 (2013): 379–391.

76 Gibson, N.J.S. “Once more, with feelings: The importance of emotion for cognitive science of religion.” In The evolution of religion: Studies, theories, and critiques (2008): 271–277.

77 E.g. related, see Upala, M. Afzal, Lauren O. Gonce, Ryan D. Tweney, and D. Jason Slone. “Contextualizing counterintuitiveness: How context affects comprehension and memorability of counterintuitive concepts.” Cognitive Science 31, no. 3 (2007): 415–439.

78 E.g. Johnson, Dominic, and Jesse Bering. “Hand of God, mind of man: Punishment and cognition in the evolution of cooperation.” Evolutionary Psychology 4, no. 1 (2006); Norenzayan, Ara. Big gods: How religion transformed cooperation and conflict. Princeton University Press, 2013.

79 Atran, Scott. In gods, we trust. New York: Oxford University Press, 2002.

80 Liénard, Pierre, and Pascal Boyer. “Whence collective rituals? A cultural selection model of ritualized behavior.” American Anthropologist 108, no. 4 (2006): 814–827.

81 McCauley, Robert N., and E. Thomas Lawson. Bringing ritual to mind: Psychological foundations of cultural forms. Cambridge University Press, 2002; Whitehouse, Harvey. Modes of religiosity: A cognitive theory of religious transmission. Rowman Altamira, 2004.

82 Nichols, Shaun. “Is religion what we want? Motivation and the cultural transmission of religious representations.” Journal of Cognition and Culture 4, no. 2 (2004): 347–371.

83 Epley, Nicholas, Adam Waytz, and John T. Cacioppo. “On seeing human: A three-factor theory of anthropomorphism.” Psychological Review 114, no. 4 (2007): 864.

84 Luhrmann, Tanya. “Talking back about When God talks back.” HAU: Journal of Ethnographic Theory 3, no. 3 (2013): 389–398.

85 Taves, Ann. Religious experience reconsidered: A building-block approach to the study of religion and other special things. Princeton University Press, 2011.

86 Taves, Ann. Revelatory events: Three case studies of the emergence of new spiritual paths. Princeton University Press, 2016.

87 Related, see: Kinsella, Michael. “Near-death experiences and networked spirituality: The emergence of an afterlife movement,” Journal of the American Academy of Religion 85, no. 1 (2016): 168–198.

88 See: www.ibcsr.org/index.php/activitites/current-activities/495-the-quantifiying-religious-experience-project.

89 E.g. see McNamara, Patrick. The neuroscience of religious experience. Cambridge University Press, 2009.

90 Schjoedt, Uffe, Hans Stødkilde-Jørgensen, Armin W. Geertz, Torben E. Lund, and Andreas Roepstorff. “The power of charisma—perceived charisma inhibits the frontal executive network of believers in intercessory prayer.” Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience 6, no. 1 (2010): 119–127.





