7 Supernatural agents




Ideas about gods, ghosts, goblins, ancestors, fairies, demons, and other agents are part and parcel of cultural discourse, and scholars have long been interested in these ideas. The cognitive science of religion (CSR) shares many aspects with earlier approaches to the study of religion. For example, nineteenth-century anthropologist Edward Tylor1 likewise pondered where the belief in spiritual beings originated. Preceding Tylor, eminent scholars such as Spinoza and Hume proposed the theory that religious concepts, such as supernatural agents, tend to have a similar, human-like structure because we are most familiar with them. However, cognitive scientists of religion track the antecedents of ideas about supernatural agents using methods and theories from the evolutionary and social sciences, including how and when these ideas tend to emerge and develop in the minds of children, and how evolution shapes tendencies to represent supernatural agents in standard ways.

The definitional approach to supernatural agents in CSR is also distinctive. Key figures (including Durkheim, Evans-Pritchard, Lienhardt, Hallowell, Klass, and Saler) have long noted that the term “supernatural agents” is problematic. For example, the supernatural is often taken to mean variously “at odds with current science,” “unnatural,” “illusory,” or sometimes simply “false.” As discussed in detail later in this chapter, CSR mitigates definitional debates about what does and does not constitute supernatural agents by providing an evolutionary technical definition of the term. From this scientific perspective, the word “supernatural” could be replaced with another, and people would still explain recurrent phenomena. Indeed, in many non-western parts of the world, people do not use such terms. As we discussed in Chapter 2 (Core Assumptions) what matters for scientists who study religion are the underlying patterns, not the name assigned to them. Like the term “religion,” “supernatural agents” are often invoked to characterize a common idea in the cultural environment.

Cognitive scientists of religion often begin studying representations of supernatural agents by selecting recurrent cultural concepts and then explaining similar features based upon their potential evolutionary origins, functions, and other psycho-social repercussions. In particular, CSR focuses on understanding three main aspects of reasoning about supernatural agents:

The antecedents of ideas about supernatural agents.

The role of social learning and cognitive biases in mature representations of supernatural agents cross-culturally.

The personal and broader social consequences of representing supernatural agents as part of the social world.



We consider the first two aspects (1 and 2 above) of reasoning about supernatural agents in this chapter and examine some personal and broader social consequences of these beliefs (3, above) in Chapter 8 (Morality).

Participation 1: Defining supernatural agents

Think about a supernatural agent. Write down the name.

What do you think makes this agent supernatural? Write down your answer in a few sentences.

Share and compare your answer with another student.

Together, come up with a new definition of supernatural agents based on your answers.





The acquisition and development of supernatural agent concepts


Most people around the world come to entertain ideas about agents with extraordinary features. Do young children find these ideas difficult or easy to represent? Moreover, what is the role of cognitive development in the acquisition of ideas about supernatural agents? Do they change their representations over time as they develop cognitively? Researchers in the socio-cognitive sciences have investigated these questions about the development of supernatural agent concepts (i.e. ontogeny) to understand better the role of cognition and culture in the origins of religious cognition.

Since the majority of studies conducted are with western children, researchers typically focus on how children represent the Judeo-Christian God. In particular, studies mostly concern how children represent God’s mind, primarily as compared to other people’s minds. Researchers converge on the idea that the tendency for concepts of extraordinary abilities emerge around preschool years but disagree over when and how children differentiate between the minds of ordinary humans and extraordinary agents, such as God. Cognitive scholars have proposed two main theories to account for children’s understanding of God’s mind; the preparedness account and the anthropomorphic account.





The preparedness account


Psychologists Justin Barrett and Rebekah Richert proposed a “preparedness” account of the development of god concepts. According to this account, the cognitive default of young children is that all intentional agents are supernatural agents. In other words, children find it relatively easy to represent ideas about an all-powerful God because they are psychologically predisposed (i.e. prepared) to represent minds as having super knowledge.2,3 Theological concepts of God as omnipotent in Abrahamic monotheistic traditions are thus readily acquired by young minds that are cognitively predisposed to receive them. For instance, Barrett and Richert propose that children find it initially more straightforward to understand that God knows everything than understand that adults’ knowledge is limited. The preparedness account predicts that children as young as three-years-old start by attributing super knowledge to all agents, including Mom and God, and only later in development come to be able to distinguish between the knowledge capabilities of different kinds of agents.

Barrett, Richert, and colleagues have interpreted the results of a series of developmental studies as providing evidence that children are cognitively predisposed to represent God’s mind as infallible. However, they must learn that adults do not have unlimited knowledge. For example, studies have shown that children as young as three-years-old think that both God and humans have true beliefs.4,5 At around elementary school age, children begin to distinguish God’s mind (as knowing everything) from human minds (as having limited knowledge and holding false beliefs).6 For example, in one study testing children’s ability to determine who can hold false beliefs (known as a false belief study), children were shown a box of crackers that contained small rocks and asked what others would think is inside the box of crackers. Younger children, until around age five, understood that a human was more likely to falsely believe that the cracker box contained crackers than God because God would know that it contained rocks.7 Additional cross-cultural research with Greek, Mayan, and Spanish children has also demonstrated that by around age five, children attribute more excellent and more accurate knowledge to God than humans.8

Some scholars have questioned Barrett, Richert and colleagues’ interpretations of these studies, and whether the results provide support for the preparedness account of children’s acquisition of ideas about extraordinary minds. One key question among critics is whether three and four-year-olds fail to attribute false beliefs to humans and god, or whether this is a consequence of this kind of experiment because the demands of that particular task are too complicated for young minds. In other words, the critical question here is why young children say that Mom and God know that the cracker box contains small rocks? One response is that children represent Mom and God as knowing everything (the preparedness account).

Another response (advocated by those who question the preparedness account) is that the task is too difficult for young children to understand and does not, therefore, accurately reflect their competence in representing the belief states of others. Indeed, some researchers have critiqued the use of false belief tasks altogether, claiming they are unreliable in indicating whether, and how, children take the perspectives of others more generally. In other words, these tasks do not detect an ability to ascribe mental states to others (known as mentalizing or theory of mind).9,10 Some studies have shown that when probed with more straightforward tasks (e.g. looking time), three and four-year-old children and even 13-month-old children attribute false beliefs to persons.11,12 However, some studies have failed to replicate these results of looking time studies with younger children (18-month-old). Other scholars propose that young children do not reliably form predictions based on false beliefs.13,14 So, the results here are mixed.

Recent research using versions of false belief tasks have not found the developmental continuity reported by the preparedness theorists. For example, studies with children from the US, Germany, and Spain found that four-year-olds attributed ignorance both to humans and God.15,16,17,18 Further evidence against the preparedness interpretation of findings with young children comes from the studies of developmental psychologist Jonathan Lane and colleagues. When asked to explain why God would know the real state of the world, three-year-olds often mentioned their knowledge, whereas five-year-olds often mentioned God’s mental capacities.19

From these findings, Lane and colleagues proposed that young children’s responses on false belief tasks do not represent an early bias towards an understanding of omniscience for agents, but rather, reflect egocentrism—the tendency to attribute what they know about reality to other agents. In other words, if children understand that the cracker box contains rocks, then they assume that other agents will also know that the cracker box includes rocks. Cognitive development is required for children to disambiguate how the world is, from how they and others perceive it, and very young children have difficulty understanding the distinction between appearances and reality. It is only later, at around age five, when children are exposed to sociocultural input about God’s properties that they have the conceptual development to discriminate between their mind and extraordinary minds. This proposal is more akin to the anthropomorphism account of children’s understanding of supernatural agents and we review it next.





The anthropomorphism account


The anthropomorphism account of children’s concepts of God was first proposed in the 1920s by famous cognitive psychologist Jean Piaget. Anthropomorphism is the tendency to attribute human-like features to non-human things, and Piaget claimed that young children use human minds as templates to understand God’s mind. Thus, they initially represent adults and God as having the same kinds of minds. That is to say, if children thought Mom knew everything, then God knew everything, but if they thought that Mom knew only some things, then they thought that God knew only some things.20 This account has received experimental support. For example, research has found that young children (i.e. three to four-year-olds) attributed false beliefs to both humans and to God, which suggests that they may be attributing what adults know (and do not know) to what God knows.21,22,23 Other scholars have proposed different interpretations of what is driving these results. As we discussed in the previous section, Lane and colleagues have suggested that children infer what ordinary and extraordinary agents know may be due not so much to anthropomorphism—i.e. what other people know generally, but to egocentrism—i.e. based on what they know.24 One reasonable interpretation is that young children attribute knowledge to God that they possess but ignorance when they do not know the correct answer.25

Previous research in CSR has focused overwhelmingly on how children represent God’s mental abilities, in particular, God’s knowledge. A few studies do focus on how children think about other aspects of God, and results support and extend the anthropomorphism account. For example, psychologists Larisa Heiphetz and colleagues found that children tended to attribute the same kinds of moral beliefs to God as to humans. For example, both think that bad behaviors are morally unacceptable.26 Consider further the work of cognitive scientist Andrew Shtulman. Shtulman investigated children’s attribution of both psychological properties and biological and physical properties to different kinds of supernatural beings (e.g. angel, God, ghost). He found that five-year-old children do anthropomorphize supernatural beings.

Furthermore, young children also attributed as many human properties (both psychological and non-psychological) to fictional and religious beings, even though they claimed to believe stronger in religious than fictional creatures. From these findings, it seems that young children do anthropomorphize God. However, this tendency is not something specially reserved for mental capacities or to the domain of religion but is part of a more general anthropomorphic tendency extended to all agents.



Figure 7.1 Anthropomorphism is the psychological tendency to attribute human-like features to non-human things, such as the god Zeus in Ancient Greek religion and mythology, who is often depicted as a human. (Image credit: Esteban De Armas/Shutterstock.com).

Psychologists Larisa Heiphetz and colleagues have synthesized current research to propose a developmental trajectory of God concepts that support the anthropomorphic account.27 Their account contains four main stages of development:

Young children come to understand that others’ minds can provide imperfect representations of the world and that adults are not all-knowing. Preschoolers also understand that they do not know everything and that some of their beliefs may be false.

As every human they encounter may have a limited mind, children initially represent God’s mind as similarly limited.

As they increasingly understand that different minds may possess different beliefs (theory of mind), children may also come to understand God’s mind as distinct from human minds.

The ability to understand a limitless mind (i.e. omniscience) is cognitively more complex and develops during early and middle childhood. This account proposes essential cognitive foundations to the representation of God. Children’s initial concepts of God’s mind are based on normal cognitive abilities that children use to conceptualize agents generally.



Heiphetz and colleagues further point to the cognitive naturalness of anthropomorphism. They contend that seeing God’s mind as human-like (and therefore limited) does not require adult-like cognitive abilities or extensive experience, such as exposure to religious teachings, to emerge. This claim raises the question, what is the role of cultural learning in this version of the anthropomorphic account? According to the researchers, an understanding of God’s omniscience can arise from social experience in addition to cognitive development. The anthropomorphic account holds that children are not cognitively predisposed towards extraordinary mental capacities. This anthropomorphic account is in contrast to the preparedness account. At a certain point in the theory of mind development, sociocultural input can facilitate an early appreciation of extraordinary minds. For instance, children who are raised in explicitly religious contexts and are more knowledgeable about God and tend to demonstrate an early appreciation of God’s exceptional mental abilities.28

To date, there is more support for the anthropomorphic account of how children represent God than the preparedness account. In other words, it seems that young children initially represent all agents as limited and later learn that God is all-knowing. The version of the anthropomorphic account proposed by Lane and colleagues also suggests that this later developing understanding of God’s mind (as limitless) does not entirely replace the earlier emerging anthropomorphic representations of God’s mind (as limited). Instead, these representations of God’s mind as human-like persist in adulthood and are elicited by implicit, rather than explicit measures. We discuss these claims in the next section.

Participation 2: Differences in theories

Divide up into groups of about 3–4 students. Work together as a group.

Briefly summarize the work so far in this chapter on children’s concepts of supernatural agents, a few sentences for each theory is sufficient.

Explain differences in the claims that the researchers are making.

Consider why these differences exist (e.g. theoretical background, methods etc.).

Decide which theory you agree with most.





Key points

Researchers have conducted much research on the question of how children represent God’s mind in the Judeo-Christian tradition.

Researchers agree that children tend to represent God’s mind as extraordinary around preschool years but disagree over when and how they come to distinguish between God’s mind and human minds.

Two main theories have been proposed to account for children’s understanding of God’s mind; the preparedness account and the anthropomorphic account.

The preparedness account proposes that children initially represent all agents as powerful and only later represent human minds as limited. By contrast, the anthropomorphic account suggests that children initially represent all agents as limited and only later learn that God is omniscient.





The representation of supernatural agent concepts in adults


The coexistence account


Abrahamic religions depict God as being omniscient, omnipotent, and omnipresent. The standard doctrine that God is limitless is, therefore, a theologically correct idea. Recall the discussion of theological correctness in Chapter 3 (Research Questions). To recap, when an idea is described as theologically correct by cognitive scientists of religion, it means that people describe an idea as it relates to official versions of the doctrine and widely reiterated among experts.29 Indeed, many adults can distinguish between the capabilities of God and those of ordinary people when they have time to deliberate about what God is like. These reflective ideas are explicit representations of God and draw on system 1.

Explicit ideas often differ from people’s implicit representations about God. People often elicit implicit ideas about God under conditions where they are not consciously aware or able to reflect, such as when they have to answer questions about God quickly.30 The kind of off-the-cuff reasoning characteristic of implicit representations of God is also often a theologically incorrect representation.31 Theological incorrectness occurs when people unconsciously distort the official doctrines of their belief systems to fit with their intuitive expectations. Research has shown that adults tend to represent God as anthropomorphic implicitly. In other words, they default to a cognitively natural default.

In one now-classic series of studies, psychologists Justin Barrett and Frank Keil elicited people’s implicit and explicit representations of God. To test their inherent ideas about God, the experimenters told participants stories about God and then asked questions to test their comprehension and recall. For instance, in one vignette, participants heard about a boy who was drowning in a river, who prayed to God. God was currently answering another prayer and saved the boy. When asked to recall the story, many participants unconsciously distorted the stories in line with a more anthropomorphic God.

For example, in the story of the two people in need, they inferred that God first answered one prayer before attending to the drowning boy, just like an ordinary person would do. Following the narrative tasks, participants completed a questionnaire at their leisure, which tested their explicit beliefs about God. Even though most participants had unconsciously anthropomorphized God in the recall tasks, later, they professed to a theologically correct32 God. In line with the accepted theology of Christianity, God was described as omnipresent and omnipotent and thus capable of answering two prayers simultaneously.33

Barrett and Keil explain these findings by proposing that people often possess two incompatible God concepts and deploy them in different contexts. They deduce that it seems easier to reason about an anthropomorphic God in everyday thought as a person who is relatable than a limitless, abstract entity. Of course, cultural learning plays a role in the representation of God concepts too, which has also been demonstrated empirically. For instance, Barrett and psychologist Brant Vanorman found that Reformed Christians who use images of God for worship tended to anthropomorphize God more readily than those who did not, suggesting a role for social reinforcement of anthropomorphic representations.34

Some scholars have criticized the design of the original Barrett and Keil study, suggesting that the language used in the narratives was anthropomorphic. Thus, participants may have been primed to think of God as human-like. For example, God was described as pushing a large stone, looking at the rock, listening to the birds, and enjoying the smell, which could have made participants more likely to reason about God as a person than if God was not described in anthropomorphic terms. Critics also claimed that there was no real-time pressure when recalling the narratives and answering questions. So, the experiments did not tap into implicit (and thus, intuitive) representations of God.35,36,37

Subsequent research has demonstrated that both children and adults tend to anthropomorphize representations of the monotheistic and Abrahamic God. This tendency is especially likely when reasoning about God’s mind and when responding under time pressure, and this differs from how people reason explicitly about God’s properties when they are not under pressure.38,39,40,41 As discussed in Chapter 2 (Core Assumptions), CSR scholars use methods that require a quick response because these tend to access system 1 processing and reflect intuitive ideas, in this example, about God. Further, the effects that Barrett and Keil reported were also found using examples of Hindu gods with participants in India,42,43 which suggests that anthropomorphizing gods is not merely a product of representing Christian deities.

Research by psychologist Michael Barlev and colleagues provides evidence for the anthropomorphic account and for Barrett and Keil’s assertion that people have two incompatible concepts of God. The research by Barlev and colleagues also probes the nature of the representation of God concepts further, and they propose a coexistence model of how people represent God.44 Specifically, the researchers were interested in the question of how adults possess two incompatible concepts of God as both a person with limits and a supernatural agent who is limitless.

Barlev and colleagues theorized that the idea of God as a person coexisted in the minds of believers alongside acquired Christian theology about God as supernatural. Based on this theory, they predicted that there might be interference or conflict between these representations when they are inconsistent. Indeed, they found evidence of this representational interference. For example, in one of their studies, the researchers asked participants to endorse or reject various statements about God under time pressure, which as you may recall, enables researchers to tap into system 1 processing (Chapter 2: Core Assumptions). The researchers presented participants with statements that they labeled in one of three ways. The first kind were consistent statements, valid for both theologically correct versions of God and persons (e.g. God has true beliefs). The second kind was statements false for both theologically correct versions of God and persons (e.g. all beliefs God has are false).

The third kind was inconsistent statements, and of most interest to the experimenters. Statements could be inconsistent in one of two ways. First, they could be inconsistent because they tended to be true for people but were false theologically (e.g. God has false beliefs). Second, they would be inconsistent because they tended to be false for people but true theologically (e.g. all beliefs that God has are correct). As Barlev and colleagues predicted, participants were less accurate and slower to respond to inconsistent versus consistent statements. In other words, participants found it more challenging to decide about God when there was a conflict between what was right for people and theologically correct for God, such as when God can do something that humans cannot. According to Barlev and colleagues, they found it more cognitively effortful to judge inconsistent statements because their minds had to reconcile between these inconsistent representations of God as a person and as a supernatural agent.

Furthermore, these differences in how participants responded to inconsistent statements were found when they were asked about God, but not when they were asked about a person who was a natural religious entity, such as a priest.45 In other words, interference does not generalize to other natural religious entities based on the person-concept. Remarkably, in another series of studies, Barlev and colleagues found evidence of this interference effect in highly devout religious adherents.46 This latter research shows further proof of representational coexistence. However, more importantly, it also provides evidence that the person template, which underlies the representation of God, cannot be revised despite decades of experience with formal Christian theology. In sum, the idea that God is human-like is deeply ingrained in the minds of modern American Christian adults.

The results of these studies help explain how and why people often tend to think of God’s mind as human-like, and why these ideas persist despite the devotion to theological concepts of God, such as the idea that God is all-knowing, that are inconsistent with them. They also suggest that, like children, adults tend to anthropomorphize God in everyday contexts. Thus, young children’s ideas about God often resemble those implicitly held by many adults. This finding brings us to the critical question of why people have an implicit bias towards anthropomorphizing God?

In the next section of this chapter, we consider two theories in the cognitive science of religion that purport to explain why anthropomorphic concepts of God emerged and proliferated in human culture; the cognitive constraint account and the hyperactive agency detection device (HADD or later, ADD). These accounts are complementary in the sense that they can contribute towards an understanding of why children’s and adults’ implicit concepts of God tend to be anthropomorphic.





Cognitive constraint account


Scholars in the cognitive sciences have long argued the case that humans cannot help but internalize versions of alternative worlds as at least partly based on the world around them, including the spread of extraordinary ideas.47 For instance, psychologist Thomas Ward and religious studies scholar Thomas Lawson have argued that new ideas always have roots in modern ideas because of cognitive constraints on our imagination.

Cognitive constraints refer to the tendency for people to draw upon default inferences and assumptions. They further contend that ideas that are similar to our own experience are judged more likely to be true.48 Indeed, research by Ward and colleagues have shown that people draw upon their existing knowledge of these conceptual domains to create and understand fictional ideas.49 For example, in one study, the researchers found that about two-thirds of all participants brought to mind a specific animal as a template (e.g. an elephant) when imagining alien life forms.50 Likewise, people retrieve ideas of apples and oranges when they conjure up imaginary fruit, or hammers and nails to think about imaginary tools.51 Here, the crux of the explanations lies in cognitive heuristics.

Other, similar psychological explanations for the emergence of ideas about supernatural agents contend that anthropomorphism is a heuristic that minimizes cognitive load.52 As children encounter many different beings such as animals and fictional characters in stories, working out each being’s capacities would require a great deal of cognitive effort. Therefore, using templates of agents with which we are most familiar (i.e. humans) is a useful shortcut. Often, young children and adults use themselves as the agent template—an exceptionally efficient cognitive heuristic is to be egocentric in their representations of other agents.

Research suggests that people may be even more egocentric when reasoning about God’s beliefs about important social and ethical issues than when estimating other people’s beliefs.53 Other studies have likewise demonstrated that people tend to attribute their views to moralistic agents in religious traditions. For instance, one study found the attribution of conservative or liberal views onto a contemporary Jesus according to whether participants were conservative or liberal American Christians. Thus, believers often use inferences about God’s beliefs to guide their moral decision-making. However, they base God’s beliefs mainly on their own beliefs in part because this is easier to represent.54

Although similar to these cognitive heuristic accounts, cognitive-evolutionary accounts of the emergence and spread of supernatural ideas are also distinctive because they make claims about universal features of the human mind and consider evolutionary factors that affect such ideas. More specifically, CSR scholars draw upon cognitive mechanisms, such as heuristics as proximate explanations (i.e. immediately responsible for causing the recurrent features of religion), but also draw upon the selection forces of evolution and thus consider the ultimate or distal cause of religious cognition as directing the emergence of cognitive templates in addition to social learning.

Specifically, scholars in CSR propose that cognitive constraints operate when we think about ordinary and extraordinary beings, including supernatural agents.55 The anthropologist Pascal Boyer has highlighted the role of early emerging conceptual structures in explaining how people acquire ideas about supernatural agents.56 His account is based on research that showcases that the mind naturally carves up the world as composed of certain types of things, most broadly including people, animals, plants, tools, artifacts, events, and so on, often referred to as intuitive ontologies. These ways of thinking are described as natural or intuitive because they are often under-determined by experience and appear much earlier than how a child’s interactions with the world would predict. To describe ontologies as intuitive or natural does not mean that social learning is unimportant.





The role of social learning in cognitive constraint accounts


Social learning may explain why humans have biases towards certain kinds of things in the world in the first place. Take the research on plants by psychologists Annie Wertz and Karen Wynn to illustrate this point.57 Their research underscores the importance of social learning to the development of food preferences in conjunction with cognitive predispositions shaped through evolution. When given the same information, namely, seeing an adult place something in his or her mouth, six and 18-month-old children selectively made inferences about edibility applied to plants but not artifacts. Given that humans have relied on plant resources throughout our evolutionary history, Wertz and Wynn deduced that human infants might possess particular social learning strategies that rapidly identify edible plants. These strategies would have enabled humans to survive and thrive in varied and changing environments.

Just like we think of plants but not artifacts as edible, Boyer has proposed that we intuitively think about other things in intuitive categories as having properties that differentiate them from others. In infancy, domain-specific learning mechanisms direct expectations of properties for each category. These assumptions about properties of things in our intuitive ontologies include folk physics (e.g. things move as a connected whole) folk biology (e.g. living things grow), folk psychology (e.g. agents have beliefs), and folk sociology (e.g. people who look alike have underlying similarities). These categories are, of course, broad, and other categories that have been proposed are more specific, including social categories such as “ownership58” and “cheater” in social exchange.59 Scholars have proposed that people represent the world this way because it enables them to make generalizations that can be adaptive, like using plants for food.





The role of evolution in cognitive constraint accounts


Concepts about agents also make sense in light of evolution because humans carve up the world along lines that were relevant for the survival and reproduction of our species. For example, the anthropologist Clark Barrett found that young children tend to assume that an animate agent has intentions but not a sleeping one.60 These biases are part of a constellation of adaptations for detecting, reasoning, and making decisions about intentional agents, which would have aided predator evasion and prey capture throughout our evolutionary history. However, we can also acquire concepts that were not targets of natural selection. Some scholars in CSR maintain that we draw inferences about extraordinary agents from our concepts of agents in general.

In evolutionary terms, these religious concepts exist within an actual domain (i.e. extraordinary agents) but not the proper domain (i.e. ordinary agents) of evolved mechanisms. As an illustration of these terms, consider a thirsty professional coming home from work and gulping milk from the carton in the refrigerator, discovering a few seconds later, to her horror, that the milk has gone sour. The event is likely to result in a feeling of disgust. For the next few days, every time she gets a whiff of milk, she feels nauseated. This tendency makes biological sense and has been shaped through disgust mechanisms in evolutionary history. The woman’s learning system unconsciously calculates: if the milk was likely to make you sick, then it is best to avoid milk. Indeed, if the milk is still in the fridge, this calculation is sound. Thus, milk is the proper domain of the target cognitions and behavior. Imagine further that she decides to meet friends after work that evening for dinner, only to discover that the appetizer containing cheese also makes her feel nauseated. Both are a form of dairy, and her learning system unconsciously calculates: if the milk was likely to make you sick, then it is best to avoid dairy. Even though it is highly unlikely that the cheese in the restaurant has also gone bad, her system equates the two.

In the scenario just described, cheese is the actual domain; in other words, the domain where these ideas and behaviors are applied. Getting back to religious cognition, CSR scholars propose that humans have evolved a repertoire of assumptions about ordinary agents because they were adaptive. Thus, regular agents are like the milk in the previous example, the proper domain of target assumptions. We also readily apply these assumptions to concepts of supernatural agents, which, like the cheese, are the actual domain of target assumptions. As these assumptions evolved to derive adaptive benefits to the actual, but not the proper domain, these accounts are evolutionary by-product accounts. That is to say, the tendency to represent supernatural agents in the environment is an unintended consequence of the tendency to represent ordinary agents in the environment more generally.



Figure 7.2 Evolutionary by-product accounts depict supernatural agent concepts as derived from the proper domain (i.e. ordinary agents in the environment) of evolved mechanisms.

These by-product accounts can be contrasted to adaptationist accounts. Adaptationist accounts explain the tendency to represent supernatural agents as shaped directly by natural selection because of their consequences. For example, social psychologist Ara Norenzayan and political scientist Dominic Johnson argue?that representations of omniscient and moralizing gods were culturally and/or genetically selected to promote cooperation in large groups.61,62 We discuss these views in more detail in Chapter 8 (Morality).

While many cognitive scientists of religion maintain that we draw inferences about extraordinary agents from our concepts of agents in general, they disagree over the types of characteristics that are transferred from the concept of agency. For example, the body and/or mind. We review two versions of the cognitive constraints account below before turning to another kind of evolutionary account.





Embodied versus disembodied minds account


The most influential account to date in CSR to explain the representation of supernatural human agents is Boyer’s version of the anthropomorphic account. Evolutionary scholars have argued that children rapidly come to develop theories about the properties of people, such as about their physicality, biology, and psychology, because it is adaptive for survival to do so, and they encounter people from the moment they are born. They have an early emerging “person template.” Thus, Boyer and others have argued that supernatural agent concepts are just person concepts onto which extraordinary properties are loaded.63,64 This tendency makes it easy for children and adults to represent similar features between the two, such as limited mental and perceptual abilities. It also makes people likely to distort the abilities of supernatural agents to conform to human agents, especially when they are under time constraints and have to make a decision quickly.

Psychologists Andrew Shtulman and Marjaana Lindeman have recently challenged this view. They have proposed that people’s ideas about supernatural agents derive from their tendency to conceive of persons as disembodied minds. This view is similar to developmental psychologist Paul Bloom’s folk-dualism view, reviewed in Chapter 6 (The Afterlife).65 To recap, Bloom proposed that we naturally think of persons as constituted by minds and bodies. We represent bodies using one set of mental mechanisms for physicality, such as the idea that bodies are physical entities and move. We represent minds using another set that infers things like beliefs and intentions from behavior (i.e. mindreading). Bloom contends that we tend to think of bodies and minds as constituting persons, but because we use different mechanisms to represent people, we can separate their minds from their bodies. Bloom proposes that this separation in our representations of people gives rise to ideas about disembodied beings. In short, the representation of supernatural agents as disembodied minds is natural.

Drawing on this intuitive folk-dualism account, Shtulman and Lindeman argue that God is fundamentally represented not as a person but as an agent with a mind. They propose that when portraying God, people do not co-opt a person concept but rather, co-opt a disembodied mind concept. For instance, one study by Shtulman and Lindenman with Christian and Hindu adults demonstrated that participants attributed more psychological (i.e. mind-dependent) properties than physiological (i.e. body-dependent) properties to God.66 They were also faster, more consistent, and more confident when applying psychological than physiological properties to God. Shtulman has argued that God is not represented as a person in general because God is not attributed equally to all person-like properties. Instead, God is construed as a particular agent with a mind upon default, and when people have time to further think about it, with a body.

Psychologist Michael Barlev has proposed that the folk-dualism account does not accurately depict how we intuitively represent people. He suggests that although representations of a person’s psychology and physicality are not reducible to each other, they are also not intuitively separable. Instead, beliefs in disembodied minds like gods and spirits require cultural learning.67 Barlev interprets the results of Shtulman and Lindeman according to the coexistence account that he (along with colleagues) have proposed to account for the fact that people have at least two representations of God. Specifically, Barlev contends that God is represented as an embodied person. He explains the differences between the types of properties attributed to God in the samples in Shtulman and Lindeman’s studies (Finland, USA, and India) as acquired theology (e.g. Christianity and Hinduism) that co-exists alongside these embodied person representations.

Barlev and colleagues also conducted a series of experiments to determine whether people tended to adopt a disembodied or embodied mind concept when thinking about God.68 The design of these studies was similar to the consistency statement studies by Barlev and colleagues described earlier in the chapter. To recap, participants read a series of statements about God and persons that were either true or false and had to decide between them. In line with the theory that people derive their concept of God from embodied persons, they found that participants were slower and less accurate to respond (i.e. they showed representational interference) on statements regarding God’s physicality as well as psychology. They concluded from this research that the embodied person concept, as espoused by Boyer, more accurately reflects how people form representations of God.





Agency detection account


So far, we have reviewed the cognitive constraint account of the representation of supernatural agents. The second main evolutionary account that purports to explain why anthropomorphic concepts of God emerged and proliferated is that they are established in a more general tendency to perceive intentional agents in the environment. As we covered in Chapter 5 (The Nature of the World), following the work of classical scholars, the anthropologist Stewart Guthrie made a cognitive theory of anthropomorphism central to a theory of religion.69,70 Guthrie argued that anthropomorphism occurs as a perceptual and cognitive strategy. Namely, facing phenomena whose cause is unknown, people assume the most important possibility. For humans, that possibility is usually personal; in other words, we interpret beings as human-like (i.e. to anthropomorphize).

The crux of this cognitive theory is that when people face chronic uncertainty about the nature of the world, they are sensitive to the detection of intentional agency, such as a person, and are biased to attribute deliberate action as the cause of things and events. Guthrie supplemented these earlier anthropomorphic theories of religion by drawing upon Darwinian evolution to explain why this perceptual strategy originated.

Psychologist Justin Barrett simplified this broad anthropomorphic theory. He posited a mental tool that he called a hyperactive agency detection device (HADD).71 The argument for the existence of HADD can be summarized as the following. As Guthrie noted, from an evolutionary perspective, the bias to detect agency in the environment is adaptive. Mistakenly interpreting a noise in a bush as a tiger when it is wind (a false positive) has no costs. Failing to detect a tiger in a bush when our ancestors heard a noise (a false negative) would have been detrimental to fitness, and this facilitated the development of belief in supernatural agents. Barrett proposed that in the modern environment, which contains more agents than the ancestral environment, anthropomorphism is triggered and produces beliefs in unseen agents who are assumed to be the cause of the stimuli. According to this account, the tendency to perceive intentional supernatural agents in the environment and draw on the same cognitive processes as human minds are a by-product of the tendency to see agents in the atmosphere more generally.

There have been debates in the literature over whether such a mechanism is hypersensitive in a way that leads to postulating superhumans. For instance, while the mechanism leads to false positives (i.e. detecting an agent where none exists),72 some have contended that HADD served important functions in the Paleolithic, during which it was formed, where the environment was abundant with predators. By contrast, we face much less of the dangers of other agents in the modern environment. Presumably, over time, the costs of maintaining a constant state of vigilance, and these perceptual errors would have given rise to self-corrections to shut down the false positives when they occur. Thus, the role of HADD in generating or propagating supernatural agency is more complicated than Barrett initially proposed.73,74 In response, Barrett began dropping the “H” from HADD, so that the device was characterized as actively interpreting agency in the environment, rather than hyperactive (i.e., ADD).

The issue surrounding the role of agent detection in the formulation of supernatural concepts, and even more controversial still, beliefs, remains. Overall, the tendency to conceive of agency in the environment as rooted in evolutionary origins complements existing evolutionary, developmental, and social accounts. While the tendency to conceive of intentional agency in the environment is insufficient as an exclusive explanation, in conjunction with accounts above, it contributes towards a more comprehensive explanation of the origins and spread of ideas about supernatural agents.

Key points

Cognitive scientists of religion agree that in the Abrahamic traditions, adults’ explicit representation of God mirrors theological doctrine, God is omniscient, omnipotent, and omnipresent. This representation often differs from adults’ implicit representations of God as having limited capacities, which are elicited under conditions where adults are not consciously aware or able to reflect.

CSR scholars disagree over the origins of these tendencies, although the two leading explanations themselves do not conflict with one another and can be accommodated into a single account.

The conceptual constraints account holds that adults implicitly anthropomorphize God because they cannot help but draw from their intuitive ontology of persons when thinking about God.

The active agency detection account holds that an agency detection mechanism is triggered in the modern environment, and it produces ideas about unseen agents who are assumed to be similar to humans and are the cause of the stimuli.

Most cognitive accounts place an essential role in social learning, in conjunction with cognitive biases and development, for the emergence and persistence of ideas about supernatural agents.





Summary of the acquisition, development, and representation of supernatural concepts

Cognitive scientists of religion conduct empirical research on the question of how children, primarily in Judeo-Christian traditions, come to represent God as omniscient.

Developmental accounts maintain that when coupled with social learning about the nature of God, predispositions and cognitive development give rise to, or reinforce, children’s developing concepts of God as super powerful.

Cognitive scientists of religion also conduct empirical research on the question of how adults come to represent God’s mind.

Children’s explicit representations of God often resemble adults’ implicit representations. For both, God is human-like. The cognitive constraint account holds that this is because people draw on their intuitive ontologies of limited agents. Expectations that agents’ knowledge is limited is based on interactions with agents throughout our evolutionary history and reinforced by the individual’s current social experiences.





The spread of supernatural agent concepts: countering intuitive biases


There are countless examples of culturally successful supernatural agents in western culture. These include examples from religious traditions but also extend to fantasy novels, folktales, sci-fi movies, and legends. Cross-culturally recurrent ideas about other kinds of supernatural agents such as ghosts and witches are also remarkably human-like. Thinking about the types of supernatural agents that one could imagine, it is striking that only a few types, based on human-like features, recur across cultures. As Boyer put it, there is “a limited catalog of the supernatural.75” Cognitive scientists of religion are concerned with why this is so. As we covered in Chapter 1 (Introduction), cognitive scientist Sperber proposed a theory called “the epidemiology of representations,” which at its core, maintained that some ideas are encoded, stored, and recalled better than others. Just like epidemiologists in medicine study, the incidence and distribution of disease, Sperber argued that social scientists could study the prevalence and distribution of ideas in culture. Today, CSR scholars are motivated to uncover the epidemiology of religious representations, and we review some of this research in this chapter.





Minimally counterintuitive concepts


So far, in the chapter, we have considered some intuitive biases that underlie the generation and transmission of supernatural agent concepts, such as a tendency to detect agency in the environment (ADD), attributing person-like features, such as minds and bodies, to supernatural agents. In this section, we will consider the claim that although supernatural agent concepts are rooted to some extent in our intuitive assumptions about agents, those that are widespread also deviate slightly from these intuitions. CSR scholars have argued that supernatural agents tend to have a special quality or combination of properties that make them counter some of our intuitive biases, they are minimally counterintuitive.

As Boyer noted, successfully transmitted supernatural agents tended to share two features. First, they tend to be like regular agents—i.e. like persons. That is to say, there is something relatable about them, and they seem on the face of it like ordinary people. Gods, ghosts, witches, and so on all appear remarkably human-like. Second, they have special properties, such as changing the physical landscape without touching it, causing illness to others with their mind, walking through walls, and so on, which provides them with extraordinary quality, making them supernatural.

Take the example of Superman. This fictional superhero is perhaps the most iconic American cultural supernatural agent of all time, rated the top comic book hero ever,76 and boosting a movie empire spanning almost half a century.77 On the one hand, Superman is Clark Kent, an ordinary 30-something-year-old American citizen raised on a farm and working as a newspaper journalist. He eats, sleeps, is motivated to avenge injustice, and even falls in love, just like the rest of us mere mortals. Superman has extraordinary powers and abilities. For example, he can fly, has super strength, super hearing, microscopic vision, and is invulnerable to most non-magical attacks. At least part of the explanation why Superman has become so successful among the American public is because of his relatability and paradoxically, his extraordinary powers. All good creative writers, consciously or unconsciously, realize that this paradox of humanness coupled with extraordinary qualities is the recipe for a successful supernatural agent concept. In the case of Superman, it is by no accident that he was depicted as more relatable (e.g. less aggressive), and more potent over time.78

Some scholars in CSR explain the social success of supernatural agents in religious traditions in much the same way they account for the spread of extraordinary concepts outside of religious domains. They describe the properties of supernatural agents as meeting some of our default expectations about the world while countering others. Specifically, supernatural agents seem much like regular agents and thus meet our inherent biases, assumptions, or predilections about agents generally. We have covered many of these so far in the chapter. Second, supernatural agents have exceptional quality, or a combination of properties, that makes them counter some of our inherent biases about agents; we refer to these as counterintuitive ideas, and we cover them here.

One classic view, found in the works of scholars such as Spinoza, Hume, and Feuerbach is that religious concepts, such as supernatural agents, tend to have a similar structure. Boyer based his technical version of this theory on classifying agents, including whether they meet intuitive assumptions about category members (e.g. people, animals, objects, and so on), and violate some of these assumptions in small ways,79 such as a talking tree, a rock that eats, or an invisible cow. Supernatural agents violate our assumptions related to persons. For example, most people conceive God as a person with special cognitive powers.

By intuitive assumptions, Boyer refers to our naïve, folk theories of the world around us. He argued that this formula (minimal tweaking) ensures that these ideas have a transmission advantage over other ideas. Justin Barrett later characterized these types of religious concepts as “minimally counterintuitive,” also referred to as MCI theory, which is a more formalized way of saying that the key to their success is that they minimally tweak our intuitive assumptions about the world. Through experiments, these scholars showed that ideas that met all intuitive expectations about a category member and those that violated too many intuitive expectations were not easily remembered and thus bad for transmission. However, people recall those that violated a few intuitive expectations more easily and as being suitable for cultural transmission.

Earlier in the chapter, we discussed work that charted our intuitive ontological assumptions. To recap, intuitive assumptions include categories of things in the world, such as persons, animals, and objects, and properties. These include spatiality and physicality in naïve physics (e.g. that things occupy a location in space and time); animacy in biology (e.g. self-propelled motion); and mentality in folk-psychology (e.g. mental states), (see Table 7.1 for an extended list of properties). Boyer proposed this theory of counterintuitiveness to account for the popularity of religious concepts in general, although, in this chapter, we are concerned only with supernatural entities. To illustrate an example of how a supernatural agent concept violates our common assumptions about the person category, consider the standard representation of a ghost.

According to Boyer, the concept of ghosts is based on our naïve theories of persons. For example, they can think and have intentions and thus activate our naïve psychology for persons. The idea of ghosts violates a property in the domain of physics; they can permeate solid objects, such as walking through walls. This example contains a violation of our expectations of folk physics for persons. However, the concept of ghosts otherwise preserves the bulk of our expectations for persons and is, consequentially, a successful supernatural agent concept. If the concept has too many violations, then it becomes too complicated and challenging for people to remember and transmit. Consider a person created in a lab, is invisible, grows smaller with time, never dies, cannot move, only thinks on Tuesdays and can read minds. This concept would qualify as massively or maximally counterintuitive. It is unlikely to become famous when competing minimally counterintuitive concepts are equally available. It is just too difficult to understand and remember.

These examples bring us to the following question: why should concepts that minimally tweak our natural assumptions enjoy greater transmissive success as compared to those that do not? There have been some factors proposed to account for these effects. These proposals include the suggestion that some concepts are more distinctive than others. People pay more attention to counterintuitive stimuli than other stimuli, which results in thinking about them more to understand and process them. We are intrigued and motivated to make sense of something that we do not quite understand, whereas something too familiar evokes little interest. Something too complicated loses our interest.80

That unusual things and events are memorable is a basic information-theory finding that appears to make MCI theory redundant. However, Boyer and Barrett specifies that MCI concepts are successful not merely because they are bizarre or unusual as compared to what is acceptable in their culture or even based on their individual experiences. They are successful because they are counter to our intuitive expectations. As we covered earlier, intuitive assumptions are the basic, untutored explanations we have for the world, and they are pretty much shared by people everywhere. Thus, scholars have proposed that these naïve theories, and what qualifies as MCI concepts, are not dependent upon the culture and individual experience. In other words, what is an MCI concept in the United States is also an MCI concept anywhere else.


Table 7.1 Example of intuitive expectations sets.

Intuitive expectation set Properties assumed

Spatiality Occupy location in space and time

Physicality Movement is continuous in space

Biology Growth and development

Animacy Self-propelled motion

Mentality Mental states





Evaluation of MCI theory


There has been mixed support for the theory that ideas that minimally tweak our assumptions are better remembered and more faithfully remembered. Some findings support the theories’ predictions,81,82,83,84 and provide evidence that children display a cognitive bias for minimally counterintuitive ideas.85 Other research, however, has failed to support predictions.86,87,88 In particular, theorists find it challenging to apply the counterintuitive label to real-world cultural concepts. Later, Barrett attempted to formalize what minimally versus maximally counterintuitive meant. This formula included:

Identifying the category of membership (e.g. golden retriever, cat).

Identifying the categories to which the member belonged (e.g. animates, persons) and the properties for that category (e.g. spatiality, biology, animacy, etc.).

Deciding whether there has been a transfer of a property (e.g. a rock that can reproduce would have transferred the property from the biology of reproduction).

Deciding whether there was a breach of naïve expectations, such as an invisible brick, which breaches the intuitive assumption that objects are visible.



Other steps that Barrett highlighted include coding the number of breaches and transfers (one point each). The exception to the one-point rule, according to Barrett, is that if multiple transfers come from the same expectation set, then they are to be considered a single instance. For example, a rock that thinks and is self-aware would be coded as one, not two points, because thinking and self-awareness are examples of mentality. It is possible to come up with some counterintuitive points for each example that represents how counterintuitive concepts are. In theory, those concepts that minimally tweak (i.e. transfer or breach only a few) expectations should enjoy greater transmissive success than those that maximally tweak them, or that include too few violations of expectations.89

Some researchers have pointed out what they perceive as weaknesses in MCI theory. Cognitive psychologist Afzal Upal has proposed that the theory underestimates the role of context. Upal draws from theories in cognitive science about how people represent concepts. He suggests that the context within which the idea is presented (e.g. the sentence, narrative), also makes it more or less memorable, especially views conflicting with what we expect based on our learned experience.90 For example, people process some information (e.g. the sparrow has feathers) faster than others (e.g. canary has feathers) based in part on our learned mental models of the world around us (in this example, prototypes for birds and characteristics of birds). People expect to see certain words together with other words and in sentences, and Upal argues that the theory also ought to take this into account.

Anthropologist Maurice Bloch argues that MCI ideas lose their privileged status and distinctiveness when embedded in a culture. Then they become familiar, and they no longer enjoy memorability advantages. In contrast, new ideas are created with such advantages, yet they are not necessarily endorsed. The key to understanding why some religious concepts become widespread, he argues, is based on the cultural tradition; people accept the ideas passed on by those before them.91 This view sharply contrasts with CSR proposal that we are cognitively predisposed to receive some ideas. Even though these intuitions can be revised in light of cultural input, cognitive science of religion scholars maintain that they are not entirely determined by it.

Anthropologist Ben Purzycki and psychologist Aiyana Willard have provided the most extensive critique of MCI theory to date. They contested the theory as an explanation of memory biases, challenging the very concept of intuitive and counterintuitive. For instance, they proposed that what is characterized as counterintuitive may become habitual to us, such as attributing mental states to animals.92 Indeed, one difficulty with the application of MCI theory is the open question of what violations of core knowledge intuitions are. This issue is because of the remaining uncertainty in the developmental and cognitive literature on precisely what inferences are contained in each ontological category.93 For example, if we ask, according to MCI theory, is a person with three eyes a violation? The answer depends entirely on whether our person concept specifies that a person can only have two eyes.

Thus, disagreement over what does and does not qualify as an MCI agent continues. Precision in MCI theory depends on precision in more basic theories in cognitive development, which we do not yet have. One major strength of the theory—albeit imperfect and developing— is that, unlike earlier theories in cognitive sciences (e.g. schemas), MCI theory makes claims about a universal mental organization. CSR scholars can make predictions about universals in religion, which is remarkable.

Participation 3: MCI theory

How does your definition of supernatural agents in the participation task at the beginning of this chapter compare to the MCI theory discussed above? Write your answer in a few sentences.

Use MCI theory to characterize the supernatural agent you named in the participation task at the beginning of this chapter. How many violations did your agent have? (Use Table 7.1). Which domains were the violations in? Write your answer in a few sentences or use bullet points.





Key points

Cognitive scientists of religion explain the emergence of ideas about supernatural agents as based on inherent biases about agents, and the spread of ideas as also influenced by these biases.

Ideas about supernatural agents based upon our intuitive ideas about persons but that deviate slightly from these intuitions enjoy a mnemonic advantage. They are known as minimally counterintuitive ideas.

MCI theory is based on claims about universal features of the human mind. The strength of the predictions it generates depends upon the development of other theories about cognitive development, which makes it an imperfect and developing theory.





Cognitive explanations for the spread of supernatural agent concepts


The minimally counterintuitive theory is part of a broader agenda in the cognitive science of religion to identify cognitive biases that affect the generation and transmission of concepts, and by extension, beliefs. As we discussed in Chapter 1 (Introduction), because of the unique history of CSR, scholars emphasize the role of cognition in the generation of religious concepts. They tend to focus on the content of religious ideas (i.e. content biases) as helping to explain why some ideas spread more readily than others. This focus on the content of religious ideas has paved the way for both widespread criticisms and the refinement of existing theories.





Social learning and cultural context


Perhaps the broadest critique of explanations of the spread of religious ideas that focus on biases in their content is by psychologists Konika Banerjee and Paul Bloom. They argue that theories about cognitive biases, such as MCI theory, do not take adequate account of the role of social learning and culture in general, on the development of belief. They use the example of Tarzan, the boy who was raised by apes after his first birthday, to demonstrate the importance of social factors in the spread of a culturally widespread concept.

Banerjee and Bloom ask, would someone never exposed to cultural ideas such as God, come to believe in God? (Hereafter the Tarzan problem, see Table 7.2 for a summary of this and other challenges to MCI theory). The obvious answer is, of course, no. They interpret some theories, such as ADD, as implying that people independently come to believe in supernatural agents. In contrast, socialization is necessary to spread such ideas.94 They propose that although intuitive biases may predispose children to accept some views over others, they must receive cultural input about the ideas to develop them. In sum, content biases are necessary, but not sufficient, to explain religious belief.95

Of course, Banerjee and Bloom are right. As we have discussed throughout this book, religion is a socially constructed, human-made category, and so it does not come to humans independently from culture. Proponents of theories about content biases in CSR take issue with these claims as a misinterpretation of their theories. Their theories are primarily about the role of cognition in the transmission of cultural ideas. Transmission is always embedded in a culture. CSR scholars do not propose that content biases without social communication can lead to religious ideas. This proposal would be preposterous. Also, CSR scholars recognize that biases in the content of ideas (i.e. content biases) are insufficient to explain the emergence and distribution of supernatural agent concepts and people’s commitment to them.


Table 7.2 Summary of the role of social learning and context biases in the spread of religious ideas.

Label Question addressed by taking account of context and culture

Tarzan problem Why would Tarzan not believe in God?

Mickey Mouse problem Why do people not treat all counterintuitive agents as Gods?

Zeus problem Why do all people not worship the same Gods?



Other scholars have proposed modifications to enhance the specificity and, thus, predictive power of theories about content biases. They contend that the context within which religious ideas are transmitted ought to play a more significant role in cognitive explanations of why people commit and thus believe in ideas.96 These cognitive biases are referred to as context biases, and they relate to the context within which ideas are transmitted. Take the spread of ideas about supernatural agents, for example. Content biases concerning how we represent agents, in general, may predispose people to express and transmit ideas about supernatural agents as invisible people who can read minds. Others propose that taking into account biases towards the context within which ideas are communicated, such as that children are typically exposed to ideas by reputable adults, and that they witness others pay commitment to these ideas through ritualized practice.





Context biases


Scholars first came to highlight the role of context biases through a series of articles that focused on explaining the transmission of god concepts. In a light-hearted article in 2008 titled “Why Santa Claus is not a god,” Barrett outlined the features that successful god concepts share. He proposed five criteria that agents are:

Counterintuitive (i.e. violating intuitive assumptions).

Intentional (i.e. a being that deliberately and purposefully initiates action).

Possess strategic information (i.e. information about people that is important to their reputation and survival).

Able to act in the human world in detectable ways.

Capable of motivating behaviors that reinforce the belief.97



In the article, Barrett highlighted the reasons why Santa Claus, a culturally prominent figure in the modern west, especially among Christian subpopulations, is not worshipped as a God. He argued that Santa Claus might seem like a God in some ways, such as his strategic knowledge about whether children are good or bad at Christmas time, and thus motivating their behavior at this time of year. Barrett concluded, however, that Santa Claus falls short of being considered as a god because he is inconsistently represented as having his five criteria.

In response to this article, psychologist Will Gervais and anthropologist Joseph Henrich argued that Barrett’s explanation for successful god concepts fell short of convincing.98 They contended that representational content biases could not explain faith in gods. They posed two problems. First, despite meeting Barrett’s criteria for a successful god concept, many counterintuitive agents are not worshipped or go out of fashion. For instance, why do children, with age, stop believing in Santa Claus even though his described content remains the same? Likewise, why do few adults believe that Mickey Mouse exists outside of the realm of fiction? They (and others) refer to the problem of why people believe in some counterintuitive concepts but not others as the Mickey Mouse problem.

The second problem concerns the question of why people do not believe in other people’s gods? To illustrate, Gervais and Henrich drew upon the case of Zeus, who has many properties that make him a successful god concept (e.g., he is influential and morally imperative to people) see Figure 7.1. Zeus was once widely worshipped in Ancient Greece, yet today few believed in him. Gervais and Henrich refer to this problem as the Zeus problem. They proposed that contextual learning biases—which have also been shaped by evolution—can explain the commitment to specific minimally counterintuitive agents and how widespread these concepts are, better than content biases alone. These context learning biases include (a) the tendency to take account of how many others tend to believe in a god, (b) how many people display their commitment to that god through behaviors, and (c) the reputability of the person who tells others about a god.

One endeavor of CSR has been to produce broad theories to explain general trends across the world between cultures. Principles of human cognition can be applied in different social contexts to explain religious cognition. For example, MCI theory predicts that all else being equal, minimally counterintuitive ideas will be easier to remember and transmit. Thus, they should be more widespread than maximally counterintuitive ideas. The ease of representation is a principle of transmission, but of course, part of the transmissive success of ideas also depends upon the context where they operate; in other words, all else is never equal. CSR scholars take account of this principle when they apply cognitive theories. For example, anthropologist Harvey Whitehouse explains how some rituals include repeating complex dogma often, such as reciting scripture or singing hymns. In this instance, because these traditions provide opportunities for rehearsal, and rehearsal aids memorability, doctrines that would have long been forgotten are passed on. That is to say, additional mechanisms may support the transmission of specific ideas.99

Likewise, theologian Hugh Nicholson has provided compelling accounts of the emergence of two counterintuitive theological doctrines. Namely, the Christian doctrine of consubstantiality (i.e. the Trinity, that the son is the same substance as the Father) and the Buddhist doctrine of non-permanence of self (i.e. that a person is irreducible to her or his physical and psychological constituents).100 Although very different doctrines, Nicholson shows how they qualify as counterintuitive ideas because they violate our underlying assumptions about persons, for example, that a person can be multiple entities at the same time or that people are not continuous.

Nicholson explains how doctrines of the Trinity and no-self emerged and became widespread by arguing that these doctrines were created in part as a result of group conflict within and between religious traditions, where groups tried to maximize the uniqueness and contrast of their doctrines as compared to other accounts. For example, he argues that the no-self doctrine was driven by an effort to maximize the contrast with Brahmanical Hinduism, which held a doctrine of an unchanging and eternal self, very much akin to folk psychological assumptions that people have immutable essences. The very reason, therefore, that these newly created ideas (e.g. no-self) contrasted with previous ones (e.g., essential self) was because they were counter to intuitions about persons since those that met our intuitions tended to favor the most common views.

Nicholson is, of course, focusing on the creation and persistence of theological writing, not popular versions of those concepts. As he and others, such as philosopher Helen De Cruz have proposed, however, CSR can also explain the transmission of some theological concepts.101 For instance, maximally counterintuitive doctrines may enjoy transmissive success. However, in popular renderings, people may espouse theologically incorrect versions of these ideas in their everyday thinking. For example, Christians assuming that Jesus and God are separate entities or Buddhists, assuming that there is a permanent self.102

To successfully explain the emergence and persistence of these theological concepts, therefore, requires multiple components. One is an understanding of intuitive biases and how they affect the transmission of ideas. Another is an understanding of the historical and contextual factors, such as group rivalry. These dual models (i.e. content and context) of religious cognition explain both the emergence and persistence of both formal theological doctrine and popular concepts in particular contexts. These critiques and refinements in MCI theory bring us to the broader question of the role that CSR scholars tend to attribute to social learning in their theories about how people represent supernatural agents





The role of social learning in the representation of supernatural agents


So far, in the chapter, we have reviewed theories that account for children’s emerging concepts of God and adult representations of God. Each account highlights the interactive role of learning in a cultural context with cognitive predispositions to produce recurrent forms of God concepts. We have covered these intermittently throughout the sections but recap some of them here. Developmental theories of the emergence of God concepts present social learning as playing a vital role in the development of children’s ideas about God. As developmental psychologist Paul Harris and colleagues have pointed out, children learn directly about God through the testimony of peers, parents, and religious leaders, all of whom reflect broader cultural ideas.103,104

Cultural input can strengthen children’s early emerging intuitions about what God is like (i.e. the preparedness account) or reinforce an alternative view that differs from their intuitions (i.e. the anthropomorphism account). Whatever the nature of intuitions, scholars maintain that they are always affected by sociocultural input. On the anthropomorphic account, for example, when coupled with the development of other abilities, such as a theory of mind, in addition to exposure to information about a monotheistic God, children can conceptualize God as omniscient. Research has also demonstrated that social instruction impacts the developmental trajectory of ideas about God. For instance, Lane and colleagues discovered that children who are raised in explicitly religious contexts and are more knowledgeable about God tend to demonstrate an early appreciation of God’s extraordinary mental abilities.

Likewise, CSR theories that purport to explain trends in mature concepts of God also assume a sociocultural component in the explanation. For instance, the cognitive constraint account claims that when coupled with the experience of agents as limited, cognitive predisposition towards anthropomorphism is strengthened in adults. When theological ideas about God as limitless are rehearsed, people develop specific concepts of God as such and draw upon these concepts in certain circumstances—such as when they have time to reflect. Research has also demonstrated that the level of rehearsal impacts the developmental trajectory of ideas about God. For instance, Barrett and Vanorman reported that believers who used images of God for worship tended to anthropomorphize God more readily than those who did not.

Some people may make the wrongful assumption that there is no role for social learning in evolutionary theories of how we develop common ideas about extraordinary agents. This mistake is often compounded by the fact that cognitive scientists of religion usually discuss how we are cognitively predisposed to think a certain way, or they use the term natural to describe these predispositions. As we discussed in the research on plants by Wertz and Wynn, experience—such as the reliance on plants throughout our evolutionary history, influences the emergence of cognitive biases, including learning strategies—such as the tendency to infer that plants are edible.

These biases are then reinforced through cultural exposure and direct instruction, such as seeing parents pick foods from a plant, or telling them that these things grow on plants and are edible. Specific ideas are described as natural for some reason. One reason, in this particular example, is because they are underdetermined by the current level of experience to the concept. Thus, other factors, such as cognitive biases shaped by evolution, are thought to be at play. The anthropologist Clark Barrett has provided a detailed account of how experience shapes the evolution of the mind, including our implicit and explicit ideas about aspects of the world in his book The Shape of Thought.105

Sometimes cognitive scientists of religion describe religious ideas as cognitively natural because they hinge upon intuitive biases that are reflected in implicit ideas about extraordinary agents. Again, this does not mean that social learning is not relevant in shaping how people come to represent God, what they believe, and how they behave in response to internalized concepts. For instance, the anthropologist Tanya Luhrmann showcased the crucial role of social learning through her extensive ethnographic and survey-based research with members of Vineyard Christian Fellowship in Chicago and Northern California. This charismatic denomination offers Pentecostal practices. Luhrmann explained how people come to believe in a God that they cannot physically see but who often speaks with them if they can learn how to listen.

Belief in an invisible but interactive God is not the result of merely receiving and accepting information but requires cognitive effort and practice.106 It requires that an individual perceive God as in the environment, is able and willing to hear them and to engage in a conversation with them. Also, the belief requires that people be able to attune themselves to receive these messages. It is no wonder that people often have periodic doubts about their ability to speak with God. That some people articulate an idea about God as person-like may reflect both an inherent bias and widely accepted theological concept of God as anthropomorphic. As anthropologist Pascal Boyer explained, the act of achieving an intuitive grasp of the presence of God in your everyday environment, speaking directly to you, is difficult—even if it is accepted as true.107

In sum, theories in CSR purport to explain the emergence and persistence of ideas about supernatural agents. They are distinctive because they highlight the role of ordinary human cognition and evolutionary forces that shape religious cognition in addition to social learning. Social learning in the absence of cognitive processing is not necessary or sufficient to produce commonalities in representations of supernatural agents around the globe. The position adopted by CSR scholars thus contrasts with a strong version of a social learning account of the emergence of concepts of supernatural agents.

For instance, one version of this account proposes that children anthropomorphize God’s mind because they have received instruction that both minds are similar and because of social interaction. Children’s everyday social interactions with other people contribute to their developing understanding of God’s mind as limited because they have learned that people’s minds are limited.108 A strong version of these ideas led to cultural determinism, the position that human behavior and modes of thinking are based exclusively on learning and social interaction in a particular culture. As you may recall from Chapter 1 (Introduction), CSR began in part as a response against cultural determinism to explain the emergence and spread of religious ideas. In short, such theories are mind-blind because they do not acknowledge or underspecify the role of human processing and predispositions and biases in shaping how people represent religious ideas.

Summary of the spread of supernatural agent concepts and evaluation of cognitive explanations for the emergence and spread of supernatural agent concepts

CSR scholars have argued that culturally popular ideas of supernatural agents tend to counter some of our intuitive biases and are minimally counterintuitive.

The minimally counterintuitive theory is part of a broader agenda in the cognitive science of religion to identify cognitive biases that affect the generation and transmission of concepts.

Explaining the origins and spread of cognitive biases includes the context within which they are used. However, some scholars have proposed that CSR ought to emphasize these components of cognition more in their theories.

CSR scholars maintain that cognitive biases are necessary but not sufficient to explain the emergence and spread of religious cognition, which requires both considerations about context and social learning.





Participation 4: Nature or nurture

Imagine that you have landed a new job as a journalist in a popular science magazine. Your first assignment is to create a one-page article called “Is belief in God the product of nurture or nature?” Based on your background research of reading this chapter:

Prepare an outline of your article. Include 3–5 main points that you will make, evidence that you will draw upon, and your conclusion.

Write the one-page article. You can also include visuals such as quotes, pictures, or charts.

In groups of two, offer feedback on another member’s article. Consider questions such as: Did they present the material accurately? Did they misrepresent someone’s work? Would ordinary people understand the claims they are making

Revise your outlines to improve them, based upon the feedback you received.





The philosophical implications of cognitive theories of supernatural agents


One important question concerns the implications of CSR explanations of religious cognition for the truth, rationality, or justification of such beliefs. Indeed, CSR theories do have implications for these types of questions. For instance, one suggestion is that religious concepts are much like ordinary concepts. This claim may help to shed light on the tendency of adherents to Abrahamic religious traditions to attribute human-like qualities to God in certain circumstances. As De Cruz and De Smedt point out, it may also explain why anthropomorphism remains a viable option in philosophical theology. For example, some schools of Islamic thought are based upon the idea that God has hands, eyes, and other attributes because it corresponds to a natural cognitive tendency.109

What does CSR say about whether supernatural agents exist? Some researchers have argued that cognitive scientists of religion should be more transparent about the ontological stance they take, and how it may affect their methodology.110 For instance, in this chapter, we have discussed how people tend to represent God. Does this say anything about whether God is real, and if so, what God is like? Earlier philosophical theories of religion were explicit about the implications of their ideas, and indeed, a large part of historical natural theology was concerned with discovering what God was like. For instance, mid-nineteenth century anthropologist and philosopher Ludwig Feuerbach claimed that human-like agents begin in the imagination, which theologians then distort into God by proposing the existence of a “perfect” human.111

Such explicit renderings about the relationship between theoretical implications for the reality of God, or indeed other supernatural agents, are not typically found among cognitive scientists of religion. As Barrett and philosopher Roger Trigg point out, CSR scholars may have their ontological commitments about the truth-value of supernatural agents. However, cognitive theories and data do not directly address the issue of whether or not they are real.112 Barrett and Trigg contend that as long as the methodology in scholarly work is neutral (i.e. their studies adhere to scientific guidelines, and their results are valid), then CSR scholars do not need to engage in such debates.

There are, however, indirect implications of these theories on debates about the truth-value of religious beliefs. Indeed, most cognitive scientists of religion have explicitly stated that their theories do not directly address the question of whether or not supernatural concepts are real. However, sometimes they do write as though a naturalistic theory of supernatural agent concepts makes a supernatural explanation superfluous.113,114 For instance, one interpretation reads that if we can explain the emergence of ideas about supernatural agents as rooted in cognition—such as a by-product of agency detection (ADD) and our intuitive assumptions about agents—in cultural context, then we do not need to invoke a supernatural interpretation to explain religious cognition.

Others offer a more radical interpretation of the claim that religion is natural. Renowned militant atheists such as philosopher Daniel Dennett115 and biologist Richard Dawkins116 use the theories and findings of CSR to argue that religion is based on erroneous beliefs. For example, some have contended that if belief in supernatural agents derives from the tendency to detect agents in the environment when there are, in fact, none present, then the belief in such agents is based upon erroneous cognition. One counterargument is that agency detection is not erroneous if one considers the contexts within which it is activated (e.g. high uncertainty).117

Others have interpreted the claim that religion is natural as favoring the existence of God. The philosopher Michael Murray, for instance, argues for the possibility that God orchestrated our cognitive architecture so that humans were likely to detect supernatural agents, which, when coupled with religious beliefs, would be much more believable.118 Others have argued along similar lines, that cognitive biases such as ADD are compatible with interpretations of the Christian doctrine of natural knowledge of God through our senses.119 Other scholars in CSR take a middle-ground and are?open to the possible coexistence of both naturalistic and supernatural explanations.120

Participation 5: Defining cognitive tendencies

Table 3.3 in Chapter 3 (Research Questions) provided examples of the cognitive foundations of religious ideas. Based on this table and this chapter:

Provide a brief definition of the following cognitive tendencies (a) theory of mind, ToM, (b) hyperactive detective agency device, HADD, (c) anthropomorphism, and (d) folk-dualism.

Explain (in a few sentences for each) how each bias enriches the understanding of (a) why people believe in supernatural agents, and (b) why people represent supernatural agents in similar ways.





Key points

Some have questioned the implications of cognitive theories on the truth-value of religion.

These questions often arise from the claim that religion is natural.

Like all religion scholars, CSR researchers have personal ontological commitments about religion but use scientific methodologies to study religion, which acts as checks and balances against biased research findings.

The research findings of CSR do not support a position about the truth-value of religion. Instead, they are open to interpretation from others, and there are many and varied opinions.





Chapter summary


In this chapter, we have considered how ideas about supernatural agents develop and mature, and cognitive factors that affect the spread of these ideas cross-culturally. Cognitive science of religion scholars propose that understanding how cognitive systems support or discourage certain types of ideas is critical to understanding how religious concepts become widespread. According to these scholars, religious beliefs in supernatural agents need not be explained by any unique domain of thought, but rather, are likely to be the outcome of existing mechanisms that enable people to reason about themselves, and social agents more generally.

In the first half of this chapter, we considered some disagreements over the nature of these cognitive biases, especially concerning the question of whether the concept of God derives properties as compared to humans, agents, or minds. In the second half of this chapter, we considered the second half of the paradox for successful supernatural agent representations, especially gods, that they violate some of our intuitive expectations of persons. These biases can, however, only take us so far. To explain how and why people in different societies show commitment to specific supernatural agents, and not others, we need to take into account that they are learned concepts and the context within which they are communicated. Some scholars have pondered the philosophical and theological implications of these naturalistic theories and have come to different conclusions.

While this chapter has focused on the representation of God as a supernatural agent, in the other chapters of this book we also consider the representation of different types of supernatural agents, including reincarnated agents in Chapter 6 (The Afterlife), and witchcraft in Chapters 5 (The Nature of the World) and 8 (Morality). We also consider the role of cognitive factors in explaining the representation and spread of ideas about spirits in the case study for this chapter.

Research case study: Spirit possession

Many religious traditions contain ideas about possession, including Christianity, Buddhism, Hinduism, Islam, and many other southeast Asian and African traditions. Spirit possession usually entails episodes where bodies of people (referred to here as hosts) and minds (e.g. of hosts and spirits) change, merge, and compete for control, often during episodes, such as during rituals. Why is spirit possession so recurrent

Modern anthropological accounts of spirit possession attempted to capture the complexity and variability in particular sociocultural contexts, including local understandings of the phenomenon. They make few generalizations about spirit possession in general. By contrast, some of the earliest accounts of spirit possession provided general explanations of the phenomena. Cognitive anthropologist Emma Cohen characterizes two different types of accounts. The first are medicalist accounts. They reduce possession to temporary dissociative states, seek associations between trance and neurophysiological factors (such as calcium deficiency), and pathologize those who experience possession. The second is sociological theories.

They emphasize the emergence and spread of trance as a product of the forces of the broader social structure within which they are embedded, such as members of marginalized groups including racial minorities and women who participate in specific communities as an index of their subordinate status. There are issues with both types of accounts. Medicalist accounts pay little attention to the context within which possession occurs, nor do they consider the possibility that trance states can occur among healthy individuals. Sociological theories are vague and unverifiable. They say little about the mechanisms through which these states exert their effects (e.g. how does this work?), and competing hypotheses make the same predictions (e.g. is trance a display of power, or a display against power?)

Cognitive anthropologist Emma Cohen revisited and expanded upon the work of another anthropologist in the 1970s, Erika Bourguignon. Bourguignon was atypical at the time of her research because she conducted a cross-cultural analysis of almost 500 societies and attempted to categorize spirit possession into two types, based on the presence or absence of altered states of consciousness. Like Bourguignon, Cohen was interested in the distribution and the presence of certain types of spirit possession. Also, Cohen sought to (a) uncover the fundamental assumptions that underpin popular ideas about possession in different contexts, (b) identify general psychological tendencies that give rise to these assumptions, and (c) determine how these tendencies manifest themselves in culturally specific settings.

In 2002, Cohen spent 18 months conducting ethnographic fieldwork among Afro-Brazilian religionists in the Northern Brazilian city of Belém, among a group of around 60 people where spirit possession was often the focus of rituals. During her time, Cohen attended social gatherings, business meetings, healing, and ritual ceremonies and met with the group leader. She noticed that two forms of spirit possession emerged. When people talked casually about possession, they assumed that the displacement of the person occurred. In other words, the agency of the host (i.e. the person) was entirely replaced by an agent (i.e. the spirit), so that no trace of the host remains, and the agent completely controls the host’s body.

However, the respected leader of the group (pai-de-santo) taught the laity about possession where the host fused identity with the agency of the spirit so that they merge during the episode. Much like lemon in a glass of water flavors the drink, the lemon and water can be separate but also fused entities to make a new taste. Cohen also noted that although some ethnographers and the popular media had recounted another type of possession—oscillation, where the agency and host fight for control during the episode (e.g. think of the movie, The Exorcist), this was seldom assumed in people’s discussions. Most importantly, even though the theological concept of possession officially endorsed by the group was a fusion model of possession, people unconsciously assumed a displacement model, which contradicted the official teachings. In other words, people were endorsing the theologically incorrect version.

Cohen developed a theory about why the discrepancy between people’s theological and everyday concepts was occurring. At the crux of her theory is the assumption that some ideas about minds and bodies are more straightforward to be remembered and faithfully communicated. Cohen proposed that people tend to attribute body behaviors to a single agent at one time. In other words, one mind controls one body. She dubbed this the “one-body-one-mind-principle.” Thus, Cohen claimed, it is cognitively more accessible to represent spirit possession as entailing a complete displacement of the host’s mind with the mind of a spirit (i.e. displacement model) than it is to represent the host’s mind as merging with the spirit’s mind in the host’s body (i.e. fusion model).

In partnership with psychologist Justin Barrett, Emma Cohen did something atypical for an anthropologist: she conducted psychological experiments to test observations based on her field observations. Together, Cohen and Barrett tested the hypotheses about spirit possession with UK students, who, unlike the people of Belém, did not have experience with possession as a religious practice, and had been exposed to western media portrayals, which tend to adopt the oscillation model. In a series of studies, Barrett and Cohen investigated how the students described possession, identified possession from some possibilities, and how accurately they recalled the three concepts of spirit possession after they read about them. Across all studies, participants displayed a strong preference for the displacement model. Just like the members of the Afro-Brazilian group, UK students assumed that the mind displaces the body during a possession, rather than fusing with it, or fluctuating for control during episodes. They freely offered this model when describing possession, identified it among the other models as possession, and more accurately recalled the details of it than the other two models.

Cohen also wondered whether these findings could apply beyond the contexts of the UK and Brazil. She surveyed the ethnographic literature and found evidence for the displacement model of spirit possession in many different cultural contexts. From her research, Cohen proposed a cultural selectionist model of spirit possession. On this model, all else being equal, traditions that endorse a displacement model of possession will have a transmissive advantage over those that do not. Of course, all else is never equal, and Cohen emphasized the importance of investigating how our assumptions about minds and bodies are shaped and reinforced in different contexts, just like she did in the ethnographic component of her research.





Questions


In your own words, summarize the claims the researcher is making (include the terms displacement, fusion, and oscillation in your summary).

What are the differences and similarities between this research and previous research on spirit possession?

What do you think demarks this research as typical of the CSR approach to religion?

Read, summarize, and evaluate (i.e. say whether and why you agree or disagree with) the following critique of Cohen’s work by sociologist Arnaud Halloy.



“Cohen focuses almost exclusively on what people think about spirit possession. However, if one wishes to take into account the process of possession, that is, how spirit possession is learned and how it evolves, such an overly ‘representational’ concept of cognition is prejudicial … possession is lived through affects and precepts which, along with the conceptions of possession Cohen rightly identifies, are good candidates for explaining its wide success around the world.121”

Further reading

Cohen, Emma. The mind possessed: The cognition of spirit possession in an Afro-Brazilian religious tradition. Oxford University Press, 2007.

Cohen, Emma. “What is spirit possession? Defining, comparing, and explaining two possession forms.” Ethnos 73, no. 1 (2008): 101–126.

Cohen, Emma, and Justin L. Barrett. “Conceptualizing spirit possession: Ethnographic and experimental evidence.” Ethos 36, no. 2 (2008): 246–267.

Cohen, Emma, and Justin Barrett. “When minds migrate: Conceptualizing spirit possession.” Journal of Cognition and Culture 8, no. 1 (2008): 23–48.

Cohen, E. “An author meets her critics. Around ‘The mind possessed’: The cognition of spirit possession in an Afro-Brazilian religious tradition” by Emma Cohen [Response to comments by Diana Espirito Santo, Arnaud Halloy, and Pierre Lienard]. Religion and Society: Advances in Research 1, No. 1 (2010): 164–176. www.berghahnjournals.com/view/journals/religion-and-society/1/1/air-rs010112.xml.





Discussion questions

Imagine that you had to create a new supernatural agent concept that would successfully spread. Based on the theories in this chapter, describe the characteristics of the agent.

Can you apply the formula of MCI theory to a supernatural agent concept? Is your agent MCI, based on this formula.

Do you agree or disagree that the Mickey Mouse, Zeus, and Tarzan problems are problems for MCI theory? Why?

Do you think that all CSR theories on the emergence and spread of supernatural agent concepts (e.g. anthropomorphism, HADD, MCI theory) have implications on whether these agents exist.





Selected further reading


Articles


Barrett, Justin L. “Theological correctness: Cognitive constraint and the study of religion.” Method & Theory in the Study of Religion 11, no. 4 (1999): 325–339.

Heiphetz, Larisa, Jonathan D. Lane, Adam Waytz, and Liane L. Young. “How children and adults represent God’s mind.” Cognitive Science 40, no. 1 (2016): 121–144.





Books


Boyer, Pascal. Religion Explained: The human instincts that fashion gods, spirits, and ancestors. Random House, 2002.



Notes

1 Tylor, Edward Burnett. Primitive culture: researches into the development of mythology, philosophy, religion, art, and custom. Vol. 2. J. Murray, 1871.

2 Barrett, Justin L., Rebekah A. Richert, and Amanda Driesenga. “God’s beliefs versus mother’s: The development of nonhuman agent concepts.” Child Development 72, no. 1 (2001): 50–65.

3 Richert, Rebekah A., and Justin L. Barrett. “Do you see what I see? Young children’s assumptions about God’s perceptual abilities.” The International Journal for the Psychology of Religion 15, no. 4 (2005): 283–295.

4 Knight, Nicola, Paulo Sousa, Justin L. Barrett, and Scott Atran. “Children’s attributions of beliefs to humans and God: Cross-cultural evidence.” Cognitive Science 28, no. 1 (2004): 117–126.

5 Richert, Rebekah A., and Justin L. Barrett. “Do you see what I see? Young children’s assumptions about God’s perceptual abilities.” The International Journal for the Psychology of Religion 15, no. 4 (2005): 283–295.

6 Barrett, Justin L., Rebekah A. Richert, and Amanda Driesenga. “God’s beliefs versus mother’s: The development of nonhuman agent concepts.” Child Development 72, no. 1 (2001): 50–65.

7 Barrett, Justin L., Rebekah A. Richert, and Amanda Driesenga. “God’s beliefs versus mother’s: The development of nonhuman agent concepts.” Child Development 72, no. 1 (2001): 50–65.

8 For a summary of these studies, see Heiphetz, Larisa, Jonathan D. Lane, Adam Waytz, and Liane L. Young. “How children and adults represent God’s mind.” Cognitive Science 40, no. 1 (2016): 121–144.

9 Bloom, Paul, and Tim P. German. “Two reasons to abandon the false belief task as a test of theory of mind.” Cognition 77, no. 1 (2000): B25-B31.

10 Surian, Luca, and Alan M. Leslie. “Competence and performance in false belief understanding: A comparison of autistic and normal 3‐year‐old children.” British Journal of Developmental Psychology 17, no. 1 (1999): 141–155.

11 Surian, Luca, Stefania Caldi, and Dan Sperber. “Attribution of beliefs by 13-month-old infants.” Psychological Science 18, no. 7 (2007): 580–586.

12 Onishi, Kristine H., and Renée Baillargeon. “Do 15-month-old infants understand false beliefs?” Science 308, no. 5719 (2005): 255–258.

13 Powell, Lindsey J., Kathryn Hobbs, Alexandros Bardis, Susan Carey, and Rebecca Saxe. “Replications of implicit theory of mind tasks with varying representational demands.” Cognitive Development 46 (2018): 40–50.

14 Perner, Josef, and Johannes Roessler. “From infants’ to children’s appreciation of belief.” Trends in Cognitive Sciences 16, no. 10 (2012): 519–525.

15 Kiessling, Florian, and Josef Perner. “God–mother-baby: What children think they know.” Child Development 85, no. 4 (2014): 1601–1616.

16 Lane, Jonathan D., Henry M. Wellman, and E. Margaret Evans. “Children’s understanding of ordinary and extraordinary minds.” Child Development 81, no. 5 (2010): 1475–1489.

17 Lane, Jonathan D., Henry M. Wellman, and E. Margaret Evans. “Sociocultural input facilitates children’s developing understanding of extraordinary minds.” Child Development 83, no. 3 (2012): 1007–1021.

18 Giménez-Dasí, Marta, Silvia Guerrero, and Paul L. Harris. “Intimations of immortality and omniscience in early childhood.” European Journal of Developmental Psychology 2, no. 3 (2005): 285–297.

19 Lane, Jonathan D., Henry M. Wellman, and E. Margaret Evans. “Approaching an understanding of omniscience from the preschool years to early adulthood.” Developmental Psychology 50, no. 10 (2014): 2380.

20 Piaget, Jean. The child’s conception of the world. No. 213. Rowman & Littlefield, 1951.

21 Kiessling, Florian, and Josef Perner. “God–mother-baby: What children think they know.” Child Development 85, no. 4 (2014): 1601–1616.

22 Lane, Jonathan D., Henry M. Wellman, and E. Margaret Evans. “Children’s understanding of ordinary and extraordinary minds.” Child Development 81, no. 5 (2010): 1475–1489.

23 Makris, Nikos, and Dimitris Pnevmatikos. “Children’s understanding of human and super-natural mind.” Cognitive Development 22, no. 3 (2007): 365–375.

24 Heiphetz, Larisa, Jonathan D. Lane, Adam Waytz, and Liane L. Young. “How children and adults represent God’s mind.” Cognitive Science 40, no. 1 (2016): 121–144.

25 Heiphetz, Larisa, Jonathan D. Lane, Adam Waytz, and Liane L. Young. “How children and adults represent God’s mind.” Cognitive Science 40, no. 1 (2016): 121–144.

26 Heiphetz, Larisa, Jonathan D. Lane, Adam Waytz, and Liane L. Young. “My mind, your mind, and God’s mind: How children and adults conceive of different agents’ moral beliefs.” British Journal of Developmental Psychology (2018).

27 Heiphetz, Larisa, Jonathan D. Lane, Adam Waytz, and Liane L. Young. “How children and adults represent God’s mind.” Cognitive Science 40, no. 1 (2016): 121–144.

28 Lane, Jonathan D., Henry M. Wellman, and E. Margaret Evans. “Sociocultural input facilitates children’s developing understanding of extraordinary minds.” Child Development 83, no. 3 (2012): 1007–1021.

29 Barrett, Justin L. “Theological correctness: Cognitive constraint and the study of religion.” Method & Theory in the Study of Religion 11, no. 4 (1999): 325–339.

30 Barrett, Justin L., and Frank C. Keil. “Conceptualizing a nonnatural entity: Anthropomorphism in God concepts.” Cognitive Psychology 31, no. 3 (1996): 219–247.

31 Slone, Jason. Theological Incorrectness: Why religious people believe what they should not. Oxford University Press, 2007.

32 Boyer, Pascal. Religion explained: The evolutionary foundations of religious belief. New York: Basic Books, 2001.

33 Barrett, Justin L., and Frank C. Keil. “Conceptualizing a nonnatural entity: Anthropomorphism in God concepts.” Cognitive Psychology 31, no. 3 (1996): 219–247.

34 Barrett, Justin L., and Brant VanOrman. “The effects of image-use in worship on God concepts.” Journal of Psychology and Christianity (1996).

35 Shtulman, Andrew. “Variation in the anthropomorphization of supernatural beings and its implications for cognitive theories of religion.” Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 34, no. 5 (2008): 1123.

36 Heiphetz, Larisa, Jonathan D. Lane, Adam Waytz, and Liane L. Young. “How children and adults represent God’s mind.” Cognitive Science 40, no. 1 (2016): 121–?144.

37 Westh, Peter. “Anthropomorphism in God concepts: The role of narrative.” Origins of Religion, Cognition, and Culture (2009): 396–413.

38 Shtulman, Andrew. “Variation in the anthropomorphization of supernatural beings and its implications for cognitive theories of religion.” Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 34, no. 5 (2008): 1123.

39 Heiphetz, Larisa, Jonathan D. Lane, Adam Waytz, and Liane L. Young. “How children and adults represent God’s mind.” Cognitive Science 40, no. 1 (2016): 121–?144.

40 Barlev, Michael, Spencer Mermelstein, and Tamsin C. German. “Core Intuitions About Persons Coexist and Interfere With Acquired Christian Beliefs About God.” Cognitive Science 41, no. S3 (2017): 425–454.

41 Kelemen, Deborah. “Are children ‘intuitive theists’? Reasoning about purpose and design in nature.” Psychological Science 15, no. 5 (2004): 295–301.

42 Barrett, Justin L. “Cognitive constraints on Hindu concepts of the divine.” Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion (1998): 608–619.

43 Chilcott, Travis, and Raymond F. Paloutzian. “Relations between Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava devotional practices and implicit and explicit anthropomorphic reasoning about Kṛṣṇa.” Journal of Cognition and Culture 16, no. 1–2 (2016): 107–121.

44 Barlev, M., Mermelstein, S., Cohen, A.S., and German, C.T. (2019). The Embodied God: Core intuitions about person physicality coexist and interfere with acquired Christian beliefs about God, the Holy Spirit, and Jesus. Cognitive Science 43, no. 9 (2019): e12784.

45 Barlev, Michael, Spencer Mermelstein, and Tamsin C. German. “Core intuitions about persons coexist and interfere with acquired Christian beliefs about God.” Cognitive Science 41 (2017): 425–454.

46 Barlev, Michael, Spencer Mermelstein, and Tamsin C. German. “Representational coexistence in the God concept: Core knowledge intuitions of God as a person are not revised by Christian theology despite lifelong experience.” Psychonomic Bulletin & Review (2018): 1–9.

47 d’Andrade, Roy G. The development of cognitive anthropology. Cambridge University Press, 1995.

48 Ward, Thomas B., and E. Thomas Lawson. “Creative cognition in science fiction and fantasy writing.” (2009).

49 Ward, Thomas B. “Structured imagination: The role of category structure in exemplar generation.” Cognitive Psychology 27, no. 1 (1994): 1–40.

50 Ward, Thomas B., Merryl J. Patterson, Cynthia M. Sifonis, Rebecca A. Dodds, and Katherine N. Saunders. “The role of graded category structure in imaginative thought.” Memory & Cognition 30, no. 2 (2002): 199–216.

51 Ward, Thomas B., Merryl J. Patterson, Cynthia M. Sifonis, Rebecca A. Dodds, and Katherine N. Saunders. “The role of graded category structure in imaginative thought.” Memory & Cognition 30, no. 2 (2002): 199–216.

52 See page 133 for a summary of theorists who support this view: Heiphetz, Larisa, Jonathan D. Lane, Adam Waytz, and Liane L. Young. “How children and adults represent God’s mind.” Cognitive Science 40, no. 1 (2016): 121–144.

53 Epley, Nicholas, Benjamin A. Converse, Alexa Delbosc, George A. Monteleone, and John T. Cacioppo. “Believers’ estimates of God’s beliefs are more egocentric than estimates of other people’s beliefs.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 106, no. 51 (2009): 21533–21538.

54 Ross, Lee D., Yphtach Lelkes, and Alexandra G. Russell. “How Christians reconcile their personal political views and the teachings of their faith: Projection as a means of dissonance reduction.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 109, no. 10 (2012): 3616–3622.

55 De Cruz, Helen. “Religious concepts as structured imagination.” International Journal for the Psychology of Religion 23, no. 1 (2013): 63–74.

56 Boyer, Pascal. The naturalness of religious ideas: A cognitive theory of religion. University of California Press, 1994.

57 Wertz, A. E., and Wynn, K. “Selective social learning of plant edibility in 6-and 18-month-old infants.” Psychological Science 25, no. 4 (2014): 874–882.

58 Boyer, Pascal. “How natural selection shapes conceptual structure: Human intuitions and concepts of ownership.” In The conceptual mind. New directions in the study of concepts (2015): 185–200.

59 Cosmides, Leda. “The logic of social exchange: Has natural selection shaped how humans reason? Studies with the Wason selection task.” Cognition 31, no. 3 (1989): 187–276.

60 Barrett, H. Clark. “Adaptations to predators and prey.” In The handbook of evolutionary psychology (2005): 200–223.

61 Norenzayan, Ara. Big gods: How religion transformed cooperation and conflict. Princeton University Press, 2013.

62 Johnson, Dominic. God is watching you: How the fear of God makes us human. USA: Oxford University Press, 2016.

63 Boyer, Pascal. “Religion explained: The evolutionary foundations of religious belief.” New York: Basic Books, 2001.

64 Atran, Scott, and Ara Norenzayan. “Religion’s evolutionary landscape: Counterintuition, commitment, compassion, communion.” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 27, no. 6 (2004): 713–730.

65 Bloom, Paul. Descartes’ baby: How the science of child development explains what makes us human. Random House, 2005.

66 Shtulman, A., and Lindeman, M. “Attributes of God: Conceptual foundations of a foundational belief.” Cognitive Science 40, no. 3 (2018), 635–670.

67 Barlev, M. and Shtulman, A. (under review). “Minds, bodies, spirits, and gods: Does widespread belief in disembodied beings imply that we are inherent dualists?” https://psyarxiv.com/e9cw4/.

68 Barlev, M., Mermelstein, S., Cohen, A.S., and German, C.T. “The Embodied God: Core intuitions about person physicality coexist and interfere with acquired Christian beliefs about God, the Holy Spirit, and Jesus. Cognitive Science 43, no. 9 (2019): e12784.

69 Guthrie, Stewart, Joseph Agassi, Karin R. Andriolo, David Buchdahl, H. Byron Earhart, Moshe Greenberg, Ian Jarvie et al. “A cognitive theory of religion [and comments and reply].” Current Anthropology 21, no. 2 (1980): 181–203.

70 Stewart, Elliott Guthrie. Faces in the clouds: A new theory of religion. New York: Oxford University Press, 1993.

71 Barrett, Justin L. Why would anyone believe in God. Walnut Creek: AltaMira Press, 2004.

72 Scholl, Brian J., and Patrice D. Tremoulet. “Perceptual causality and animacy.” Trends in Cognitive Sciences 4, no. 8 (2000): 299–309.

73 E.g. see McKay, Ryan, and Charles Efferson. “The subtleties of error management.” Evolution and Human Behavior 31, no. 5 (2010): 309–319.

74 Westh, Peter. “Anthropomorphism in God concepts: The role of narrative.” Origins of Religion, Cognition, and Culture (2009): 396–413.

75 Boyer, Pascal. “Religious thought and behaviour as by-products of brain function.” Trends in Cognitive Sciences 7, no. 3 (2003): 119–124.

76 “IGN’s top 100 comic book heroes > #1: Superman.” IGN Entertainment. Archived from the original on May 7, 2011. Retrieved May 27, 2011.

77 www.the-numbers.com/movies/franchise/Superman#tab=summary.

78 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Superman#Personality.

79 Boyer, Pascal. The naturalness of religious ideas: A cognitive theory of religion. University of California Press, 1994.

80 Upal, M. Afzal. “Role of context in memorability of intuitive and counterintuitive concepts.” In Proceedings of the Cognitive Science Society 27, no. 27 (2005).

81 Barrett, Justin L., and Melanie A. Nyhof. “Spreading non-natural concepts: The role of intuitive conceptual structures in memory and transmission of cultural materials.” Journal of Cognition and Culture 1, no. 1 (2001): 69–100.

82 Boyer, Pascal, and Charles Ramble. “Cognitive templates for religious concepts: Cross-cultural evidence for recall of counter-intuitive representations.” Cognitive Science 25, no. 4 (2001): 535–564.

83 Upala, M. Afzal, Lauren O. Gonce, Ryan D. Tweney, and D. Jason Slone. “Contextualizing counterintuitiveness: How context affects comprehension and memorability of counterintuitive concepts.” Cognitive Science 31, no. 3 (2007): 415–439.

84 Hornbeck, Ryan G., and Justin L. Barrett. “Refining and testing ‘counterintuitiveness’ in virtual reality: Cross-cultural evidence for recall of counterintuitive representations.” International Journal for the Psychology of Religion 23, no. 1 (2013): 15–28.

85 Banerjee, Konika, Omar S. Haque, and Elizabeth S. Spelke. “Melting lizards and crying mailboxes: Children’s preferential recall of minimally counterintuitive concepts.” Cognitive Science, 37, no. 7 (2013): 1251–1289.

86 Gonce, Lauren O., M. Afzal Upal, D. Jason Slone, and D. Ryan Tweney. “Role of context in the recall of counterintuitive concepts.” Journal of Cognition and Culture 6, no. 3 (2006): 521–547.

87 Tweney, Ryan D., M. Afzal Upal, Lauren O. Gonce, D. Jason Slone, and Kristin Edwards. “The creative structuring of counterintuitive worlds.” Journal of Cognition and Culture 6, no. 3 (2006): 483–498.

88 Norenzayan, Ara, Scott Atran, Jason Faulkner, and Mark Schaller. “Memory and mystery: The cultural selection of minimally counterintuitive narratives.” Cognitive Science 30, no. 3 (2006): 531–553.

89 Barrett, Justin L. “Coding and quantifying counterintuitiveness in religious concepts: Theoretical and methodological reflections.” Method & Theory in the Study of Religion 20, no. 4 (2008): 308–338.

90 Upal, M. Afzal. “An alternative account of the minimal counterintuitiveness effect.” Cognitive Systems Research 11, no. 2 (2010): 194–203.

91 Bloch, Maurice. “Are religious beliefs counter-intuitive.” In Radical interpretation in religion, ed. N. Frankenberry. Cambridge University Press, [MB] 2002.

92 Purzycki, Benjamin Grant, and Aiyana K. Willard. “MCI theory: A critical discussion.” Religion, Brain & Behavior 6, no. 3 (2016): 207–248.

93 Purzycki, Benjamin Grant, and Aiyana K. Willard. “MCI theory: A critical discussion.” Religion, Brain & Behavior 6, no. 3 (2016): 207–248.

94 Banerjee, Konika, and Paul Bloom. “Would Tarzan believe in God? Conditions for the emergence of religious belief.” Trends in Cognitive Sciences 17, no. 1 (2013): 7–8.

95 Gervais, Will M., Aiyana K. Willard, Ara Norenzayan, and Joseph Henrich. “The Cultural Transmission of Faith: Why innate intuitions are necessary but insufficient, to explain religious belief.” Religion 41, no. 3 (2011): 389–410.

96 Henrich, Joseph, and Robert Boyd. “On modeling cognition and culture: why cultural evolution does not require replication of representations.” Journal of Cognition and Culture 2, no. 2 (2002): 87–112.

97 Barrett, J.L. (2008). Why Santa Claus is not a god. Journal of Cognition and Culture 8, 149–161.

98 Gervais, Will M., and Joseph Henrich. “The Zeus problem: Why representational content biases cannot explain faith in gods.” Journal of Cognition and Culture 10, no. 3 (2010): 383–389.

99 Whitehouse, Harvey. Modes of religiosity: A cognitive theory of religious transmission. Rowman Altamira, 2004.

100 Nicholson, Hugh. The spirit of contradiction in Christianity and Buddhism. Oxford University Press, 2016.

101 De Cruz, Helen. “Cognitive science of religion and the study of theological concepts.” Topoi 33, no. 2 (2014): 487–497.

102 Berniunas, Renatas. “Folk psychology of the self and afterlife beliefs: The case of Mongolian Buddhists.” Ph.D. diss., Queen’s University Belfast, 2012.

103 Harris, Paul L., and Kathleen H. Corriveau. “Learning from testimony about religion and science.” In Trust and skepticism: Children’s selective learning from testimony. 2014, 28–41.

104 Harris, Paul L., and Melissa A. Koenig. “Trust in testimony: How children learn about science and religion.” Child Development 77, no. 3 (2006): 505–524.

105 Barrett, H. Clark. The Shape of Thought: How Mental Adaptations Evolve. New York: Oxford University Press, 2015.

106 Luhrmann, Tanya M. When God talks back: Understanding the American evangelical relationship with God. Vintage, 2012.

107 Boyer, Pascal. “Why “belief” is hard work: Implications of Tanya Luhrmann’s When God talks back.” HAU: Journal of Ethnographic Theory 3, no. 3 (2013): 349–357.

108 Carpendale, Jeremy I.M., and Charlie Lewis. “Constructing an understanding of mind: The development of children’s social understanding within social interaction.” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 27, no. 1 (2004): 79–96.

109 De Cruz, Helen, and Johan De Smedt. A natural history of natural theology: The cognitive science of theology and philosophy of religion. MIT Press, 2014.

110 Näreaho, Leo. “The cognitive science of religion: philosophical observations.” Religious Studies 44, no. 1 (2008): 83–98.

111 Feuerbach, Ludwig. The essence of Christianity trans. George Eliot [Marian Evans] (1854): 14.

112 Trigg, Roger, and Justin L. Barrett, eds. The roots of religion: Exploring the cognitive science of religion. Routledge, 2016.

113 Atran, Scott. In gods we trust: The evolutionary landscape of religion. Oxford University Press, 2004.

114 Boyer, Pascal. Religion explained: The evolutionary foundations of religious belief. New York: Basic Books, 2001.

115 Dennett, Daniel Clement. Breaking the spell: Religion as a natural phenomenon. New York: Penguin, 2006.

116 Dawkins, Richard. The god delusion. London: Bantam Press, 2006.

117 Murray, M.J. “Four arguments that the cognitive psychology of religion undermines the justification of religious belief.” In J. Bulbulia, R. Sosis, E. Harris, R. Genet, C. Genet and K. Wyman eds. The evolution of religion: Studies, theories, and critiques. Santa Margarita, CA: The Collins Foundation Press, 2007.

118 Murray, M.J. (2007). “Four arguments that the cognitive psychology of religion undermines the justification of religious belief.” In J. Bulbulia, R. Sosis, E. Harris, R. Genet, C. Genet and K. Wyman eds. The evolution of religion: Studies, theories, and critiques. Santa Margarita, CA: The Collins Foundation Press.

119 Clark, Kelly James, and Justin L. Barrett. “Reformed epistemology and the cognitive science of religion.” Faith and Philosophy 27, no. 2 (2010): 174–189.

120 Barrett, Justin L. Cognitive science, religion, and theology: From human minds to divine minds. Conshohocken, PA: Templeton Press, 2011.

121 Cohen, E. (2010). An author meets her critics. Around “The mind possessed”: The cognition of spirit possession in an Afro-Brazilian religious tradition” by Emma Cohen [Response to comments by Diana Espirito Santo, Arnaud Halloy, and Pierre Lienard]. Religion and Society: Advances in Research 1 No.1, 158, 164–176: www.berghahnjournals.com/view/journals/religion-and-society/1/1/air-rs010112.xml.





8 Morality




The connection between religion and morality has been debated for centuries.1 In a famous dialogue that dates back to the fourth century BCE, Ancient Greek moral philosopher, Socrates, asked: “Is an action morally good because the gods command it, or do the gods command it because it is morally good?2” Many of the founders of the social scientists, including Emile Durkheim, have passionately weighed in on such questions by describing religion as a force that binds groups together and prevents immoral conduct. The idea that religion motivates selfless behavior to benefit others at a personal cost is central in debates about the evolutionary origins of religions. Today, debates about religion and morality continue to dominate academic and popular domains and highlight the complexity and controversy of issues.

Although scholars differ in how they conceptualize the term morality, it is used here in a broad sense to refer to standards or principles about right or wrong conduct. The chapter is organized into three sections. First, we will consider research on the question, where does morality come from? Next, we weigh up evidence about how religion affects moral decision-making and behavior in contemporary society. Here, we will discuss the results of social psychological research on prosociality and prosocial behaviors, actions intended to help others, such as honesty, cooperation, and generosity. Finally, we will turn to the contribution of research in the cognitive-evolutionary sciences on questions about the relationship between religion and morality.





Part 1: Where does morality come from?


One important question from a cognitive-evolutionary perspective concerns whether, and how, natural moral responses emerge in normally developing humans. As discussed in Chapter 3: Research Questions (Table 3.2), an understanding of ontogeny (how do traits related to morality develop in humans?) provides scientists with a proximate explanation of moral behavior. Correspondingly, one research task is to identify early emerging predispositions and biases towards moral behavior in children to locate the cognitive basis for moral tendencies.





The moral foundations of humans


Developmental psychologist Paul Bloom has also conducted much research on the question of the origins of moral behavior. Bloom’s research contributes to a growing body of evidence that babies have what he refers to as a “naïve sense of morality.” In the studies, babies demonstrate some rudimentary tendencies that we would expect to be necessary before full-blown culturally developed morality emerges. For instance, Bloom and members of his lab found that even six-month-olds differentiate between agents that help and hinder one another. For example, babies differentiate between helpful puppets that assist in pushing a ball up a hill and other puppets that hinder the ball by pushing it down the hill.

More remarkably, babies also show a preference for agents that display cooperative behavior. For example, when offered both puppets, they overwhelmingly displayed a preference for the puppet that pushed the ball up the hill—aka the good guy. When they develop language, 18-month-olds explicitly identify the pushing puppet as “the good guy.” They also dispense justice by choosing to give the helping puppet, rather than the hindering puppet, a treat, and they prefer agents who do the same. In other words, babies have a strong preference for good over bad.

The research of developmental psychologists like Bloom reveals that this initial moral sense is biased towards members of our kind. Babies show a preference for members of their own group over others; they favor them and expect them to be more helpful than out-group members. Babies decide who is a member of the out-group mainly based on appearances, such as belonging to a different race, speaking a foreign language, and even by wearing a different colored T-shirt than them.3

Adults also have strong inclinations towards members of their in-group, and it seems that these inclinations emerge early. Such preferential treatment makes sense because in-group members are more likely to have shared interests and presumably to reciprocate acts of kindness, so ultimately favoring one’s in-group is a wise investment. Research with babies is especially significant because it demonstrates that impartiality is not at the core of morality. Rather, in-group biases, which come to include religious affiliation, drive prosociality.

So, does religion make us moral? According to this research in developmental psychology, the answer is no. Nevertheless, Bloom is not advocating a simplistic view of the emergence of morality, and nor is he downplaying the role of religious socialization. Based on his research with babies, Bloom proposes that morality is ultimately a synthesis of the biological, cognitive, and cultural. In other words, fully developed morality is a combination of biological predispositions concerning aspects of human behavior.

These aspects include feeling the pain of others, cultural traditions (including religious socialization, which conspires with early inclinations to shape our sense of what is right and wrong) and learned experience and critical reflection. Bloom’s studies fundamentally reveal that young children display the basic foundations of morality: the capacity and willingness to judge the actions of others, a sense of justice, and basic responses to altruism and nastiness. Bloom concludes that this basic moral apparatus is necessary for morality; without it, we would be nothing more than amoral agents, pursuing our self-interest. While Bloom acknowledges that the capacities of babies are minimal, he proposes that these capacities, rather than religious input, are necessary for morality.

Situated in an evolutionary-cognitive framework, Bloom suggests a cognitive basis for moral inclinations that are necessary, but not sufficient, for full-blown morality to develop. Research with children in contexts where ideas about what is moral differ would enhance what is known about ontogeny (i.e. how traits related to morality develop) by specifying the roles of cognitive biases and environmental inputs more precisely. Bloom’s research suggests that these cognitive biases are based in part on identifying cooperative behavior (and others evolve for different reasons). Other scholars in CSR endorse a stronger version of this claim, known as the “morality as cooperation” theory. This is the theory that morality consists of a collection of biological and cultural solutions to the problems of cooperation recurrent in human social life, and some primatologists agree with this claim.

Key points

Babies demonstrate some basic tendencies that we would expect to be necessary before full-blown culturally endorsed morality emerges, such as the capacity and willingness to judge the actions of others, a sense of justice, and primary responses to altruism and nastiness.

Bloom concludes that this necessary moral apparatus is, in part, rooted in biological predispositions.

These basic tendencies are necessary but not sufficient for moral systems of conduct to emerge.

Fully developed morality also involves socialization, learned experience, and critical reflection.





The moral foundations of nonhuman animals


Some of the traits necessary for morality to develop are indeed also found in nonhuman animals, such as the great apes, dogs, elephants, dolphins, and whales. Animals provide a meaningful contrast to moral capacities, behaviors, and systems of conduct in humans. They enable us to understand the fundamental development of morality in humanity and to address the ultimate question from a phylogenetic perspective of where morality comes from?

There are hundreds of observations of animals engaging in helping behaviors in the media towards humans and each other. Consider the following report as an example. In June 2008, researchers in Ulsan, South Korea, spent a day following dolphins in the Sea of Japan. Late that morning, they noticed that around 12 dolphins were swimming very close together. Upon further inspection, they realized that one female dolphin was severely injured, wriggling, tipping from side to side, and turning upside down, as though her pectoral flippers were paralyzed. The small group of dolphins crowded around the injured female, diving beneath and supporting her from below. After about 30 minutes, the dolphins formed an impromptu raft: swimming side by side with the injured female on their backs, helping her to breathe and avoiding drowning. Eventually, the injured dolphin stopped breathing, and a handful of dolphins stayed touching the body until it sank out of sight.4

It is difficult not to be struck with emotion at this depiction of the group assisting their injured group member. However, most researchers who study nonhuman animals propose that they do not have morality in the human sense. In other words, other animals do not have a well-developed and reasoned sense of right and wrong as humans do. Instead, researchers propose that human morality incorporates a set of psychological tendencies and capacities that are older than our species. Historian of science, Michael Shermer, calls these tendencies and capacities premoral sentiments.

Shermer summarizes premoral sentiments that have been observed in nonhuman animals as the following:

‘attachment and bonding, cooperation and mutual aid, sympathy and empathy, direct and indirect reciprocity, altruism and reciprocal altruism, conflict resolution and peacemaking, deception and deception detection, community concern and caring about what others think about you, and awareness of and response to the social rules of the group.5’ This shopping list indeed points to the conclusion that the capacity for moral behavior is not uniquely human.

Many scientific studies also showcase the precursors to morality shared by humans and other mammals. For example, Capuchin monkeys display an understanding of fairness, refusing to cooperate when presented with unequal rewards for the same behaviors. This sense of fairness was famously demonstrated in an experiment by a primatologist, Frans de Waal, who has conducted extensive research on the moral capabilities of animals. In one study, two Capuchin monkeys were each housed in a self-contained cage, side-by-side, at de Waal’s research facility.6

Both monkeys were trained to give a small token to a researcher through the bottom of the cage in exchange for a cucumber. On one occasion, however, the researcher changed the protocol and gave one monkey a grape, which is a preferred food, while the other monkey was still given a cucumber in exchange for the token. This new protocol was then repeated. Each time the researcher repeated the new protocol, the monkey with the cucumber, in witnessing his fellow monkey receive the delicious grape, became more agitated, grasping the bars in protest, looking to his fellow conspecific, and making a loud shrieking sound. In one trial, captured on video, the monkey who had only received the cucumber became so agitated that he forcefully threw the cucumber back at the experimenter in what appeared to be an act of protest.7

Notably, some of the traits necessary for morality to develop are found in our closest living relatives, chimpanzees, and bonobos. They share a common ancestor with humans who lived around 4–6 million years ago and can be viewed as the best available surrogate for this human ancestor and may offer us a glimpse into our evolutionary past. For instance, chimpanzees and bonobos will adopt and rear orphans as their offspring, and members of the group appear to mourn the death of elderly females.8

In addition to the similarity in human ancestral lineage, chimpanzees also mirror the social community size of early humans and are thus particularly apt for comparison to us. They live in groups that average around 50 individuals, which is likely to be similar to the size of early hunter-gatherer human groups in our ancestral history. Observational studies have showcased that chimpanzees often collaborate by forming political alliances, working with others to hunt as a team.9 Chimpanzees also demonstrate reciprocity. For example, they are more likely to share meat following a hunt with individuals who previously groomed them.10

According to scholars such as Bloom, de Waal, and Shermer, religion does not make people moral. Drawing from hundreds of studies and observations, they argue that empathy, cooperation, and fairness are not distinctively human traits, nor are they the result of religious socialization in adults. Non-human animals and babies also demonstrate some of the untutored capacities that we would expect to find in moral beings, and so morality cannot come from religion. De Waal devotes an entire book, The Bonobo and the Atheist: In Search of Humanism Amongst the Primates,11 to the argument that we do not get our morality from God. De Waal further argues that we do not even get our morality from careful philosophical reasoning about the conditions under which acts are good or bad, which are how some intellectual thinkers and new atheists propose that proper systems of morality emerge.

Most scholars in the evolutionary sciences concede that religion does not provide humans with an underlying moral system that they would not have otherwise had. Instead, it is more likely that religious prescriptions co-evolved as part of these tendencies that we already have, such as empathy and cooperative tendencies. In other words, religious dogma and philosophical thought piggybacked on what was already felt to be fundamentally right or wrong. This conclusion leads us full circle to the question of where morality comes from in the first place.

Key points

Other animals do not have a well-developed and reasoned sense of right and wrong as humans do.

However, non-human animals demonstrate some of the traits necessary for morality to develop, such as empathy, cooperation, and fairness.

Premoral traits are not unique to humans and are not the result of religious teachings.

Human morality incorporates a set of psychological tendencies and capacities that are older than our species.





The origins of morality


Scholars such as de Waal propose that the basic building blocks of morality, such as the fundamental sense of right and wrong, are felt in the bodies of babies and other mammals. As human adults, we often experience these kinds of bodily reactions to harm and suffering daily. Take, for example, the visceral response you may have in seeing a photograph of an abused child in a news report or watching an advertisement on television seeking donations to feed starving children in Africa. Many evolutionary scholars explicitly propose that morality emerged from the ancient roots of primate psychology, and they too endorse versions of the morality-as-cooperation theory.

Participation 1: The feeling of right and wrong

Close your eyes and imagine as vividly as you can a dog, child, or senior. If you choose someone you love, your reaction will be stronger, but you can use an image of a stranger. Once you have the image of them in your mind, imagine a teenage boy kicking them in the chest as hard as they can for no reason. Then open your eyes. How does your body feel? Is your heart pounding? Do you have sweaty palms? Has your breath become quicker than before? Did you grimace, clench your teeth, or feel a surge of adrenaline or a general feeling of unease? Whatever your reaction, it is unlikely that you would classify your response as making you feel “good.” This general unpleasant feeling is what de Waal means when he says that our sense of right and wrong is felt in our bodies.



Popular authors and proponents of the view that morality is ultimately a product of our evolutionary history include de Waal, Shermer, and anthropologist Barbara King.12 More specifically, these scholars view human decency as having grown out of primate sociality. Like many evolutionary scientists, they emphasize the benefits of group membership to humans and other social animals. Being part of a group enhances individual and group survival and provides more opportunities for reproduction than being alone. For example, groups are less vulnerable to attacks from outsiders than individuals and are more successful at finding food.

All social animals have had to modify or restrain behaviors for group living to be worthwhile. For instance, take social insects. Ant colonies can possess millions of individuals, and successful colonies include an ant sterile caste system, which significantly contributes to their success. Females serve the needs of the Queen, do not reproduce but instead raise their siblings. This system restricts competition for mating, which in turn facilitates cooperation, which is essential for the long-term survival of the colony.13 On this account of morality, premoral sentiments such as empathy, sympathy, reciprocity, and altruism evolved as a means of restraining individual selfishness and building more cooperative groups, which ultimately led to the survival of the species.14 This proclivity for parochialism helps to explain why babies display the strongest prosocial tendencies towards members of their kind, and non-human animals react strongest to behaviors that directly affect them.

Accounts that focus on primate sociality as the driver of moral sentiments may also explain why species differ in the degree to which they express them. Psychologist Michael Tomasello, who has spent much of his career studying the sociality of humans and animals, has proposed that humans are uniquely cooperative when compared to other animals because they are so dependent upon the group for survival. In short, he suggests that while many animals such as chimpanzees and bonobos are social and thus display some of the fundamental tendencies that underlie morality, humans are ultra-social and, therefore, best show the capacity for moral behavior.

Tomasello has conducted dozens of experiments that directly compare the cognitive and social abilities of both chimpanzees and human toddlers. His lab found that although toddlers and chimpanzees perform identically on physical tasks, like using a stick to retrieve food that is out of reach, they differ when it comes to the performance on social tasks, like learning how to solve a problem by imitating another person. In these social tasks, toddlers perform about twice as well as the apes. Children also out-perform chimpanzees in experiments where they have to work together to obtain a reward. Children are much more likely than their ape counterparts to collaborate with a partner.15 Indeed, some of the earliest research with chimpanzees has shown that chimpanzees show no natural ability to work together. This reluctance occurs even when chimpanzees are trained to work together to obtain a reward.16

Tomasello pinpoints how, precisely, our evolutionary heritage contributed to this ultra-sociality in humans. He points to differences in the strategies for obtaining food when the two species diverged from their common ancestor around six million years ago as the key to understanding these fundamental differences. Chimpanzees, who eat mostly fruit, gather most food alone, whereas humans became collective foragers, working together to hunt big game when fruits and vegetables became scarce.

One effect of the need for humans to obtain food as a group was that they began to think of themselves as members of a larger unit whose members worked together for mutual gain. They were able to take the perspective of others and share intentions to reach shared goals. This ability gave rise to two components that are at the core of morality: sympathy, concern for other individuals, and fairness, the idea that everyone should get what he or she deserves. According to Tomasello, the enhanced ability to cooperate underpins the moral differences between humans and nonhumans. These arguments are versions of the “morality-as-cooperation” theory, which we visit in more detail later in the chapter.

In this section, we covered research suggesting that religion does not make people moral because the basic building blocks of morality are rooted in our evolutionary history as a social species. In other words, religion is not necessary for moral behavior. A more empirically grounded question is whether, and how, does religion impact ethical decision-making and behavior? For instance, does religiosity increase or decrease moral behavior? Scholars in the socio-cognitive sciences have proposed that when it comes to morality, there are both similarities and differences between how the religious and irreligious reason and act, and we cover this research in the next section.

Participation 2: Is morality possible without God?

Imagine that you have landed a new job as a journalist for an international religious newsletter. Your first assignment is to create a one-page article called “is morality possible without God?” Based on your background research of reading this chapter:

Prepare an outline of your article. Include 3–5 main points that you will make, evidence that you will draw upon, and your conclusion.

Write the one-page article. You can also include visuals such as quotes, pictures, or charts.

In groups of two offer feedback on another member’s article. Consider questions such as: Did they present the material accurately? Did they misrepresent someone’s work? Would ordinary religious people understand the claims they are making?

Revise your outlines to improve them based upon the feedback you received.





Key points

Researchers propose that fully developed morality is ultimately a synthesis of the biological, cognitive, and the cultural, but that the basic apparatus for moral judgment and actions are found in our evolutionary heritage as social species.

Morality-as-cooperation theory proposes that morality is a collection of biological and cultural solutions to the problems of cooperation, recurrent in human social life.

Some scholars have proposed that religious dogma built upon what was already felt to be fundamentally right or wrong, which is why essential components of religious morality are similar.

Religion is not necessary for morality, but different religions may encourage or enhance existing moralistic tendencies.





Summary of does religion make people moral?

Research with babies and nonhuman animals have demonstrated that they possess basic underlying moralistic tendencies, even though they do not have a fully developed moral system of conduct like adult humans.

The primary underlying moral apparatus in humans comes from their biological tendencies and cognitive-emotional reactions ultimately derived from their evolutionary heritage as a social species; many aspects of morality facilitated group living.

Basic morality is not dependent upon cultural input, and it is possible to be moral without religious guidance. Thus, religion does not make people moral.

Religious ethics are likely to have co-evolved with the development of moralistic tendencies in humans. Therefore, religious teachings about right and wrong share fundamental similarities.

Moral guidelines derived from religious traditions play a role in developing and refining one’s sense of right and wrong.





How does religion impact moral decision-making and behavior in contemporary society?


Holding questions about the ultimate origins of morality aside for now, another related question concerns how people reason in terms of what is right and wrong in contemporary society. Insights from moral philosophy and research in social psychology highlight the similarities and differences between theists and non-theists in the world today, and we review this research next. While a few studies have been conducted cross-culturally,17 one limitation to keep in mind is that most research is in the modern western world. Comparisons between the two groups are divided into four key aspects in this section: (1) where people derive moral guidance, (2) what people care about, (3) whom people care about, and (4) why and when people act prosocially.





1 Metaethics: where people derive moral guidance


At the start of this chapter, we reviewed research suggesting that the fundamental building blocks of morality are part of our evolutionary heritage as a social species. Fundamental moral inclinations are deeply embedded in our evolved psychology and flourish naturally in the absence of religious indoctrination. As scholars such as Bloom have proposed, full-blown morality is ultimately a synthesis of the biological, cognitive, and cultural. Evolutionary processes and cognitive processing conspire to produce the fundamental building blocks of moral judgment. Yet fully developed morality is a combination of biological predispositions concerning aspects of human behavior, such as feeling the pain of others, and cultural traditions, including religious socialization. These predispositions conspire with early inclinations to shape our sense of what is right and wrong, along with learned experience and critical reflection. It is more likely that religious indoctrination concerning judgments of right and wrong co-evolved with these moral tendencies, emphasizing some rather than others, rather than contradicting them.

At the start of this chapter, we reviewed research suggesting that the fundamental building blocks of morality are part of our evolutionary heritage as a social species. Fundamental moral inclinations are deeply embedded in our evolved psychology and flourish naturally in the absence of religious indoctrination. As scholars such as Bloom have proposed, full-blown morality is ultimately a synthesis of the biological, cognitive, and cultural. In fundamental ways then, we would expect theists and non-theists to be morally similar. Indeed, this is the case. They seem to share core preferences for justice and compassion. For instance, all world religions agree on some basic principles regarding harm, and non-religious people tend to have similar ideas about harm and justice, such as the basic idea that torture or killing an innocent person is wrong. The philosopher Peter Singer points out the similarity in religious and non-religious dogma and philosophical writings, such as the notion of impartiality. This principle is found in many diverse religious and philosophical systems of morality from the golden rule in Christianity (i.e. do unto others as you would have done unto you) to the teachings of the renowned Chinese philosopher Confucius, and the political philosopher John Rawls’s landmark theory of justice.

Nevertheless, theists and non-theists derive socialization and moral guidance from different sources, and in other ways, they differ. Most notably, theists and non-theists often use different criteria to determine which actions are immoral. The source of moral guidance and criteria used to establish moral judgment is commonly referred to as a metaethical style. Theists are often guided in their moral principles according to religious ethics, such as codes of conduct that are stipulated in holy books such as the Bible and Qur’an, oral and written traditions, and religious teachers. Many religious traditions have rules that reward obedience, such as the promise of seventy-two virgins in Islam. Many traditions also have punitive consequences for those who do not abide by and enforce religious codes of ethics, such as the Christian idea of the torment of hell.

Religious dogma tends to facilitate a type of rule-based objectivist morality, which stipulates that there is one right or wrong action, such as it is always wrong to commit adultery or kill. This rule-based objectivist morality is known in philosophy as deontological reasoning. Thus, religious people tend to believe that if two people differ on a moral issue, only one person can be right.18 For believers, God is both the author of morality and the arbiter of justice. Thus, the sense of what is right is typically based on divine command, not only on consequences based on benefits or harm.19 Although often religions share secular value frameworks, and as such, do consider things like the consequences of actions.

New atheists have claimed that this rule-based deontological style of reasoning based on ancient dogma deems religious ethics ill-equipped to determine moral values. They often draw upon the arguments of classic western thinkers such as Socrates who discussed the relationship between Greek gods and piety. The fundamental dilemma proposed is whether God’s commandments are moral because he commands them or because they are moral. Whatever the answer, critics maintain that religion is an ineffective system to determine what is right. They point to problems with relativism, such as knowing which God is correct when two conflict in their moral stipulations.

There are also difficulties in interpreting scripture, such as making sense of moral commandments when they are taken out of cultural and historical context. For example, consider the custom of disgracing men with long hair in ancient Mediterranean cultures because it was a symbol of being subordinate to women (I Corinthians 11:14). Another primary criticism is that some moral commandments in religious texts seem to go against our most basic sensibilities. Consider the prescription to cut off the hand of a woman who seizes an attacker’s genitals in defense of her husband (Deuteronomy 25:11–12),20 or the advice for parents of a wayward son to bring him to the local elders to be stoned to death (Deuteronomy 21:18–21).

As the philosopher Ryan Falcioni summarizes it, on account of new atheists, religion is viewed as, at best, giving people bad reasons for doing good things, and at worst, bad reasons for doing bad things.21 The late Christopher Hitchens, author of the book God is Not Great: How Religion Poisons Everything,22 contends that there is no single act of moral goodness performed by a religious person that an irreligious person would not likewise perform, but without the reference to God. Hitchens, like Richard Dawkins, evolutionary biologist, and author of The God Delusion,23 argues that religion motivates and justifies certain evils; it enables perpetrators to commit actions with a sense of righteousness that comes from assumed divine approval. According to these authors, religion adds justification to immoral acts.24

Theists are also less likely than non-theists to judge moral decisions as subjective or culturally relative, i.e. dependent upon context. This tendency is so strong that exposing most people to reminders of religion makes them perceive morality as more objective.25 By contrast, the less religious people are, the more comfortable they are with ignoring abstract moral rules and basing decisions on consequences (consequentialism), especially based on principles of utilitarianism (the outcome that provides the most benefit to the largest number of people). The secular humanists herald consequentialism as a better system for determining what is right and wrong.





2 Moralizing spectrum: What people care about


Research in social psychology suggests that religious and non-religious people are guided in their moral decision-making by different values, and thus their moral concerns differ. Moral Foundations Theory (MFT), developed by the social psychologist Jon Haidt and colleagues,26 is based on questionnaire data from thousands of people and explains how and why people differ in their moral decision-making across cultures and religious traditions. The gist of the theory is that our moral concerns can be divided up into five underlying values: (1) care-harm, (2) fairness, (3) in-group loyalty, (4) respect for authority, and (5) purity (i.e. the body is a temple and can be contaminated by thoughts and actions).

Haidt and colleagues propose that these values significantly influence but do not determine the types of moral systems that humans construct. Some cultures construct moral systems based on a few of these foundational values, such as the United States, which tends to focus narrowly on the first two individualizing moral foundations:27 care and concern over harm and fairness. Other cultures use a broader array of values to determine their moral systems, such as in-group loyalty, respect for authority, and purity. Most people in western religious traditions endorse the first two foundational values: care and concern over harm, and fairness, in their moral decision-making. Yet, more religious people tend to moralize a broader range of actions beyond those about harm and injustice, including disobedience to authority, group disloyalty, and sexual impurity.28 In short, the more religious a person is, the more likely they are to draw upon a broader spectrum of principles in their moral reasoning and to be moralistic.

Some scholars in CSR who favor of the morality-as-cooperation view have provided a critique of MFT theory. Anthropologist Oliver Curry points to both theoretical and empirical problems that he believes a fractionation method (discussed later in this chapter) can overcome.29 First, MFT takes a cooperative approach to morality but it does not derive its domains from any underlying theory of cooperation. Thus, some domains that map onto cooperation, such as loyalty and authority, are likely to chart morality more reliably than others, such as care and purity. Second, the five foundations are too restrictive, and a seven-factor model based upon the recurrent problems of cooperation is the best available tool to map the moral landscape cross-culturally.30 These include: helping kin, helping the group, reciprocating, being brave, deferring to superiors, dividing disputed resources, and respecting prior possession.





3 Moral discrimination: Whom people care about


Religions also tend to have value frameworks that serve to guide adherents in determining right and wrong. They include the Triple Gems of Jainism, Judaism’s Halacha, Islam’s Sharia, Catholicism’s Canon Law, and Buddhism’s Eightfold Path, among others.31 Moral-based value systems increase in-group solidarity. They also increase the “otherness” of out-groups. As Jon Haidt observed, “morality binds and blinds,32” or as the saying goes, “one man’s terrorist is another man’s freedom fighter.”

Social psychologist Azim Shariff has conducted many studies on the relationship between prosociality and religion. He explains the double-edged sword between in-group loyalty and religiously held values in particular, and he outlines how this effect is slightly different for theists and non-theists. Shariff draws on research demonstrating that theists direct their prosociality more parochially towards in-group members, whereas non-theists tend to be universal in scope. In other words, religious people tend to be more groupish at a local level. Theists are generally happier than non-theists because they feel part of a group, but they also actively, therefore, feel disconnected from the out-group.33

One line of reasoning explains why believers tend to be more discriminatory and why they are also more charitable to causes in their in-group, such as donating to their church. It is a two-sided coin. Theists tend to see those who share their religious views as one group, and atheists and those who do not share their beliefs as another out-group. Whereas non-theists, by contrast, tend to see one big universal constituency of people made up of lots of differences.





4 Moral motivation: Why and when people act prosocially


One important question concerns how religion changes people’s behavior? In concrete terms, psychologists seek to determine whether religion increases prosociality, which is measured through aspects of behavior such as instances of generosity, cooperation, and honesty. Religious people report more prosocial behavior than non-religious people. A few surveys have supported these claims. Based on the number and amount of charitable donations made by religious folk.34 Yet researchers have failed to confirm the effects of religiosity on prosocial behavior in controlled studies.

These experiments actually confirm that people say they are religious and suggest that religiosity increases the need for impression management. In other words, in these surveys, religious participants are engaging in socially desirable responding; they want to be perceived as more generous by others, and so they respond to these surveys as though they are. Other research provides a slightly different interpretation.35 Believers do tend to be more charitable and prosocial than nonbelievers. However, much of this moral goodness is directed towards the religious in-group. These findings are hardly surprising given that religious values are powerful fuel for in-group solidarity.36

The motivation to demonstrate prosocial behaviors differs between theists and non-theists. Religious people are more charitable when primed with supernatural agent concepts, including God. This conclusion has been borne out by empirical results in hundreds of studies, obtained using experimental economic games, methods that allow for the exploration of decision-making in controlled social interactions involving opportunities for cooperation, punishment, trust, and generosity. For instance, in one series of studies, participants allocated more money to anonymous strangers when God concepts were implicitly activated than when neutral or no concepts were activated.37

One interpretation of this effect is that believers tend to be more vigilant of the fact that a social monitoring supernatural agent, like God, sees everything they do. Other research has shown that non-theists do not respond to these kinds of religious cues; they do not fret so much when they think that God could be watching them. Nonbelievers do, however, also demonstrate more prosocial behavior when they are primed with concepts relating to social institutions, such as the police and courts.38 In other studies, experimenters found that even when participants were not consciously aware of eyespots, they donated more generously to anonymous strangers.39

Recent research has provided evidence that these supernatural priming effects extend to morally concerned non-agentic forces of karma. For instance, in one series of studies, participants from different religious and spiritual affiliations who believed in karma were more likely to share money with a stranger after thinking about karma than before. These effects were not found for participants who did not believe in karma.40 These studies suggest that in addition to the fear of supernatural punishment, believers are also motivated to act prosocially to increase the likelihood of future good fortune.



Figure 8.1 Watched people are nice people, even if they are not consciously aware that they feel they are being surveilled. For example, Buddha Eyes, also known as Wisdom Eyes, are painted on virtually every Buddhist shrine in Nepal. They are a reminder of the omniscience of a Buddha. (Image credit: filmlandscape/Shutterstock.com).

Both religious and non-religious people are motivated to act prosocially by different social cues. For the religious, it is theistic cues of a watchful agent and even cues of karma.41 For the irreligious, it is social institutions. All forms of social surveillance have the potential to punish wrongdoers, whether this is divine intervention, principles of supernatural justice, or an aspect of civil justice. Other research suggests that these effects only serve as a temporary increase in prosocial behavior, at the least, as long as the person thinks that he or she is under surveillance. This research may well explain the so-called “Sunday Effect” on people’s behavior, such as less pornographic website traffic in religious metropolitan areas on Sundays.42 Alternatively, even shorter duration, increased charitability among Marrakesh shopkeepers when the Muslim call to prayer (adhan) was audible but not when it was inaudible.43 Likewise, secular institutions rely upon periodic reminders of justice, such as police presence and CCTV cameras, to ensure the civil obedience of citizens.44

Another intriguing finding is that non-religious people also view God as a kind of moral surveillance, keeping believers in check. So, disbelief in God signals a lack of monitoring.45 For instance, believers in God are regarded by most as more moral and trustworthy than those who do not believe. A recent Pew survey found that the majority of respondents in almost 40 countries agreed that believing in God is essential to morality.46 Rates of agreement were highest in Central Asia and West Africa, and the lowest in North America and Europe. However, even in the United States, where traditional religious affiliation has declined, the majority of people surveyed (53 percent) agreed that belief was necessary to be a good person.

Other polls suggest that theists are deeply mistrustful of atheists, and even atheists implicitly view theists as more trustworthy. For example, they see acts such as serial murder and incest as more representative of atheists than members of religious groups.47 Furthermore, the religiously affiliated may view a particular religious affiliation as a precondition for morality. Believers are likely to trust only those who share their specific religious beliefs. Another recent survey by the Pew Research Centre found that half of Americans say that it is important for a President to share their religious beliefs.48 It is by no accident that almost all U.S. presidents have been Christians, the dominant religion in the country.49

In sum, religion impacts moral decision-making in many important ways. Although theists and non-theists agree on some basic principles regarding harm and justice, they differ according to where they derive their moral guidance, their metaethical style of reasoning about morality, and what moral issues they care about. It is difficult to say with certainty whether theists are more prosocial than non-theists. Theists report higher levels of prosociality than nonbelievers, engage in more charitable behavior that tends to be directed towards other members of their religious group. Both religious and non-religious people are at least temporarily motivated to act prosocially based on the perception that they are being surveyed by a third party and can be punished for their behavior.

Key points

Theists and non-theists share some core moral preferences such as justice and compassion.

Theists and non-theists differ in key aspects of morality.

Theists are more likely to employ deontological reasoning in their moral decision-making, apply a more extensive array of values such as respect for authority and purity in their morals, and act prosocially towards others who belong to their religious group—especially when they think that God is watching them.

Non-theists are more likely to make moral decisions based on consequentialist principles, apply values concerning harm and fairness in moral decision-making, act prosocially towards other people—especially when they think that social institutions such as the police are monitoring them.





Case study: To what extent are religious beliefs responsible for Laney’s actions?





Background


Questions about the role of religion in morality are apparent in legal debates over whether, and to what extent, beliefs influence those convicted of wrongdoing. On Mother’s Day 2003, a Texas woman, Deanna Laney, stoned two of her children to death and seriously injured a third. She pleaded guilty by insanity to the killings of her sons; eight-year-old and six-year-old and causing severe injury to her 14-month-old.50

The Laney family were active members of the church community and Ms. Laney sang in the choir. A year earlier, she had told fellow churchgoers that the world was coming to an end and that God had told her to get her house in order. During the investigation, Laney explained to psychiatrists that she was driven to kill by a message from God and that they would rise again from the dead. In an interview, she said, “I felt like I obeyed God, and I believe there will be good out of this … I feel like he will reveal his power, and they will be raised up. They will become alive again.51”

Laney said she understood God’s will after watching one of her sons playing in her home. He turned to his mother and was holding a spear. After tripping over a stone in her garden, she said she understood that she was going to have to kill them by stoning. One doctor told the court that Laney had separated psychologically from the horror of her actions and felt that she was simply a woman on a divine mission carrying out the Lord’s will.

Laney pleaded insanity in the killings. Five mental health experts were consulted on the case: two each by the prosecution and defense, and one by the judge. They concluded that she suffered from psychotic delusions and was unable to know right from wrong at the time of the killings.

Laney was committed to a State Hospital for eight years until her release in May 2012. She is subject to a list of conditions, including no unsupervised contact with minors and regular drug tests, to ensure that she takes the required medication.52





Assignment


Imagine that you are the judge in this case. Based on the evidence above, and in your role as judge, write a one-page letter to the court, providing your decision on the four aspects of this case and justifying each response.Is Laney guilty of murder? (Yes/No/Unsure)

Should she go to prison or be treated in a state hospital? (Yes/No/Unsure)

To what extent do Laney’s religious beliefs explain her actions? (5=Completely, 4=Very, 3=Unsure, 2=Somewhat, 1=Not at all).

To what extent are Laney’s religious beliefs responsible for her actions? (5=Completely, 4=Very, 3=Unsure, 2=Somewhat, 1=Not at all).





Compare your justification for the rating in question 3 to another student who has answered differently and discuss your reasons.

Compare your justification for the rating in question 4 to another student who has answered differently and discuss your reasons.





Part 3: Evolutionary-cognitive perspectives on the relationship between religion and morality


Researchers in the evolutionary cognitive sciences adopt a distinctive approach to questions about the relationship between religion and morality. For instance, cognitive scientists of religion often bypass the category of religion all together and instead carve up religious systems according to recurrent features across traditions, such as the notion of supernatural agency. These recurrent features are often part of the repertoire of evolved human tendencies, such as representing what another person is thinking (i.e. mentalizing), and modifying one’s behavior in the presence of another agent.

Cognitive scientists of religion, therefore, tend not to discuss broad questions such as how religion impacts morality and instead focus on more specific issues such as the effect of thinking that a supernatural agent is monitoring a person on his/her behavior, and on the development of that society. Thus, another distinguishing feature of CSR is that researchers ask questions about the relationship between religion and morality at both the level of the individual and society. One consequence of the method of fractionating religion into recurrent features across traditions is that it showcases the fundamental building blocks of moral and religious systems, showcasing their natural foundations. Findings from CSR research usually point towards two broad conclusions, as outlined below.





1 Religion encourages prosocial behavior because it hinges upon our evolved tendencies


Components of religious systems are remarkably effective at ensuring that people follow the rules and cooperate, mainly because they are based upon natural tendencies that appear throughout our evolutionary history. For instance, social monitoring in religious traditions ensures compliance because they hinge upon our natural tendency to alter our behavior when we are monitored, especially when combined with the fear of punishment.

Religious systems also tap into intuitive ideas about immanent justice (covered in Chapter 5: The Nature of the World). For example, negative deeds are punished, and positive deeds are rewarded, even when there is no obvious causal link between the two.53,54,55 These kinds of social monitors with the power to punish appear in many different forms throughout the world. For example, omnipotent agents such as the monotheistic God in Christian traditions;56 the law of karma, adopted by the Vedic traditions of Hinduism, Buddhism, and Jainism;57 and witchcraft.58

As we discussed in Chapter 3 (Research Questions), scholars in CSR disagree over the precise role of cultural evolution in the emergence and persistence of religious thinking and behavior. Crucially, the debate hinges upon the origins of the natural tendencies that make up religious systems. Specifically, whether they are by-products of cognitive machinery that evolved for reasons that have nothing to do with religion (e.g. agency detection device—ADD, encourages the detection of predators and prey). Or, whether religious ideas evolved because they became useful for individuals and groups in the course of cultural evolution (e.g. rituals enhance group solidarity).

Both adaptationist and by-product accounts have implications for the religion-morality debate. Common to both is a central role that cognitive biases and predispositions play in religious systems. There is a limited repertoire of psychological tendencies, shaped by our evolutionary history, which explains why many religious traditions have similar underlying components—including those that affect the endorsement of moral virtues and conformity. On the adaptationist account, however, the coexistence of recurrent features in moral and religious systems is driven by their benefits.

One example of an adaptationist account at the group-level is the theory of “Big Gods” described in the case study at the end of this chapter. This theory proposes that the cultural success of moralizing gods has been instrumental in ensuring the success of modern-day institutionalized religion. More specifically, ideas about powerful, all-knowing Gods is an important factor enabling the human transition from small-scale, kin-based groups to large-scale societies,59 and it is also responsible for the stability of large-scale civilizations throughout history.





2 Religion is not the only route to behavior modification, but it is highly effective


While the effects associated with morality can be found in components that make up religious systems, religion is not unique at inducing these effects. For example, as we have previously discussed, the idea of a social monitoring agent, such as God, with the capacity to punish moral transgressions is effective at inducing compliance behavior in populations. Yet social monitoring in secular institutions, such as CCTV and the police, is another means of achieving this end.

Consider as a further illustration of the sharing of sacred values and participation in collective action in religious traditions. Sharing sacred values associated with a particular religion promotes in-group solidarity and derogation of perceived out-groups. Some primatologists have argued that moral behavior ultimately derived from the tendency of humans to be social. Specifically, collaboration and other prosocial tendencies enabled people to obtain benefits from group living. In other words, humans are inherently groupish. Thus, religious morality may well hinge upon the human tendency for parochialism.

One well-established finding is that moral-based values increase this propensity for in-group solidarity. The renowned sociologist Emile Durkheim noted this type of social cohesion in groups of people who believed in the same values and claimed that, especially when they acted together, there was a kind of “collective effervescence.” Other research has suggested that groups performing synchronized actions are especially likely to feel bonded with one another.60,61 It is therefore unsurprising that many religious traditions are replete with collective ritual actions entailing synchronized movements that enhance group cohesion.

Anthropologist Harvey Whitehouse proposes that certain kinds of rituals exploit the human tendency to benefit kin who share genetic relatedness preferentially. This tendency has evolved because it has clear evolutionary benefits, and humans are therefore attuned to recognize and preferentially treat others who are similar and share similar experiences. For instance, one reason why religious rituals serve to bond participants together is that they contain a range of kinship cues, such as similar costumes, headdresses, face paint, as well as similar movements that give rise to shared experiences.62

This groupishness and effervescence are not, of course, limited to groups who are affiliated by religious values. For example, Libyan revolutionaries justify fighting (which they perceive as morally righteous) because they regard their comrades as closer than brothers. This suggests that in addition to the effects of shared ritual action, the effect partly derives from an extension of evolved kinship systems to benefit family members.63 Massive political rallies likewise maximize the effects of synchronized activity, which contributes to feelings of collective effervescence, such as the protests against the immigration ban in the U.S. during Trump’s administration in 2017.

In sum, the components of religious systems exert effects on adherents, such as building solidarity, increasing out-group derogation, and modifying behaviors in response to potential supernatural punishment. Yet, these effects are not unique to religious systems and may be achieved through other means.

Key points

CSR showcases the natural foundations of religious and moral systems.

The CSR approach to studying the relationship between religion and morality is distinctive because it fractionates the category of religion into recurrent features, asks specific questions at measurable units of analyses, and investigates the effect of the relationship at the individual and societal level.

Research on religion and morality in CSR points to two broad conclusions. First, religious systems and prosociality are underpinned by a limited number of predispositions and biases that can be traced back to our evolutionary history. Second, while religion is not the only means to ensure conformity, it is a highly effective means of behavior modification.





A new fractionation approach to religion and morality


Psychologist Ryan McKay and anthropologist Harvey Whitehouse propose a new approach to understanding the connection between religion and morality. Their work builds upon prior approaches in CSR by fractionating the category of religion (Chapter 2: Core Assumptions). They argue that morality must also be fractionated, and that prosociality—which is often used in social psychological studies as a proxy for morality—is an inadequate measure of morality.

McKay and Whitehouse’s model involves two necessary procedures. First, the categories of religion and morality must be decomposed into theoretically grounded elements. Second, theorists ought to consider the complex interplay between cognition and culture in the development and expression of these elements. In short, researchers must first fractionate the categories of religion and morality and then establish connections between the components. These procedures are outlined in more detail below.





1 Researchers must fractionate the categories of religion and morality into theoretically grounded elements


We discussed how cognitive scientists of religion conceptualize religion in Chapter 2 (Core Assumptions). To recap, cognitive scientists of religion propose those general theories of what constitutes religion are unreliable and biased. Take the analogy of sport to help explain the fundamental problem they have with questions about religion. Imagine trying to answer the question of whether sport serves a particular function. It is true that in all cultures, people like to play and engage in exercise, but the differences in the configurations of these things across cultures are enormous. In some places, contests are competitive and draw in large crowds, in other places, they take the form of teams competing against one another, and in other places, the aim is for an individual to improve their physical skills. Where does sport begin and end?

As anthropologist Pascal Boyer puts it, the question is not worth pursuing, as it is a matter of terminology, not as a substantive understanding of what people do in these circumstances.64 Likewise, asking whether religion makes one moral depends upon how one defines religion and morality. Since these are, like sport, not naturally occurring categories, they are defined based mainly on a person’s viewpoint and experience, and in the modern west, what we consider as religious or moral most likely differs from how people in other parts of the world conceptualize these categories.

For these reasons above, cognitive scientists of religion take an alternative approach to study religion by fractionating religious systems into their constituent components. Key candidates to be explained are typically those that seem to recur across cultures, such as concepts of non-visible agents, punitive deities, continued consciousness in the afterlife, and ritualized behavior. The underlying assumption is that recurrent ideas and practices are underpinned by various psychological propensities that are reassembled in culturally contingent ways. For instance, ideas about places and people as having a purpose are based on the tendency for humans to engage in teleological reasoning. Assumptions that supernatural agents have minds are made possible by our capacity and inclination towards mentalizing agents generally.

McKay and Whitehouse have argued that we should study morality in much the same way CSR scholars research religion. Like religion, morality consists of many components. It can also mean different things to different people and labeling certain behaviors as moral or immoral may well depend upon judgments about the person, motivation, and situation. Scholars seem to circumvent the definitional problems of studying morality by investigating prosociality. Yet McKay and Whitehouse find this term equally unsatisfactory in its current usage. The standard social psychological usage focuses on pleasant, neighborly aspects of behavior such as generosity and trust. By contrast, evolutionary scholars tend to use the term prosociality to mean behavior that furthers the interests of a particular group (whether or not this disadvantages another group). Yet scholars are seldom explicit about what, precisely, their use of the term prosociality designates.

The lack of upfront conceptualizations is especially problematic because depending on which definition is used, the same behavior can be labeled either prosocial or not. For instance, murder and even genocide can be viewed as prosocial according to the evolutionary conceptualization of the term because they facilitate success in intergroup competition. Even more importantly, the term has implications for testing theories of religion and morality. For instance, harming an out-group member may be labeled as either prosocial or immoral and used to provide evidence for or against the hypothesis that religion enhances prosociality.

At the core of this new approach is the assumption that religion and morality are not unitary things, but rather, are multifaceted.65 McKay and Whitehouse propose to fractionate both religion and morality in an attempt to understand the relationship between the two better. Unlike most other researchers, they do not assume that the relationship between religion and morality is unidirectional. Instead, they consider worthy of scholarship questions about which features of religion influence the expression of human virtues, and how moral representations amplify and constrain the activation of religious intuitions.

McKay and Whitehouse point out that the fractionation approach they propose works only when the elements are theoretically grounded in levels that account for the influence of both cognition and culture. They criticize other scholars for operationalizing religion or morality as purely psychological systems or cultural notions. For instance, recall the work of researchers such as Bloom and de Waal, who have investigated the precursors to morality in babies and other primates. These researchers have concluded that religion is not necessary for morality. Yet, they assume that morality is located in a set of evolved psychological mechanisms, for example, recall the discussions earlier in the chapter about the biological predispositions that underpin morality, such as feelings of empathy. Further, the same authors operationalize religion as a set of cultural notions; they do not seek out the potential psychological foundations. Work in CSR has demonstrated that although religion is culturally learned, to grasp such cultural concepts and transmit them to others is rooted in early emerging cognitive capacities and preferences.

On McKay and Whitehouse’s account, the formation of religious and moral traits is a product of both cognitive-developmental and socio-historical processes. For instance, the capacity to empathize with others’ pain may be located in the neural structures of infants’ brains. However, environmental cues help shape these structures and culturally distributed norms about what is the right course of action in certain circumstances that affect their expression. Processes at each of these levels influence the nature and targets of empathy in society, influencing people’s willingness to tolerate harming behaviors such as warfare and enslavement, for example. The same combination of cognition and culture is also valid for religious concepts. For example, the genetic capacity to process information about mental events may undergird developmental pathways for mind-body dualism. However, this tendency is also shaped and constrained by cultural concepts and their histories, such as notions of bodiless agents.





2 Establish connections between theoretically grounded elements of religion and morality


McKay and Whitehouse propose that understanding the relationship between religion and morality requires first unpacking these levels of influence for each concept and second specifying the levels at which the impact is hypothesized to occur. For instance, asking the question of how notions of bodiless agents impact the development of empathy at each level of explanation? Like others, such as Haidt, they propose a limited number of moral values based upon our evolutionary history.

McKay and Whitehouse also consider whether and how religions have selectively favored moral values of various kinds, and whether and how the evolutionary histories of religion and morality are related. For example, fairness is a good candidate as an element of morality in cultural systems because it can be tracked to concerns in our evolutionary past. Evolutionary psychologist Nicolas Baumard and colleagues have convincingly argued that the preference for fairness evolved to ensure mutually advantageous cooperative interactions in our ancestral past.66

McKay and Whitehouse propose that they can begin to ask whether, for example, there is a biologically evolved connection between a preference for fairness—regarded commonly as a moral virtue—and mentalizing capacities (a component of reasoning about supernatural agents). Research in CSR already suggests that the evolution of mentalizing abilities would have magnified the costs of violating norms of fairness. Being able to represent a supernatural agent as having a mind but being physically absent meant that one could also represent a third-party monitor to report one’s cheating behavior.67 McKay and Whitehouse have argued that these methods will provide the basis for more precise questions and answers to questions about the relationship between religion and morality and encourage future researchers to adopt them.

To recap, the theory of morality-as-cooperation proposes that morality consists of a collection of biological and cultural solutions to the problems of cooperation recurrent in human social life. We have come across versions of this theory earlier in the chapter, espoused by primatologists, developmental psychologists, and popular writers. CSR is distinctive, however, because researchers here have identified distinct problems of cooperation and their solutions, and they have formulated and tested predictions cross-culturally.

To date, this approach has proven fruitful and has provided data to support the theory of morality-as-cooperation. For instance, one research team at the University of Oxford, led by Dr. Oliver Curry, fractionated morality into seven specific forms of cooperative behavior. These included: helping kin, helping the group, reciprocating, being brave, deferring to superiors, dividing disputed resources, and respecting prior possession. The researchers predicted that these seven cooperative behaviors would be considered morally good cross-culturally. Across 60 societies, they found that the moral valence of these behaviors was uniformly positive. This provides some evidence that the selected seven cooperative behaviors are plausible candidates for universal moral rules, and that morality-as-cooperation could provide a robust theory of morality across disciplines.69 Researchers in the social-cognitive sciences continue to test the hypothesized relationships between religion and morality.70



Figure 8.2 Whitehouse and McKay suggested breaking down claims about what constitutes morality into its components (e.g. as specified by Moral Foundations Theory, MFT) and religion and then ask if manifestations of religious constructs in different cultures actually combined those fractionated elements in various ways? For example, the proposition that “God will punish sinners” may evoke concerns over care and harm and resonate with intuitions. These may include events caused by agents in the environment (HADD) who have the ability to think (ToM). The relations depicted here are intended to be illustrative rather than exhaustive.68

Participation 3: The fractionation method

Chapter 2 (Core Assumptions) provides illustrations and examples of the fractionation approach to religion in CSR. Based on this chapter:

Provide a brief summary of how CSR researchers fractionate religion and morality.

Explain (in a few sentences for each) how this fractionation method enriches the understanding of religion and morality.





Key points

McKay and Whitehouse criticize previous research on the relationship between religion and morality. For example, previous research assumes that religion and morality are unitary categories, fail to consider the role of cognition and culture in their expression and development, and investigates only the effect of religion on morality (and not vice-versa).

McKay and Whitehouse propose a new approach to studying the relationship between religion and morality that has two steps.

First, the categories of religion and morality are fractionated into theoretically grounded elements.

Second, we can ask whether religious traditions found around the world produce constructs that connect these fractionated elements of religion and morality in various ways. This would allow scholars to establish whether and how the fractionated elements of religion and morality are or are not related.





Summary of how does religion impact moral decision-making and behavior?

Members of the public assume that morality requires religion, and new atheists argue that religion is an obstacle to morality.

The science of ethics movement proposes that science is the only way to determine what is right from wrong, but it has been met with skepticism from the broader scientific community.

Research in social psychology has demonstrated that the relationship between religion and moral decision-making is more complicated than either the public or new atheists depict.

There are both core similarities and important differences in how atheists and theists tend to reason about morality.

Research in the cognitive science of religion showcases the natural foundations of these core similarities as rooted in our cognitive makeup and psychological heritage as group members.

CSR scholars propose that a more sophisticated way to examine the relationship between religion and morality is to compare their elements and evolutionary history for possible connections and overlap.





Research case study: Religion as surveillance and moral enforcement

The basic observation that religion produces morally obedient citizens has been long advanced by scholars who are either proponents for or against religion, such as Voltaire and Marx, and those who have sought to understand the primary social functions of religion, such as Evans-Pritchard. Social psychologist Ara Norenzayan and colleagues draw upon experimental and cross-cultural data. They propose that powerful, omniscient interventionist deities are concerned with regulating the moral behavior of humans, for example, as found in monotheistic and polytheistic religions, which are a critical factor among several in the scaling up of cooperation in large-scale societies.

Norenzayan presents the following two observations and a connection between the two in the form of an argument. The first observation concerns the rapid rise in large-scale anonymous societies. For most of human history, people lived in small bands of foragers, yet today most humans live in large-scale anonymous societies. This change happened rapidly and recently, over the past 12,000 years. Even though humans and primates tend to cooperate with small groups, large-scale cooperation is unique to humans. Humans that cooperate often reap many more benefits than those who do not.

As an illustration, think for a moment of the many benefits to you by being a member of modern-day society. Nevertheless, such large-scale cooperation is also tricky without surveillance since cooperation relies to no small extent on trust, and not all people are trustworthy. As another simple illustration, consider any group project that you have been involved in, there always tend to be students who do not contribute much but get the same grade, aka social loafers. One way to monitor what people are doing and to ensure compliance with rules is through social surveillance, such as courts and police. Yet, these have developed somewhat recently and only for some places, especially more prosperous nations, although the administration of justice is also deemed unreliable and ineffective by many.

The second observation concerns the rise in moralizing gods. Throughout human history, in small-scale societies, gods, and other supernatural agents tended to have limited powers and limited moral concern. They demanded the right practice in behaviors, such as burial rites and sacrifice, but people represented these behaviors as linked to the selfish intention of the agents. Supernatural agents such as gods cared little about how people treated each other and mostly about how they were treated. Yet paralleling the rise in large-scale societies was the rise in so-called “Big Gods,” omnipotent moralizing agents with the power to punish moral wrongdoers. Big Gods spread so successfully that the vast majority of the world’s believers belong to religions with such gods.

The central argument proposed by Norenzayan and colleagues is that the spread of prosocial religions (i.e. religions that come with moral stipulations and consequences) over the last twelve millennia has been an important shaper of large-scale societies, characterized by cooperation and moral obedience among massive anonymous groups. As Norenzayan puts it, “watched people are nice people,” and a range of naturalistic and lab experiments have demonstrated that the expectation of monitoring and accountability increases prosocial tendencies.71 Although why we have these tendencies in the first place is another issue.

One compelling explanation is by evolutionary biologist Dominic Johnson, who argues that fear of supernatural punishment, like other forms of punishment, is not an accidental by-product of other evolved mechanisms but is, in fact, adaptive and has been favored by evolution for this reason.72 Research has also demonstrated that people in societies, and societies, with Gods that are more moralizing, are even more cooperative.73,74

Norenzayan and colleagues are not proposing that religion, or even Big Gods, is necessary for abidance to rules and, more specifically, large-scale cooperation among strangers. Instead, they are proposing that Big Gods are a very efficient and successful means to achieve this. As we already mentioned, secular societies function well without religion as a source of moral authority and enforcement. However, they tend to rely on other forms of social policing (i.e. threats and reminders of law-enforcement). Of course, while Big Gods may be exceptionally efficient at inducing cooperation, religion has been (and in many parts of the world, still is) associated with morality in ways that ensure obedience to a set of rules as well as justifying punishment for wrongdoers.

Some scholars provide critiques and alternative accounts of the relationship between the rise of Big Gods and the parallel rise in large-scale societies as mainly due to the social monitoring effect of deities. Some have questioned the conceptual clarity of arguments based on divine punishment.75 Others contend that the cultural prevalence of moralizing God concepts does not result from the fact that they promote cohesive behaviors among groups. For example, evolutionary psychologist Nicholas Baumard and colleagues propose that other features of the representation of god concepts make them memorable and transmissible. Such as applying the fairness or proportionality bias, the tendency to represent our actions and consequences as having proportionate consequences, to invisible agents. Baumard and colleagues also contend that the Big God’s account underestimates the role of increased affluence in facilitating large-scale moralizing religions.76 As we discuss in Chapter 10 (Rituals, Part 2), anthropologist Harvey Whitehouse and colleagues have argued that ritual practices were more important than the belief in moralizing gods to the initial rise of social complexity.77 Norenzayan and colleagues have rebutted these claims, proposing that differences in how the data were prepared resulted in Whitehouse and colleagues’ findings,78 and so, the debate continues.





Questions


In your own words, summarize the claims the researchers are making.

What do you think demarks this research as typical of the CSR approach to religion?

Do you agree or disagree with the claims the author is making and the critiques?

What do you think are the real-world implications of this theory on debates about religion and morality?



Further reading

Norenzayan, Ara. Big gods: How religion transformed cooperation and conflict. Princeton University Press, 2013.

Norenzayan, Ara, Azim F. Shariff, Will M. Gervais, Aiyana K. Willard, Rita A. McNamara, Edward Slingerland, and Joseph Henrich. “The cultural evolution of prosocial religions.” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 39 (2016).

Purzycki, Benjamin Grant, Coren Apicella, Quentin D. Atkinson, Emma Cohen, Rita Anne McNamara, Aiyana K. Willard, Dimitris Xygalatas, Ara Norenzayan, and Joseph Henrich. “Moralistic gods, supernatural punishment, and the expansion of human sociality.” Nature 530, no. 7590 (2016): 327.





Chapter summary


The general public certainly assumes that religion makes people moral, and new atheists have argued that religion is likely to make people justify immoral actions. Yet, research in the social cognitive sciences presents a more empirically grounded, nuanced, and balanced picture of the relationship between religion and morality. Religious and irreligious people do tend to derive their morality from different sources, and they also tend to use different criteria to decide which actions are moral. Theists tend to view moral laws as derived from divine command. They also tend to be moral objectivists, reasoning that when two people argue about a position, only one person can be correct. By contrast, non-theists are subjective or culturally relative. They are more willing to base judgments on utilitarian thinking – less likely to consider whether a transgression would optimize welfare for the highest number of people but rather to look at principles to determine whether they are right or wrong rather than consequences. This finding has led some—such as secular humanists—to argue that weighing up the costs and benefits of such topics as abortion, war, world hunger, is a better moral system than just relying on principles.

Researchers in CSR have demonstrated that although there are significant differences, people who are religious and non-religious share a fundamental moral foundation concerning harm and fairness, a foundation that may well have pre-dated religious doctrine and intellectualization. Humans and other mammals share basic moral apparatus, and the underlying sense of right and wrong may well have evolved from our history as a social species. Cognitive scientists of religion have also demonstrated that while religion is not necessary for morality, it is an effective behavior-modifying system whether religion is expressed as a powerful deity, principle of cause and effect, or the essence of witchcraft because ultimately watched people are nice people.

One question often asked is whether religion makes people moral? In other words, is religion necessary for morality? Research with babies and non-human animals has demonstrated that empirically it is possible to be moral without God. This research converges on the idea that fully developed morality is ultimately a synthesis of the biological, cognitive, and cultural. In other words, what we commonly think of as morality is ultimately a combination of biological predispositions, thoughtful considerations about things like the consequences of people’s behaviors, and cultural norms—including socialization into religious traditions that stipulate what is right and wrong. On this account, moral guidelines derived from religious traditions play a role in judgments concerning right and wrong. However, the necessary underlying apparatus for morality is a concoction of biological, cognitive, and emotional tendencies derived from our evolutionary heritage. Elements of this concoction are thus part of early emerging tendencies in young children and non-human animals. Morality is therefore not dependent upon religiosity, nor is it even dependent upon cultural input, language, or even being human.

Discussion questions

Which view of morality do you most agree with? Why?

Do you think that atheists and theists are more alike, or different, on their views on morality?

What is the main contribution of CSR to the study of religion and morality?





Selected further reading


Articles


McKay, Ryan, and Harvey Whitehouse. “Religion and morality.” Psychological Bulletin 141, no. 2 (2015): 447.

Norenzayan, Ara. “Does religion make people moral?” Behaviour 151, no. 2–3 (2014): 365–384.

Curry, Oliver Scott. What’s Wrong with Moral Foundations Theory, and How to get Moral Psychology Right available at https://behavioralscientist.org/whats-wrong-with-moral-foundations-theory-and-how-to-get-moral-psychology-right/.





Books


Johnson, Dominic. God is watching you: How the fear of God makes us human. USA: Oxford University Press, 2016.



Notes

1 For a summary of some of these debates see Norenzayan, Ara. “Does religion make people moral?” Behaviour 151, no. 2–3 (2014): 365–384.

2 Plato. Euthyphro. Originally published c. 395 BCE.

3 Bloom, Paul. Just babies: The origins of good and evil. Broadway Books, 2013. A summary of some of this research is also here: www.nytimes.com/2010/05/09/magazine/09babies-t.html.

4 www.newscientist.com/article/dn23108-dolphins-form-life-raft-to-help-dying-friend/.

5 Shermer, Michael, and Dennis McFarland. The science of good and evil: Why people cheat, gossip, care, share, and follow the golden rule. Macmillan, 2004, 31.

6 See the paper: Brosnan, Sarah F., and Frans BM De Waal. “Monkeys reject unequal pay.” Nature 425, no. 6955 (2003): 297, and the full talk https://www.npr.org/2014/08/15/338936897/do-animals-have-morals.

7 See here: www.youtube.com/watch?v=lKhAd0Tyny0.

8 De Waal, Frans, and Frans B.M. Waal. The Bonobo and the atheist: In search of humanism among the primates. W.W. Norton & Company, 2013.

9 Boesch, Christophe. “Cooperative hunting roles among Tai chimpanzees.” Human Nature 13, no. 1 (2002): 27–46.

10 Hockings, Kimberley J., Tatyana Humle, James R. Anderson, Dora Biro, Claudia Sousa, Gaku Ohashi, and Tetsuro Matsuzawa. “Chimpanzees share forbidden fruit.” PLoS One 2, no. 9 (2007): e886.

11 Waal, Frans B.M. The Bonobo and the atheist: In search of humanism among the primates. W.W. Norton & Company, 2013.

12 King, Barbara J. Evolving God: A provocative view on the origins of religion. University of Chicago Press, 2017.

13 Hölldobler, Bert, and Edward O. Wilson. Journey to the ants: A story of scientific exploration. Harvard University Press, 1994.

14 For further reading on this topic, see: De Waal, Frans. Primates and philosophers: How morality evolved. Princeton University Press, 2009; Hauser, Marc. Moral minds: How nature designed our universal sense of right and wrong. Ecco/HarperCollins Publishers, 2006; Tomasello, Michael. A natural history of human morality. Harvard University Press, 2016.

15 Herrmann, Esther, Josep Call, María Victoria Hernández-Lloreda, Brian Hare, and Michael Tomasello. “Humans have evolved specialized skills of social cognition: The cultural intelligence hypothesis.” Science 317, no. 5843 (2007): 1360–1366.

16 Crawford, Meredith P. “The cooperative solving of problems by young chimpanzees.” Comparative Psychology Monographs 14 (1937): 1–88.

17 E.g. Awad, Edmond, Sohan Dsouza, Azim Shariff, Iyad Rahwan, and Jean-François Bonnefon. “Universals and variations in moral decisions made in 42 countries by 70,000 participants.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 117, no. 5 (2020): 2332–2337.

18 Piazza, Jared, and Justin F. Landy. “‘Lean not on your own understanding’: Belief that morality is founded on divine authority and non-utilitarian moral judgments.” Judgment and Decision Making 8, no. 6 (2013): 639.

19 Piazza, Jared, and Paulo Sousa. “Religiosity, political orientation, and consequentialist moral thinking.” Social Psychological and Personality Science 5, no. 3 (2014): 334–342.

20 See Falcioni pages 311–315, for a more detailed treatment of these arguments. (incomplete ref) Ch. 17 Ryan Falcioni edited volume (Phil Zuckerman) Beyond Religion.

21 (incomplete ref) Ch. 17 Ryan Falcioni edited volume (Phil Zuckerman) Beyond Religion.

22 Hitchens, Christopher. God is not great: How religion poisons everything. McClelland & Stewart, 2008.

23 Dawkins, Richard. The god delusion. Random House, 2016.

24 See the discussion with Dawkins, www.youtube.com/watch?time_continue=1630&v=nZp_cA60bN4.

25 Yilmaz, Onurcan, and Hasan G. Bahcekapili. “Without God, everything is permitted? The reciprocal influence of religious and meta-ethical beliefs.” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 58 (2015): 95–100.

26 For a summary of the theory, see Graham, Jesse, Jonathan Haidt, Sena Koleva, Matt Motyl, Ravi Iyer, Sean P. Wojcik, and Peter H. Ditto. “Moral foundations theory: The pragmatic validity of moral pluralism.” In Advances in Experimental Social Psychology 47. Academic Press, 2013, 55–130.

27 Henrich, J., Heine, S.J., & Norenzayan, A. (2010). The weirdest people in the world? Behavioral and Brain Sciences 33, 61–83.

28 For a summary of this research, see Shariff, Azim F., Jared Piazza, and Stephanie R. Kramer. “Morality and the religious mind: Why theists and nontheists differ.” Trends in Cognitive Sciences 18, no. 9 (2014): 439–441.

29 https://behavioralscientist.org/whats-wrong-with-moral-foundations-theory-and-how-to-get-moral-psychology-right/.

30 Curry, Oliver Scott, Matthew Jones Chesters, and Caspar J. Van Lissa. “Mapping morality with a compass: Testing the theory of ‘morality-as-cooperation’ with a new questionnaire.” Journal of Research in Personality 78 (2019): 106–124.

31 Esptein, Greg M. Good without God: What a billion nonreligious people do believe. New York: HarperCollins, 2010, 117.

32 Haidt, Jonathan. “Moral psychology for the twenty-first century.” Journal of Moral Education 42, no. 3 (2013): 281–297.

33 For a summary of this research, see Shariff, Azim F. “Does religion increase moral behavior?.” Current Opinion in Psychology 6 (2015): 108–113.

34 Brooks, Arthur C. Who really cares: The surprising truth about compassionate conservatism-America’s charity divide-who gives, who doesn’t, and why it matters. Basic Books (AZ), 2007.

35 Sedikides, Constantine, and Jochen E. Gebauer. “Religiosity as self-enhancement: A meta-analysis of the relation between socially desirable responding and religiosity.” Personality and Social Psychology Review 14, no. 1 (2010): 17–36.

36 Galen, Luke W. “Does religious belief promote prosociality? A critical examination.” Psychological Bulletin 138, no. 5 (2012): 876.

37 Shariff, Azim F., and Ara Norenzayan. “God is watching you: Priming God concepts increases prosocial behavior in an anonymous economic game.” Psychological Science 18, no. 9 (2007): 803–809.

38 Shariff, Azim F., and Ara Norenzayan. “God is watching you: Priming God concepts increases prosocial behavior in an anonymous economic game.” Psychological Science 18, no. 9 (2007): 803–809.

39 Haley, Kevin J., and Daniel M.T. Fessler. “Nobody’s watching?: Subtle cues affect generosity in an anonymous economic game.” Evolution and Human Behavior 26, no. 3 (2005): 245–256.

40 White, Cindel J.M., John Michael Kelly, Azim F. Shariff, and Ara Norenzayan. “Supernatural norm enforcement: Thinking about karma and God reduces selfishness among believers.” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 84 (2019): 103797.

41 White, Cindel J.M., John Michael Kelly, Azim F. Shariff, and Ara Norenzayan. “Supernatural norm enforcement: Thinking about karma and God reduces selfishness among believers.” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 84 (2019): 103797.

42 Edelman, Benjamin. “Markets: Red light states: Who buys online adult entertainment?.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 23, no. 1 (2009): 209–20.

43 Duhaime, Erik P. “Is the call to prayer a call to cooperate? A field experiment on the impact of religious salience on prosocial behavior.” Judgment and Decision Making 10, no. 6 (2015): 593.

44 For example, see Pinker, Steven. The better angels of our nature: The decline of violence in history and its causes. Penguin UK, 2011.

45 Gervais, W.M., Shariff, A. F., and Norenzayan, A. (2011). “Do you believe in atheists? Distrust is central to anti-atheist prejudice.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 101, No. 6, 1189–1206.

46 www.pewglobal.org/2014/03/13/worldwide-many-see-belief-in-god-as-essential-to-morality/.

47 Gervais, Will M. “Everything is permitted? People intuitively judge immorality as representative of atheists.” PloS One 9, no. 4 (2014): e92302.

48 www.pewforum.org/2016/01/27/3-religion-in-public-life/.

49 www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2017/01/20/almost-all-presidents-have-been-christians/.

50 Retrieved Feb 2nd, 2020 from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deanna_Laney_murders#cite_note-Secrets-1.

51 Retrieved Feb 2nd, 2020 from www.independent.co.uk/news/world/americas/god-told-me-to-kill-boys-says-mother-54427.html.

52 Retrieved Feb 2, 2020 from https://www.kltv.com/story/18620253/deanna-laney-out-of-mental-institution/.

53 Baumard, Nicolas, and Coralie Chevallier. “What goes around comes around: The evolutionary roots of the belief in immanent justice.” Journal of Cognition and Culture 12, no. 1–2 (2012): 67–80.

54 Jessica incomplete reference: White, Claire, Paulo Sousa, and Karolina Prochownik. “Explaining the Success of Karmic Religions.”

55 White, Cindel, Adam Baimel, and Ara Norenzayan. “What are the causes and consequences of belief in karma?” Religion, Brain & Behavior 7, no. 4 (2017): 339–342; White, C.J.M., and Norenzayan, A. (2019). “Belief in karma: How cultural evolution, cognition, and motivations shape belief in supernatural justice.” In J. M. Olson ed. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology 60: 1–63. doi:10.1016/bs.aesp.2019.03.001.

56 Norenzayan, Ara, Azim F. Shariff, Will M. Gervais, Aiyana K. Willard, Rita A. McNamara, Edward Slingerland, and Joseph Henrich. “The cultural evolution of prosocial religions.” Behavioral and brain sciences 39 (2016).

57 White, Cindel, Adam Baimel, and Ara Norenzayan. “What are the causes and consequences of belief in karma?” Religion, Brain & Behavior 7, no. 4 (2017): 339–342.

58 Evans-Pritchard, Edward E. Witchcraft, oracles and magic among the Azande. Vol. 12. London: Oxford, 1937; Parren, Nora. “The (possible) cognitive naturalness of witchcraft beliefs: An exploration of the existing literature.” Journal of Cognition and Culture 17, no. 5 (2017): 396–418.

59 Norenzayan, Ara, Azim F. Shariff, Will M. Gervais, Aiyana K. Willard, Rita A. McNamara, Edward Slingerland, and Joseph Henrich. “The cultural evolution of prosocial religions.” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 39 (2016).

60 Lang, Martin, Daniel J. Shaw, Paul Reddish, Sebastian Wallot, Panagiotis Mitkidis, and Dimitris Xygalatas. “Lost in the rhythm: effects of rhythm on subsequent interpersonal coordination.” Cognitive Science 40, no. 7 (2016): 1797–1815.

61 Miles, Lynden K., Louise K. Nind, and C. Neil Macrae. “The rhythm of rapport: Interpersonal synchrony and social perception.” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 45, no. 3 (2009): 585–589.

62 Saroglou, Vassilis. “Believing, bonding, behaving, and belonging: The big four religious dimensions and cultural variation.” Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology 42, no. 8 (2011): 1320–1340.

63 Whitehouse, Harvey, Brian McQuinn, Michael Buhrmester, and William B. Swann. “Brothers in Arms: Libyan revolutionaries bond like family.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111, no. 50 (2014): 17783–17785.

64 Boyer, Pascal. “Minds make societies: How cognition explains the world humans create.” London: Yale University Press.

65 McKay, Ryan, and Harvey Whitehouse. “Religion and morality.” Psychological Bulletin 141, no. 2 (2015): 447.

66 Baumard, Nicolas, Jean-Baptiste André, and Dan Sperber. “A mutualistic approach to morality: The evolution of fairness by partner choice.” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 36, no. 1 (2013): 59–78.

67 Johnson, Dominic, and Jesse Bering. “Hand of God, mind of man: Punishment and cognition in the evolution of cooperation.” Evolutionary Psychology 4, no. 1 (2006).

68 Taken from: McKay, Ryan, and Harvey Whitehouse. “Religion and Morality.” Psychological Bulletin 141, no. 2 (2015): 447–473, with permission.

69 Curry, O. H., D. Mullins and Whitehouse, H. “Is it good to cooperate? Testing the theory of morality-as-cooperation in 60 societies.” Current Anthropology 60, no. 1 (2019).

70 Personal communication with Harvey Whitehouse 11 August 2020.

71 See the summary on page 372. Norenzayan, Ara. “Does religion make people moral?” Behaviour 151, no. 2–3 (2014): 365–384.

72 Johnson, Dominic. God is watching you: How the fear of God makes us human. USA: Oxford University Press, 2016.

73 Johnson, Dominic DP. “God’s punishment and public goods.” Human Nature 16, no. 4 (2005): 410–446.

74 Purzycki, Benjamin Grant, Coren Apicella, Quentin D. Atkinson, Emma Cohen, Rita Anne McNamara, Aiyana K. Willard, Dimitris Xygalatas, Ara Norenzayan, and Joseph Henrich. “Moralistic gods, supernatural punishment, and the expansion of human sociality.” Nature 530, no. 7590 (2016): 327.

75 Schloss, Jeff, and Murray, Michael. “Evolutionary Accounts of Belief in Supernatural Punishment: A Critical Review.” Religion, Brain & Behavior 1, no. 1, (2011): 46–99.

76 Baumard, N., Hyafil, A., Morris, I. & Boyer, P. (2015) Increased affluence explains the emergence of ascetic wisdom and moralizing religions. Current Biology 25(1):10–15.

77 Whitehouse, Harvey, Pieter François, Patrick E. Savage, Thomas E. Currie, Kevin C. Feeney, Enrico Cioni, Rosalind Purcell, et al. “Complex societies precede moralizing gods throughout world history.” Nature 568, no. 7751 (2019): 226–229.

78 Retrieved from here (forthcoming) https://psyarxiv.com/jwa2n/.





