3 Research questions




One aspect that makes the cognitive science of religion (CSR) a distinctive approach to the study of religion is the kinds of questions that scholars tend to ask. Namely: Why do some religious ideas and behaviors persist? What kind of mind does it take to represent these ideas? What is the source of these cognitive foundations? And, how does culture interact with cognition to produce religion? Sometimes scholars state these questions explicitly in their writings, but more often than not, they remain implicit in their work. We consider these questions in this chapter.





1 Why do some religious ideas and behaviors persist?


CSR has focused on explaining why particular kinds of ideas and behaviors persist in relatively stable forms throughout history, within and across different cultural environments. Explaining the recurrence of specific ideas and practices is especially important when there may be many versions that can be constructed.1 Think for a moment about the many different configurations of supernatural agents in the world that could exist. Yet, despite the potential for diversity in religious ideas across cultures, some concepts, such as representations of supernatural agents as having human-like features, recur. This is in part because ideas are constrained by our experience of the world.

Often, these particular sets of ideas and behaviors that appear to be cross-culturally recurrent have coalesced to form systems that resemble what scholars have tended to label “religious.” As discussed in Chapter 2 (Core Assumptions), CSR typically fractionates religion into cross-culturally recurrent forms of ideas and practices. These include concepts of non-visible agents as punitive deities, continued consciousness in the afterlife, and ritualized behavior.2 Explaining why particular forms of these ideas and actions emerge and persist is what CSR scholars mean when they say that we can explain “religion.” To ascertain the types of beliefs and behaviors that are recurrent and across religious systems, researchers often collect or draw upon existing archaeological, historical, ethnographic, and experimental data. This data is then analyzed for recurrent patterns.

Key points

CSR is concerned with explaining why specific ideas and behaviors are found in similar forms across cultures and throughout history.





(a) Popular and theological versions of religion


CSR focuses on explaining the cultural transmission of religious ideas but distinguishes between theological versions of religion and those employed by ordinary people every day. Cognitive scientists of religion are particularly interested in explaining ideas that emerge relatively easily, with little instruction, established at an early age. These kinds of ideas tap into intuitive processes (i.e. system 1). As covered in Chapter 2 (Core Assumptions), ideas emerging from system 1 are quick, automatic, and implicit. Philosopher Robert McCauley calls the types of religious ideas that emerge relatively easily “maturationally natural.” Maturationally natural ideas tend to characterize many every day lay understandings of religion (for more examples of intuitions that underpin maturationally natural ideas, see Table 7.1 in Chapter 7 (Supernatural Agents).

If theological concepts counter our assumptions about the world, then how do experts recite theological doctrines with ease? McCauley calls these abilities “practiced naturalness.” Practiced naturalness arises not through the ordinary course of physical and psychological development and with minimal instruction, but rather, through consistent training. Think about learning to play a musical instrument, or driving a car, for example. These ideas require support for people to adopt them, such as frequent rehearsal. Theological ideas that counter our intuitions are explicitly held and consciously accessible concepts. That is to say; people tend to recite them accurately only when they have time to think or when they stick to the rehearsed script.


Table 3.1 Characteristics of religious ideas.

Associatedsystem Mental processes Characteristics Often found in …

1 Maturationally natural. Emerge easily from a young age with minimal instruction. Popular religion.

2 Practiced naturalness. Are reinforced through cognitive effort and cultural support. Theological religion.



Key points

Ideas that emerge easily and with little instruction are called maturationally natural.





CSR scholars are interested in the sociocultural conditions that give rise to the formation of theological beliefs when these explanations also include a role for human cognition. Cognitive scientists of religion also acknowledge that many theological concepts are complicated and differ from our intuitions about the world. For example, the Christian doctrine of the Trinity presents God as three distinct persons (i.e. the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit) yet of the same substance,3 which counters our intuition that a person is singular. CSR scholars are most interested in the relationship between theological versions of religion and popular versions of these ideas because they tell us much about the role of cognition in processing religious concepts.

Key points

Ideas often rehearsed and quickly accessible are called practiced naturalness.





(b) Theologically correct and incorrect ideas


Cognitive scientists of religion have focused more on explaining the persistence of ideas in popular religion, espoused by ordinary people, rather than formal religion articulated by theologians. Yet often ordinary people draw upon theological sources when constructing beliefs. For instance, people often profess to believe in theological versions of religious ideas, such as the concept of karma in the Buddhist tradition. Cognitive scientists of religion call these “theologically correct”4 ideas. By labeling certain ideas as theologically correct, CSR scholars are not making judgments about what is the true, or correct, version of a given doctrine. Rather, the term refers to people’s explicit reference to theological versions of religious ideas. There are, of course, many versions of theological correctness. What matters for cognitive scientists of religion is what people say they believe when they have time to reflect.

Sometimes people’s theologically correct ideas are consistent in different contexts. People claim they believe in certain ideas based on religious teachings. Yet, they often unconsciously revert to versions of these ideas that are more straightforward and intuitive (i.e. closer to maturationally natural ideas). For example, many Buddhists hold a belief in luck despite the incompatibility with the doctrine of karma.5 CSR scholars deem these “theologically incorrect”6 ideas.

The discrepancy between professed beliefs and everyday reasoning occur in different contexts but are especially likely under two conditions. The first is during real-time cognitive processing, such as when under time constraints to provide an answer. For example, as we discuss in Chapter 7 (Supernatural Agents), one study found that Christian participants explicitly represented the Abrahamic God as omnipotent7 (theologically correct). Yet when under pressure, they tended to represent God as having limited abilities and preferences, just like an ordinary person (theologically incorrect).

The second condition where discrepancies are likely to occur is when people are in strong emotional states, such as distress. For example, many Christians feel that it is morally unacceptable to be angry with God (theologically correct). Nevertheless, when they experience an adverse event, such as a diagnosis of cancer, some report experiencing bouts of anger towards God8 (theologically incorrect). Again, CSR scholars are most interested in discrepancies between what people say they believe at different times and under different conditions because this informs us about the role of cognition in processing religious concepts.

So far in this chapter, we have covered many aspects of research in CSR. Although CSR overlaps with other disciplines that study the mind and culture, aspects of CSR are different. For instance, CSR is similar to the field of psychology of religion in many ways, such as applying theories and methods of the psychological sciences to explain religious thought and behavior. Yet cognitive scientists of religion tend to be less concerned with explaining individual psychology, for example, answering questions like “why does a specific individual become religious?” Instead, CSR scholars tend to be more concerned with accounting for cross-cultural patterns in what people tend to believe, for example, answering questions like “why do people intuitively represent God as a human-like agent with special powers?”

Key points

There are often differences between what people say they believe (theologically correct) and how they reason every day (theologically incorrect).

These discrepancies often occur when people do not have time to think or are in an emotional state.

CSR is more concerned with explaining how people reason every day than what people say they believe.





Table 3.2 Characteristics of religious ideas.

Associated systemLabelDefinitionOften found in circumstances …

1 Theologically correct. Ideas consistent with espoused religious beliefs. When people have time to reflect.

2 Theologically incorrect. Ideas inconsistent with espoused religious beliefs. When people do not have time to reflect or are in an emotional state.





2 What kind of mind does it take to represent these ideas and behave accordingly?


One key endeavor in CSR is to explain the limited and recurrent repertoire of religious ideas and behaviors by appealing to what is known about how humans tend to think, especially as there is a vast number of alternative ideas and practices that may be adopted and transmitted. As we discussed earlier in this chapter, human minds and cultures may give rise to a seemingly endless variety of ideas, but only some enjoy transmissive success. For instance, why do many people think that everything happens for a reason rather than by chance? Why assume that life continues, rather than ends, at biological death? Why are supernatural agents, such as ghosts, typically represented as invisible persons with minds rather than as mindless? How come God is depicted as interested in moral behavior rather than the mundane details of life? Why do people engage in rituals in different cultures and not some other behavior? These and many more questions guide the research described in this book.

Key points

To answer questions about why some ideas about religion are cross-culturally recurrent, CSR scholars draw upon an understanding of how humans tend to think.





(a) Identifying cognitive foundations


At the heart of most cognitive science of religion queries is the question: what kind of mind would it take to represent these ideas, and behave accordingly? In technical terms, this involves identifying the psychological predispositions, cognitive and content biases, and constraints necessary for representing ideas or displaying behaviors. To identify these cognitive or psychological foundations, scholars draw from existing research in the cognitive sciences. They often engage in new research with children and adults within and across cultures that differ meaningfully from one another.9 This methodology allows researchers to investigate whether, and how, natural responses emerge. If cultures differ in their accepted views, yet people tend to think similarly, then it suggests that cognitive foundations underpin ideas.

As we will cover throughout the chapters, fundamental cognitive foundations have been identified or proposed as underpinning religious ideas and behaviors. These include teleology, a bias towards seeing things in the world as having a purpose and being made for that purpose;10 folk dualism, the intuition that minds are separate and independent from bodies;11 anthropomorphism, the tendency to attribute human-like properties, including mental states and characteristics, to non-human things12 fairness or proportionality bias, the tendency to represent our actions and consequences as having proportionate consequences;13 kinship detection and identity fusion, the ability to recognize and calibrate kinship—and by extension, fuse identity with imagined kin14 (see Table 3.3 for a more extensive list).

For an example of how to identify cognitive foundations of religion, take the seemingly simple act of praying to God for help (i.e. supplication, or petitioning), something millions of people do every day. In performing this action, people often automatically, and without reflection, assume that God:

Exists.

Can access the request.

Understands the request.

Can affect an outcome.

Is willing to affect an outcome.



We can break down these assumptions about God even further. For instance, (b) that God can access the request and (c) understands the request, take for granted that God has mental states such as beliefs, desires, and intentions. It also assumes that God has different mental states than ours so that what the petitioner is thinking is not the same as what God is thinking, and what the petitioner desires, believes, and intends is not necessarily the same as what God desires, believes, and intends.

Holding these assumptions during prayer is an example of anthropomorphism, attributing human-like properties, including mental states and characteristics, to non-human things. The tendency to attribute others with mental states and represent these states as different from our own is often referred to as a “Theory of mind” (ToM), or more generally, mentalizing.

If humans could not represent agents as possessing mental states such as desires and intentions, then the act of asking a deity to change an outcome would presumably not have appeared so readily in human culture.15

We can identify cognitive predispositions when they emerge early among children with minimal instruction, even though cultural environments shape the specific forms they have taken.16 They give rise to maturationally natural ideas and form cognitive biases that are not unique to religious ideas. For example, as we discussed in Chapter 2 (Core Assumptions), it is difficult to think of examples where these mentalizing abilities are not evoked. Individuals who are impaired in the ability to represent others’ desires and intentions, such as people with autism spectrum disorders,17 often have difficulty navigating the social world. These cognitive predispositions, which underpin religious actions, readily appear in other domains and everyday social interactions.

Key points

CSR scholars identify the cognitive and behavioral biases necessary for representing common religious ideas and behaviors.

These cognitive biases are not found exclusively in religion and emerge in other domains.





Table 3.3 Examples of some psychological foundations that underpin and impact religious ideas and a chapter where they are discussed in more detail. These are illustrative, not exhaustive.

#Cognitive foundationDescription or exampleExample chapter

1 Teleology Seeing things in the world as having a purpose and being made for that purpose. 5: The nature of the world.

2 Psychological essentialism Members of a category share deep commonalities that make them what they are. 5: The nature of the world.

3 Immanent justice reasoning Reasoning as though good things happen to good people and, conversely, that bad things tend to happen to bad people. 5: The nature of the world.

4 Folk-dualism Perceiving minds are separate and independent from bodies. 6: The afterlife.

5 Simulation constraint The inability to imagine something. For example, imagining not having mental states, because imagination depends upon thinking. 6: The afterlife.

6 Offline social reasoning The ability to think about a person as continuing in another realm when they are not physically present. 6: The afterlife.

7 Embodiment The tendency to think about people as physically embodied, even when represented as in a supernatural sphere of existence. 6: The afterlife.

8 Anthropomorphism Attributing human-like properties, including mental states and characteristics, to non-human things. 7: Supernatural agents.

9 Minimally counter intuitive transmission advantage Attending to, and remembering, ideas that meet most of our default expectations about the world and counter a few others. 7: Supernatural agents.

10 Proportionality bias Representing actions and consequences as having proportionate consequences. 8: Morality.

11 Imitative fidelity A social learning strategy where we imitate some behaviors more closely than others. 9: Rituals: Part 1.

12 Action representation system Ritual actions are handled by the same cognitive system that processes everyday actions. 9: Rituals: Part 1.

13 Mnemonic effects The frequency of ritual performance impacts how the behaviors are processed. 9: Rituals: Part 1.

14 Hazard precaution system Spontaneous ritualized behavior occurs when people threats are detected in the environment. 10: Rituals: Part 2.

15 Emotional effects Ritual performance reduces anxiety. 10: Rituals: Part 2.

16 Affiliative effects Experiencing pain in a ritual setting makes people more amenable to group bonding. 10: Rituals: Part 2

17 Kinship detection and identity fusion Recognizing and calibrating kinship, and by extension, fusing identity with imagined kin. 10: Rituals: Part 2.





(b) Religion emerges as a result of typically developing cognition


There are many examples of psychological foundations that underpin both ideas and behaviors in religion and other domains. For example, consider the following cases:

The feeling of transcendence induced by hallucinogenic drugs at a music festival.

The state of awe experienced from staring at a natural wonder of the world, such as the vastness of the Grand Canyon.

The sense of collective effervescence among team members playing a sport.

The stereotyped, rigid movements of dancers in a theatre.

The precision with which children meticulously leave out cookies and milk for Santa Claus on Christmas Eve.

Sacred values of patriotism that serve to inspire or legitimize violence.



If the psychological tendencies that underpin religious concepts and behaviors are not distinct from those that underpin their non-religious counterparts, then there is no need to posit a unique domain reserved for religious cognition or behavior. For example, although there is something particular about the actors and the actions performed in religious ritual, the basic structure of these agents’ actions does not fundamentally differ from what we find in everyday acts. As anthropologist Pierre Lienard and religious studies scholar, E. Thomas Lawson put it, “Ritual drummers ritually drumming on ritual drums are still drummers drumming on drums.18” Given what we know about the persuasiveness of particular forms of thought, which underpin much of religion in different contexts, religious ideas are part and parcel of our typically developing cognition. These ideas and behaviors emerge with minimal instruction and spread when introduced in social environments; much like music, art, or language, religion is cognitively natural.19

Key points

The cognitive biases that underpin religious ideas emerge with little instruction. Ideas spread rapidly when introduced to other environments.

Other non-religious ideas and behaviors also emerge with little instruction, such as music, art, and language.

Religion, like music, art, and language, is cognitively natural.





(c) Religious traditions may have distinctive configurations of religious ideas and behaviors, but they draw upon the same pool of psychological tendencies


The psychological foundations that make up religion do not differ from those that constitute non-religious domains. However, these tendencies may join together in specific ways to form components that make up religious traditions. For instance, certain kinds of altered states of consciousness underpin many types of religious experiences, and the compulsion to act in repetitive ways in groups of like-minded people undergirds many types of religious rituals. Yet CSR acknowledges that the individual components within religious traditions may appear distinctive; for example, rituals may be performed with different explanations about the meaning related to specific sacred values.

Furthermore, religious traditions may have distinctive configurations of these components. For instance, some religious groups may emphasize individual altered states of consciousness, whereas others may be centered on group-ritualized action. Religious systems draw upon the same pool of psychological tendencies. They tend to have similar components (e.g. continued consciousness after biological death, ritualized actions, altered states of consciousness).

For illustration, consider those fun plastic construction toys, Legos. You can build two different objects, like those in Figure 3.1. They look completely different, but upon closer inspection, you come to realize that some of the colored blocks (e.g. white and brown) appear in both objects. Ultimately, the blocks are drawn from the same bag, and so there cannot be endless configurations of shapes; overlap is inevitable.

These fundamental similarities in the psychological building blocks of religion are one reason why early pioneers of CSR took issue with some mainstream assumptions in religious studies. Namely, that religion is unique (i.e. sui generis20), and that religions are so different that they cannot be compared to each other (i.e. extreme versions of cultural relativism).

These psychological biases explain not only why some ideas and behaviors are possible in the first place, but also why they are probable, given what we know about the human mind. For example, as we cover in Chapter 7 (Supernatural agents), supernatural agents such as ghosts, ancestors, and gods tend to be represented as special kinds of persons. On the one hand, we hold many of the same default expectations for supernatural agents that we also hold for ordinary people, such as the assumption that they can hear and communicate with us. On the other hand, supernatural agents also tend to violate a few other default expectations that we hold for ordinary people. For instance, they can move through walls.





Figure 3.1 Just like Legos make different objects from the same pool of blocks; religious traditions have distinctive configurations with some overlap, and they are underpinned by the same suite of psychological propensities. (Image credit: HeinzTeh/Shutterstock.com).

To some extent, these culturally successful concepts enjoy transmissive success across and within cultures because they depend upon meeting and tweaking intuitive expectations about different categories of objects in the world. These categories are known as intuitive ontological categories,21 such as persons, animals, and human-made objects22 (for illustration, see Table 7.1 in Chapter 7: Supernatural Agents). In other words, they have more significant transmission potential than other concepts that do not meet and then minimally violate our intuitive expectations for agents. CSR scholars refer to the transmission potential of different concepts as content biases.

Another important consideration in identifying cognitive predispositions and biases is the effects that ideas and behaviors have on people. For example, ideas about supernatural agents exert important effects on those who hold such beliefs; they are often construed as providing prescriptions or guidelines for how humans should behave, typically with perceived negative consequences for those who do not comply. As we discuss in Chapter 10 (Rituals: Part 2), one especially cross-culturally recurrent form of compliance is the participation in cultural rituals. Ritual participation also serves essential functions, such as an honest signal of a person’s commitment to the group, and the belief that the gods are watching is a means of social surveillance. These ideas and behaviors enhance cooperative group living, particularly in large-scale societies.23

Key points

The tendency for humans to engage in cognitive biases partly explains the spread of religious ideas.

Similar biases may make up different features of religious traditions.

The combination of biases is unique to each tradition.

Each concept has the potential to become widespread. These are known as content biases.





3 What is the source of these cognitive tendencies?


A related question concerns the source of these cognitive tendencies; in other words, why do these aspects of human thought and behavior emerge so readily?





(a) Cognitive accounts


The early emergence of ideas is an indication of cognitive naturalness. That is to say, given minimal instruction, humans are predisposed to represent the world in specific ways. One indication that cognitive predispositions underpin ideas is similarities in how people tend to think about concepts, including religion. One important point to keep in mind is that predispositions exist even though cultural environments can modify ideas.24

For example, consider again the theory of language acquisition that we covered in Chapter 1. Chomsky noted that people can produce and understand an infinite number of novel sentences, more than they could ever have learned. Consequentially, he theorized that we are mentally equipped with an internal preparedness for language acquisition. Taking account of mental processes and internalized rules like grammar can explain the stability underlying the seemingly endless array of language. This cognitive account also assumes that different forms of language exist and are learned. Likewise, a cognitive account can explain the stability underlying the diversity of religious representations and behaviors by highlighting predispositions and biases as criteria of what makes certain features of religion natural. This cognitive account of religion also takes as a starting point the fact that different forms of religious ideas and practices exist and are acquired by cultural learning.

Key points

CSR scholars acknowledge that content biases depend upon on how humans tend to think.

A focus on content biases is mostly a cognitive account of religious ideas and behaviors.





(b) Cognitive-evolutionary accounts


In Chapter 1 (Introduction), we considered the influence of evolutionary approaches in the early formations of CSR. Today, an extension of the cognitive account in CSR draws upon the evolutionary sciences to explain why aspects of human thought and behavior emerge so readily. These cognitive-evolutionary accounts locate the source of these intuitions to evolved domain-specific systems. The systems themselves, which are a product of human evolution, are responsible for these early emerging biases.

Consider the example of praying to a deity again. Representations of the concept of God can be understood as an expression of a more general and intuitive bias in the domain of psychology: that of attributing human characteristics to non-human things and events (i.e. anthropomorphism25). This tendency may well have emerged as an adaptive response to increasingly complex primate social interaction in our ancestral past.26 In other words, it was adaptive to be able to infer people’s intentions and desires, and more broadly, make predictions about their future behavior. In modern society, it is adaptive to reason about the intentions and desires of our conspecifics. In religious contexts, this tendency has been merely extended to special kinds of agents.

Drawing on the evolutionary sciences and formulating testable hypotheses to explain religion demarks CSR from most other approaches to the study of religion. All evolutionary accounts attempt to get at the ultimate causality behind the origins and persistence of religious ideas. Research on the human mind helps to explain the proximate mechanisms (i.e. the event immediately responsible) for causing the recurrent features of religion. Evolutionary explanations also focus on the ultimate mechanisms, or causes, of the recurrent features of religion (i.e. a distal cause, often referred to as the ultimate cause). Put another way, ultimate explanations address evolutionary functions (the “why” question), and proximate explanations address how that functionality is achieved (the “how” question).

To illustrate, take a simple example of an event, why did the ship sink? (Figure 3.2) One proximate cause is that it had a hole, and water entered the ship, and it could not stay afloat (the “how” question). One ultimate cause is that the ship was on autopilot, which was inaccurate, and caused the ship to hit a rock (the “why question”). Likewise, evolutionary scientists use proximate and ultimate mechanisms to understand religious ideas and behaviors.

Consider another example from the cultural domain. Why do people participate in high-ordeal community rituals, such as walking barefoot through burning coal fires? One proximate explanation is that fear of social ostracism from the community motivates people to participate in the ritual. One ultimate explanation is that in our ancestral history, characterized by small groups of people dependent on each other for survival, social ostracism would have meant death to the individual, and lack of cooperation, the death of humans as a species. There were fitness benefits to conforming to displays of commitment to the group, for individuals and groups. So those who have survived (i.e. modern individuals) are strongly motivated to avoid social ostracism. Both proximate and ultimate explanations are valuable and complementary in explaining religious dispositions.

These two broad kinds of questions, proximate and ultimate, can be subdivided into two questions each (see Table 3.5). This subdivision was an attempt in 1963 by the ethnologist Niko Tinbergen to expand and clarify the distinction between proximate and ultimate questions to explain animal behavior. It is now known as “Tinbergen’s four questions.27” These questions guide the research agendas of many cognitive-evolutionary scholars of religion. The first two questions (mechanism and ontogeny) are proximate (how) explanations That CSR scholars often employ. The second two questions (phylogeny and adaptive significance) require ultimate or evolutionary (why) kinds of explanations, and these are the kinds of questions that cognitive-evolutionary scholars also explore.



Figure 3.2 Why did the ship sink? Answering this question draws on both proximate causes (it had a hole in the deck) and distal causes (faulty autopilot steered the ship into a rock). (Image credit: Astarina/Shutterstock.com).


Table 3.4 Characteristics of cognitive-evolutionary accounts.

Type Characteristics Often found in … Source

Proximate explanation. Focus on the cause immediately responsible. “How” questions Cognitive

Ultimate explanation. Focus on the ultimate cause. “Why” questions Evolutionary



Seeking answers to all four of Tinbergen’s questions expands explanations beyond mechanisms to also describe the development, evolutionary history, and adaptive significance of features of religious thought and behavior.

For example, one observation is that people in different cultures often reason about God as human-like. For instance, God is assumed to be constrained even though they may subscribe to a theological view of God as all-powerful and knowing. Why have anthropomorphic concepts of God emerged and proliferated in human culture when they are introduced to populations rather than other concepts of God? One account in CSR is outlined below and developed in Chapter 7 (Supernatural Agents):

Mechanism: What is the structure of the tendency?



Adults tend to reason about God as human-like when they are under cognitive load, or during time constraints. This finding indicates that it is less cognitively effortful to think of supernatural agents, like God, as similar to humans than to think that God is different. In other words, people have a natural tendency to anthropomorphize God.

Ontogeny: How does the tendency develop in individuals?



Young children also anthropomorphize God, which supports the claim that people have a natural tendency to anthropomorphize God.

Phylogeny: What is its evolutionary history?



People are constrained in their representations of supernatural agents by how they represent human agents generally.

Adaptive significance: How have the variations influenced fitness?



These anthropomorphic biases are part of a constellation of adaptations for detecting, reasoning, and making decisions about intentional agents, which would have aided predator evasion and prey capture throughout our evolutionary history. We also, however, can acquire concepts that were not targets of natural selection. We draw inferences about extraordinary agents from our concepts of agents in general. This tendency is a by-product that does not serve an adaptive function in the context of reasoning about extraordinary agents.



Cognitive-evolutionary scholars in CSR aim to provide answers to all four questions to explain religion. This includes accounting for why aspects of religious cognition and behavior make them likely to recur in similar forms across cultures, and how these predispositions interact with the environment to produce variations of similar forms. Hence, the subtitle of this book: Connecting evolution, brain, cognition, and culture.

In practice, cognitive scientists of religion often focus on one or several of the four questions based on their expertise and the question. For instance: (a) brain: neurocognitive and cognitive scientists tend to focus on uncovering the mechanism (what is the structure?); (b) cognition: developmental psychologists tend to track ontogeny (how does it develop in individuals?); those also versed in the evolutionary sciences (a, b, c), such as evolutionary biologists, anthropologists and psychologists, ask additional questions about the phylogeny (what is the evolutionary history?) and adaptive significance of traits (how have variations influenced fitness? how has culture shaped it?)



Figure 3.3 The goal of CSR is to explain religion by connecting four domains of knowledge. Note that evolutionary theory can be applied to the other levels of brain, cognition, and culture, which is why many scholars label evolutionary theory as unifying approaches within the subdiscipline.

Given the growing number of interdisciplinary institutes dedicated to cognitive-evolutionary research on religion, it appears that the next generation of graduate students in training will come to inherit a wide range of methodologies and perspectives. Interdisciplinary research and methodological pluralism will continue to be important because together, researchers can provide answers to these four questions, explain and map religious predispositions, and their cultural expression. Not all questions have been given equal attention, and progress has been made for some aspects of religion on some questions and not others. There are also more disagreements on the answers to some questions. Eventually, it will be possible to provide a list of predispositions and data to inform answers to all four questions. To date, this endeavor is a work in progress.

Key points

Evolutionary accounts attempt to get at the ultimate causality behind the origins and persistence of religious ideas.

Evolutionary accounts focus on the ultimate mechanisms, or causes, of the recurrent features of religion (i.e. a distal cause, often referred to as the ultimate cause).

Ultimate explanations address evolutionary functions (the “why” question).

Adaptationist theories explain religion as adaptations that enhanced fitness.

By-product theories explain religion as by-products of predispositions and biases.

Four questions guide cognitive-evolutionary accounts. These are related to mechanism, ontogeny, phylogeny, and adaptive significance.





So far, in this section, we have discussed evolutionary accounts as ultimate explanations that address evolutionary functions (the “why” question). Considerations such as ontogeny, phylogeny, and adaptive significance of the trait provide explanations beyond mechanisms and are pursued by many cognitive scientists of religion. Cognitive scientists of religion sometimes disagree over the answers to Tinbergen’s four questions for aspects of religious concepts and behaviors. They may also disagree on the level of selection of the trait, namely, whether this occurs at the genetic, individual, or group level as well as the historical origins and current function.

Answers about the historical origin and current function of a trait give rise to two main accounts of the precise role of evolution in the emergence and spread of religion in the cognitive-evolutionary sciences. One takes the form of adaptationist arguments, explaining at least some aspects of religious systems as biological and/or cultural adaptations that enhanced the fitness of individuals or groups. Some scholars argue that natural selection has favored the psychological propensity for religious practices and representations about the afterlife, intelligent design, and moral obligations because they provide benefits that increase the fitness of the individual or group. Some of these postulated benefits include encouraging socially advantageous attitudes and behaviors and promoting better physical health.28 For example, religious commitment and ritual participation are associated with marked improvements in physical well-being, including less coronary artery disease, hypertension, stroke, immune system dysfunction, cancer, and overall mortality as well as mental health benefits.29

Another account proposes that standard features of religious systems are by-products (i.e. unintended consequences) of cognitive predispositions and biases, rather than biological and/or cultural adaptations that enhance fitness. These predispositions and biases give rise to standard features of religion. However, they are ultimately by-products of cognitive machinery that evolved for reasons that have nothing to do with religion. They evolved because of their success in other non-religious domains. For example, construing the tendency to represent invisibly but monitoring supernatural agents in the environment as an unintended consequence of the inclination of humans to perceive agency in the environment. This tendency is known as hyperactive agency detection device (HADD), or more recently, agency detection device (ADD).30 This inclination may have evolved to help support the detection of predators and prey, but not ghosts or gods.

While the adaptationist and by-product perspectives contrast, they do not necessarily contradict one another, even when they refer to the same trait. This state of affairs is because the origins of a trait (Table 3.6) and the trait’s function may well change over time. In other words, a trait’s current use (function) does not necessarily explain its origin.

For instance, like biological traits, most adaptations start as by-products or spandrels (i.e. traits that are not especially adaptive but are retained because they are not harmful). They can be co-opted (i.e. have a use other than the one for which natural selection has built it) because of their benefits, and are then selected. For instance, the earliest feathers belonged to dinosaurs not capable of flight, so they must have evolved for something else, like attracting mates or keeping warm.31 Later on, feathers became essential for modern birds’ flight. Similarly, ritualization might emerge as a by-product, but if it helps reduce anxiety, it can be selected for. Another important consideration in evolutionary accounts of religion is the level of selection; in other words, the heritable variation underpinning differential fitness. In CSR, the levels are typically genetic, individual, and group.


Table 3.5 Tinbergen’s four questions commonly expressed today.

# Object of explanation Question Kind of explanation

1 Mechanism What is the structure of the trait? Proximate

2 Ontogeny How does the trait develop in individuals? Proximate

3 Phylogeny What is the trait’s evolutionary history? Ultimate (evolutionary)

4 Adaptive significance How have the trait variations influenced fitness? Ultimate (evolutionary)




Table 3.6 Example of accounts of the origin and function of religion. Note that there are many combinations of possibilities related to the historical origins and current functions.

Type Historical origin Current function Example of theory

Adaptation Adaptations that enhanced the fitness of individuals or groups. Enhance the fitness of individuals or groups. Ritual participation enhances well-being.

By-product Unintended consequences of an adaptation. None, or neutral: do not enhance or detract from the fitness of individuals or groups. Ability to infer the presence of intentional agents favors the spread of religious ideas about agents.



For example, consider ritual participation again. One adaptationist account, covered earlier in this section, proposed that religious commitment and ritual participation increase physical well-being and were selected for at the individual level because of the individual benefits. Another adaptationist account at the group level proposes that rituals are culturally successful because they enhanced the survival of the group. In small-scale and traditional societies, being part of a group was essential for survival, and yet group-living also brings the risk of free-riders, who are not committed but reap the benefits of group living. Rituals may serve as costly signals and credibility enhancing displays to convey one’s commitment to the group and facilitate their acceptance as a reliable and collaborative group member. This explanation is at the group-level, because of the group benefits. Of course, aspects of ritual behavior may have both individual and group benefits. Likewise, some may be adaptive and others, by-products, so the explanatory picture of religion can become complicated.

While the by-product account came to influence early conceptualizations of CSR, today, scholars differ according to their endorsement of particular theories and research on the evolutionary origins of religious ideas and behaviors. This evolutionary approach includes fundamental questions such as whether, and to what extent, religion is a by-product of cognitive processes and practices that evolved for other purposes and because of their success in other non-religious domains.

So far, in this section, we have considered examples mainly where the mechanism of selection can be described as “natural selection”—that differential survival and reproduction of individuals is due to differences in heritable traits characteristic of a population over generations. It is important to note, however, that this is not the only possible mechanism of selection. For example, another is sexual selection, differences in reproductive rates, and cultural selection, differences in rates of cultural transmission of ideas and behaviors.

After natural selection, cultural selection is the second most popular school of evolutionary theorizing about religion in CSR. This model of cultural selection very much resembles natural selection. The key difference is that while natural selection concerns genetic inheritance, cultural selection deals with cultural inheritance not necessarily connected with human reproduction. For example, a behavior can be transmitted to others who are genetically unrelated.

Cultural evolution is faster than genetic evolution and thus influences it. For example, by age five, most children cannot break down the sugars in milk; they are lactose intolerant. Lactase persistence, which allows drinkers to access milk’s nutrition, is very much under genetic control. Yet one culturally involved package that influenced the emergence of lactase persistence was the domestication of cattle around 10,000 years ago, which permitted people to extract nutrients from milk into adulthood. In short, culture influences genes. Proponents of cultural selection advocate for the role of culture beyond the genetic level to the individual and group level also. An example of cultural evolution as the mechanism of selection in religion (at the group-level) is the theory encountered earlier in this section, that ritual participation cultivates cooperation to benefit the group.

In sum, evolutionary theories deal with ultimate questions about the emergence and persistence of religious phenomena. Still, they sometimes differ in terms of the mechanism of selection proposed the level of selection and the origins and function of the mechanism (Table 3.7). The goal of this chapter is to enable students to identify the basic differences in evolutionary explanations for religion. A more thorough discussion of the intricacies and relationships between and within evolutionary accounts is beyond the scope of a general introduction to CSR. Still, students can refer to the citations of scholars cited in Table 3.7 for further reading on the topic.

Although there is an ongoing debate about the origin, function, and exact role of evolution in religious ideas and behaviors,33 most scholars agree that understanding the evolutionary causality behind the origins of ideas and behaviors leads to a better explanation of religion overall.34 Most cognitive scientists of religion assume that evolutionary sciences are, or should be, essential to a cognitive explanation of religious phenomena. Some35 have argued the case that the evolutionary sciences are distinct and complementary, often referring to “cognitive and evolutionary approaches to the study of religion” to capture both.36


Table 3.7 Mechanism of selection often featured in evolutionary explanations of religion.32

# Mechanism of selection Explanation Example Example of scholars who endorse view

1 Natural Adaptation: Some features of religions are straightforward adaptations for individuals resulting from the process of natural selection. Religious commitment and participation increase adherent’s fitness benefits, such as physical well-being. a) Bulbulia.b) Sosis.

By-product: Some features of religions are by-products of cognitive predispositions and biases. a) Boyer.b) Lawson & McCauley.

2 Sexual Religions aid humans in the successful propagation of their genes. Religiosity serves as a cultural signal about values such as fidelity. Religion enables individuals to appeal more to members of the opposite sex and ensure a good pool of prospective mates. a) Slone and Van Slyke.b) Weeden, Cohen and Kendrick.

3 Cultural Cultural selection impacts the differential transmission of cultural ideas and practices Religion cultivates cooperation among members to benefit the individuals and group overall. a) Henrich.b) Norenzayan.



Key points

Many CSR scholars acknowledge that to explain religion, we also need to take account of the ultimate mechanisms shaping ideas and behaviors.

These scholars propose that evolutionary processes explain how humans tend to think.

These are cognitive-evolutionary accounts of religious ideas and behaviors.

Scholars in CSR differ on the origin, function, and exact role of evolution in religious ideas and behavior.





4 How does culture interact with cognition to produce religion?


As we covered in Chapter 1 (Introduction), early pioneers in CSR argued that the study of religion was skewed in favor of personal and interpretative accounts of religion over systematic and explanatory theories. Their endeavors aimed to redress this balance by including explanatory accounts. As McCauley points out, the aim of CSR was never to dismiss the insights provided by interpretative accounts, but rather, to enrich them by including explanations of religion.37 This endeavor includes specifying how cognitive predispositions interact with the environment, which often entails an understanding of sociocultural particulars. The historical and culturally situated character of religion is, correspondingly, emphasized, even by early works in the area, such as those by anthropologists Harvey Whitehouse (1995)38 and Stewart Guthrie (1993).39 As Trigg and Barrett put it, the cognitive science of religion “draws upon the cognitive sciences to explain how pan-cultural features of human minds, interacting with their natural and social environments, inform and constrain religious thought and action.40”

Key points

CSR aimed to explain religion by taking account of how cognition interacts with culture.

Some scholars in CSR, especially anthropologists, have dedicated much of their research to understanding religious ideas and behaviors in particular contexts.





(a) Content and context biases


To answer questions about the interaction between cognition and culture, researchers build on their knowledge of cognitive biases (which give rise to content biases) by evoking the cultural environments that give rise to recurrent ideas and practices. As we cover in Chapter 10 (Rituals: Part 2), evolutionary anthropologist Joseph Henrich and colleagues have proposed that content biases are necessary to explain the stability and change of religious ideas and behaviors over time and across cultures. However, they are not sufficient.41 Henrich proposed the need to evoke context biases to explain such things.42 Context biases are not related to the content of specific ideas but rather, to the context in which they are transmitted, such as the perceived reliability of the person transmitting the information and the sociocultural context within which they occur.

Consider the following examples from Chapter 7 (Supernatural Agents). First, think about popular agents in western culture, such as the Tooth Fairy or Santa Claus. These agents are depicted as having similar properties of gods, yet they are not believed in as gods, nor do they evoke the same level of commitment that they would if they were represented as gods. After all, no wars have been fought over whether the Tooth Fairy is real. Second, consider other agents such as Zeus, who contains all the features of a successful god but is no longer believed to be a god.43 Why do children tend to endorse the beliefs of their parents? Why does belief change over time? Moreover, why do people not believe in other people’s gods if they all employ content biases that enjoy transmissive success?

To answer these questions, Henrich and colleagues urge us to consider various contextual factors, including context biases. These factors include understanding the history of ideas that have been labeled religious, including an understanding of how ideas originated and the cultural context within which they spread and changed over time. For instance, philosopher Helen De Cruz and colleagues have outlined the relationship between theological ideas and intuitions (i.e. natural theology) and the historical development and transmission of theological concepts over time.44 Another series of contextual considerations include questions of how intergroup conflict exacerbates or emphasizes differences within religious traditions. For example, Theologian Hugh Nicholson provides an account of the emergence of the Buddhist doctrine of no-self and the Christian doctrine of the Trinity that takes into consideration both cognitive biases and intergroup conflict at critical points during the emergence of these doctrines.45

A great deal of human knowledge comes through cultural learning. Some concepts are more readily endorsed than others because the source of information influences us. For example, people are more likely to endorse ideas about God from a prestigious individual with traditional authority, such as the Catholic Pope, than those without authority, such as a stranger during Mass. Likewise, as we cover in Chapter 10 (Rituals: Part 2), the convictions of individuals who engage in credibility enhancing displays (i.e. literally walk the walk) are more likely to be believed, in so far as their behavior is connected to authentically living out professed religious beliefs. Accounting for context-dependent factors enhances the explanatory power of CSR over and above content biases alone. As we cover in Chapter 11 (Conclusion), recent developments in CSR include an appreciation that human cognition is a result of dual inheritance from interacting genetic and cultural streams of evolution, which broadens the scope of traditional evolutionary accounts.46

Cognitive scientists of religion have attempted to understand how these biases manifest themselves in particular sociocultural contexts, thus endorsing context biases and other features of the environment at the time of their research. This understanding is achieved by drawing on their specialist knowledge and often spending extended periods in the field conducting ethnographic research.47

Key points

Content biases refer to biases that direct our attention to the content of representations.

Context biases are related to the context in which ideas are transmitted, such as the reliability of the source.

Scholars have proposed that content biases are necessary, but not sufficient, to explain the popularity of some religious ideas and behaviors.

Scholars propose that context biases, such as the perceived reliability of the person transmitting the information and the sociocultural context within which they occur, enhance the explanatory power of CSR.





Summary of standard research questions





1 Why do some ideas and behaviors persist?


Of all the possible types of religious ideas and behaviors that could be possible, we find some that recur. First, scholars identify what these popular ideas and behaviors are, and then they ask what makes these ideas and behaviors especially common?





2 What kind of mind does it take to represent these ideas?


One reason why these ideas and behaviors are especially prevalent within and across cultures is that they relate to how humans tend to think. They may also have important individual and societal effects, which makes them more likely to be remembered and passed on.





3 What is the source of these biases?


One way of identifying how humans tend to think is by looking at early emerging biases in children and adults in different cultures, and to examine our evolutionary history for possible origins and adaptive functions of these biases and behaviors.





4 How does culture interact with cognition to produce religion?


These ideas and behaviors are especially prevalent within and across cultures because they fit well with the environment. Other ideas seem very different in different contexts or may change depending on the sociocultural conditions. Understanding how culture interacts with cognition provides a more fruitful explanation of religion.



Overview summary of basic assumptions in CSR as outlined in this chapter





1 Religion is cognitively natural


Cognitive biases that underpin religious ideas and actions emerge early among children with minimal instruction. Religious ideas are part and parcel of our normally developing cognition and rapidly spread when introduced in social environments.





2 Religion is not unique


Some religious systems are distinctive, but all contain fundamental psychological biases.

The cognitive biases that underpin religious ideas and actions readily appear in other domains.





3 Religion can be explained scientifically


Religion is not a singular, naturally occurring phenomenon. It can be fractionated into cross-culturally recurrent forms of ideas and practices to explain why certain forms of these ideas and behaviors emerge and persist. Theories about religion can be tested using scientific methods such as formulating falsifiable hypotheses and performing statistical analyses.





4 Religion can be explained through a better understanding of cognition and culture


To explain how and why specific ideas emerge and are recurrent within and across cultures entails taking account of cognitive biases and how they are manifested and shaped by different cultural contexts.





Chapter summary


According to CSR, to successfully explain religion involves two things: the first draws on what is known in the cognitive and evolutionary sciences about panhuman cognition; that is, how humans attend to, process, and remember information, to explain why these patterns persist (content biases). The second draws on a specialist understanding of particular sociocultural environments in which these ideas and behaviors operate, to explain how these predisposed patterns of thinking and behaving manifest themselves in particular contexts (context biases and other sociocultural conditions48). This perspective demarks CSR from disciplines such as the sociology of religion, which tends to focus more on how social dynamics shape religious ideas and behaviors rather than specifying the interaction between the environment and cognitive mechanisms to account for such variation.

Discussion questions

What is CSR? Draft a response using your own words and compare it to your answer from Chapter 1.

Based on Chapters 1–3, outline the distinguishing features of CSR.

Based on Chapters 1–3, what do you think are the strengths and weaknesses of CSR?





Selected further reading


Articles


Barrett, J. L. “Cognitive science of religion: What is it, and why is it?” Religion Compass 1, No. 6 (2007): 768–786.

Boyer, Pascal. “Religious thought and behaviour as by-products of brain function.” Trends in Cognitive Sciences 7, no. 3 (2003): 119–124.





Books


Evans, Dylan, and Oscar Zarate. Introducing evolutionary psychology: A graphic guide. Icon Books Ltd, 2015.

McCauley, Robert N. Philosophical foundations of the cognitive science of religion: A head start. Bloomsbury Publishing, 2017.

Whitehouse, Harvey, and James Laidlaw, eds. Religion, anthropology, and cognitive science. Durham, NC: Carolina Academic Press, 2007.



Notes

1 Sperber, Dan. Explaining culture: A naturalistic approach. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge, 1996.

2 McKay, Ryan, and Harvey Whitehouse. “Religion and morality.” Psychological Bulletin 141, no. 2 (2015): 447.

3 Nicholson, Hugh. The spirit of contradiction in Christianity and Buddhism. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2016.

4 Barrett, Justin L. and Frank C. Keil. “Conceptualizing a nonnatural entity: Anthropomorphism in God concepts.” Cognitive Psychology 31, no. 3 (1996): 219–247.

5 Slone, Jason. Theological incorrectness: Why religious people believe what they shouldn’t. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007.

6 Slone, Jason. Theological incorrectness: Why religious people believe what they shouldn’t. Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2007.

7 Shtulman, Andrew. “Variation in the anthropomorphization of supernatural beings and its implications for cognitive theories of religion.” Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 34, no. 5 (2008): 1123.

8 Exline, Julie Juola, and Alyce Martin. “Anger toward God: A new frontier in forgiveness research.” In Handbook of Forgiveness, Routledge, 2007, 97–112.

9 White, Claire, Maya Marin, and Daniel M.T. Fessler. “Not just dead meat: An evolutionary account of corpse treatment in mortuary rituals.” Journal of Cognition and Culture 17, no. 1–2 (2017): 146–168; Emmons, Natalie A., and Deborah A. Kelemen. “Young children’s acceptance of within-species variation: Implications for essentialism and teaching evolution.” Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 139 (2015): 148–160; Cohen, Emma, Emily Burdett, Nicola Knight, and Justin Barrett. “Cross‐cultural similarities and differences in person‐body reasoning: Experimental evidence from the United Kingdom and Brazilian Amazon.” Cognitive Science 35, no. 7 (2011): 1282–1304; Astuti, Rita, and Paul L. Harris. “Understanding mortality and the life of the ancestors in rural Madagascar.” Cognitive Science 32, no. 4 (2008): 713–740; Malley, Brian. How the Bible works: An anthropological study of evangelical biblicism. Rowman Altamira, 2004; Whitehouse, Harvey. Inside the cult: Religious innovation and transmission in Papua New Guinea. Oxford University Press on Demand, 1995.

10 Kelemen, Deborah. “Are children ‘intuitive theists’? Reasoning about purpose and design in nature.” Psychological Science 15, no. 5 (2004): 295–301.

11 Chudek, Maciej, Rita McNamara, Susan Burch, Paul Bloom, and Joseph Henrich. “Developmental and cross-cultural evidence for intuitive dualism.” Psychological Science 20 (2013).

12 Barrett, Justin L. Why would anyone believe in God? United Nations Publications, 2004; Guthrie, Stewart, Joseph Agassi, Karin R. Andriolo, David Buchdahl, H. Byron Earhart, Moshe Greenberg, Ian Jarvie et al. “A cognitive theory of religion [and comments and reply].” Current Anthropology 21, no. 2 (1980): 181–203.

13 Baumard, Nicolas, and Pascal Boyer. “Explaining moral religions.” Trends in Cognitive Sciences 17, no. 6 (2013): 272–280.

14 Swann Jr, William B., Michael D. Buhrmester, Angel Gomez, Jolanda Jetten, Brock Bastian, Alexandra Vazquez, Amarina Ariyanto et al. “What makes a group worth dying for? Identity fusion fosters perception of familial ties, promoting self-sacrifice.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 106, no. 6 (2014): 912; Atran, Scott. Talking to the enemy: Violent extremism, sacred values, and what it means to be human. Penguin UK, 2010; Hamilton, William D. “The genetical evolution of social behaviour. II.” Journal of Theoretical Biology 7, no. 1 (1964): 17–52.

15 Norenzayan, Ara, Will M. Gervais, and Kali H. Trzesniewski. “Mentalizing deficits constrain belief in a personal God.” PloS One 7, no. 5 (2012); Johnson, Dominic, and Jesse Bering. “Hand of God, mind of man: Punishment and cognition in the evolution of cooperation.” Evolutionary Psychology 4, no. 1 (2006).

16 McCauley, Robert N. Why religion is natural and science is not. Oxford University Press, 2011.

17 Baron-Cohen, Simon. Mindblindness: An essay on autism and theory of mind. MIT Press, 1997.

18 Liénard, Pierre, and E. Thomas Lawson. “Evoked culture, ritualization and religious rituals.” Religion 38, no. 2 (2008): 158, 157–171.

19 McCauley, Robert N. Why religion is natural and science is not. Oxford University Press, 2011; Barrett, Justin L. “Exploring the natural foundations of religion.” Trends in Cognitive Sciences 4, no. 1 (2000): 29–34.

20 Idinopulos, Thomas A., and Edward A. Yonan, eds. Religion and eductionism: Essays on Eliade, Segal, and the challenge of the social sciences for the study of religion. Vol. 62. Brill, 1994.

21 Boyer, Pascal, and H. Clark Barrett. “Domain specificity and intuitive ontology.” In The handbook of evolutionary psychology 2005, 96–118.

22 De Cruz, Helen. “Religious concepts as structured imagination.” International Journal for the Psychology of Religion 23, no. 1 (2013): 63–74; Nyhof, Melanie, and Justin Barrett. “Spreading non-natural concepts: The role of intuitive conceptual structures in memory and transmission of cultural materials.” Journal of Cognition and Culture 1, no. 1 (2001): 69–100; Boyer, Pascal. The naturalness of religious ideas: A cognitive theory of religion. University of California Press, 1994; Ward, Thomas B. “Structured imagination: The role of category structure in exemplar generation.” Cognitive Psychology 27, no. 1 (1994): 1–40.

23 Norenzayan, Ara, Azim F. Shariff, Will M. Gervais, Aiyana K. Willard, Rita A. McNamara, Edward Slingerland, and Joseph Henrich. “The cultural evolution of prosocial religions.” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 39 (2016); Sosis, Richard, and Eric R. Bressler. “Cooperation and commune longevity: A test of the costly signaling theory of religion.” Cross-cultural Research 37, no. 2 (2003): 211–239.

24 McCauley, Robert N. Why religion is natural and science is not. Oxford University Press, 2011.

25 Stewart, Guthrie. Faces in the clouds: A new theory of religion. New York: Oxford University Press, 1993.

26 Brüne, Martin, and Ute Brüne-Cohrs. “Theory of mind—evolution, ontogeny, brain mechanisms and psychopathology.” Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews 30, no. 4 (2006): 437–455.

27 Tinbergen, Niko. “On aims and methods of ethology.” Zeitschrift für tierpsychologie 20, no. 4 (1963): 410–433.

28 E.g. Bering, Jesse M. “The folk psychology of souls.” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 29, no. 5 (2006): 453–462; Bulbulia, Joseph. “Nature’s medicine: religiosity as an adaptation for health and cooperation.” Where God and science meet 1 (2006): 87–121.

29 Koenig, Harold G., Michael E. McCullough, and David B. Larson. “Religion and health.” New York: Oxford University Press 1 (2001): 276–291.

30 Barrett, J. Why would anyone believe in God? (Cognitive Science of Religion). Walnut Creek, CA: Altamira, 2004.

31 Retrieved 4th June, 2020, from: https://www.livescience.com/25948-dinosaurs-feathered-tails-shake.html.

32 Adapted from Figure 2: Robert N. McCauley, “Recent trends in the cognitive science of religion: Neuroscience, religious experience, and the confluence of cognitive and evolutionary research”; Connor Wood, “Antistructure and the roots of religious experience …” Zygon® 55, no. 1 (2020): 97–124.

33 Bering, Jesse M. “The folk psychology of souls.” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 29, no. 5 (2006): 453–462; Bloom, P. (2009). “Religious belief as an evolutionary accident.” In The believing primate: Scientific, philosophical, and theological reflections on the origin of religion, 118–127; Bulbulia, Joseph, Richard Sosis, Erica Harris, R. Genet, Cheryl Genet, and Karen Wyman. The Evolution of Religion Studies, Theories, & Critiques. 2008; Henrich, Joseph, and Richard McElreath. “The evolution of cultural evolution.” Evolutionary Anthropology: Issues, News, and Reviews: Issues, News, and Reviews 12, no. 3 (2003): 123–135; Richerson, Peter J., and Robert Boyd. Not by genes alone: How culture transformed human evolution. University of Chicago Press, 2008; Sosis, Richard. “The adaptationist-byproduct debate on the evolution of religion: Five misunderstandings of the adaptationist program.” Journal of Cognition and Culture 9, no. 3–4 (2009): 315–332; Wilson, David. Darwin’s cathedral: Evolution, religion, and the nature of society. University of Chicago Press, 2010.

34 Bloom, Paul. “Religious belief as an evolutionary accident.” In The believing primate: Scientific, philosophical, and theological reflections on the origin of religion (2009): 118–127; Sosis, Richard. “The adaptationist-byproduct debate on the evolution of religion: Five misunderstandings of the adaptationist program.” Journal of Cognition and Culture 9, no. 3–4 (2009); Bulbulia, Joseph, Richard Sosis, Erica Harris, R. Genet, Cheryl Genet, and Karen Wyman. The Evolution of Religion Studies, Theories, & Critiques. 2008; Henrich, Joseph, and Richard McElreath. “The evolution of cultural evolution.” Evolutionary Anthropology: Issues, News, and Reviews 12, no. 3 (2003): 123–135.

35 Barrett, Justin L. “Cognitive science of religion: Looking back, looking forward.” Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion 50, no. 2 (2011): 229–239.

36 Barrett, Justin L., and Roger Trigg. The roots of religion: Exploring the cognitive science of religion (Ashgate Science and Religion Series). Ashgate Publishing Group, 2014; Watts, Fraser, and Léon P. Turner, eds. Evolution, religion, and cognitive science: Critical and constructive essays. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2014.

37 McCauley, Robert N. Philosophical foundations of the cognitive science of religion: A head start. Bloomsbury Publishing, 2017.

38 Whitehouse, H. Inside the cult: Religious innovation and transmission in Papua New Guinea. Oxford University Press on Demand, 1995.

39 Stewart, Guthrie. Faces in the clouds: A new theory of religion. New York: Oxford University Press, 1993.

40 Barrett, Justin L., and Roger Trigg. The roots of religion: Exploring the cognitive science of religion (Ashgate Science and Religion Series). Ashgate Publishing Group, 2014: 4.

41 Peter J. Richerson and Robert Boyd, Not by genes alone: How culture transformed human evolution, 1st edn. University of Chicago Press, 2006; Henrich, Joseph. “The evolution of costly displays, cooperation, and religion.” Evolution and Human Behavior 30, no. 4 (2009): 244–260.

42 Gervais, Will M., and Joseph Henrich. “The Zeus problem: Why representational content biases cannot explain faith in gods.” Journal of Cognition and Culture 10, no. 3–4 (2010): 383–389.

43 Gervais, Will M., and Joseph Henrich. “The Zeus problem: Why representational content biases cannot explain faith in gods.” Journal of Cognition and Culture 10, no. 3–4 (2010): 383–389.

44 De Cruz, Helen, and Johan De Smedt. A natural history of natural theology: The cognitive science of theology and philosophy of religion. MIT Press, 2014.

45 Nicholson, Hugh. The spirit of contradiction in Christianity and Buddhism. Oxford University Press, 2016.

46 Henrich, Joseph, and Richard McElreath. “The evolution of cultural evolution.” Evolutionary Anthropology: Issues, News, and Reviews 12, no. 3 (2003): 123–135.

47 Cohen, Emma. The mind possessed: The cognition of spirit possession in an Afro-Brazilian religious tradition. Oxford University Press, 2007; Whitehouse, Harvey. Inside the cult: Religious innovation and transmission in Papua New Guinea. Oxford University Press on Demand, 1995; Whitehouse, Harvey, and Luther H. Martin, eds. Theorizing religions past: Archaeology, history, and cognition. Rowman Altamira, 2004; Xygalatas, Dimitris. The burning saints: Cognition and culture in the fire-walking rituals of the Anastenaria. Routledge, 2014.

48 Gervais, Will M., and Joseph Henrich. “The Zeus problem: Why representational content biases cannot explain faith in gods.” Journal of Cognition and Culture 10, no. 3–4 (2010): 383–389; Henrich, Joseph, and Richard McElreath. “The evolution of cultural evolution.” Evolutionary Anthropology: Issues, News, and Reviews 12, no. 3 (2003): 123–135.





4 Methods




The cognitive science of religion (CSR) is characterized by the diversity and flexibility in methods employed. There are, however, core assumptions that bind the seemingly endless varieties of research methodologies in CSR together. These include the conviction that (a) religion can be studied using scientific methods and commitments to (b) methodological naturalism and (c) methodological pluralism. We consider these assumptions in more detail below.





Methodological assumptions


1 Religion can be studied using scientific methods


As we discussed in previous chapters, one conviction of early cognitive scientists of religion was that religious ideas and behaviors, like other kinds of human phenomena, can be studied scientifically. Cognitive scientists of religion formulate theories about religious ideas and behaviors and make predictions about the past, present, and future state of affairs. What makes these theories scientific is that they are (or can be) tested using formal methods of the sciences. CSR scholars often generate testable predictions (i.e. hypotheses) using formalized methods, such as statistical analyses, which is the interpretation of numerical facts and data using mathematical theories of probability. These predictions about religion are subject to verification or revision based on the principles of testability and goodness-of-fit of existing data.

For instance, many CSR scholars invite critique from an array of specialists in multiple disciplines on topics such as ritual behavior1 or ideas about the afterlife.2 In some cases, entire research agendas have been shaped and modified based on collaboration, testing, and feedback. For instance, anthropologist Harvey Whitehouse teamed with experimental psychologists to formulate his theory of Modes of Religiosity (MoR) in ways that could be empirically tested against competing alternatives.3 He also sought out historians of religion to apply his theory to prehistorical, Graeco-Roman, and Christian religions to test the model,4 and modified his theory in light of evidence.5

Key points

CSR is a scientific approach to religion.

Scholars formulate theories about religious ideas and behaviors and make predictions about the past, present, or future state of affairs.

These theories are tested using formal methods of the sciences, such as the generation of testable predictions using formalized methods, including statistical analyses.

CSR has enriched our understanding of many aspects of religion.





2 Methodological naturalism


Previously, we considered the assumption (1) that “religion can be explained using scientific methods.” It would be more accurate to state that CSR scholars hold the opinion that “some aspects of religion can be studied using scientific methods.” This is because CSR researchers are bound together by a commitment to methodological naturalism, the basic idea that only the “human side” of religious ideas and experiences can be studied in naturalistic terms. This boundary has implications for what cognitive scientists of religion study.

Cognitive scientists of religion are interested in understanding how and why humans respond to ideas that are deemed religious, rather than to decipher whether or not those ideas are true or false (i.e. ontological status). Scholars in CSR tend to see questions about whether or not religious concepts such as God exist as outside the scope of scientific research both methodologically (how would we test it?) and theoretically (why would we test it?). Thus, religious concepts such as “transcendence” and “holy” are significant to the extent that they can be operationalized and studied empirically.

Neuroscientists, in particular, are often asked about the implications of their work on religion. For example, neuropsychologist Uffe Schjoedt and his research team found that informal types of prayers directed to the Christian God activate primary areas of social cognition in the brain. In his work, Schjoedt is explicit that his research aim is to describe the basic neural processing employed by participants in religious practices.6 Regardless, he often has to clarify in interviews that these findings say nothing about the reality of God or religion, only the corresponding areas of the brain that are activated in this specific type of practice.7 We return to these issues in more detail in the conclusion of this book (Chapter 11).

Key points

CSR scholars espouse a commitment to methodological naturalism, which is the basic idea that only the “human side” of religious ideas and experiences can be studied in naturalistic terms.





3 Methodological pluralism


If religion is not a singular entity, then it follows that no one method will provide ample insight. CSR scholars thus adopt a range of methods to answer research questions (i.e. methodological pluralism). Examples of the kinds of research methods CSR scholars use to answer research questions are provided in Table 4.1. These examples are illustrative, not exhaustive.

Participation 1: Identifying research

Working in pairs, obtain one of the original research articles from the following research topics in Table 4.1 using your resources, such as a the college library, Google Scholar, or Academia (the references are in endnotes).



Answer the remaining questions with your partner.

Summarize some of the research questions about this topic based on the introduction (or start) of the chapter, using your own words. For example, do people in different cultures believe in reincarnation? Why are these ideas about how to identify someone who has died similar?

Outline the methods that the author used to investigate these questions (e.g. large historical databases, cross-cultural experiments).

In your own words, summarize the author’s conclusions.





Key points

CSR scholars adopt that multiple methods, to address questions in the study of religion.





4 Interdisciplinarity integration in CSR


The assumption that the human side of religion can be studied scientifically creates a boundary around the type of research that CSR scholars conduct. Within this scientific and naturalistic framework, research in the evolutionary and cognitive sciences is diverse and is characterized by the integration of disciplines and methods. By contrast, research in most academic institutions tends to be compartmentalized, and scholars tend to stay within their own perspectives. For example, sociologists talk largely about the global, cultural anthropologists focus on describing diversity, and cognitive psychologists are more interested in human universals than particulars.


Table 4.1 Examples of research questions and methodologies employed in CSR.

# Question Methods Summary Findings

1 What is cognition? Philosophy of science analysis, ethnographic data and experimental evidence. There is disagreement between earlier and later generations of cognitive scientists. CSR scholars disagree on what cognition is. Some claim that it is primarily formal-logistic mental representations while others expand it to include emotions, embodiment, contexts, and culture.8

2 Which cognitive biases help explain religious belief, paranormal belief, and belief in life’s purpose? Statistical modeling. A path model testing the various relationships between cognitive biases and different types of supernatural belief. Extensions of theory of mind (anthropomorphism, mind body dualism, and teleology) mediate the impact of theory of mind on a variety of supernatural beliefs. Anthropomorphism predicts increased paranormal belief but not belief in God. Anthropomorphic tendencies are also negatively impacted by living in a religious area, but belief in God is increased.9

3 How do people represent spirit possession? Ethnography. Participant-observation and interviews. 18 months of participant-observation and interviews in an Afro-Brazilian religious tradition in northern Brazil. Intuitive ideas about bodies and minds facilitate the spread and appeal of popular ideas about spirit possession.10

4 How do people integrate natural and supernatural explanations for the same events? Experiments, studies, ethnography. Experiments with individuals and groups in multiple settings, vignette studies, surveys, focus group discussion, key informant interviews, ethnography. People reconcile natural and supernatural explanations by using them to understand multiple levels of causality. Natural explanations are often used to explain how something happened; supernatural explanations are often used to explain why something happened.11

5 Why do shamans observe costly taboos? Field experiments. Present participants with stories about shamans who do and do not self-deny and measure their inferences. Mentawai (Siberut Island, Indonesia) participants were presented stories about shamans to measure their inferences. Mentawai people infer that self-denying shamans are more cooperative, supernaturally powerful, and sincere in their belief.12

6 Why do gods care about the things we do? Surveys in naturalistic contexts. Free-list data, a variety of metric scaling techniques, cross-cultural comparisons. Surveys and interviews with American Christian students and Buddhist-animist Tyvans from southern Siberia. Cross-culturally, gods care about and punish a relatively narrow set of concerns. When directly asked, however, locally salient deities appear to care about and punish moral transgressions.13

7 How does the human cognitive system process ritualized actions? Experimental studies. Participants watched videos of various functional and non-functional (ritual) action sequences and pressed a response button for each segment they could identify. Two different experiments were conducted on Danish undergraduates to study how participants divide up and represent actions when observing functional and non-functional (ritual) behavior. People process ritual behaviors in a way that heightens cognitive load and hampers memory encoding. Thus, stimulating expectations (predictive processing).14

8 Why do people subject themselves to painful religious rituals and what effects do they have? Experiments in the lab and the field using physiological measures (heartbeat, blood pressure, impedance cardiography and respiration), videos of facial expressions, painful electrical stimulation, pre-scan tests and post-scan interviews and economic games. Various experiments were conducted on Danish, Spanish and Mauritian participants to determine the psychological and sociocultural functions of painful religious rituals. Painful and extreme religious rituals promote prosociality, not only in participants undergoing the ritual but also among observers of high-ordeal participants. Painful rituals can cause analgesic states and dissociative symptoms, which are sometimes experienced as divine presence. They also affect memory by cognitive depletion. Prayer seems to modulate the expectations, intensity and unpleasantness of pain.15

9 How do the special features of ritual influence memory formation? Field experiments. Field experiments involving online measurement of excitement, video-recording and post hoc recollection by participants. Participants’ memory encoding of highly exciting ritual action is impeded, which facilitates post hoc social (re-) construction of events as well as potential meaning.16

10 Does participation in extreme religious rituals send costly signals? Ethnographic fieldwork and experiments in the field, economic games, interviews, and statistical analyses of historical documents. Various experiments performed in various parts of the world to determine the costly signal hypothesis. Basically, they do. However, field studies indicate that extreme ritual behavior is not enough, whereas together with regular temple or church attendance it is more effective.17

11 How do emotionally intense “imagistic” rituals bond groups? Mathematical models, online experiments. Mathematical models generated predictions that a team of psychologists then tested in collaboration with experts on highly fused groups (e.g. military, extreme sports, twins) and via online experiments. Sharing personally transformative (memorable, meaningful, and self-defining) experiences with other group members produce identity fusion (a visceral sense of oneness motivating strong forms of pro-group action).18

12 What are the functions of ritual? Developmental and cross-cultural research. Experiments with individuals and groups in multiple settings, vignette studies, surveys, focus group discussion, key informant interviews, ethnography. Rituals serve a variety of functions; practical (e.g. solving problems), psychological (e.g. reducing anxiety), and social (e.g. cooperation, initiation).19

13 What are the neural correlates of religious experiences? Neuroscience. Pre-scan psychological tests, functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) using various experimental conditions, followed by post-scan interviews. Three different experiments were conducted on Danish participants from various denominations (mostly Inner Mission Lutherans and Pentecostals) and a secular control group (mostly BA students in the humanities). There are no specific neural mechanisms dedicated to religious experiences. Even simple phenomena such as prayer draw on various areas and mechanisms in the brain and are influenced by individual expectations (predictive processing).20

14 How do assumptions about speakers’ charismatic abilities change how information is processed? Neuroscience, questionnaires. Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) in response to speakers who Christian participants believed had healing abilities. Participants’ recognition of charismatic authority enhances their susceptibility to charismatic influence by down regulating their executive system.21

15 Can religious experiences (sensed presence, healing, miracles) and paranormal beliefs be induced experimentally? Card games, interviews, hypnosis, sensory deprivation, Virtual Reality, eye tracking and fMRI. A variety of experiments with and observations of Dutch and Danish participants. Tests indicate that the use of suggestion can induce religious and paranormal experiences. When manipulating with the senses, predictive processes take over in the brain and meet the cultural and individual expectations of the participants.22

16 Must young children think of God the same as a human being? Developmental cross-cultural research: knowledge-ignorance Theory of Mind (ToM) task. Three- to six-year-old children in four different countries (the UK, Israel, Dominican Republic, and Kenya) participated in a version of the classic “false-belief” task. Though preschoolers may mistake God for a human being, they do not have to. Children in four different cultures distinguished between God’s knowledge and their mother’s even before they had a stable understanding of what their mom knows and does not know.23

17 Do people more easily remember minimally counterintuitive ideas (MCI)? Recall and memory experiments using 15 coded types of MCI. A variety of recall and memory experiments have been conducted on Western and non-Western participants. The results are mixed. Results contradict each other, and cognitive architecture is often more complex than assumed.24

18 Do people have a hypersensitive agency detection device (HADD)? Biological motion perception tasks, point-light displays, ethnographic evidence, threat-inducing experiments and Virtual Reality experiments. Experiments to test whether American, Dutch and Danish participants show illusory agency detection. Studies show that people do occasionally detect agents in ambiguous situations, but threatening situations do not intensify agent detection. Thus, the term “hypersensitive” is unwarranted.25

19 Why do people look for physical marks and behaviors that imply continued memory? Cross-cultural experiments using imaginative perspective-taking tasks. Series of experiments with participants in the UK and India. The distinctiveness of physical marks and memories were manipulated. People regard physical marks and behaviors that imply a memory from a past life as strong evidence that a person has been reborn, but for different reasons. They also implicitly assume the body continues, even though they say it changes.26

20 What is the cultural evolutionary history of modes of religiosity? Ethnographic, historical, and archaeological data. Quantitative analysis of data from regional and global samples of ethnographic, historical, and archaeological sources. Imagistic practices are associated with small-scale group bonding, whereas doctrinal practices are associated with increasing agricultural intensity and the rise of larger and more complex social formations.27

21 How can we understand ancient initiation rituals in the Roman cults of Mithras (2nd to 4th century CE)? Historical texts and images. Review of the description of Mithraic initiation rituals based mostly on depictions, such as images. Initiation rituals documented throughout history show that initiates are subject to “rites of terror.” These rites are memorable, but their significance is locally construed.28

22 Do prehistorical and ancient religions support the modes of religiosity theory? A combination of historical texts, images, and archaeological data. A number of studies have been published by historians and archaeologists on the pros and cons of the modes theory. The results are mixed. The problem of causality (do cognitive constraints cause modes of ritual organization) is intractable. There is, however, a general acceptance of the theory.29

23 Is mind-body dualism present in China? Philosophical analysis, qualitative and quantitative textual analyses. Three different machine-based techniques—word collocation, hierarchical clustering, and topic modeling analysis of ancient Chinese texts. Chinese thought is often portrayed as radically different from Western thought. Textual evidence provides support against strong mind-body holism.30

24 Can math be used to analyze myths? Phylogenetic analysis of big data. Conceptual mapping, bioinformatics, component analysis, and social networks analyses of mythical and folklore corpuses. Phylogenetic analyses of various textual corpuses divulge relationships and patterns that are difficult or even impossible to find by traditional methods. They can also resolve conflicting theories of myths.31

25 Can we test evolutionary theories of religion? Developing large databases consisting of all relevant information in particular parts of the world from the deep prehistorical past to the present in order to statistically test competing hypotheses of the evolution of religion. Two prominent databases, Database of Religious History32 and Seshat: Global History Databank33 have been developed to test competing hypotheses. Such as: 1) that moralizing gods play a causal role in the development of complex societies and 2) that complex societies developed before the belief in moralizing gods. The results are inconclusive. Each of the two databases support the hypotheses of their own research teams. The disagreement rests on very complex statistical procedures.34

26 Can computer simulations model religious change and religious evolution? Agent-based statistical modeling. A statistical analysis of data from the International Social Survey Programme Religion Module (ISSP) and the Human Development Report (HDR). The modeling provides an accurate forecast of changes in existential security and religiosity in a very large number of countries and periods of time.35 It also can simulate religions as adaptive systems.36

27 Can computer simulations test religious studies theories? Computer models and computer simulations. A number of modeling studies have been applied to CSR theories such as Lawson & McCauley’s ritual competence theory and theories in the general study of religion such as Rodney Stark’s theory of religious movements and Robert Bellah’s Axial Age theory. The procedures necessary to develop computer models requires careful, detailed thought about the intermediate assumptions in particular theories of religion. The modeling can indicate which theories are most robust and can also lead to further unforeseen research questions.37



Much of the discrepancy in disciplines is due to philosophical and ideological differences, as well as the history of the approaches. Yet early proponents of a cognitive approach to the study of religion had been trained in a variety of methods across many disciplines: including religious studies, philosophy, anthropology, and psychology, and the subdiscipline has continued to study religion from an interdisciplinary perspective. The ultimate goal of CSR is to connect what is known about evolution, brain, cognition, and culture to explain religion by integrating disciplinary approaches. There are four key dimensions of interdisciplinary integration in CSR:38





1 Unit of integration


The unit of integration refers to the level at which integration takes place. Interdisciplinarity in CSR means multiple things. First, individual researchers master skills and methods in more than one discipline. This kind of interdisciplinary research, where one scholar increases knowledge across disciplines, provides insights but is not the only way that CSR is interdisciplinary. After all, this approach alone risks CSR becoming a jack of all trades and master of none. CSR is also integrated at a higher unit, beyond individual scholars, by promoting the team-based research paradigm. This is evidenced through the many multi-authored papers published in the cognitive and evolutionary sciences today.

In the following illustration, consider how this team-based approach works by imagining that an interdisciplinary team of cognitive scientists of religion is addressing the question, “why and how do ideas and behaviors that have been deemed religious, spread?” This particular team consists of an evolutionary psychologist, a neurocognitive scientist, a cognitive psychologist, and other social scientists.





(1) Evolutionary psychologist


The evolutionary psychologist is interested in questions about whether and how intuitive responses emerge. Intuitive responses are likely to be based on universal mechanisms, constraints, traits, etc., which may have been selected for during evolution. To understand whether a response is based on an intuitive mechanism, the researcher conducts experiments in different cultures, especially those that differ. If cultures differ in their accepted views, yet people tend to think similarly, then it suggests that evolutionary processes also influence responses.





(2) Neurocognitive scientist


The neuroscientist wants to understand better how cognitive functioning and emotional states are activated in the brain, as well as the connections between them. These gesture towards the neurobiological, and even evolutionary deep-rooted, basis of ideas and behaviors. This researcher uses methods such as neuroimaging to see which brain areas are activated in religious activities.





(3) Cognitive psychologist


The cognitive psychologist is interested in cognition and wants to seek out conditions that make it possible to tap into intuitive processes. For example, by designing nifty experiments where people respond based on their off-the-cuff, gut-like reactions rather than relying on people’s carefully thought through responses.





(4) Other social scientists


Many other social scientists involved in this hypothetical example are also equipped to study the distribution and stability of religious concepts. These include anthropologists, cognitive scientists, historians, psychologists, philosophers, sociologists, and religionists. These researchers use a combination of methods including archaeological surveys, historiographical analyses, textual analyses,39 self-reports, interviews, narrative recall tasks, behavioral tasks, economic games, experimental and quasi-experimental fieldwork,40 and computer modeling.

For example, those vested in cultural processes also take into account the role of the environment to understand how socialization and cultural input modifies and shapes both intuitive and reflective thought—for example, comparative research with children and adults and large-scale cross-cultural and historical surveys. Unfortunately, the vast amount of what we know about human psychology comes only from WEIRD traditions (i.e. Western, Educated, Industrialized, Rich, and Democratic).41 CSR conducts cross-cultural research, often in other non-WEIRD traditions, to address questions about the recurrence of religious concepts in many different cultures.42



Figure 4.1 CSR scholars often work in interdisciplinary teams to conduct research on religion. (Image credit: fizkes/Shutterstock.com).

Social scientists also draw upon existing archaeological, historical, ethnographic data, and large-scale social surveys to test goodness-of-fit with their theories.43 Others conduct secondary analyses of existing massive ethnographic and historical databases, such as the Standard Cross-Cultural Sample (SCCS) and the Human Relations Area Files (HRAF),44 and the Database of Religious History (DRH45). Such databases make possible analyses of aspects across cultures and throughout time while controlling for effects of historical contact between societies (i.e. Galton’s problem). These databases also enable scholars to formally test probabilistic models of aspects of religious ideas and behaviors.

Probabilistic models deal with statistical trends in data, enabling researchers to make claims about the frequency of ideas and behaviors in the world. In other words, they can reasonably make claims about how the world tends to be. These include the tendency to engage in physical contact with the corpse by kin during ritual preparation for disposal,46 the co-occurrence of ritual dynamics and particular socio-political arrangements,47 and the representation of high gods as interested in moral behavior.48

Together, these areas of inquiry and associated methods enable teams of scholars to understand how and why ideas and behaviors that have been deemed religious, spread. Of course, the examples of methods provided here are not exhaustive. For example, many researchers have engaged in the philosophical, historical, archaeological and theological treatment of CSR theories.49

This interdisciplinarity and methodological pluralism result in fluidity and a lack of clear demarcation of who is a CSR researcher and who is not, and throughout this book, scholars are referred to by their primary field of training (e.g. anthropologist, psychologist). As discussed in Chapter 1 (Introduction), the criteria for inclusion is their commitment to some of the main principles outlined in Chapters 1–4 of this book, as well as the nature of research, which typically reflects this commitment.

Participation 2: Create a new research topic

Based on what you have read so far in this book:

Come up with a research topic about religion that is typical in CSR. This can be about a religious idea, belief, or behavior, and it could have been asked before or be unique. For example, life after death, goblins, ghosts, fairies, fate, rituals to prevent harm.

Write down a list of 3–4 scientific questions about this topic. For example, have people always believed in life after death? Do people in different cultures believe in life after death? How are these ideas about life after death modified by the cultural environment?

Outline the methods that you would use to answer each of these questions (e.g. archaeology, large historical databases, neuroimaging, ethnography, field studies, cross-cultural experiments, large databases).

Based on the methods you would use, write down who you would want in your research team (e.g. archaeologist, historian, anthropologist, psychologist).

Swap your response to another student, give, and receive, feedback. Provide feedback on how they could improve based upon your understanding of CSR.

Modify your answers in light of their feedback.





Key points

Interdisciplinary integration is the level at which integration takes place.

Integration takes place in CSR at the level of the individual scholar, and in teams of scholars.





2 Scope of integration


The scope of integration refers to the degree of similarity between participating fields. A narrow form of interdisciplinarity involves collaboration between closely related fields, for example, archaeology and history. By contrast, CSR adopts a broad form of interdisciplinarity because collaboration occurs between fields whose key ideas, commitments, and methods tend to differ, such as literature and neuroscience.

Key points

The scope of integration refers to the degree of similarity between participating fields.

CSR integrates fields that are both similar and different.





3 Type of integration


The type of integration refers to the ways in which core theories about the nature of the world in different fields are brought together. In multidisciplinary research, scholars address problems from different disciplinary perspectives. These collaborative efforts often divide up labor and result in the culmination, but not necessarily the integration of knowledge. Religious Studies is an example of a multidisciplinary field. Here, students are often taught different perspectives on religion, while the contributing areas may benefit from added perspectives; they usually remain unchanged by it. By contrast, cognitive scientists of religion also borrow methods, concepts, and theories from one another. This type of interdisciplinarity leads to a pluridisciplinarity form of interaction.

CSR aims to go even further and produce a synthesis of methods, concepts, and theories that is qualitatively different than any single disciplinary approach. This ultimate aim is still a work in progress, but existing examples of the most influential forms of interdisciplinarity in other areas have led to new fields that cut across disciplinary boundaries such as behavioral economics and cognitive science itself.

Key points

The type of integration refers to the ways in which core theories about the nature of the world in different fields are brought together.

CSR is a multidisciplinary and pluridisciplinary approach.





4 Methodological integration


One unfortunate consequence of distinctive disciplinary approaches is the reluctance to go outside them, and scholars who focus on specific aspects of religion are often left with a narrow range of tools. As the saying goes, if the only tool you have is a hammer, it is tempting to treat everything as if it were a nail.50 Strong interdisciplinarity requires methodological integration.

While many researchers who study religion talk about interdisciplinarity as a way to increase knowledge, they often construe interdisciplinarity as obtaining and exchanging more data from different scholars. This approach will result in more data, of course, but conducting the same protocol in different contexts also means that any design errors will also be replicated. As anthropologist Dimitris Xygalatas notes, “the problem is not that you won’t get data; it is that you won’t really know what those data mean.51”

Cognitive scientists of religion concede that there is no one right predetermined way to study religion. Religion can be considered at different levels, such as neurochemistry, brain, and culture. CSR scholars use methods that are most appropriate to the types of questions they ask concerning the persistence and prevalence of “religious” ideas and behaviors. To extend the previous analogy, if scholars who remain in their disciplinary boundaries tend to approach problems in the study of religion with a hammer, then cognitive scientists come equipped with a tool kit.



Figure 4.2 CSR scholars come equipped with a methodological tool kit to solve problems in the study of religion. (Image credit: Emojoez/Shutterstock.com).

Research in the cognitive and evolutionary sciences on religion involves teamwork, collaboration, and continuous interaction between and within groups of specialists rather than uncoordinated efforts by isolated generalists. This results in methodological pluralism and integration. In this format, researchers often combine these methodologies from different epistemological traditions into a single research agenda. Figure 4.3 showcases how interdisciplinary perspectives offer a better explanation of religious phenomena. Table 4.2 provides examples of how interdisciplinary research provides a better account of ritual by answering Tinbergen’s four questions (covered in detail in Chapter 3: Research Methods) about the mechanism, ontogeny, phylogeny, and adaptative significance of ritual behavior.

Key points

CSR adopts methodological pluralism and methodological integration.





Summary of methodological assumptions and approaches in CSR





1 Scientific methods


A commitment to scientific methods binds scholars. This commitment includes the formulation of testable hypotheses and the performance of statistical tests to determine trends in religious ideas and behaviors.





2 Methodological naturalism


CSR researchers are bound together by a commitment to methodological naturalism, which is a basic stance that scientists can study the emergence and effects of religious ideas and behaviors. However, they cannot determine whether these ideas are true or false.





3 Methodological pluralism


Cognitive scientists of religion employ a diverse array of methods to answer questions about religion. Researchers use methods that are appropriate for the type of questions they ask. Often scholars use approaches common to the neurosciences (e.g. brain imaging), evolutionary sciences (e.g. cross-cultural studies), psychological sciences—including developmental psychology (e.g. behavioral experiments), and anthropology (e.g. ethnographic fieldwork).





4 Interdisciplinary integration


Scholars from a diversity of disciplines work together in CSR to answer questions about religion. They include archaeologists, anthropologists, psychologists, philosophers, scholars of religion, and historians. Integration in CSR is characterized by the unit, scope, and type of interdisciplinarity.





Chapter summary


Nowadays, CSR has come to be characterized by its diversity in theories (interdisciplinarity) and methods (methodological pluralism). This combination is rare, but, in some ways, it is hardly surprising that it has characterized CSR; after all, many scholars study the mind and how humans think, yet they each bring to the table a variety of theories, methods, and approaches, which enhances the research. Generally speaking, cognitive scientists of religion tend to have a specialty in an understanding of evolution, the human mind, cognition, and culture, with the ultimate aim of drawing on all four areas to explain the stability and diversity in religious forms.



Figure 4.3 Example of how different levels of analyses and corresponding methods provide a better explanation of rituals. For example, researchers measured the physiological responses of participants and spectators during real-time in a ritual performed in the field52 (a). Other research has focused on the cognitive representation of the effectiveness of ritualized action,53 while various studies have investigated ritual synchrony (b).54 Others have investigated the relationships between the features of ritual and the socio-political dynamics of religion (c).55

Discussion questions

What are the strengths and weaknesses of the methodological approach used by CSR?

What aspects of religion do you think are outside the scope of scientific inquiry?





Table 4.2 Example of how interdisciplinary research provides a better account of ritual by answering Tinbergen’s four questions.56

#Object and kind of explanationTinbergen’s question applied to ritualsExample of research findings and informed theories and conclusions on this question

1 Mechanism(proximate) What are the mechanisms underlying ritual? Rituals decrease anxiety. Ritual synchrony increases cohesion. Effects depend upon context. Bio-psycho-social mechanisms undergird the effects of rituals.

2 Ontogeny(proximate) How does ritual behavior develop in individuals? By engaging in rituals, children learn how to segregate their social world into those who are trustworthy and have high status and those who do not. Learning rituals are motivated by a drive to affiliate with social groups.

3 Phylogeny(ultimate) What is the evolutionary history of ritual? Traces of ritual behavior observed in Wild Guinea baboons and white-faced capuchin monkeys but not the great apes. Evidence of ritual in archaic human history from the archaeological record. Rituals are not a product of the modern environment, and humans have a psychological propensity to engage in rituals.

4 Adaptive significance(ultimate) What are the functions of ritual? Rituals promote trust and have psychological benefits such as reducing the anxiety of individuals and groups. Rituals identify group members, ensure commitment to the group norms, facilitate cooperation with coalitions and maintain group cohesion.





Selected further reading


Articles


Legare, Cristine. H., and M. Nielsen. “Ritual explained: interdisciplinary answers to Tinbergen’s four questions.” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences 375, no. 1805: (2020).





Books


McCauley, Robert N. “Recent trends in the cognitive science of religion: Neuroscience, religious experience, and the confluence of cognitive and evolutionary research.” Zygon 55, no. 1 (2020): 97–124.

Whitehouse, Harvey., “Twenty-five years of CSR: A personal retrospective.” In Luther H. Martin & Donald Wiebe (eds.). Religion explained? The cognitive science of religion after twenty-five years. London and New York: Bloomsbury Academic, 2017, 43–55.

Xygalatas, Dimitris. “Bridging the gap: The cognitive science of religion as an integrative approach.” In Evolution, cognition, and the history of religion: A new synthesis. Leiden and Boston: Brill, 2018, 255–272.



Notes

1 Boyer, Pascal, and Pierre Liénard. “Why ritualized behavior? Precaution systems and action parsing in developmental, pathological and cultural rituals.” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 29, no. 6 (2006): 595–613; Schjoedt, Uffe, Jesper Sørensen, Kristoffer Laigaard Nielbo, Dimitris Xygalatas, Panagiotis Mitkidis, and Joseph Bulbulia. “Cognitive resource depletion in religious interactions.” Religion, Brain & Behavior 3, no. 1 (2013): 39–55; Norenzayan, Ara, Azim F. Shariff, Will M. Gervais, Aiyana K. Willard, Rita A. McNamara, Edward Slingerland, and Joseph Henrich. “The cultural evolution of prosocial religions.” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 39 (2016).

2 Bering, Jesse M. “The folk psychology of souls.” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 29, no. 5 (2006): 453–462.

3 Atkinson, Quentin D., and Harvey Whitehouse. “The cultural morphospace of ritual form: Examining modes of religiosity cross-culturally.” Evolution and Human Behavior 32, no. 1 (2011): 50–62; Barrett and Lawson 2001; Cohen and Barrett 2008; Richert et al. 2005.

4 Whitehouse, Harvey, and Luther H. Martin, eds. Theorizing religions past: Archaeology, history, and cognition. Rowman Altamira, 2004.

5 Whitehouse, Harvey, and Robert N. McCauley, eds. Mind and religion: Psychological and cognitive foundations of religiosity. Rowman Altamira, 2005.

6 Schjoedt, Uffe. “The religious brain: A general introduction to the experimental neuroscience of religion.” Method & Theory in the Study of Religion 21, no. 3 (2009): 310–339.

7 Schjoedt, Uffe, Hans Stødkilde-Jørgensen, Armin W. Geertz, and Andreas Roepstorff. “Highly religious participants recruit areas of social cognition in personal prayer.” Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience 4, no. 2 (2009): 199–207.

8 Boyer, P. The naturalness of religious ideas: A cognitive theory of religion. Berkeley, LA, London: University of California Press, 1994; Boyer, P. “Cognitive tracks of cultural inheritance: How evolved intuitive ontology governs cultural transmission.” American Anthropologist 100 no. 4 (1999): 876–889; Donald, M. “The slow process: A hypothetical cognitive adaptation for distributed cognitive networks.” Journal of Psychology 101 (2007): 214–222; Donald, M. “The first hybrid minds on earth.” In A. W. Geertz and J. S. Jensen eds., Religious narrative, cognition and culture: Image and word in the mind of narrative. Sheffield & Oakville: Equinox Publishing, 2011, 67–96; Geertz, A. W. “Brain, body and culture: A biocultural theory of religion.” Method and Theory in the Study of Religion 22, no. 4 (2010): 304–321; Jensen, J. S. “The complex worlds of religion: Connecting cultural and cognitive analysis.” In I. Pyysiäinen & V. Anttonen eds., Current approaches in the cognitive science of religion. London & New York: Continuum, 2002, 203–228; Jensen, J. S. “Normative cognition in culture and religion.” Journal for the Cognitive Science of Religion 1, no. 1 (2013): 47–70; Kundtová Klocová, E. & Geertz, A. W. “Ritual and embodied cognition.” In R. Uro, J. J. Day, R. E. DeMaris, and R. Roitto eds., The Oxford handbook of early Christian ritual. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2019, 74–94; Lawson, E. T. “Counterintuitive notions and the problem of transmission: The relevance of cognitive science for the study of history.” Historical Reflections/Reflexions Historiques 20, no. 3 (2013): 481–495; Lawson, E. T., and McCauley, R. N. Rethinking religion: Connecting cognition and culture. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990; McCauley, R.N. Why religion is natural and science is not. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011; Newen, A., de Bruin, L., & Gallagher, S. eds. The Oxford Handbook of 4E Cognition. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2018.

9 Willard, Aiyana K., and Ara Norenzayan. “Cognitive biases explain religious belief, paranormal belief, and belief in life’s purpose.” Cognition 129, no. 2 (2013): 379–391.

10 Cohen, E. The mind possessed: The cognition of spirit possession in an Afro-Brazilian religious tradition. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007.

11 Gelman, S., & Legare, C. “South African children’s understanding of AIDS and flu: Investigating conceptual understanding of cause, treatment and prevention.” Journal of Cognition and Culture 9, no. 3–4 (2009): 333–346.

12 Singh, M., & Henrich. J. (2020). “Why do religious leaders observe costly prohibitions? Examining taboos on Mentawai Shamans.” Evolutionary Human Sciences 2 (e32). https://doi.org/10.1017/ehs.2020.32.

13 Purzycki, B. G. “The minds of gods: A comparative study of supernatural agency.” Cognition 129, no. 1 (2013): 163–179; Purzycki, B. G. “The evolution of gods’ minds in the Tyva Republic.” Current Anthropology 57, no. S13 (2016): S88–S104.

14 Nielbo, K. L., & Sørensen, J. “Spontaneous processing of functional and non-functional action sequences.” Religion, Brain & Behavior 1, no. 1 (2011): 18–30.

15 Jegindø, E.-M. E., Vase, L., Jegindø, J., & Geertz, A. W. “Pain and sacrifice: Experience and modulation of pain in a religious piercing ritual.” International Journal for the Psychology of Religion 23, no. 3 (2013): 171–187; Jegindø, E.-M. E., Vase, L., Skewes, J. C., Terkelsen, A. J., Hansen, J., Geertz, A. W., … Jensen, T. S. “Expectations contribute to reduced pain levels during prayer in highly religious participants.” Journal of Behavioral Medicine 36, no. 4 (2013): 413–426; Konvalinka, I., Xygalatas, D., Bulbulia, J., Schjødt, U., Jegindø, E.-M., Wallot, S., … Roepstorff, A. “Synchronized arousal between performers and related spectators in a fire-walking ritual.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108, no. 20 (2011), 8514–8519; Xygalatas, D., Mitkidis, P., Fischer, R., Reddish, P., Skewes, J., Geertz, A. W., … Bulbulia, J. “Extreme rituals promote prosociality.” Psychological Science 24, no. 8 (2013): 1602–1605; Xygalatas, D., Schjoedt, U., Bulbulia, J., Konvalinka, I., Jegindø, E.-M., Reddish, P., … Roepstorff, A. “Autobiographical memory in a fire-walking ritual.” Journal of Cognition and Culture 13, no. 1 (2013): 1–16.

16 Xygalatas, Dimitris, Uffe Schjoedt, Joseph Bulbulia, Ivana Konvalinka, Else-Marie Jegindø, Paul Reddish, Armin W. Geertz, and Andreas Roepstoff. “Autobiographical memory in a fire-walking ritual.” Journal of Cognition and Culture 13, no. 1–2 (2013): 1–16.

17 Bird, R. B., & Power, E. A. “Prosocial signaling and cooperation among Martu hunters. Evolution and Human Behavior 36 (2015): 389–397; Bulbulia, J. “Charismatic signalling.” Journal for the Study of Religion, Nature and Culture 3, no. 4 (2019): 518–551; Bulbulia, J., & Sosis, R. “Signalling theory and the evolution of religious cooperation.” Religion 41, no. 3 (2011): 363–388; Carl Brusse “Signaling theories of religion: Models and explanation.” Religion, Brain & Behavior 10, no. 3 (2020): 272–291; Power, E.A. “Discerning devotion: Testing the signaling theory of religion.” Evolution and Human Behavior, 38 (2017): 82–9; Sosis, R. “Religious behaviors, badges, and bans: Signaling theory and the evolution of religion.” In P. McNamara ed., Where God and science meet: How brain and evolutionary studies alter our understanding of religion. Volume 1: Evolution, genes, and the religious brain. Westport & London: Praeger Publishers, 2006, 61–86; Sosis, R., and Bressler, E.R. “Cooperation and commune longevity: A test of the costly signaling theory of religion.” Cross-Cultural Research 37, no. 2 (2003): 211–239; Sosis, R., & Ruffle, B.J. “Religious ritual and cooperation: Testing for a relationship on Israeli religious and secular kibbutzim.” Current Anthropology 44, no. 5 (2003): 713–722.

18 Whitehouse, Harvey, Jonathan Jong, Michael D. Buhrmester, Ángel Gómez, Brock Bastian, Christopher M. Kavanagh, Martha Newson et al. “The evolution of extreme cooperation via shared dysphoric experiences.” Scientific Reports 7 (2017): 44292.

19 E.g. Wen, Nicole J., Aiyana K. Willard, Michaela Caughy, and Cristine H. Legare. “Watch me, watch you: Ritual participation increases in-group displays and out-group monitoring in children.” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B375, no. 1805 (2020): 20190437; Watson-Jones, Rachel E., Harvey Whitehouse, and Cristine H. Legare. “In-group ostracism increases high-fidelity imitation in early childhood.” Psychological Science 27, no. 1 (2016): 34–42.

20 Schjødt, U., Stødkilde-Jørgensen, H., Geertz, A. W., & Roepstorff, A. “Rewarding prayers.” Neuroscience Letters 443 (2008): 165–168; Schjødt, U., Stødkilde-Jørgensen, H., Geertz, A. W., & Roepstorff, A. “Highly religious participants recruit areas of social cognition in personal prayer.” Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 4 (2009): 199–207; Schjødt, U., Stødkilde-Jørgensen, H., Geertz, A. W., Lund, T. E., and Roepstorff, A. “The power of charisma—perceived charisma inhibits the frontal executive network of believers in intercessory prayer.” Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 6 (2011): 119–127; Bulbulia, J., & Schjoedt, U. “The neural basis of religion.” In F. Krueger & J. Grafman eds., The neural basis of human belief systems. Hove & New York: Psychology Press, 2013, 169–190.

21 Schjoedt, Uffe, Hans Stødkilde-Jørgensen, Armin W. Geertz, Torben E. Lund, and Andreas Roepstorff. “The power of charisma—perceived charisma inhibits the frontal executive network of believers in intercessory prayer.” Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience 6, no. 1 (2011): 119–127.

22 Andersen, M. “Predictive coding in agency detection.” Religion, Brain & Behavior 9, No.1 (2019): 65–84; Andersen, M., Nielbo, K. L., Schjoedt, U., Pfeiffer, T., Roepstorff, A., & Sørensen, J. “Predictive minds in ouija board sessions.” Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 18 (2018): 577–588; Andersen, M., Pfeiffer, T., Müller, S., & Schjoedt, U. “Agency detection in predictive minds: A virtual reality study.” Religion, Brain & Behavior 9, no. 1 (2009): 52–64; Andersen, M., Schjoedt, U., Nielbo, K. L., & Sørensen, J. “Mystical experience in the lab.” Method and Theory in the Study of Religion 26 (2014): 217–245; Deeley, Q., Walsh, E., Oakley, D.A., Bell, V., Koppel, C., Mehta, M.A., and Halligan, P.W. “Using hypnotic suggestion to model loss of control and awareness of movements: An exploratory fMRI study.” PloS ONE 8, no. 10 (2013): e78324. Deeley, Q., Walsh, E., Oakley, D.A., Bell, V., Koppel, C., Mehta, M.A., and Halligan, P.W. “Modelling psychiatric and cultural possession phenomena with suggestion and fMRI.” Cortex 53 (2014): 107–119; Hoogeveen, S., Schjoedt, U., & van Elk, M. “Did I do that? Expectancy effects of brain stimulation on error-related negativity and sense of agency.” Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 30, no. 11 (2018): 1720–1733; van Elk, M. “An EEG study on the effects of induced spiritual experiences on somatosensory processing and sensory suppression.” Journal for the Cognitive Science of Religion 2, no. 2 (2014): 121–157; van Elk, M. (2017). “The self-attribution bias and paranormal beliefs.” Consciousness and Cognition 49: 313–321.

23 Burdett, E.R.R., Wigger, J.B., & Barrett, J.L. “The minds of god, mortals, and in-betweens: Children’s developing understanding of extraordinary and ordinary minds across four countries.” Psychology of Religion and Spirituality (2019, September 2nd). Advance online publication. https://doi.org/10.1037/rel0000285.

24 Barrett, J.L. “Coding and quantifying counterintuitiveness in religious concepts: Theoretical and methodological reflections.” Method and Theory in the Study of Religion 20 (2008): 308–338; Barrett, J.L., Burdett, E.R., & Porter, T.J. “Counterintuitiveness in folktales: Finding the cognitive optimum.” Journal of Cognition and Culture 9 (2009): 271–287; Boyer, P., & Ramble, C. “Cognitive templates for religious concepts: Cross-cultural evidence for recall of counter-intuitive representations.” Cognitive Science 25 (2001): 535–564; Purzycki, B.G., & Willard, A.K. “MCI theory: A critical discussion.” Religion, Brain & Behavior 6, No. 3 (2016): 207–248; Gonce, L.O., Upal, M.A., Slone, D.J., & Tweney, R.D. “Role of context in the recall of counterintuitive concepts.” Journal of Cognition and Culture 6 (2006): 521–547; Gregory, J., Barrett, J.L. “Epistemology and counterintuitiveness: Role and relationship in epidemiology of cultural representation.” Journal of Cognition and Culture 9, no. 3 (2009): 289–314; Norenzayan, A., Atran, S., Faulkner, J., & Schaller, M. “Memory and mystery: The cultural selection of minimally counterintuitive narratives.” Cognitive Science 30, (2006): 531–553; Upal, M.A., Owsianiecki, L., Slone, D. J., & Tweney, R.D “Contextualizing counterintuitiveness: How context affects comprehension and memorability of counterintuitive concepts.” Cognitive Science 31 (2007): 1–25.

25 Andersen, M. “Predictive coding in agency detection.” Religion, Brain & Behavior 9, no. 1 (2019): 65–84; Andersen, M., Pfeiffer, T., Müller, S., & Schjoedt, U. “Agency detection in predictive minds: A virtual reality study.” Religion, Brain & Behavior 9, No. 1 (2019), 52–64; Barrett, J.L. (2000). “Exploring the natural foundations of religion.” Trends in Cognitive Sciences 4, no. 1 (2000): 29–34; Barrett, J.L. Why would anyone believe in god? Walnut Creek, Lanham, MD: AltaMira Press, 2004; Barrett, J.L., & Burdett, E.R. (2011). “The cognitive science of religion.” Psychologist 24, no. 4 (2011), 252–255; Barrett, J.L., & Lanman, J.A. “The science of religious beliefs.” Religion 38, no. 2 (2008): 109–124; Guthrie, S.E. Faces in the clouds: A new theory of religion. Oxford & New York: Oxford University Press, 1995; Guthrie, S.E. “Animal animism: Evolutionary roots of religious cognition. In I. Pyysiäinen & V. Anttonen eds., Current approaches in the cognitive science of religion. London & New York: Continuum, 2002, 38–67; Guthrie, S.E. “Prediction and feedback may constrain but do not stop anthropomorphism.” Religion, Brain & Behavior 9, no. 1 (2019): 89–91; Maij, D.L.R., van Schie, H.T., & van Elk, M. “The boundary conditions of the hypersensitive agency detection device: An empirical investigation of agency detection in threatening situations.” Religion, Brain & Behavior 9, no. 1 (2019): 23–51; van Elk, M. “Paranormal believers are more prone to illusory agency detection than skeptics.” Consciousness and Cognition 22 (2013): 1041–1046; Van Leeuwen, N., & van Elk, M. “Seeking the supernatural: The interactive religious experience model.” Religion, Brain & Behavior 9, no. 3 (2019): 221–275.

26 White, C. “Cross-cultural similarities in reasoning about personal continuity in reincarnation: Evidence from South India.” Religion, Brain & Behavior 6, no. 2 (2016): 130–153.

27 Atkinson, Quentin D., and Harvey Whitehouse. “The cultural morphospace of ritual form: Examining modes of religiosity cross-culturally.” Evolution and human behavior 32, no. 1 (2011): 50–62; Whitehouse, Harvey, Pieter Francois, Patrick E. Savage, Thomas E. Currie, Kevin C. Feeney, Enrico Cioni, Rosalind Purcell et al. “Complex societies precede moralizing gods throughout world history.” Nature 568, no. 7751 (2019): 226–229; Gantley, Michael, Harvey Whitehouse, and Amy Bogaard. “Material correlates analysis (MCA): An innovative way of examining questions in archaeology using ethnographic data.” Advances in Archaeological Practice 6, no. 4 (2018): 328–341.

28 Martin, L.H. “Ritual competence and mithraic ritual.” In L.H. Martin ed., The mind of mithraists: Historical and cognitive studies in the roman cult of Mithras, London: Bloomsbury, 2015, 41–56; Panagiotidou, O., & Beck, R. The Roman Mithras cult: A cognitive approach. London: Bloomsbury Academic, 2017.

29 Martin, L.H., & Pachis, P. eds. (2009). Imagistic traditions in the Graeco-Roman world: A cognitive modeling of history of religions research. Acts of the panel held during the XIX Congress of the International Association for the History of Religions (IAHR), Tokyo, Japan, March 2005. Thessaloniki: Vanias Editions; McCauley, R.N., & Lawson, E.T. Bringing ritual to mind: Psychological foundations of cultural forms. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002; Whitehouse, H., & Martin, L.H. Theorizing religions past: Archaeology, history, and cognition. Walnut Creek, Lanham, MD: AltaMira Press, 2004.

30 Slingerland, E. “Body and mind in Early China: An integrated humanities-science approach,” Journal of the American Academy of Religion 81, no. 1 (2013): 6–55; Slingerland, E., Nichols, R., Nielbo. K., & Logan, C. “The distant reading of religious texts: A ‘big data’ approach to mind-body concepts in early China” Journal of the American Academy of Religion 85, no. 4 (2017): 985–1016.

31 Berezkin, Y.E. “Peopling of the new world from data on distributions of folklore motifs.” In R. Kenna, M. MacCarron, & P. MacCarron eds., Maths meets myths: Quantitative approaches to ancient narratives. Bern, Switzerland: Springer International Publishing, 2017, 71–89; Gramsch, R., MacCarron, M., MacCarron, P., & Yose, J. “Medieval historical, hagiographical and biographical networks.” In R. Kenna, M. MacCarron, & P. MacCarron eds., Maths meets myths: Quantitative approaches to ancient narratives. Bern, Switzerland: Springer International Publishing, 2017, 45–69; Kenna, R., & MacCarron, P. (2017). “A networks approach to mythological epics.” In R. Kenna, M. MacCarron, & P. MacCarron eds., Maths meets myths: Quantitative approaches to ancient narratives. Bern, Switzerland: Springer International Publishing, 2017, 21–43; Thuillard, M., Quellec, J.-L. L., d’Huy, J., & Berezkin, Y. “A large-scale study of world myths.” Trames. A Journal of the Humanities and Social Sciences 22, no. 4 (2018): 407–424; Weiss, D. “How quantitative methods can shed light on a problem of comparative mythology: The myth of the struggle for supremacy between two groups of deities reconsidered.” In R. Kenna, M. MacCarron, & P. MacCarron eds., Maths meets myths: Quantitative approaches to ancient narratives. Bern, Switzerland: Springer International Publishing, 2017, 213–228.

32 https://religiondatabase.org/landing/.

33 http://seshatdatabank.info/.

34 Beheim, B., Atkinson, Q.D., Bulbulia, J., Gervais, W.M., Gray, R.D., Henrich, J., … Willard, A.K. “Corrected analyses show that moralizing gods precede complex societies but serious data concerns remain.” (2019): 1–30. doi:10.31234/osf.io/jwan2n; Lang, M., Purzycki, B. G., Apicella, C. L., Atkinson, Q. D., Bolyanatz, A., Cohen, E., … Henrich, J. “Moralizing gods, impartiality and religious parochialism across 15 societies.” Proceedings of the Royal Society B, (2019): 286, 1–9. doi:10.1098/rspb.2019.0202; Norenzayan, A. Big gods: How religion transformed cooperation and conflict. Princeton & Oxford: Princeton University Press, 2013; Savage, P.E., Whitehouse, H., Francois, P., Currie, T.E., Feeney, K.C., Cioni, E., … Turchin, P. “Reply to Beheim et al.: Reanalyses confirm robustness of original analyses. (2019): 1–17; Turchin, P., Whitehouse, H., Francois, P., Hoyer, D., Nugent, S., Larson, J., … Squitieri, A. “Explaining the Rise of Moralizing Religions: A Test of Competing Hypotheses Using the Seshat Databank.” SocArXiv Preprint, (2019): 1–28. doi:10.31235/osf.io/2v59j; Whitehouse, H., Francois, P., Savage, P.E., Currie, T.E., Feeney, K.C., Cioni, E., … Turchin, P. “Complex societies precede moralizing gods throughout world history.” Nature 568, (2019): 226–229.

35 Gore, R.J., Lemos, C.M., Shults, F.L., & Wildman, W.J. “Forecasting changes in religiosity and existential security with an agent-based model.” Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation 21, no. 1 (2018): 1–26; Shults, F.L., Gore, R.J., Wildman, W.J., Lynch, C.J., Lane, J.E., & Toft, M.D. “A generative model of the mutual escalation of anxiety between religious groups.” Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation 21, no. 4 (2018): 1–25.

36 Sosis, R. “Why cultural evolutionary models of religion need a systemic approach.” In A.K. Petersen, I.S. Gilhus, L.H. Martin, J.S. Jensen, & J. Sørensen eds., Evolution, cognition, and the history of religions: A new synthesis. Festschrift in honour of Armin W. Geertz. Leiden and Boston: Brill, 2019: 45–61; Sosis, R. “Four advantages of a systemic approach to the study of religion.” Archive for the Psychology of Religion 42, no. 1 (2020): 142–157; Wood, C., & Sosis, R. “Simulating religions as adaptive systems.” In S.Y. Diallo, W. J. Wildman, F.L. Shults, & A.Tolk eds., Human simulation: Perspectives, insights, and applications. Cham, Switzerland: Springer Nature, 2019, 209–232.

37 Czachesz, I., & Lisdorf, A. “Computer modeling of cognitive processes in biblical studies: The primacy of urban christianity as a test case. In I. Czachesz & R. Uro eds., Mind, morality and magic: Cognitive science approaches in biblical studies. Durham: Acumen, 2013, 77–97; Lane, J.E., Shults, F.L., & McCauley, R. N. (2019). “Modeling and simulation as a pedagogical and heuristic tool for developing theories in cognitive science: An example from ritual competence theory.” In S. Y. Diallo, W. J. Wildman, F. L. Shults, & A. Tolk (Eds.), Human simulation: Perspectives, insights, and applications (pp. 143–154). Cham, Switzerland: Springer Nature; Nielbo, K. L., Braxton, D. M., & Upal, A. (2012). “Computing religion: A New tool in the multilevel analysis of religion.” Method and Theory in the Study of Religion 24, no. 3: 267–290; Shults, F. L., Wildman, W. J., Lane, J. E., Lynch, C. J., & Diallo, S. (2018). “Multiple axialities: A computational model of the axial age.” Journal of Cognition and Culture, 18: 537–564; Taves, A. “Modeling theories and modeling phenomena: A humanist’s initiation.” In S.Y. Diallo, W.J. Wildman, F.L. Shults, & A. Tolk eds., Human simulation: Perspectives, insights, and applications. Cham, Switzerland: Springer Nature, 2019, 83–94.

38 See Xygalatas, Dimitris. “Bridging the gap: The cognitive science of religion as an integrative approach.” In Evolution, cognition, and the history of religion: A new synthesis. Leiden and Boston: Brill, 2018, 255–272.

39 Slingerland, Edward. “Body and mind in early China: An integrated humanities-science approach.” Journal of the American Academy of Religion 81, no. 1 (2013): 6–55.

40 Xygalatas, Dimitris. The burning saints: Cognition and culture in the fire-walking rituals of the Anastenaria. Routledge, 2014.

41 Henrich, Joseph, Steven J. Heine, and Ara Norenzayan. “The weirdest people in the world?” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 33, no. 2–3 (2010): 61–83.

42 Harris, Paul L., and Rita Astuti. “Learning that there is life after death.” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 29, no. 5 (2006): 475–476; Cohen, Emma. The mind possessed: The cognition of spirit possession in an Afro-Brazilian religious tradition. Oxford University Press, 2007; Emmons, Natalie A., and Deborah Kelemen. “The development of children’s prelife reasoning: Evidence from two cultures.” Child development 85, no. 4 (2014): 1617–1633; White, Claire. “Cross-cultural similarities in reasoning about personal continuity in reincarnation: evidence from South India.” Religion, Brain & Behavior 6, no. 2 (2016): 130–153; Whitehouse, Harvey. Inside the cult: Religious innovation and transmission in Papua New Guinea. Oxford University Press on Demand, 1995.

43 Baumard, Nicolas, and Pascal Boyer. “Explaining moral religions.” Trends in cognitive sciences 17, no. 6 (2013): 272–280; Norenzayan, Ara. Big gods: How religion transformed cooperation and conflict. Princeton University Press, 2013; Norenzayan, Ara, and Azim F. Shariff. “The origin and evolution of religious prosociality.” Science 322, no. 5898 (2008): 58–62; Norenzayan, Ara, and Azim F. Shariff. “The origin and evolution of religious prosociality.” Science 322, no. 5898 (2008): 58–62; Purzycki, Benjamin Grant. “The minds of gods: A comparative study of supernatural agency.” Cognition 129, no. 1 (2013): 163–179.

44 Slingerland, Edward, and Brenton Sullivan. “Durkheim with data: The database of religious history.” Journal of the American Academy of Religion 85, no. 2 (2017): 312–347.

45 Slingerland & Sullivan, 2015; Baumard & Boyer, 2013; Norenzayan, 2013; Purzycki, 2013; Atkinson & Whitehouse, 2011; Turchin et al., 2012; Norenzayan & Shariff, 2008; Johnson, 2005.

46 White, Claire, Maya Marin, and Daniel MT Fessler. “Not just dead meat: An evolutionary account of corpse treatment in mortuary rituals.” Journal of Cognition and Culture 17, no. 1–2 (2017): 146–168.

47 Atkinson, Quentin D., and Harvey Whitehouse. “The cultural morphospace of ritual form: Examining modes of religiosity cross-culturally.” Evolution and Human Behavior 32, no. 1 (2011): 50–62.

48 Johnson, Dominic D.P. “God’s punishment and public goods.” Human Nature 16, no. 4 (2005): 410–446.

49 E.g. De Cruz and De Smedt 2010; Geertz and Jensen, 2014; Hodge 2011; Nichols 2007; Nicholson 2014; Pyysiäinen 2001; Schloss and Murray 2011; Whitehouse and Martin, 2004.

50 Abraham H. Maslow (1966). The psychology of science. p. 15. Joanna Cotler Books,

51 https://items.ssrc.org/insights/strong-interdisciplinarity-and-explanatory-pluralism-in-social-scientific-research/.

52 Konvalinka, Ivana, Dimitris Xygalatas, Joseph Bulbulia, Uffe Schjødt, Else-Marie Jegindø, Sebastian Wallot, Guy Van Orden, and Andreas Roepstorff. “Synchronized arousal between performers and related spectators in a fire-walking ritual.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108, no. 20 (2011): 8514–8519.

53 Barrett, Justin, and E. Thomas Lawson. “Ritual intuitions: Cognitive contributions to judgments of ritual efficacy.” Journal of Cognition and Culture 1, no. 2 (2001): 183–201.

54 Mogan, Reneeta, Ronald Fischer, and Joseph A. Bulbulia. “To be in synchrony or not? A meta-analysis of synchrony’s effects on behavior, perception, cognition and affect.” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 72 (2017): 13–20.

55 Atkinson, Quentin D., and Harvey Whitehouse. “The cultural morphospace of ritual form: Examining modes of religiosity cross-culturally.” Evolution and Human Behavior 32, no. 1 (2011): 50–62.

56 Table based upon: Legare, C.H., and M.Nielsen. “Ritual explained: Interdisciplinary answers to Tinbergen’s four questions.” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences 375, no. 1805 (2020): 20190419–20190419.





