5 The nature of the world




Anyone who has spent time with children will know that they ask many questions. They especially delight in asking “why” questions: “Why is the sky blue?” “Why did the dog pee on the carpet?” “Why did my sister get a cookie?” Researchers have provided evidence that this type of constant questioning is not merely a bid by young children to keep the conversation going. Rather, they are legitimate requests for causal explanations.1 Causal explanations uncover how one event, process, or state contributes to another; in other words, the conditions and circumstances that bring the outcome about. As developmental psychologist Cristine Legare points out, the capacity to use questions flexibly and efficiently is a sound strategy. It allows children to acquire new information, increase their understanding, and solve problems.2 Even preschool children will continue to ask questions until they have what they believe is a satisfactory answer from a reliable source.3,4

Children also tend to find some types of explanations more compelling than others. For instance, they are attuned to the consistency of current accounts with their prior knowledge. If children receive information that is inconsistent with what they currently know, then they are motivated to seek out and construct an explanation.5 Adults also tend to find some types of answers more inherently satisfying than others. For example, they tend to privilege patterns in explaining behaviors and make generalizations based on these perceived patterns rather than on individual examples.6 It appears that while seeking and providing explanations supports the remarkable human capacity to discover information about the world around us, the capacity is also biased towards particular kinds of explanations.

Cognitive scientists of religion have proposed that cognitive biases towards particular types of explanations often make religious views of the world more compelling than scientific or other views. Conversely, intuitions often impinge on the scientific understanding of the world. As cognitive scientist Andrew Shtulman has argued, we are biased towards a misunderstanding of how the world works more generally—in stark contrast to what science has revealed. Shtulman claims, we are, in fact, “scienceblind.” Similarly, philosopher Robert McCauley has concluded that religion—at least, as popularly construed in the minds of ordinary people—is cognitively natural and science is not.7 As we covered in Chapter 3 (Research Questions), scholarly endeavors in the cognitive science of religion (CSR) focus on identifying cognitive biases that predispose us towards religious explanations.

In this chapter, we consider religious explanations for the origins and development of the natural world, species, and the cause of natural events and illnesses. We cover research that showcases why the idea of an ordered, purposeful world intentionally created by a designer inherently provides a more compelling explanation for the development of the world than the processes of evolutionary change. We then move onto other ideas about events in the world, such as thinking that good people are rewarded with good fortune rather than luck, that terminal illness and natural disasters happen to people for a reason rather than morally neutral processes. We will also encounter research on how people typically reason when natural and supernatural explanations collide. We will also consider how these findings challenge popular misconceptions throughout the history of academia that acquiring scientific knowledge replaces religious beliefs. First, we turn to competing explanations of the world through the controversial debate on intelligent design versus evolution by natural selection that is especially prominent in the US.





Explaining the origins and development of the natural world


There is overwhelming scientific evidence supporting evolution by natural selection, the underlying biological theory that species change over time, give rise to new species, and share a common ancestor. However, around 39 per cent of adults in the US reject the very idea of evolution, and about 40 per cent accept it—a relatively low rate when compared to other economically prosperous nations.8 Researchers have proposed that the comparatively low acceptance of evolution in America (as compared to other countries) is due in part to widespread religious fundamentalism.9

Religious groups often present evolution by natural selection as incompatible with religious ideas about the origins and development of the natural world, such as intelligent design. Intelligent design includes the underlying assumption that the universe and living things are designed and created by an intelligent entity. Those who endorse intelligent design often identify as creationists. Creationists hold the view that the universe and life originated from specified acts of divine creation, such as through the work of God. For instance, scientists estimate the world to be 4.5 billion years old and maintain that species evolve through mutation and selection, which are processes that involve a degree of randomness, and genetic error. By contrast, many young-earth creationists believe that God intentionally created the world and all species between 6,000 to 10,000 years ago. This is an example of a conflicting account because the purported relationship between science, or more specifically, biological evolution and religious accounts of the world, is viewed as incompatible.

Others construe the relationship between biological evolution and religious accounts of the origin and development of the world as compatible. For example, those who endorse “theistic evolution” (also known as “evolutionary creationism”) hold views that regard religious teachings about God as compatible with modern scientific understandings of evolution. The list of proponents of theistic evolution includes a list of established religious figures, including Pope Benedict XVI. When people reason that these accounts are compatible, they often adopt a form of coexistence reasoning referred to by cognitive scientists as integrated thinking, in which evolutionary and religious explanations are combined into a single account. For example, many proponents of theistic evolution point out that while evolutionary theory explains how life and species evolve gradually, it is neutral on the question of how life began on earth in the first place.

Many instances of integrative thinking about religion and evolution provide a single explanation of the origins and development of the world that includes a causal chain of proximate and distal causes. As we discussed in Chapter 3 (Research Questions), distal causes are the most distant, or ultimate causal explanation of the event. For instance, that God creates the conditions under which evolution can occur. Proximate causes are the closest causal explanations to the event, for example, how life and species evolve. This type of integrative thinking includes the view that a deity guides evolution by specifying the laws that govern it (i.e. distant cause). The outlook also leaves species to evolve according to the conditions they experience as time goes by (i.e. the proximate cause).10 Even school-age children, who may not have an accurate understanding of evolutionary biology, will nonetheless exhibit this type of integrative thinking, reasoning that God created the first monkeys, and then humans evolved from them.11 Nevertheless, many subpopulations in the US hold views about the nature of the world that are not construed as compatible with scientific accounts of biological evolution, and they reject evolutionary theory in favor of creationist explanations.

Participation 1: Case study: Should public schools teach students about evolution and present intelligent design as an alternative?





Background


The perceived conflict between scientific and religious views of the origins and development of the world and its inhabitants is apparent in the debate over whether, and how, public schools should teach students about evolution and present intelligent design as an alternative. These issues have been debated in many states and at all levels of state government. Currently, whether or not intelligent design is taught in public schools, and indeed, whether schools opt out of teaching evolution altogether, differs by state.12 Science and education communities have sought to provide reassurance that scientific knowledge does not contradict religious beliefs because it says nothing about religious realities or values. Despite these efforts, many continue to believe that the theory of evolution threatens and is in direct conflict with their religious beliefs.





Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District


In September 2005, 11 parents of public-school children sued the Dover Area School District in Pennsylvania because the school board changed its biology-teaching curriculum to require that intelligent design is taught as a scientific alternative to evolution by natural selection. The case was the first direct challenge in the US federal courts testing a public-school district policy that required teaching intelligent design. Much of the trial featured testimonies from theologians, professors, and other specialists arguing for and against the explanatory power of evolution and the relevance of intelligent design as a scientific alternative. The case was the first direct challenge in the US federal courts testing a public-school district policy that required teaching intelligent design. The judge ruled that intelligent design was a religious theory and should not be taught in science class.





Assignment


After researching this case on the internet, outline at least four arguments in total, including those for and against the explanatory power of evolution and the relevance of intelligent design as a scientific alternative.

Label these arguments as either conflict or compatibility accounts of the relationship between biological evolution and supernatural explanations of the world.

Rank these arguments concerning how convincing you find them on a scale of 1–4.

Explain in a few sentences why you find the top-ranked argument most convincing and the lowest-ranked argument least compelling.

Do you think public schools teach students about evolution and present intelligent design as an alternative? Explain your answer.





Key points

Children and adults find some types of explanations intuitively more compelling than others.

Cognitive scientists of religion have proposed that biases towards particular types of explanations often make religious views of the world more compelling than scientific or other views.

Intuitions may impinge on the scientific understanding of the world, especially the origins and development of the natural world and its inhabitants.

Religious groups often present evolution by natural selection as incompatible with religious ideas about the origins and development of the natural world and species, such as intelligent design.

Sometimes religion and science are construed as compatible, and people integrate supernatural and natural explanations to explain the origins and development of the world and species.





Why do people reject evolutionary theory and endorse creationism?


One obvious question is the extent to which aspects of cognition and culture explain the rejection of evolutionary theory and endorsement of creationism. Is this due to cognition, culture, or both? In this section, we review some of the main factors that contribute to people’s ideas about evolution and creationism, including, but not limited to, the cognitive factors that cognitive science of religion (CSR) scholars have identified.





1 Worldview


The rejection of evolutionary theory and endorsement of creationism is shaped to some extent by a person’s worldview. Two aspects in particular predict the rejection of evolutionary accounts and acceptance, of creationism, as part of a worldview.





Enculturation


The first aspect that helps to explain the rejection of evolutionary theory and endorsement of creationism is enculturation into a group. Children are socialized into conventional ways of thinking about the world. They receive information about the nature of the world from in-group members whom they regard as reputable sources of authority, such as parents and religious leaders. As locally accepted ideas are repeated often, they become highly accessible to children. Children are repeatedly exposed to ideas through their parents, social reference groups, and subculture. For instance, a child who is brought up in a fundamentalist Christian community is likely to say that God created the universe. Furthermore, enculturation into the western world may also have an impact on the accessibility of ideas; the idea of nature as being purposefully made is prevalent in Christian and Abrahamic theistic traditions and discourse in the US.13,14

While researchers accept that culturally accepted ideas are more accessible to children, they differ, however, on the extent to which they think enculturation influences beliefs. The extreme enculturation view maintains that beliefs are determined exclusively by social learning. This perspective is part of the broader view of human cognition and behavior as a cultural construct. As we covered in Chapter 1 (Introduction), early pioneers of CSR disliked the theory of cultural determinism because it negated the role of humans as active in processing the world around them.

Several findings provide a reason to reject the extreme version of the enculturation hypothesis. As we review in the next section, preferences for creationist types of explanations are found among young children and adults, across religious traditions and cultures. Scholars in CSR tend to endorse a more moderate version of the enculturation hypothesis. This version rightly grants that exposure and socialization are essential in the development of children’s reasoning about the world. The difference between those who endorse the extreme version of the exposure hypothesis and those who accept a more moderate view is where they place causal weight. Those who support the extreme version of the enculturation hypothesis assume that exposure to ideas is the causal mechanism of children’s tendency to reason in ways that reinforce religious views of the world. According to this view, exposure enables the understanding and availability of ideas about creationism. That is, children are quick to access these ideas when reasoning about the nature of the world. This process leads to the internalization, acceptance, and commitment of these ideas as facts (i.e. belief).

By contrast, those who endorse a moderate view of enculturation accept the role of early socialization in the salience (i.e. accessibility) of ideas about nature, such as the idea that the world was created for a purpose. They also grant a role for socialization in explaining how people come to endorse views about the world, such as the belief in creationism. What they take issue with, however, is a single causal chain model between exposure to ideas on the one hand and reasoning about the world on the other. This simplistic equation misses a crucial component in children’s thinking, the role of cognitive biases, and the processing of information (Figure 5.1).

To illustrate this point, consider again the example of the child who is brought up in a fundamentalist Christian community. Scholars agree that the child is likely to say that God created the universe. Cultural determinists propose that this is because the child has received repeated exposure and socialization about creationism, and cognitive scientists agree that socialization has an impact. However, CSR scholars would add that a creationist view of the world emerges early and is rapidly developing also because it satisfies default cognitive biases in children (Figure 5.2). A child who receives repeated exposure to evolutionary theory, which is not well supported by early emerging cognitive biases, might find it difficult to internalize this view. For example, they may well endorse evolution but are likely to make predictable errors when reasoning about the process of natural selection. These errors are anticipated in the sense that they reflect assumptions more compatible with the creationist or intentional views that other children find quite easy to endorse. By comparison, the child who receives repeated exposure to ideas about creationism, which is well supported by early emerging cognitive biases, might find it easier to internalize these views.



Figure 5.1 The extreme version of the enculturation hypothesis is a form of the “black box” theories (see Figure 1.3, Chapter 1) because they do not allocate a role for human cognitive processing in belief formation.





Group identification


The second aspect that helps to explain the rejection of evolutionary theory as part of a worldview is group identification. Group identification includes identification by demographics, politics, and of course, religious affiliation. A large-scale demographically representative survey of the American public’s understanding of, and attitudes towards, evolution reveals essential insights. Psychologist Deena Weisberg and colleagues found that participants who had higher levels of religiosity were more likely to reject the idea of evolution.15 Levels of religiosity and identification with a religious group, more specifically, are influenced by enculturation. Of course, children may change their opinions as they become older. Encountering information about evolution as adults may trigger a type of motivated reasoning known as identity-protective cognition.16 Rather than weighing up the likelihood of evolution, people automatically respond to the group’s values. If the group rejects evolutionary theory (i.e. they hold a conflicting account of the relationship between evolution and religion), then the individual will also reject it.

Group identification and worldview affect the processing of new ideas. As discussed at the start of the chapter, children are attuned to the consistency of current explanations with prior knowledge. Information that is inconsistent with what they currently know is judged differently than information that is consistent with what they know. In particular, if children receive information that is inconsistent with what they currently know, they are motivated to seek out and construct an explanation.17 This tendency may lead to the rejection of evolutionary theory if it is perceived as inconsistent with conventional religious interpretations of the world.





2 Understanding evolution


Another reason why people reject evolutionary theory and thus are more likely to endorse alternative views of the origins and development of the world is that they do not understand it. People often struggle to grasp critical concepts such as inheritance, variation, natural selection, and adaptation.18,19 There are two main reasons why people find it especially challenging to understand the theory of evolution.





Lack of knowledge


One reason why people do not understand evolutionary theory is that they lack knowledge about it, often referred to as a knowledge-deficit hypothesis.20 This is the view adopted by Weisberg and colleagues, who conducted a large-scale survey on attitudes towards evolution. They found that knowledge about evolutionary theory predicts levels of acceptance in the US to a greater extent than demographics, political identification, and even religiosity.21





Cognitive obstacles


Cognitive scientists of religion have outlined some of the cognitive obstacles that people face when they encounter evolutionary theory. These obstacles are a product of the fact that the fundamental tenets of evolutionary theory often conflict with our cognitive biases about what makes an explanation of the world cognitively compelling. These biases tend to predispose people towards favoring religious explanations for the world, such as creationism. Some of these biases are outlined in the next section.



Figure 5.2 The moderate version of the enculturation hypothesis allocates an interactive role for human cognitive processing in the development of beliefs.

Key points

CSR scholars propose that a creationist view of the world emerges early and is rapidly developing because it satisfies default cognitive biases in children.

These biases often make religious views about the nature of the world more compelling than scientific or other views.

These biases also create cognitive obstacles to understanding evolutionary theory and partially explain why many people reject it in favor of creationist explanations of the world.

Belief in creationism emerges readily when cognitive biases are coupled with cultural information that supports religious views about the origins and development of the natural world.





Cognitive biases that impede understanding evolution and favor creationism


Almost all scientists accept the theory of evolution by natural selection, yet the American public is divided.22 By contrast, the basic idea that a being or beings created the universe or natural order recurs throughout cultures.23 These facts bring us to two questions: Why is evolutionary theory so poorly understood in the US? Moreover, why are supernatural ideas about the origins of the universe so widely accepted among different cultures? Research in the social cognitive sciences points to cognitive obstacles that impede the understanding of evolution by natural selection and make religious ideas about the origins and development of the world and species, such as creationism (the idea that divine intervention created the universe) a compelling alternative. In this section, we focus on three cognitive biases that affect reasoning about the world: promiscuous teleology, anthropomorphism, and psychological essentialism.



Figure 5.3 Many cultures endorse the idea that a supernatural being such as God created the universe and humans. The Creation of Adam painting by Italian artist Michelangelo illustrates the Biblical creation narrative from the Book of Genesis in which God gives life to Adam. (Image credit: doom.ko/Shutterstock.com).





Promiscuous teleology


Evolution by natural selection involves the component of blind chance variations (mutations), which are selected for by consequences. Chance is described here as blind because there is no forward-looking component, such as a designer (e.g. God). It is difficult to accept that the inhabitants of the world emerge and change as a result of chance. Even Charles Darwin (who is regarded as the father of evolutionary theory), had trouble accepting this component because it contradicted the commonsense view that everything happens for a reason.24 By contrast, the tendency to see things in the world as having a purpose (and being made for that purpose) is readily endorsed. This tendency is often referred to as teleology, and it helps to explain the appeal of religious views that depict the world as ordered and purposeful. Indeed, developmental psychologists Deborah Kelemen and Cara DiYanni25 found that children’s preferences for teleological explanations of nature’s origins were associated with the endorsement of a non-human intelligent design of nature. They also found this association between purpose and agency in Chinese children. Thus, their findings extend beyond individuals raised in a non-Abrahamic and officially secular culture.26

People are especially adept at adopting teleological reasoning with artifacts, and here it often proves useful. Consider an episode in Season 2 of Game of Thrones, for example, when Grenn, Edd, and Samwell Tarly found an object buried in the snow in a landmark in the wilderness.27 The men reasoned that the sharp object was a spear, made of dragon glass, and they immediately asked questions about the intentions of the person who left it. The men reasoned that the person who left the spear must have been a ranger of the Night’s Watch—a military order that guards a wall that serves as a border between lands. Nevertheless, the men concluded that the person wanted someone else to find the weapon, so it must be of great importance. On the basis of this reasoning, the men decided to keep the artifact, much to their advantage later when it turns out that the spear kills monsters known as White Walkers. This fictional example of teleological reasoning demonstrated an instance when teleology was correctly applied. Namely, the spear was made for a purpose. When this reasoning extends to things that were not prepared for a purpose, teleological thinking becomes “promiscuous.”

Kelemen first coined the term promiscuous teleology and she has conducted the most extensive research on the development of teleological thought to date. In one of her studies, Kelemen asked US children and adults a series of questions about living and nonliving natural objects. These included questions about objects to which teleology applies (e.g. artifacts, parts of organisms such as teeth to chew food). They also included questions about objects to which teleology does not apply (e.g. whole organisms such as tigers and nonliving entities). She found that children were much more likely than adults to explain the properties of living kinds like lions in teleological terms, including nonliving natural kinds like clouds. Compared to adults, preschoolers were much more likely to say that living things, artifacts, and non-living natural objects are “for” something.28

Further, when given options such as asking whether rocks were pointy because of a physical process (i.e. “bits of stuff piled up for a long period of time”) or because they performed a function, children (in contrast to adults) attributed a function to almost every kind of object. For example, they reasoned that rocks were pointy “so that animals wouldn’t sit on them and smash them” or that “animals could scratch on them when they got itchy.” In other words, children assumed that the pointiness of the rocks, like the properties of other objects, had a function.





The cognitive basis of promiscuous teleology


Kelemen explains children’s preferences for teleological explanations as rooted in deep-seated biases that favor intentions and purpose-based explanations more generally. As we covered at the start of this chapter, children like to explain things, and this tendency spills over to all domains. This theory implies that, in line with the naturalness-of-religion thesis in CSR, reasoning about nature as purposefully designed is cognitively natural. On this account, the tendency to see things in the world as having a purpose is a by-product of the tendency to see agents as having goal-directed behavior and to see artifacts as designed by agents with specific goals.

As we will cover over the next two chapters (Chapter 6: The Afterlife, Chapter 7: Supernatural Agents), humans are naturally inclined to privilege intentional explanations for agents’ behavior. In other words, people’s behavior is not represented by children as random action sequences. Instead, they represent behavior as governed by a set of non-observable mental states. These states include beliefs (drinking water will stop me from being thirsty), desires (I would like to quench my thirst), and intentions (I will drink the glass of water to quench my thirst). The desire to explain agents’ behavior is a core component of human cognition, emerges early, and continues to develop throughout childhood. For example, by 12-months, children will attribute goals to computer-generated shapes;29 moreover, 15-month-olds infer the goals of a nonhuman agent to make predictions about their future behavior.30

The tendency to reason about people as intentional agents is often referred to as mentalizing. This tendency may well be evolutionarily adaptive because it helps people to predict others’ future behavior and respond accordingly. Nevertheless, this tendency sometimes leads to error. For instance, we often think that there exists intention behind ambiguous events, even when social entities or forces cause them. For example, children and adults are likely to say that an unusually positive event (such as a woman who suddenly recovers from cancer) is due to supernatural causes such as good character, God, or luck than natural causes.31 In high stakes situations, the tendency also leads to actual behavioral consequences in children and adults. For example, after observing an adult unwittingly give one of two children a lesser reward for a task, children will avoid that adult just as much as they avoid an adult who intentionally gives one of two children a smaller award for a job.32

Although it may seem less obvious, reasoning about the intention behind the creation of artifacts, another early emerging tendency, may also serve similar mentalizing functions. Throughout much of human history, understanding the intentions behind actions involved in artifact manipulation (i.e. ultimately to create something useful) would have facilitated efficient strategies to reproduce the tool or something like it that served the same purpose. For instance, when 15, 18-month-old children see a demonstrator fail to produce what they had intended (based on previous successful attempts by the demonstrator), they do not precisely copy what the demonstrator does. Instead, they produce the result that the demonstrator intended to create and even come up with their actions along the way.33 Promiscuous teleology starts to robustly display itself around the same time that children explicitly understand artifact design.

Research supports the interpretation that teleology is a naturally emerging cognitive bias. First, the tendency of children in Kelemen’s studies, in contrast to the adults, was to endorse teleological explanations for all types of things. If this tendency were a product of enculturation, then we would expect the bias to attribute purpose to natural kinds as increasing, not decreasing, with age and repeated exposure to ideas. Second, the developmental psychologist Margaret Evans found that all children preferred creationist accounts of the origins of natural kinds over alternative accounts. This finding was regardless of whether parents in Christian fundamentalist and non-fundamentalist communities taught evolution-based origins.34 Finally, other research has demonstrated the tendency for children and adults to reason teleologically about living and nonliving kinds and to embrace a design stance in different cultures. This includes cultures with a comparatively lower degree of religiosity, such as children from Britain35 and China,36,37 and Finnish adults.38 These findings suggest that the tendency for teleological reasoning is not an exclusive product of the level of religiosity endorsed by the broader population. Nor is it due to exposure to the worldview of Western Abrahamic culture.

Reasoning about the intended purpose of the world and things in it is cognitively natural, and some versions of this tendency (such as reasoning about the intentions behind artifact production) served humans well. However, the tendency to reason about nature as having an intended purpose may not serve us so well in the contemporary western world, where the mainstream scientific community endorses evolution by natural selection as fact.





Anthropomorphism


As previously discussed, evolution by natural selection involves the component of blind chance. No forward-looking deity designs the world or its inhabitants; rather, variations of species occur by chance and are selected for in biology by their consequences. By contrast, proponents of intelligent design view the universe and living things as designed and created by an intelligent entity. As per the creation story in Genesis, creationists believe that this entity is God. The general idea that an agent intentionally created the world is not exclusively found in the modern western world and recurs across history and throughout cultures in creation stories. Versions include the idea among Australian Aborigines that the Maker of Many Things brought up living things from underground, the Mayan idea that agents thought aspects of the world into existence, and the Scandinavian tradition that gods made the earth from the flesh of a giant.39 Research in CSR suggests that the tendency towards anthropomorphism may help to explain the appeal of religious views that depict the world as designed and brought into existence by an agent.

Anthropomorphism is the tendency to attribute human features (e.g. agency, emotional states, intentions) to nonhuman things. Classic scholars, including Spinoza, Hume, Feuerbach, Nietzsche, Tylor, Horton, and Levi-Strauss, have long noted the importance of anthropomorphism in religion. Following these scholars, the anthropologist Stewart Guthrie made a cognitive theory of anthropomorphism central to a modern cognitive theory of religion. Guthrie argued that the tendency to anthropomorphize was initially established as a perceptual strategy.40,41 The crux of this cognitive theory is that when people face chronic uncertainty about the nature of the world, they are sensitive to the detection of intentional agency, such as a person, and are biased to attribute deliberate action as the cause of things and events. One specific consequence of this tendency is that people project human-like characteristics onto nonhuman agents and objects, such as supernatural agents, clouds, and chairs.

Guthrie and others have argued that this tendency to project human-like features everywhere results in the tendency to see human-like beings everywhere. It gives rise to animism and to interpret ambiguous evidence as being caused by an agent. Consider the case of “crop circles.” (Figure 5.4) In many parts of the world, people have reported intricate patterns or geometric shapes emerging overnight in grain fields. On closer inspection, the stalks of the plants have been flattened to create these shapes. These events could be due to natural processes, such as the weather, magnetism on the earth’s surface, deformities in the grain, or the unintended consequence of an agent, such as animals consuming the plants. However, people commonly attribute these patterns to an agent with the intention to produce the visual effect. For example, as though a person was trying to make it seem as though a supernatural agent has created the patterns or the work of a superhuman agency (such as dancing fairies, extra-terrestrial life, or God).

Those who endorse intelligent design propose an anthropomorphic account of the universe, namely, that design implies a designer. Proponents of intelligent design sometimes use the “watchmaker analogy” to illustrate this point, proposing that if you stumbled upon a correctly functioning watch on the ground, you are likely to assume that someone designed it and placed it there at some point in time. Proponents of creationism often point out that intricacy, and the perfection of complex systems, such as the universe and species, is the result of the work of God.





The cognitive origins of anthropomorphism


People are biased to attribute the intentional action of an agent as the cause of affairs when information is ambiguous. Psychologist Justin Barrett posited a mental tool that he called a hyperactive agency detection device (HADD).42 From an evolutionary perspective, scholars have argued that this bias was adaptive. Mistakenly interpreting a noise in a bush as a tiger when it is wind (a false positive) has no costs. Nevertheless, failing to detect a tiger in a bush when our ancestors heard a noise (a false negative) would have been detrimental to fitness. These implications facilitated the development of belief in supernatural agents. In the modern environment, HADD is triggered and produces beliefs in unseen agents who are assumed to be the cause of the stimuli. Thus, people are likely to see meaning in the stars, faces in the clouds, and even Jesus Christ in a slice of toast.43 This anthropomorphic tendency is heightened when there is perceived intricacy and perfection of complex systems (when considering the universe, for example).



Figure 5.4 Crop circles in field in Alsace, France. (Image credit: Sahara Prince/Shutterstock.com).





Psychological essentialism


Developmental psychologist Susan Gelman coined the term psychological essentialism, and she has conducted the most extensive research on psychological essentialism to date.44 Psychological essentialism is an implicit belief that members of a category, such as species of animals, share deep commonalities that make them what they are. For example, when asked what causes a tiger to have stripes and to roar children often claim, “there is something about tigers” that leads to those characteristics.45 The idea of a tiger’s essence also leads children to assume that it makes them different from other animals, such as zebras. These commonalities among category members are often characterized as determined by a true underlying nature that cannot be observed directly (i.e. an “essence”). The essence remains stable even when the animals physically change and it is also perceived as responsible for similarities that members share.46,47

The tendency to engage in psychological essentialism creates problems for learning the scientific theory of evolution and enhances the likelihood of endorsing creationist explanations of the world. First, a fundamental principle of evolutionary theory is that all existent life forms share a common ancestor. This principle is mostly inconsistent with the idea that a unique and discrete essence undergirds species. Second, if species are perceived to be bounded, fundamentally unchanging and homogeneous, then construing relations within and among species is difficult to comprehend. This essentialist bias makes grasping the selective survival and reproduction of particular individuals within populations—another critical component of evolutionary theory—challenging. As cognitive scientists Andrew Shtulman and Laura Schulz have shown, adults typically think of evolution as the gradual transformation of an entire population (e.g. the moths become darker over time). They are less likely to endorse explanations about the selective survival and reproduction within populations (e.g. darker moths are more likely to reproduce than lighter moths).48

Shtulman and Schulz found that those who tend to endorse essentialism in biology also tend to have a poor understanding of evolutionary theory.49 Around one-third of the US population rejects evolutionary theory because they find it implausible that one species can transform into another.50 In other words, species are unchanging and stable, which lends to design-based thinking. This bias enables an even easier acceptance of creationism. If species are fixed and created, then it lends easily to the idea that God created species. Many Christian fundamentalists maintain that God created species between 6,000 and 10,000 years ago. They further maintain that only God can create new.51





The cognitive origins of psychological essentialism


The tendency for psychological essentialist reasoning emerges early. From around the age of two, children reason about animal species as having immutable essences. This bias is part of early emerging folk biology; in other words, pre-scientific, naïve theories about how people tend to classify and reason about the natural world.52 These folk theories provide children with a way to categorize living things and to explain their behavior.53,54 As Legare and colleagues propose, essentialist thinking about species is likely to be evolutionarily adaptive because it enables people to make inferences about the biological world that would have facilitated their survival.55 For instance, viewing predators such as snakes as having unchanging inherent hazardous properties motivates people to avoid them. However, extending essentialist reasoning to all category members impedes understanding of the relationships between and within species through the process of evolution.

Key points

Cognitive biases emerge early in children.

Cognitive biases help to explain why evolutionary theory is poorly understood in the US and the inherent appeal of creationism as an alternative explanation of the world.

Biases can be traced to our evolutionary history as directly aiding survival (e.g. essentialism), or alternatively, as a by-product of reasoning that helped survival when applied to the correct domain for which it was intended (e.g. teleology, anthropomorphism).

These biases include promiscuous teleology (which favors intentions and purpose-based explanations of the world), anthropomorphism, (the tendency to project human-like features everywhere, which results in interpreting ambiguous evidence as being caused by an agent), and psychological essentialism, (the tendency to view members of a species as having a fixed essence of innate being that determines their observable properties).





When intuitions and scientific facts about the world collide


Research in the social cognitive sciences has illustrated that people have a deep-rooted tendency to view nature as designed by an agent and species as having immutable essences. These biases may function in ways that are beneficial in some domains. For example, reasoning about the intention behind the maker of an object. However, they are less helpful when they interfere with understanding the processes of biological evolution. One obvious question is whether, and how, people can override these tendencies to understand evolutionary processes better?

Science and education communities are motivated in part by the view that increased knowledge leads to increased understanding of evolution (i.e. the knowledge-deficit hypothesis). Consequentially, they have increased efforts to help young children, students, and the broader public understand the theory of evolution by providing more information about it. These are worthy endeavors. Providing more information about biological processes is an essential first step, but it does not, however, guarantee the understanding or acceptance of evolution. As outlined at the start of the chapter, people’s worldviews also partially determine how they respond to the theory of evolution. As we have also covered in the chapter, cognitive scientists of religion have outlined the cognitive obstacles that all people face when they encounter evolutionary theory. Scholars in CSR paint a more complicated picture of the relationship between knowledge and belief formation than a straightforward knowledge-deficit hypothesis or enculturation account would predict. They propose strategies that take account of critical time periods of theory formation in children as well as cognitive biases that continue to adulthood, for increasing the likelihood of understanding evolution.

Research in CSR has demonstrated that cognitive biases are deeply entrenched and resistant to change. In order to build a scientific understanding of the world, children need to undergo conceptual change. They need to understand the concepts that are fundamental to evolution (such as heritable characteristics, common ancestry, and selective survival), and to comprehend how these concepts cohere to form the theory of evolution by natural selection—yet conceptual change is challenging to initiate and complete. To achieve conceptual change, children must overhaul their intuitive theories constructed in the absence of a scientific theory.

Conceptual change requires restructuring knowledge, not just enriching it. As Shulman explains, scientific theories never entirely overwrite intuitive theories. He likens the outcome of conceptual change to a palimpsest, an old manuscript typical in the Middle Ages. During this period, because of the scarcity of materials, one document was physically recorded on top of another.56 Thus, even though people have knowledge of the correct answers, when they are under pressure, they revert to heuristics about the nature of the world and often make incorrect judgments.



Figure 5.5 Just like the new ink doesn’t completely cover up words written earlier; Shulman explains how intuitive theories about the world lurk below scientific ones. (Image credit: Ann Baldwin/Shutterstock.com).

The early emerging intuitive construal of the nature of the world is more likely to be a lifelong bias. Even though such inherent tendencies may be inhibited or concealed by later constructed beliefs—such as science education—they are never entirely displaced. Thus, theories about purposeful design and evolutionary principles often coexist. People can override their intuitions by effortful processing, such as the explicit answers given by participants concerning nature when they have time to reflect. However, intuitions often re-emerge when participants are forced to make speed judgments about nature and do not have time to reflect.57,58 These findings can be understood from a dual-process model of the mind covered in Chapter 3 (Research Questions). There seems to be a discrepancy between adults’ reasoning about the origin of nature when they have time, energy, and motivation (and can access System 2) and how they respond quickly (and must default to System 1).

For example, as Kelemen and other developmentalists have shown, when given time to reflect on an answer to a question, for example, asking what things are “for,” adults tend to reject teleological explanations for the world more often than children. When adults do not have time to reflect (for example, when they had to make a speeded judgment), they tend to revert to the default intuition that natural phenomena are purposefully made.59,60 Researcher Elisa Järnefelt and colleagues conducted a series of these types of speeded judgment studies.61 The researchers found that, as expected, religious adults’ baseline tendency to endorse nature as purposefully created was higher than non-religious participants. Nevertheless, even the non-religious participants tended to default back to understanding natural phenomena as purposefully made when under time pressure.

While being educated is a protective factor, being a scientist is not—at least not to the degree that we might expect. Those with little to no formal schooling tend to endorse more teleological explanations than those with formal schooling science training.62 Indeed, those who have received an extensive education, such as college professors, tend to have less teleological explanations for natural phenomena than those who have received tertiary education, such as undergraduates. Even professional physical scientists accept as many scientifically unwarranted teleological explanations as those in the humanities who lacked this training.63 Importantly, the degree of the speeded effects (i.e. the tendency to default to teleological ideas under time pressure) is the same regardless of education. For instance, even though physical scientists understand the cause of metabolic processes of plants, when under timed conditions, many judged the statement “trees produce oxygen so that animals can breathe” as “true.”

There are individual differences in the extent to which adults can override their intuitive biases against evolutionary theory by engaging in effortful processing. Psychologist Will Gervais found that the tendency to engage in analytic thinking predicted endorsement of evolution among US college students, even when taking into account other things that predict evolutionary beliefs, like belief in God. Analytic thinking is a step-by-step methodological approach to thinking where a complex problem is broken down into single and manageable components. When this method is used, it often conflicts with intuitive responses.64

Gervais has proposed that individuals who engage in the form of analytic or reflective thinking are more likely to be able to override the instinctive reaction against evolution to endorse it. Given that analytic thinking is a crucial skill facilitated in higher education, this may well explain the correlation between education level and rejection of purposeful design in nature when participants have the chance to think without time pressure before answering. Yet other research has suggested that some of these findings do not always replicate cross-culturally, and relationships between cognitive reflection and beliefs also depend upon cultural exposure to relevant ideas.65 Belief is a much more complicated process than one’s cognitive style. Yet, Gervais’ findings provide a reason to encourage analytic thinking among those of us who do not always want to accept our instinctual responses.

Recent research has suggested that a more effective method to ensure that adults come to understand evolutionary theory is to teach them about evolution while they are young. For example, science education standards recommend a comprehensive explanation of adaptation by natural selection in grades 8 and 12;66 in part, due to the assumption that children are incapable of understanding the theory at an earlier age. Yet by this stage, children’s intuitive ideas (such as viewing the world as intentionally designed and imbued with hidden essences), act as impediments to learning about evolution. This tendency is in part because they have not received information on alternative coherent theories to challenge prior beliefs. They have not received information on the theory of evolution because of the assumption that they are not capable of understanding it before this age.

As Shtulman has pointed out, educators then have to help students not only to learn accurate theories but also to unlearn their naïve (i.e. pre-scientific) theories about the world.67 Some scholars have challenged the assumption that younger children are incapable of understanding evolutionary theory. Researchers Emmons, Smith, and Kelemen have demonstrated that even children as young as five years old are capable of understanding complex biological ideas. They created a storybook specifically to aid the understanding of evolutionary theory.68 These scholars advocate for introducing age-appropriate tools, such as storybook depictions of evolution, to enhance children’s early understanding of evolution. Also, cognitive scientists of religion propose that arming educators with an awareness of these biases can inform pedagogical strategies to improving evolution understanding and help them to teach evolution to students more effectively. For instance, Legare and colleagues have produced a guide for teaching evolution in the social sciences that outlines both biases and teaching strategies.69

Key points

CSR scholars have demonstrated that cognitive biases that serve as obstacles to understanding evolutionary theory are profoundly entrenched and resistant to change, and they are never entirely displaced by scientific knowledge.

To build a scientific understanding of the world, children need to undergo conceptual change. Educators must help students to learn scientific theories about the world but also unlearn naïve assumptions about the world.

Informing educators about these biases can inform pedagogical strategies to improving evolution understanding and help them to teach evolutionary theory to students more effectively.





The rationality of religious and scientific thinking


In the previous section, we covered research demonstrating that cognitive biases towards creationist explanations for the world exist despite increasing age and advanced education. These findings and the research of CSR, more generally, have implications for the academic study of religion. They relate specifically to the idea that science is rational, and faith is irrational, referred to here as the science-as-rational and religion-as-irrational theses. These theses have roots in early nineteenth-century anthropologists, often referred to as intellectualists, such as Edward Tylor and James Frazer. Among other endeavors, they were preoccupied with uncovering the origins of religious and magic beliefs. An era of rationalism profoundly influenced these Victorian scholars, and they worked within what was then construed as an evolutionary framework, where religion was interpreted as the misapplication of scientific principles, and science was construed as the highest level of rational thinking.

According to these early intellectualist theories, as thinking becomes more sophisticated, cultures pass through a series of stages, from magic to religion and finally to science. Eventually, more knowledge will eradicate religion. They favor a displacement theory and would predict that increasing scientific knowledge supplants religious ideas. This prediction has not been borne out, and research in the cognitive-evolutionary sciences provides a much more complicated picture than is often depicted in popular accounts. Yet, versions of the argument have appeared throughout history by some of the world’s most famous thinkers (e.g. Nietzsche, Marx, and Freud). These ideas are also regurgitated in different forms in the writings of new atheist thinkers, most notably the “four horsemen”: Richard Dawkins, Daniel Dennett, Sam Harris, and the late Christopher Hitchens. It seems that religious thinking, which tends to favor creationist explanations, is not replaced by scientific reasoning and that religion is not going to be eliminated.

Other theorists espouse a different view of the relationship between science and religion. For instance, evolutionary biologist Stephen Jay Gould advocates for a view called “non-overlapping magisterial” (NOMA), that science and religion represent different areas of inquiry, so there is a difference between the aspects they have legitimate authority, or magisterium, over. He describes the NOMA principle as the following,

Science tries to document the factual character of the natural world and to develop theories that coordinate and explain these facts. Religion, on the other hand, operates in the equally important, but utterly different, realm of human purposes, meanings, and values—subjects that the factual domain of science might illuminate, but can never resolve.70

Of course, Gould is discussing the epistemological relationship between science and religion in the world. This view is related in many ways to the corresponding psychological models of these two phenomena, as showcased in this chapter by cognitive science researchers, such as Kelemen, Legare, and Shulman, among others. These scholars suggest that scientific explanations do not replace religious ones but rather coexist with them. In other words, tendencies towards creationist reasoning about nature are not supplanted by increased knowledge and elaboration of ideas about science. This theory is known as a coexistence model.

Coexistence models are used to explain how people reason about natural and supernatural phenomena more generally.71,72 They account for how people can accommodate and reconcile multiple explanations for the same kind of event or outcomes. These could be scientific and lay theories, for example, or natural and supernatural theories. People do this by using different types of explanations to explain different levels of causality. We visit coexistence models between natural and supernatural explanations in more detail in the next section.

Participation 2: Increasing the understanding of evolutionary theory

Imagine that you have been appointed as head of a new national task force to assign funds to increase the understanding of evolutionary theory. Draft a brief (5-minute) rebuttal to members on the task force, based on what you have read in this chapter.Commentator A claims that the only way to increase understanding of scientific theories about the world is to prove that religion is false. He proposes spending 100 percent of the funds on materials to discredit religious ideas such as intelligent design.

Commentator B claims that the only way to increase understanding of scientific theories about the world is to increase understanding about evolution. She proposes spending 100 per cent of the funds on materials to teach children about evolution.





Next, outline how you would spend the funds to increase the understanding of evolutionary theory. You can allocate funds to multiple strategies (e.g. public policy, education, advertising, recruiting groups, and so on).





Key points

CSR scholars have demonstrated that cognitive biases that serve to facilitate belief in creationist understandings of the world are never entirely displaced by scientific knowledge.

These findings do not support a displacement theory of how people represent scientific and religious explanations of the world, which predicts that increasing scientific knowledge supplants religious ideas.

The findings support a coexistence model of how people represent scientific and religious explanations of the world because people accommodate and reconcile biological and supernatural accounts.





Summary of explaining the origins and development of the natural world

Many adults in the US outwardly reject evolutionary theory as an explanation of the origins and development of the world and species, and many accept creationist ideas as an alternative explanation.

There are many aspects of cognition and culture that explain these trends.

CSR has outlined cognitive obstacles to understanding evolutionary theory and biases that favor creationist accounts. These include promiscuous teleology, anthropomorphism, and essentialism.

These biases are never entirely displaced by scientific knowledge, and supernatural and scientific explanations often coexist in people’s minds.





Explaining events in the world: Coexistence reasoning


Thus far, we have learned that cognitive scientists of religion endorse a coexistence account of theory change to explain cognitive biases about the origins and development of the world among adults. That is to say, naïve theories about nature are not displaced by increased knowledge about science, but rather, are concealed by later constructed beliefs, so ultimately naïve and learned theories coexist in the minds of people. Cognitive scientists have demonstrated that coexistence reasoning exists across cultures and throughout development. This is especially prominent when people reason about events in the world, such as the origins of species, misfortune, illness, and death.73,74 These scholars have also proposed that people are much more likely to employ coexistence reasoning to explain highly significant events.

We have already covered examples of coexistence reasoning about the origins of species at the start of the chapter. As you may recall, some people construe the relationship between biological evolution and supernatural accounts of the origin and development of the world are compatible, often adopting integrated thinking. For example, reasoning that evolutionary theory explains how life and species evolve gradually but that God created life on earth in the first place. We also cover examples of coexistence reasoning about death in Chapter 6 (The Afterlife). Here, research reveals that people are sensitive to aspects of the context in their explanations. For example, when presented with a narrative highlighting the biological aspects of death (e.g. the unsuccessful efforts of doctors to save the dead person), people are likely to assert that living functions (and mainly bodily functions) have ceased. By contrast, when the same people are presented with a narrative highlighting the spiritual aspects of death (e.g. a religious figure or ceremony), they are more likely to assert that living functions (and particularly spiritual or mental functions) continue. In what follows in this section, we concentrate on coexistence reasoning about misfortune and illness.





Misfortune


One of the most well-known examples of coexistence reasoning about misfortunate events was in the 1930s by the British anthropologist Evans-Pritchard. Evans-Pritchard disagreed with his intellectualist predecessors who viewed science as the highest form of thought and religion and magic as the misapplication of science. Evans-Pritchard’s grounds for disagreement was spending an extended time conducting ethnographic fieldwork—observing and interacting—with the Azande people in North Central Africa, with the goal of understading the people in their terms. He argued that the Azande used both natural and supernatural explanations to explain events.

Evans-Pritchard provided what is now a famous example of a collapsing granary (i.e. a massive structure of beams and clay to store for grain where people also gather under the shade). This unfortunate event happened frequently, he observed, so there was nothing at all remarkable about it. Sometimes, however, the granary would collapse, and people were injured as a result. Evans-Pritchard explained that people are not ignorant of natural laws. They understand that termite damage and decay make the eventual demise inevitable. Yet the Azande were not so much concerned with the question of how the granary collapsed as with why it collapsed at that particular moment on those specific people.75 Thus, Pritchard claimed that the Azande supplemented naturalistic explanations of the collapse of the granary with supernatural forces of witchcraft. Witchcraft caused the granary to collapse at that particular moment in time when specific individuals were underneath it.

One of the main contributions of Evans-Pritchard’s work was to make a seemingly exotic belief in witchcraft seem easy to relate to when considered in context. To extend Evans-Pritchard’s observations, consider how Azande’s beliefs relate to people’s thinking in the modern western world today. We too make a host of assumptions about the world’s reality because we cannot trace all causal pathways, and they remain hidden from our perception. We fill these “black boxes” of causal pathways with all sorts of laws when probed, just like the Azande. The following quote from the pioneer in cybernetics, Ross Ashby, sums up this idea:

The child who tries to open a door has to manipulate the handle (the input) so as to produce the desired movement at the latch (the output), and he has to learn how to control the one by the other without being able to see the internal mechanism that links them. In our daily lives, we are confronted at every turn with systems whose internal mechanisms are not fully open to inspection, and which must be treated by the methods appropriate to the Black Box.76

Few people can explain the internal mechanism that links a handle to the latch, or how flipping a light switch results in electricity and light, yet we blindly trust these aspects of our environment. In part, this is due to context biases because it is easier to learn from others we trust than to practice a behavior only when we understand the inner workings of causality. Thus, for a child growing up in the modern West, a belief in electricity is no more rational than Azande’s belief in magic.





Illness


Access to natural and supernatural explanations is not confined to the Azande. Developmental psychologist Cristine Legare (whose research we encountered earlier in the chapter), investigated how children and adults reasoned about the cause and spread of AIDS in South Africa.77 Just like Evans-Pritchard reported that the Azande used different types of explanations for the collapsing granary, Legare and colleagues also found a difference between the type of cause of AIDS that participants endorsed.

As we discussed at the start of the chapter, scientists often categorize questions, and explanations, as either proximate or distal. Distal causes are the most distant, or ultimate, causal explanation of the event, and proximate is the closest causal explanation. Legare and colleagues found that people endorsed witchcraft as providing an answer to the “why” question of illness (the distal cause), whereas biology offers a response to the “how” question of disease (the proximate cause). For instance, participants tended to identify a proximate natural cause for contracting AIDS, such as having unprotected sex, and a distal cause as supernatural, such as reasoning that the witches distorted people’s sense of good judgment or put an HIV infected person in a person’s path. We discuss this research in more detail in the case study at the end of the chapter.

Combining both natural and supernatural explanations about illness is not only found in Africa. Legare and colleagues have also found similar types of coexistence reasoning about illness in Vanuatu, a Melanesian island nation in the South Pacific.78 There are also many instances of coexistence reasoning in the modern western world, especially when it comes to the diagnosis of life-threatening illness. Consider the devastating scenario of a woman hearing for the first time from the oncologist that she has cancer. The oncologist may well preempt the “how” (i.e. proximate) question by explaining the risk factors that make people susceptible to diseases, such as genetics. She may even explain to the patient that the exact cause of cancer is unknown.

Most people have a rudimentary understanding of the underlying mechanisms of disease, just enough knowledge to justify protective behavior. For example, most Americans know that the coronavirus (COVID-19) spreads from person to person, and that avoiding social contact is the safest way to avoid contamination. Yet even those who have expertise in the biological model of disease do not find this model a satisfying explanation of misfortune. More often than not, the question that is most pressing in the mind of a newly diagnosed individual with a life-threatening disease, such as metastatic cancer, is “why me?”79 This has been dubbed as “the question with no answers”.80,81 This term refers to the fact that, in the mind of the individual, there are no satisfactory answers from a medical model of disease that adequately explain the ultimate cause of their cancer, and why they have to endure the condition rather than someone else.

Many people who are diagnosed with a chronic illness, such as cancer, are likely to employ a non-biological framework to make sense of their plight.82 These frameworks are generally referred to in the coping literature as “meaning-making.” This refers to the representation or restoration of possible meaningful relationships between events, and people frequently employ teleological reasoning, such as the idea that their suffering is for a purpose.83 Unsurprisingly, research in the psychology of religion suggests that at least in non-life-threatening stages of cancer, patients report becoming more religious following diagnoses.84 Drawing upon religion may be especially prevalent in the early stages following diagnoses because it may provide people with reassurance and certainty to an otherwise uncertain outcome, for instance, that God has a purpose for them or can help them cope. Certainty reduces anxiety about consequences, and studies report overall better mental health outcomes for believers suffering from chronic illness relative to non-believers.85

Other studies report a decline in religious belief in terminal illnesses when patients are closer to death. This finding is commensurate with the interpretation that drawing upon religious frameworks helps people make sense of uncertainty.86 The psychologist Julie Exline and colleagues found that many cancer survivors—especially those who reported belief in God—reported being angry at God for their disease.87 Appealing to a sense of divine order in the world to explain suffering may be more cognitively appealing than the alternative, which is to explain one’s suffering as deserved (i.e. immanent justice) or just misfortune. Indeed, of all the possible causes for good health, people rate luck as the least important factor.88

Just like the Azande drew upon their culturally salient model of witchcraft to explain why the granary collapsed at a particular moment injuring specific individuals, believers are likely to draw upon their existing beliefs and culturally dominant representations of God and divine order to make meaning from their suffering. On the one hand, cancer survivors have an understanding of cancer from a biomedical model. Yet, on the other, they employ other non-biological frameworks to answer questions about why they got the disease. Both cases depict the coexistence of natural and supernatural explanations that again serve to dispel the idea that has permeated many discussions about the rationality of religion, that greater scientific knowledge displaces religious thinking.

In sum, converging evidence from diverse contexts demonstrates that supernatural beliefs are not replaced by scientific knowledge but instead coexist and are often employed to explain different types of causes. This coexistence reasoning is not unique to the domain of the supernatural or religious but applies to many naïve theories of how the world works.89,90 In the next section, we continue to focus on how intuitive biases predispose us towards specific explanations for events in the world. As will become apparent, these tendencies favor religious over secular accounts.

Key points

Supernatural beliefs are not replaced by scientific knowledge but instead coexist and are often employed to explain different types of causes.

Cognitive scientists have demonstrated that coexistence reasoning exists across cultures and throughout development when reasoning about events in the world, such as the origins of species, illness, and death.

One of the most well-known examples of coexistence reasoning was the description of the Azande people in North Central Africa in the 1930s by the British anthropologist Evans- Pritchard.

The Azande were concerned with the question of how the granary collapsed, and they used naturalistic examples to explain this. They were also concerned with the question of why the granary collapsed at a particular time when certain people were sitting under it, and they used supernatural forces of witchcraft to explain this.





Explaining events in the world: reasoning about moral justice


Previously in the chapter, we covered research by cognitive scientists of religion, who showcased how people are cognitively biased to explain naturally occurring events in terms of an inherent purpose, known as teleology. How many times have you heard the following phrases employed by people to explain an event? “It was meant to be,” “everything happens for a reason,” “what goes around comes around,” “you reap what you sow.” You may have even uttered the words to yourself on occasion. Chances are that when you utter these phrases, they are not being used to explain mundane, insignificant events, such as realizing that your spouse did not tighten the lid on the jam jar properly.

As people often think that significant events happen for a reason, they are also motivated to uncover the reason for the event. Consider the endowment of the disaster with purpose; to communicate something to the people affected. On 11 March, 2011, a powerful magnitude-9 earthquake in Northeastern Japan initiated a series of massive tsunami waves that wreaked havoc on many coastal areas of the country. Around 150,000 evacuees lost their homes, and approximately 16,000 people lost their lives. The damage of property was estimated to be in the region of $235 billion, making it the costliest natural disaster in world history.91 On 14 March, Tokyo Governor Shintaro Ishihara told reporters that the disaster was “divine punishment” because the Japanese people had become egoistic and greedy.92 His comments sparked many public criticisms—most notably from the governor of Miyagi Prefecture, north of Tokyo on the east coast of Honshu island, where the death toll was expected to be around 10,000. Shintaro later retracted his remarks and apologized.93

On the one hand, we can attribute Shintaro’s comments about the tsunami to the unfiltered thoughts of a 78-year old conservative politician with a history of making offensive remarks. On the other hand, while Shintaro was the most vocal, he was not the only public figure to have offered such explanations.94 A poll conducted by the Public Religion Research Institute (PPRI) in April 2011 reported that 38 percent of Americans surveyed believed that natural disasters, such as the Tsunami in Japan, were a sign from God.95 What differed in the accounts between the Eastern and Western cultures was the mechanism through which they proposed the tragedy occurred; Ushihara, a follower of Buddhism and Shinto, attributed it to a supernatural force, whereas many Americans attributed it specifically to the will of a monotheistic God. What was similar to both Buddhist and Christian explanations was the assumption that the tragedy was purposefully intended to communicate something to the people affected. This is a prototypical example of teleological reasoning.

In addition to reasoning that the event had a purpose, Shintaro was also assuming that bad things tend to happen to bad people. The tendency to reason this way, and conversely, that good things happen to good people is common among ordinary people as well as political leaders. It is part of a tendency known as immanent justice reasoning. We may find Shintaro’s comments morally offensive, yet we would find it more cognitively perplexing if he had commented that the disaster was a divine reward (rather than divine punishment) because the Japanese people had become self-centered and greedy.





Immanent justice reasoning


Immanent justice reasoning refers to the tendency to reason that good things happen to good people and, conversely, that bad things tend to happen to bad people—even when there are no plausible naturalistic causal links between the actions and outcome. Consider the following example of immanent justice reasoning from Northern Ireland. A charity called the “Kevin Bell Repatriation Trust” is run by a modest retired couple, Mr. and Mrs. Bell, who set up the charity when their son died unexpectedly in the US in 2013. Vowing never to let another family deal with the stress and hardship of arranging and paying to have their family members returned home, they spent their years working hard on fundraising and helping hundreds of families who had lost a loved one abroad. The couple is famously admired in Northern Ireland for their charity work.

In 2017, news broke all over Ireland that the Bells had won £1 million in the UK lottery.96 Immediately news and social media platforms like Twitter and Facebook were inundated with well-wishers who advocated teleological explanations for the event. Local celebrities, news reporters, and the public delighted in how good things happen to good people and that they were rewarded for their generosity. Some said that it was a gift from God, while others explained it as karma. During that time, it was tough not to attribute their success to some force of nature. Consider the alternative explanation that their fate was merely down to good fortune. In the UK National lottery, six numbers are drawn at random from the set of integers between 1 and 49, which means that there is a vast, but limited, combination of numbers. Statisticians have calculated that the jackpot chance is approximately 1 in 14 million. Their fate was improbable, but not impossible. Were they just lucky?

Let’s consider a counterexample. In 2004, Iorworth Hoare, a 52-year-old felon in England convicted of sex attacks including raping a retired schoolteacher, was on day release from his life imprisonment sentence when he decided to buy a lottery ticket. Hoare hit the jackpot and scooped a 7.2 million win. He was released in 2005. The retired policeman who arrested Hoare in 1966 said that he could not think of a “less deserving person” to win the money. Despite public outcry, the government could not stop Hoare from collecting latter his prize.97

In this latter example, you are likely to feel a deep sense of unease. You may even search for something to compensate for this event, such as “well maybe the victims can seek more compensation money,” or “the man can never be seen in public now because the win made his face recognizable.” I doubt that you would interpret this event as “meant to be” or “the will of God” or “karma.” You are more likely to say that Hoare’s lottery win was due to chance than the Bells’. Yet when you sit down and think about it in the cold light of day, there is nothing causally linking the Bells’ good deeds with their lottery win more than Hoare’s atrocious crimes to his good financial fortune—yet the explanation of fate, rather than chance, is more cognitively appealing in the Bell case. Your assumptions are based on immanent justice reasoning: good things happen to good people and conversely, that bad things happen to bad people.





The cognitive basis of immanent justice reasoning


Why do we tend to reason as though good things happen to good people and, conversely, that bad things tend to happen to bad people, even when there are no plausible naturalistic causal links between the actions and outcome? This tendency is a product of both cognition and culture. Ideas about immanent justice reasoning recur throughout large-scale societies. Scholars have pointed to the many examples in the Judeo-Christian culture of people suffering for their sins.98 Moreover, the many western cases of good deeds attracting good outcomes and bad deeds attracting adverse results can be found in popular media.99 Thus, ideas about immanent justice are likely to be strengthened with enculturation. For instance, adults tend to engage in immanent justice reasoning more than elementary school children,100,101 and the relationship between the extent to which people watch fictional television (whose narratives often represent the world as just) positively correlates with the extent to which they employ immanent justice explanations.102

Cognitive biases and motivational beliefs enable the rapid endorsement of immanent justice reasoning. Research has repeatedly shown that children engage in immanent justice reasoning to make sense of the world, and notably when entailing judgments of fairness.103 The tendency has been reported cross-culturally, including in Eastern traditions,104 suggesting that this form of reasoning is not a product of Judeo-Christian or WEIRD traditions (i.e. Western, Educated, Industrialized, Rich, and Democratic), but is likely to have cognitive foundations. For instance, scholars in the cognitive and social sciences have argued that the underlying tendency to think that things happen for a reason is a by-product of universal social-cognitive biases, specifically, the tendency to reason about the intention behind artifacts and people’s behaviors. As we covered in the last section of this chapter, these tendencies spill over to other domains, leading us to see the world as a product of agency, purpose, and design (i.e. promiscuous teleology).

Against the baseline tendency to reason about events as happening for a reason, immanent justice involves reasoning that links actions and outcomes—good deeds lead to good results, and bad deeds lead to adverse outcomes. One prominent theory in social psychology explains the motivation behind immanent justice reasoning as stemming from a “just-world hypothesis,” a sense that the world is purposefully ordered and just, and thus a safe place to live. Hence the sense that people’s actions are inclined to bring morally fair and fitting consequences. Indeed, immanent justice reasoning can bring a sense of control over the world and is often used to explain events for which we do not have control over or comprehend.

Cognitive scientist Nicolas Baumard and colleagues have proposed an evolutionary explanation for immanent justice reasoning. He suggests that it is derived from our evolved sense of fairness.105 In a series of studies, they found that people who do not claim to believe in immanent justice are implicitly influenced by it. Most importantly, all participants were likely to evoke notions of fairness when the misdeed is followed by misfortune, but not when the misfortune is disproportionate to the crime. For example, when they heard a story about a man who insulted a beggar and then was hit by a car and died, participants were likely to say that the cause of the man’s death was not because he insulted the beggar.

On the other hand, when they heard a story about a man who insulted a beggar and then tripped on his shoelace and fell, they were likely to say that the cause of the fall was because the man insulted the beggar. In other words, our evolved sense of fairness construes misfortune as a way of compensating for the misdeed. This sense of fairness was adaptive. In our species’ development in cultural evolution, cooperation was crucial for survival; few would cooperate with a social group member who did not abide by and enforce a sense of fairness. In other words, the group punishes those who do wrong, and those who do right are rewarded.

Related, and as we will cover in Chapter 8 (Morality), the general tendency to construe the world as fair serves to deter those who would not otherwise abide by the rules. This effect is stronger if the moral policing agent dishing out fairness is a supernatural agent or divine force, such as God, or karma.106,107 Of course, immanent justice reasoning is found without the appeal to divine order or intervention, with dire consequences. For example, many Germans living under the Nazi regime were persuaded that those who were sent to the concentration camps were members of an impure race who did something wrong to deserve their fates.108 Still, many popular versions of religion have been influenced by the tendency to reason about good fortune as a reward for adhering to moral rules and ill fortune as imposed for violation of regulations.109

As we covered earlier in the chapter, people tend to engage in attributing the intentional action of an agent as the cause of affairs in the world. Thus, the idea of an agent or sense of agency as evoked in the causal process between deed and outcome is cognitively appealing. Indeed, many theologians have sought to justify why bad things happen to good people, and good things happen to bad people in western Christianity where a monotheistic God is sovereign, A conundrum often referred to as the problem of evil, or theodicy. Developmental psychologist Paul Bloom and colleagues have turned their attention to how ordinary people reason about deeds and outcomes. They found that the relationship between religious belief and immanent justice reasoning may be mediated by mentalizing ability, which, as we covered in the previous section, refers to the tendency to reason about agents as intentional beings. Specifically, they found that higher mentalizing is related to the tendency to engage in immanent justice explanations.110 This finding supports the view that immanent justice reasoning is a by-product of the human inclination to reason about the intention behind people’s behaviors.

Research has demonstrated that while both religious and non-religious adults provide teleological explanations for the causes of life-altering events, theists give significantly more of these explanations than atheists and they tend to hold stronger teleological beliefs.111,112 The relationship may not be solely about religious beliefs but rather, the tendency of religious individuals to reason about the goals, intentions, and beliefs of their deities or cosmic order. Even though most contemporary religious doctrines state that punishment occurs only in the afterlife, many people are automatically tempted to explain adverse events regarding immanent justice. Thus, natural disasters like the 2011 tsunami are interpreted as divine warnings or cautions to sinful behavior. Likewise, in India, vast differences in inequality and the caste system are justified by the laws of karma, the accumulation of deeds over lifetimes. It appears that immanent justice reasoning is a naturally emerging tendency that is often supported by cultural ideas about the nature of the world.

Participation 3: Cognitive biases

Provide a brief definition of the following cognitive foundations: (a) promiscuous teleology (b) anthropomorphism (c) psychological essentialism, and (d) immanent justice reasoning.

Table 3.3 in Chapter 3 (Research Questions) provided examples of the cognitive foundations of religious ideas. Based on this table and chapter:

Table 3.5 in Chapter 3 (Research Questions) outlines four questions to enrich explanations of religion. Go through this chapter and find one answer to each of the questions for the selected biases.Mechanism or bias 1: What is the structure of immanent justice reasoning?

Ontogeny: How does promiscuous teleology develop in individuals?

Phylogeny: What is the evolutionary history of anthropomorphism?

Adaptive significance: How has psychological essentialism influenced fitness?





Explain (in a few sentences for each) how each bias enriches the understanding of how people reason about the natural world.





Key points

People often think that significant events happen for a reason, and they are motivated to uncover the reason for these events.

People tend to reason that good things happen to good people and conversely, that bad things tend to happen to bad people, even when there are no plausible naturalistic causal links between the actions and outcome.

Cognitive scientist Nicolas Baumard and colleagues have proposed that immanent justice reasoning is derived from our evolved sense of fairness.

Cognitive biases (such as promiscuous teleology, anthropomorphism, and a sense of fairness), and cultural worldviews enable the rapid endorsement of immanent justice reasoning.





Summary of explaining events in the world

People employ coexistence reasoning across cultures and throughout development to explain events in the world, such as the origins of species, misfortune, illness, and death.

People often adopt integrated thinking when reasoning about accounts of the origins of species and illness.

Integrated thinking is a type of coexistence reasoning where people construe the relationship between natural and supernatural accounts as compatible, and they integrate both into a single explanation.

Evans-Pritchard and Legare and colleagues found that people in Africa endorsed supernatural causes to explain “why” misfortune occurred (the distal cause). In contrast, natural causes told “how” misfortune occurred (the proximate cause). Similar types of coexistence reasoning about illness are present in other parts of the world, such as Melanesia and the modern West.

People often explain events in the world by endorsing ideas about moral justice. They are likely to reason concerning immanent justice, that good things happen to good people, and conversely, that bad things tend to happen to bad people.

Cognitive biases and enculturation facilitate the widespread endorsement of immanent justice reasoning.





Research case study: The coexistence of natural and supernatural explanations for illness

Developmental psychologist Cristine Legare was intrigued by Evans-Pritchard’s early observations about how the Azande reason about the causes of events. Drawing from her background in cross-cultural and developmental psychology, Legare noted that access to natural as well as supernatural explanations is not confined to the Azande. Legare noted the distinct parallels between Evans-Pritchard’s observations of reasoning about misfortune in Zandleland and the presence of both biological and supernatural explanations for the transmission and cure of illnesses in parts of the world where serious diseases are prevalent. For example, in parts of South Africa, although people have access to information about the transmission of the AIDS virus, supernatural accounts of infection based on witchcraft are also disseminated.

Legare wondered whether biological knowledge supplants supernatural explanations. In other words, one possibility is that people use supernatural explanations until they acquire an adequate understanding of biological reasons. Another option is that people use both supernatural and natural frameworks, but here, little was known about how people used these types of explanations. For instance, supernatural and natural frameworks may remain distinct and alternative views of the world that are recruited to explain specific types of events, or they may be used jointly to explain the same phenomenon. Based on Evans-Pritchard’s observations and the research on chronic illness, Legare expected the latter. Yet only a detailed and systematic series of studies, which compared different ways of coexistence thinking, would provide concrete evidence for this and information about how, precisely, they coexist at the same time.

Legare and colleagues thus investigated how children and adults reasoned about the cause and spread of AIDS among two communities in South Africa, where discourse about AIDS is prevalent.113 The communities Legare worked with had both knowledge of biomedical explanations for AIDS (e.g. contaminated blood) and supernatural frameworks of understanding (e.g. bewitchment). Also, research with communities other than the Azande would speak to the question of whether, and to what extent, coexistence reasoning appears cross-culturally. Furthermore, by conducting studies with children and adults, Legare and her colleagues were able to understand the development of coexistence reasoning over time.

In one series of studies, Legare and her team asked children and adults to reason about the likelihood of different types of explanations for the contraction of AIDS. They found that all participants gave biological explanations, and almost all (93 percent) gave at least one bewitchment explanation throughout the study. Based on these findings, they concluded that bewitchment explanations were more flexible and idiosyncratically employed than biological explanations. Importantly, they also found a difference between the type of cause that participants endorsed. Proximate explanations are like the “why.” In the case of the granary, this was the termites eating the wood, and in the case of cancer, this is the cell dividing at an alarming rate. They focus on the closest causal explanation to the event. By contrast, distal accounts concentrate more on the “how” questions; they focus on the most distant, or ultimate, causal explanation of the event. In other words, witchcraft caused the termites to eat the wood at that precise time, or that by getting cancer, God had a purpose for the individual.

In Legare’s study, most participants identified a proximate natural cause for contracting AIDS, (e.g. having unprotected sex), and the distal cause was supernatural (e.g. reasoning that witches distorted your sense of sound judgment). Furthermore, participants often combined both types of statements in a precise fashion to explain contracting AIDS, referred to as integrated thinking. For example, participants provided reasons such as “a witch can make a condom weak and break,” “jealousy and spells, people sent someone with AIDS to sleep with him,” and “the people that hated her paid the witches to put the virus in her path.”

Both children and adults reasoned about the causes of AIDS similarly, and adults were even more likely than children to cite supernatural causes. From her research, Legare argued that bewitchment explanations were neither the result of ignorance nor replaced by biological explanations. Instead, they coexist to explain particular aspects of illness. Furthermore, the combination of biological and natural reasoning about events are not naïve ways of thinking that we grow out of, but rather, are robust default explanatory frameworks that are supported by enculturation. As she and others who have studied the development of causal reasoning have discovered both biological and supernatural explanations are found in many different cultures on diverse topics, including evolutionary and creationist accounts of the origin of species among Americans and Europeans.





Discussion questions


In your own words, summarize the claims Legare is making.

What are the differences and similarities between Legare’s research and previous research (e.g. Evans-Pritchard’s research) on coexistence reasoning?

What do you think demarks this research as typical of the CSR approach to religion?

What are the implications of this research on the religion-as-irrational thesis proposed by new atheists (covered earlier in the chapter)?





Further reading


Legare, Cristine H., and Susan A. Gelman. “Bewitchment, biology, or both: The coexistence of natural and supernatural explanatory frameworks across development.” Cognitive Science 32, no. 4 (2008): 607–642.

Watson‐Jones, Rachel E., Justin T.A Busch, and Cristine H. Legare. “Interdisciplinary and cross‐cultural perspectives on explanatory coexistence.” Topics in Cognitive Science 7, no. 4 (2015): 611–623.

Busch, Justin TA, Rachel E. Watson‐Jones, and Cristine H. Legare. “The coexistence of natural and supernatural explanations within and across domains and development.” British Journal of Developmental Psychology 35, no. 1 (2017): 4–20.

C.H. Legare and A. Shtulman (2017). “Explanatory pluralism across cultures and development.” In J. Proust and M. Fortier, eds. Metacognitive Diversity. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.





Chapter summary


Developmental and cross-cultural research provides evidence that people have cognitive biases that predispose them towards understanding and endorsing particular ideas about the world. These biases often make religious views more appealing to people than scientific explanations, including the idea that an intelligent agent purposefully designed the world and its inhabitants; that events happen in the world for a reason; that good deeds lead to good outcomes, and evil deeds lead to adverse outcomes. Indeed, even when adults receive sophisticated science education, they cannot help but fall back on intuitive pre-scientific theories when pressured or burdened. Perhaps we can educate children about evolution at a younger age, thinking harder as adults will encourage us to override our naïve assumptions about the world. Yet as research has shown, both natural and supernatural explanations tend to coexist. It seems to be the case that natural explanations suffice in certain circumstances. Still, when it comes to an understanding of tragic and significant events, people find supernatural explanations more satisfying as ultimate explanations.

Discussion questions

Can you think of examples of coexistence reasoning about significant events (including from your personal experience or those you have encountered in the media) not listed in the chapter?

If cognitive biases favor supernatural explanations for events, then what are the implications for believers and non-believers?

What are the practical implications of the research on cognitive biases that favor religious explanations? (e.g. child-rearing, education, debates on science as rational and religion as irrational).





Selected further reading


Articles


Banerjee, Konika, and Paul Bloom. “Why did this happen to me? Religious believers’ and non-believers’ teleological reasoning about life events.” Cognition 133, no. 1 (2014): 277–303.

Kelemen, Deborah. “Why are rocks pointy? Children’s preference for teleological explanations of the natural world.” Developmental Psychology 35, no. 6 (1999): 1440.

Legare, Cristine H., E. Margaret Evans, Karl S. Rosengren, and Paul L. Harris. “The coexistence of natural and supernatural explanations across cultures and development.” Child Development 83, no. 3 (2012): 779–793.





Books


McCauley, Robert N. Why religion is natural and science is not. Oxford University Press, 2011.

Shtulman, Andrew. Scienceblind: Why Our Intuitive Theories About the World are So Often Wrong. Hachette UK, 2017.



Notes

1 Frazier, Brandy N., Susan A. Gelman, and Henry M. Wellman. “Preschoolers’ search for explanatory information within adult-child conversation.” Child Development 80, no. 6 (2009): 1592–1611.

2 Legare, Cristine H., Candice M. Mills, André L. Souza, Leigh E. Plummer, and Rebecca Yasskin. “The use of questions as problem-solving strategies during early childhood.” Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 114, no. 1 (2013): 63–76.

3 Mills, Candice M., Cristine H. Legare, Meridith G. Grant, and Asheley R. Landrum. “Determining whom to question, what to ask, and how much information to ask for: The development of inquiry in young children.” Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 110, no. 4 (2011): 539–560.

4 Ronfard, Samuel, Imac M. Zambrana, Tone K. Hermansen, and Deborah Kelemen. “Question-asking in childhood: A review of the literature and a framework for understanding its development.” Developmental Review (2018).

5 Legare, Cristine H. “Exploring explanation: Explaining inconsistent evidence informs exploratory, hypothesis‐testing behavior in young children.” Child Development 83, no. 1 (2012): 173–185.

6 Williams, Joseph Jay, Tania Lombrozo, and Bob Rehder. “The hazards of explanation: Overgeneralization in the face of exceptions.” Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 142, no. 4 (2013): 1006.

7 Robert N McCauley, Why Religion is Natural and Science is Not. New York: Oxford University Press, 2011.

8 Jon D. Miller, Eugenie C. Scott, and Shinji Okamoto, “Public acceptance of evolution.” Science 313, no. 5788 (2006): 765.

9 Jon D. Miller, Eugenie C. Scott, and Shinji Okamoto, “Public acceptance of evolution.” Science 313, no. 5788 (2006): 765.

10 Mivart, St George Jackson. On the genesis of species. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1871.

11 Evans, E. Margaret. “The emergence of beliefs about the origins of species in school-age children.” Merrill-Palmer Quarterly (1982-) (2000): 221–254.

12 Pew (2014: February 3). “Fighting over Darwin, state by state.” www.pewforum.org/2009/02/04/fighting-over-darwin-state-by-state/. Downloaded October 5, 2018.

13 Arthur McCalla, “Creationism.” Religion Compass 1, no. 5 (2007): 547–560.

14 Scott, E.C., Miller, J.D., and Okamoto, S., “Public acceptance of evolution.” Science, 313, No. 5788 (2006): 765–766.

15 Weisberg, Deena Skolnick, Asheley R. Landrum, S. Emlen Metz, and Michael Weisberg. “No missing link: Knowledge predicts acceptance of evolution in the United States.” BioScience 68, no. 3 (2018): 212–222.

16 Cohen, Geoffrey L., Joshua Aronson, and Claude M. Steele. “When beliefs yield to evidence: Reducing biased evaluation by affirming the self.” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 26, no. 9 (2000): 1151–1164.

17 Legare, Cristine H. “Exploring explanation: Explaining inconsistent evidence informs exploratory, hypothesis‐testing behavior in young children.” Child Development 83, no. 1 (2012): 173–185.

18 Rosengren, Karl S., Sarah K. Brem, E. Margaret Evans, and Gale M. Sinatra, eds. Evolution Challenges: Integrating Research and Practice in Teaching and Learning about Evolution. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012.

19 Andrew Shtulman, “Qualitative differences between naïve and scientific theories of evolution.” Cognitive Psychology 52, no. 2 (2006): 170–194.

20 Weisberg, Deena Skolnick, Asheley R. Landrum, S. Emlen Metz, and Michael Weisberg. “No missing link: Knowledge predicts acceptance of evolution in the United States.” BioScience, 68, no. 3 (2018): 212–222.

21 Weisberg, Deena Skolnick, Asheley R. Landrum, S. Emlen Metz, and Michael Weisberg. “No missing link: Knowledge predicts acceptance of evolution in the United States.” BioScience 68, no. 3 (2018): 212–222.

22 Pew Research Center. “Religious landscape study.” Washington, DC, 2014.

23 David Adams Leeming, Creation Myths of the World: An Encyclopedia, Vol. 1. Santa Barbara: ABC-CLIO, 2010.

24 Darwin, Charles. Life and Letters of Charles Darwin. Vol. 1. Krill Press via PublishDrive, 2016.

25 Deborah Kelemen and Cara DiYanni, “Intuitions about origins: Purpose and intelligent design in children’s reasoning about nature.” Journal of Cognition and Development 6, no. 1 (2005): 3–31.

26 Schachner, Adena, Liqi Zhu, Jing Li, and Deborah Kelemen. “Is the bias for function-based explanations culturally universal? Children from China endorse teleological explanations of natural phenomena.” Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 157 (2017): 29–48.

27 Game of Thrones “The Prince of Winterfell.” Episode 8, Season 2. Directed by Alan Taylor. Written by David Benioff and D.B. Weiss. HBO, Air Date, 2012.

28 Deborah Kelemen, “The scope of teleological thinking in preschool children.” Cognition 70, no. 3 (1999): 241–272.

29 Susan C. Johnson, Amy Booth, and Kirsten O’Hearn, “Inferring the goals of a non-human agent.” Cognitive Development 16, no. 1 (2001): 637–656.

30 Csibra Gergely and György Gergely, “The teleological origins of mentalistic action explanations: A developmental hypothesis.” Developmental Science 1, no. 2 (1998): 255–259.

31 Jacqueline D. Woolley, Chelsea A. Cornelius, and Walter Lacy, “Developmental changes in the use of supernatural explanations for unusual events.” Journal of Cognition and Culture 11, no. 3–4 (2011): 311–337.

32 Donovan, Elizabeth, and Deborah Kelemen. “Just rewards: Children and adults equate accidental inequity with intentional unfairness.” Journal of Cognition and Culture 11, no. 1 (2011): 137–150.

33 Malinda Carpenter, “Instrumental, social, and shared goals and intentions in imitation.” In Imitation and the Social Mind: Autism and Typical Development. 2006: 48–70.

34 E. Margaret Evans, “Cognitive and contextual factors in the emergence of diverse belief systems: Creation versus evolution.” Cognitive Psychology 42, no. 3 (2001): 217–266.

35 Deborah Kelemen, “British and American children’s preferences for teleo-functional explanations of the natural world.” Cognition 88, no. 2 (2003): 201–221.

36 Järnefelt, Elisa, Liqi Zhu, Caitlin F. Canfield, Marian Chen, and Deborah Kelemen. “Reasoning about nature’s agency and design in the cultural context of China.” In Religion, Brain & Behavior. 2018: 1–23.

37 Rottman, Joshua, Liqi Zhu, Wen Wang, Rebecca Seston Schillaci, Kelly J. Clark, and Deborah Kelemen. “Cultural influences on the teleological stance: Evidence from China.” Religion, Brain & Behavior 7, no. 1 (2017): 17–26.

38 Järnefelt, Elisa, Caitlin F. Canfield, and Deborah Kelemen. “The divided mind of a disbeliever: Intuitive beliefs about nature as purposefully created among different groups of non-religious adults.” Cognition 140 (2015): 72–88.

39 Pag Clark, Kelly James. Religion and the Sciences of origins: Historical and Contemporary Discussions. Springer, 2014: 1–2.

40 Guthrie, S. “A cognitive theory of religion.” Current Anthropology 21, no. 2 (1980): 181–203.

41 Stewart, Elliott Guthrie. Faces in the Clouds: A New Theory of Religion. New York: Oxford University Press, 1993.

42 Barrett, Justin L. Why Would Anyone Believe in God? Walnut Creek: AltaMira Press, 2004.

43 www.buzzfeed.com/arielknutson/people-who-found-jesus-in-their-food?utm_term=.biWVxyoee#.hs4Y5xVoo.

44 Gelman, Susan A. The Essential Child: Origins of Essentialism in Everyday Thought. Oxford Series in Cognitive Development, 2003.

45 Gail M. Gottfried and Susan A. Gelman, “Developing domain-specific causal-explanatory frameworks: The role of insides and immanence.” Cognitive Development 20, no. 1 (2005): 137–158.

46 Douglas L. Medin and Andrew Ortony, “Psychological essentialism.” Similarity and Analogical Reasoning 179 (1989): 195.

47 Susan A. Gelman and Henry M. Wellman, “Insides and essences: Early understandings of the non-obvious.” Cognition 38, no. 3 (1991): 213–244.

48 Andrew Shtulman and Laura Schulz. “The relation between essentialist beliefs and evolutionary reasoning.” Cognitive Science 32, no. 6 (2008): 1049–1062.

49 Andrew Shtulman and Laura Schulz. “The relation between essentialist beliefs and evolutionary reasoning.” Cognitive Science 32, no. 6 (2008): 1049–1062.

50 Pew (2013: December 30). “Public’s views on human evolution.” www.pewforum.org/2013/12/30/publics-views-on-human-evolution/. Downloaded March 27, 2018.

51 Alice B. Kehoe, “Scientific creationism: Worldview, not science.” Cult Archaeology and Creationism (1987): 11–20.

52 Gelman, Susan A. “Psychological essentialism in children.” Trends in Cognitive Sciences 8, no. 9 (2004): 404–409.

53 Douglas L. Medin and Scott Atran, eds. Folkbiology. Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1999.

54 Susan A. Gelman, John D. Coley, and Gail M. Gottfried, “13 Essentialist beliefs in children: The acquisition of concepts and theories.” In Mapping the Mind: Domain Specificity in Cognition and Culture (1994): 341.

55 Legare, Cristine, John Opfer, Justin Busch, and Andrew Shtulman. “A field guide for teaching evolution in the social sciences.” Evolution and Human Behavior 39, no. 3 (2018): 257–268.

56 Andrew S. Shtulman, Scienceblind: Why Our Intuitive Theories About the World are So Often Wrong. New York: Basic Books, 2017.

57 Kelemen and Rosset, “The human function compunction,” 138–143.

58 Andrew Shtulman and Joshua Valcarcel, “Scientific knowledge suppresses but does not supplant earlier intuitions.” Cognition 124, no. 2 (2012): 209–215.

59 Robert F. Goldberg and Sharon L. Thompson-Schill, “Developmental ‘roots’ in mature biological knowledge.” Psychological Science 20, no. 4 (2009): 480–487.

60 Deborah Kelemen and Evelyn Rosset, “The human function compunction: Teleological explanation in adults.” Cognition 111, no. 1 (2009): 138–143.

61 Elisa Järnefelt, Caitlin F. Canfield, and Deborah Kelemen, “The divided mind of a disbeliever: Intuitive beliefs about nature as purposefully created among different groups of non-religious adults.” Cognition 140 (2015): 72–88.

62 Krista Casler and Deborah Kelemen, “Developmental continuity in teleo-functional explanation: Reasoning about nature among Romanian Romani adults.” Journal of Cognition and Development 9, no. 3 (2008): 340–362.

63 Deborah Kelemen, Joshua Rottman, and Rebecca Seston, “Professional physical scientists display tenacious teleological tendencies: Purpose-based reasoning as a cognitive default.” Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 142, no. 4 (2013): 1074.

64 Jonathon M. Seidl, “Over 50% of Harvard, Princeton and MIT students get this simple logic question wrong,” last modified November 14, 2013.

65 www.nature.com/articles/s41562-018-0426-0.

66 Achieve, Inc. (2013). “Next-generation science standards.”

67 Shtulman and Valcarcel, “Scientific knowledge,” 209–215.

68 Kelemen, Deborah, Natalie A. Emmons, Rebecca Seston Schillaci, and Patricia A. Ganea. “Young children can be taught basic natural selection using a picture-storybook intervention.” Psychological Science 25, no. 4 (2014): 893–902.

69 Legare, Cristine, John Opfer, Justin Busch, and Andrew Shtulman. “A field guide for teaching evolution in the social sciences.” Evolution and Human Behavior 39, no. 3 (2018): 257–268.

70 Gould, Stephen Jay. Rocks of Ages: Science and Religion in the Fullness of Life. Ballantine Books, 2011: 31.

71 Cristine H. Legare, E. Margaret Evans, Karl S. Rosengren, and Paul L. Harris, “The coexistence of natural and supernatural explanations across cultures and development.” Child Development 83, no. 3 (2012): 779–793.

72 Kevin Dunbar, J. Fugelsang, and Courtney Stein, “Do naïve theories ever go away? Using brain and behavior to understand changes in concepts.” Thinking with Data (2007): 193–206.

73 Legare, C.H., Evans, E.M., Rosengren, K.S., and Harris, P.L. (2012). “The coexistence of natural and supernatural explanations across cultures and development.” Child Development 83, no. 3: 779–793.

74 Busch, Justin T.A., Rachel E. Watson‐Jones, and Cristine H. Legare. “The coexistence of natural and supernatural explanations within and across domains and development.” British Journal of Developmental Psychology 35, no. 1 (2017): 4–20.

75 Edward E. Evans-Pritchard, Witchcraft, Oracles and Magic Among the Azande. Vol. 12. London: Oxford, 1937.

76 Ashby, W. Ross, “Chapter 6: The black box.” In An Introduction to Cybernetics. London: Chapman & Hall, 1956, 86–117.

77 Cristine H. Legare and Susan A. Gelman, “Bewitchment, biology, or both: The co‐existence of natural and supernatural explanatory frameworks across development.” Cognitive Science 32, no. 4 (2008): 607–642.

78 Busch, Justin T.A., Rachel E. Watson‐Jones, and Cristine H. Legare. “The coexistence of natural and supernatural explanations within and across domains and development.” British Journal of Developmental Psychology 35, no. 1 (2017): 4–20.

79 Tori Tomalia, “The Why Me of Cancer.” Cure, last modified December 12, 2014.

80 Conrad Eamonn, “Why me? The question with no answers.” The Huffington Post, last modified February 13, 2013.

81 Comment on “Why Me?” Cancer Survivors Network (weblog). https://csn.cancer.org/node/294615.

82 Juliet M. McMullin, Israel De Alba, Leo R. Chavez, and F. Allan Hubbell, “Influence of beliefs about cervical cancer etiology on Pap smear use among Latina immigrants.” Ethnicity & Health 10, no. 1 (2005): 3–18.

83 Crystal L. Park, “Making sense of the meaning literature: An integrative review of meaning-making and its effects on adjustment to stressful life events.” Psychological Bulletin 136, no. 2 (2010): 257.

84 Richard N. Eidinger and David V. Schapira, “Cancer patients’ insight into their treatment, prognosis, and unconventional therapies.” Cancer 53, no. 12 (1984): 2736–2740.

85 Simon Dein and J. Stygall, “Does being religious help or hinder coping with chronic illness? A critical literature review.” Palliative Medicine 11, no. 4 (1997): 291–298.

86 Robert J. Baugher, Candice Burger, Roberta Smith, and Kenneth Wallston, “A comparison of terminally ill persons at various periods to death.” OMEGA – Journal of Death and Dying 20, no. 2 (1990): 103–115.

87 Julie J. Exline, Crystal L. Park, Joshua M. Smyth, and Michael P. Carey, “Anger toward God: Social-cognitive predictors, prevalence, and links with adjustment to bereavement and cancer.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 100, no. 1 (2011): 129.

88 Adrian Furnham, “Explaining health and illness: Lay beliefs on the nature of health.” Personality and Individual Differences 17, no. 4 (1994): 455–466.

89 Legare, Evans, Rosengren, and Harris, “The coexistence of natural and supernatural,” 779–793.

90 Shtulman, Scienceblind.

91 Becky Oskin, “Japan earthquake and tsunami of 2011: Facts and information.” LiveScience. September 13, 2017.

92 Jackson, Andy, “Tokyo mayor: Tsunami was ‘divine punishment.’” Asian Correspondent, last modified March 15, 2011.

93 Justin McCurry, “Tokyo governor apologizes for calling tsunami ‘divine punishment,’” last modified March 15, 2011.

94 McCurry, “Tokyo governor.”

95 Robert P. Jones and Daniel Cox, “Few Americans see natural disasters a sign from God.” PRRI, last modified 2011.

96 “Kevin Bell Trust founders win £1m in UK lottery.” RTE News, last modified June 29, 2017.

97 “UK | England | West Yorkshire | ‘Lottery rapist’ freed from jail.” BBC News, last modified March 31, 2005.

98 Lakshmi Raman and Gerald A. Winer, “Evidence of more immanent justice responding in adults than children: A challenge to traditional developmental theories.” British Journal of Developmental Psychology 22, no. 2 (2004): 255–274.

99 Markus Appel, “Fictional narratives cultivate just‐world beliefs.” Journal of Communication 58, no. 1 (2008): 62–83.

100 Konika Banerjee and Paul Bloom, “‘Everything happens for a reason’: Children’s beliefs about purpose in life events.” Child Development 86, no. 2 (2015): 503–518.

101 Raman and Winer, “Evidence of more immanent justice,” 255–274.

102 Appel, “Fictional narratives cultivate just‐world beliefs,” 62–83.

103 Paul E Jose, “Just‐world reasoning in children’s immanent justice judgments.” Child Development 61, no. 4 (1990): 1024–1033.

104 Zick Rubin and Letitia Anne Peplau. “Who believes in a just world?” Journal of Social Issues 31, no. 3 (1975): 65–89.

105 Nicolas Baumard and Coralie Chevallier, “What goes around comes around: The evolutionary roots of the belief in immanent justice.” Journal of Cognition and Culture 12, no. 1–2 (2012): 67–80.

106 Ara Norenzayan, Big Gods: How Religion Transformed Cooperation and Conflict. New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 2013.

107 Cindel White, Adam Baimel, and Ara Norenzayan, “What are the causes and consequences of belief in karma?” Religion, Brain & Behavior (2017): 1–4.

108 Robert Nevitt Sanford and Craig Comstock, Sanctions for Evil. Sources of Social Destructiveness. [By] Nevitt Sanford, Craig Comstock, and Associates. New Jersey: Jossey-Bass, 1971.

109 R. Shweder, N. Much, Manamohan Mahapatra, and Lawrence Park, “Divinity and the ‘big three’ explanations of suffering.” Morality and Health 119 (1997): 119–169.

110 Banerjee and Bloom, “Why did this happen to me?” 277–303.

111 Konika Banerjee and Paul Bloom, “Why did this happen to me? Religious believers’ and non-believers’ teleological reasoning about life events.” Cognition 133, no. 1 (2014): 277–303.

112 Bethany T. Heywood and Jesse M. Bering, “‘Meant to be’: How religious beliefs and cultural religiosity affect the implicit bias to think teleologically.” Religion, Brain & Behavior 4, no. 3 (2014): 183–201.

113 Cristine H. Legare and Susan A. Gelman, “Bewitchment, biology, or both: The co‐existence of natural and supernatural explanatory frameworks across development.” Cognitive Science 32, no. 4 (2008): 607–642.





6 The afterlife




The belief that something extraordinary happens to people when they die is cross-culturally ubiquitous. Across the dazzling array of ideas about the afterlife, there are a few underlying assumptions in common depictions: that the person survives biological death, retains his or her mental processes and identity, embarks on a journey to the next life, and resides in a physical location. In this chapter, we will consider three types of theories in the cognitive evolutionary sciences about why these ideas are so prevalent.

First, we consider cognitive theories of afterlife beliefs. These theories propose that we are cognitively predisposed to represent people as continuing in some form after biological death. Second, we turn to contextual approaches of afterlife beliefs. These theories also tend to endorse cognitive predispositions and biases as underpinning ideas about the afterlife. Still, they tend to place more emphasis on context and the role of cultural transmission and cultural learning on the development and endorsement of these ideas than cognitive accounts. Third, we consider motivational theories of afterlife beliefs, which focus on the motivation to believe that life exists after biological death. These include terror management theorists who propose that belief in an afterlife is driven by the need to control the fear of death. The chapter ends by considering the implications of cognitive science of religion (CSR) theories on the truth, rationality, and justification of afterlife beliefs.





Cognitive theories of afterlife beliefs


Cognitive scientists of religion have argued that cognitive predispositions help to explain why people find it relatively easy to accept the idea of an afterlife, and why specific ideas about the afterlife—for example, that mental process such as thinking, continue—are cross-culturally recurrent. In what follows, we review research that investigates children’s and adults’ representations of death and the afterlife, before turning to contextual theories.





Immortality in the afterlife as cognitive default


Psychologist Jesse Bering conducted a series of studies in the United States and Europe designed to investigate how children and adults intuitively reason about death. In one set of studies, Bering asked adults to reason about the states of a protagonist named Richard. In the story, they read that Richard was in a bad mood because he suspected that his wife had an affair; hungry, so he sucked on a fresh breath mint; accidentally pressed on the accelerator instead of the break, hit another car, and died in the crash. Participants were asked, now that Richard is dead, can he experience certain states? Bering categorized each of the states. They included psychobiological (e.g. is he still hungry?), perceptual (e.g. can he see the paramedics trying to resuscitate him?), epistemic (e.g. is he thinking about his wife?), emotional (is he still angry at his wife?), and desire (does he want to be alive?). Bering found that participants were more likely to say that Richard’s emotional and epistemic (i.e. thinking) states continued while his psychobiological (e.g. hunger) and perceptual states ceased at death. This effect occurred mostly regardless of what participants said they thought happens to a person after death (i.e. their explicit afterlife belief).

Along with psychologist David Bjorklund, Bering presented a modified version of this original study to children between 4- and 12-years-old and adults using a puppet show. Children witnessed a toy alligator eating a stuffed brown mouse.2 Again, participants (both adults and children) were asked to reason about brown mouse’s states now that he was no longer alive. They found that as children got older (around 8–12 years old), they tended to say that emotional, desire and epistemic (i.e. thinking) states continued. In contrast, psychobiological state, (e.g. hunger) and perceptual states no longer existed. Thus, older children and adults in this study were reasoning similarly to how adults reasoned in the original research. Bering found that in this new study, young children were likely to say that all states continued; after his demise, the brown mouse was still thinking and feeling thirsty, and so on. In other words, they did not discriminate between the states but instead had a default stance that all states continue after death.

Bering and colleagues replicated the puppet studies with Spanish school children. They also investigated the role of religious instruction on representations of death by comparing the responses of children who attended a Catholic vs. secular school. Overall, Catholic school children were more likely to reason that all states continue after death than children attending secular school.3 In short, religiously schooled children were more likely than non-religiously schooled children to attribute states to the dead, most likely because of the increased exposure to afterlife beliefs. This finding is not surprising. Children grow up in traditions that support the notion of life after death. Hence, repeated exposure to the idea that life continues after death is likely to strengthen the belief that life continues after death.

Although participants differ in their representations of death according to the extent of their religious indoctrination, the findings of Bering’s research team cannot be explained as exclusively determined by instruction. Younger children were more likely to assume that all states continue, whereas older children privileged certain types of psychological states. This trend is precisely the opposite of what we would expect if the origins of such beliefs could be traced exclusively to religious indoctrination. If religious instruction was driving children’s ideas about the afterlife, then increased exposure (which comes with age) to religiously endorsed ideas about life after death in school should lead to older children representing all states as continuing.

Yet it was younger children (who have less exposure to theologically accepted ideas about life after death) who asserted that all states continue. Nor can the results of the studies be explained exclusively as a product of enculturation in America. Bering and colleagues found fundamental similarities in reasoning about the afterlife among Spanish and American schoolchildren. With both sets of participants, they found that older children were more likely to say that fewer states continued and that all children were more likely to say that the mouse continued to think, desire, and love than to see, feel hungry or need to use the bathroom. These findings suggest that cognitive predispositions may also influence how participants conceptualize death.

The studies of Bering’s research team revealed that children and adults were aware of the fact that the body stops working at death, but they viewed the mind as active. Researchers concluded that states tied to the body are therefore easy to represent as ceasing to continue at the point of death. Bering also concluded that we have a natural predisposition towards immortality and psychological immortality especially, since even with increasing age, children were more likely to say that mental states continued after death. According to Bering, we are naturally inclined to be immortalists, and this explains how ideas about life after death spread so quickly once introduced into a population. Further, we are especially prone to thinking that mental states continue after biological death, and this explains why ideas about the afterlife (that depict the person after death as a psychological being) enjoy widespread cultural success.

Other studies further support Bering’s claim that psychological immortality is cognitively natural, and that when supported by cultural ideas, rapidly develop into beliefs about the afterlife. Psychologist Natalie Emmons and colleagues investigated how children reasoned about their existence before they were conceived.4 Specifically, Emmons and her team asked children about their states before they existed in their mother’s belly.

They found that children reasoned about their existence before this life (i.e. prelife beliefs) just like children reasoned about their existence after death. With increasing age, children reasoned as though their emotions and desires were present before their birth but that their bodily states were not. This study is particularly important because it took place in two non-Western cultures in Ecuador, where cultural scripts about prelife were not as available as afterlife scripts. Bering’s studies have also been replicated in other non-Western countries, including China.5 The results of these studies also offer support for the theory that we are predisposed to represent people as immortal, and especially, continuing psychologically after biological death.

This research presented in CSR thus far concludes that the cognitive default is to represent psychological states as continuing to exist, with the implication that this tendency facilitates belief in the afterlife. Others have argued that early emerging representations of death are not as consistent or static as the psychological immortality account implies; and that enculturation and context affect people’s reasoning about death much more than this research acknowledges.

Key points

Bering and colleagues conducted studies with children and adults in the US and Spain.

Even though adults had different beliefs about the afterlife, they tended to reason similarly about a person who had died. This finding suggests that the results are not merely due to an explicit belief or disbelief in an afterlife.

Adults reasoned that a person’s mental states (such as remembering and feeling) were more likely to continue after death than states related to the person’s physical body (such as seeing the paramedics or being hungry).

Younger children in the US and Spain assumed that all states continued after death, whereas older children, like adults, thought that only mental states continued. This finding suggests that the results are not merely due to a view of life after death endorsed by the USA or Spain.

Catholic schoolchildren were more likely to assume that all states continue after death than children attending a secular school. This finding suggests that religious instruction increases the belief that all states continue after death.

Bering concludes that the idea of immortality comes naturally to us. Furthermore that psychological immortality is exceptionally intuitive and resistant to change and that this explains why afterlife beliefs spread so quickly once introduced to a population.





Contextual theories of afterlife beliefs


Like cognitive theories, contextual theories also tend to endorse the possibility that cognitive predispositions underpin ideas about the afterlife. Still, they place more emphasis on the role of cultural transmission and cultural learning on the development of these ideas. Researchers who propose contextual accounts of afterlife beliefs often conduct cross-cultural research. Contextual theories depict representations of death and the afterlife as more fluid and nuanced than cognitive approaches.





Immortality in the afterlife as culturally learned


Developmental psychologist Paul Harris, social anthropologist Rita Astuti, and psychologist Marta Giménez conducted a series of cross-cultural studies with children and adults. These studies aimed to assess the extent to which there are cultural similarities and variability in children’s and adult’s reasoning about death and the afterlife. The researchers thus selected two cultures that differed according to people’s exposure to death and culturally endorsed views on the afterlife. First, Harris and Giménez conducted studies in Madrid, Spain,6 where Catholicism is the predominant religious affiliation, and a belief in Christian Heaven is apparent. Next, Astuti and Harris conducted a follow-up study in rural Madagascar, a country off the southeast coast of Africa, where a belief in ancestors is culturally endorsed. Ancestors are dead relatives who are said to affect the living, and people often behave in ways that aim to please their ancestors.7

The study in rural Madagascar is especially crucial for understanding how variation in cultural input may affect the development of afterlife beliefs for three reasons.

First, Madagascar is a non-western culture. The context enables researchers to assess whether the findings of their studies are a product of western ideas about death and the afterlife or whether they generalize across cultures. Second, children in Madagascar have many more experiences of death than is typical of western cultures because they participate in the killing of animals. This context enables researchers to investigate the impact of the first-hand experience on concepts of the afterlife. Third, ancestral beliefs and practices are widespread in Madagascar. These beliefs would allow researchers to assess the extent to which culturally accepted ideas influence people’s concepts of death and the afterlife.

Harris and colleagues found that children were mostly unsystematic in their responses to questions about life after death before the age of seven. Thus, the researchers did not focus on pinpointing the cognitive default view of young children’s reasoning about death because their research indicates that young children do not exhibit any consistent patterns. Instead, they are interested in explaining ideas about death that appear to be increasingly consolidated in older children. These findings are in contrast to the results of Bering’s studies. As you may recall, Bering and colleagues found that younger children (from around age five) tended to say that all states continued; in other words, they were immortalists. These findings led Bering to propose that the cognitive default view is personal immortality, which helps to explain the widespread endorsement of afterlife beliefs.

Harris and colleagues found that children became more systematic in their reasoning about death from around age seven. At this age, they characterize children as extinctivists, tending to deny the continuity of all states to people after death. Harris and colleagues propose that children are essentially espousing a predominantly biological view of death. This emerging biological view of death is likely to be a product of both children’s increasing understanding of biology and in some circumstances, such as in the context of Madagascar, their personal experience of death. As they come to understand that the cessation of biological functions characterizes death, children assume that the processes that sustain life (including cognitive and emotional states) cease at death.

The research of Harris and colleagues also suggest that while children’s earliest systematic view of death is extinctivist, they gradually come to view some aspects of a person as continuing to exist. Like Bering, they found that older children and adults are more likely to claim that mental processes continue after death than younger children. Bering asked participants questions about the physical and mental processes of characters in his studies. In the studies in Madagascar, Astuti and Harris also included questions about the continuity of the soul after biological death. While participants responded that the mind was more likely to continue than the physical body, results demonstrated that they also thought that the soul was more likely to continue than the mind.

When interpreting their research findings, Harris and colleagues did not rule out the possibility that intuitive biases underpinned participants’ reasoning. They placed more emphasis, however, on the role of cultural learning about the afterlife to explain their findings, as children get older, they are exposed to afterlife beliefs and rituals in the community. Ideas about life after death, therefore, become more accessible through frequent activation, and children come to adopt them. For instance, in Madagascar, people often talk about the intentions and desires of the ancestors who are said to be lurking around. They also participate in rituals designed to honor their ancestors.





Psychological and physical continuity in the afterlife


A later series of studies with children and adults suggests that in certain cultures, at least, people represent the body as continuing after death. These studies were conducted by Harris and psychologists Rachel Watson-Jones, Justin Busch, and Cristine Legare in Tanna, Vanuatu (a Melanesian island in the South Pacific).8 Vanuatu maintains indigenous supernatural beliefs but also increasingly embraces Christian doctrine. In particular, participants in Vanuatu often adopt a literal interpretation of scripture. They are exposed to the Christian concept of resurrection, the belief that bodies will be raised from the grave at the time of Final Judgment. Researchers also conducted the studies in Austin, Texas, which is characterized by diversity in religious affiliation with a majority of liberal Christians. Participants were asked whether or not different biological and psychological processes continue to function after death, and these questions were framed in a theistic (e.g. “now that David is with God”) and non-theistic (e.g. “now that David is dead”) narrative.

Commensurate with previous studies, younger children did not discriminate between biological and psychological processes and were likely to say that both continued after death. From age seven, participants reasoned in the non-theistic narrative that living processes ceased at death, and in the theistic framed question, those processes continue after death. Further, US adolescents and adults were likely to endorse the continuation of psychological processes over biological processes. Participants in Vanuatu, however, provided more physiological than mental processes following the theistic framed question. In other words, when people were told that David was with God, they tended to assume that David’s eyes and ears still worked, that his legs could move, his heart could beat, and so on.

Participants also tended to offer as many supernatural types of explanations for the continuation of biological and psychological processes, for instance, claiming that God gives his legs the power to work. From their results, the authors concluded that the participants in Vanuatu were reasoning as though the people in heaven were not disembodied, but rather, required their bodies to be with God. They propose that in specific contexts, at least, the representation of people in the afterlife as physically embodied is as intuitive as the representation of people as psychologically immortal.

In summary of the chapter thus far, Bering proposes that children’s intuitive stance is towards psychological immortality and that with increasing age, they become more efficient at materialist reasoning. For instance, they are better able to incorporate their acquired scientific knowledge about the relationship between the brain and mind into their views about psychological functioning after death. When intuitions about life after death are culturally elaborated upon, they produce beliefs in the afterlife. Thus, psychological immortality of the dead is the natural stance, and this enables beliefs about the afterlife to be quickly adopted. By contrast, Harris and colleagues propose that older children first come to understand death in terms of the breakdown of biological processes. Thus, their first systematic theory of death is extinctive. With increasing exposure to ideas and practices surrounding the afterlife, children come to adopt a view of people as existing elsewhere. The afterlife includes beliefs about personal immortality but is also characterized by the continuity of the soul and in specific contexts, continuity of the physical body. Both accounts explain why particular ideas about the afterlife (e.g. that the mind and soul continue), are readily endorsed by ordinary people. Harris and colleagues also propose that people do not abandon their biological concepts of death in favor of culturally learned ideas about the afterlife. Instead, they hold two parallel concepts of death.





Biological and religious conceptions of death


The experimental designs of Harris and colleagues enabled them to investigate the possibility that people have more than one concept of death. While Bering and colleagues presented participants with a single narrative or depiction and then asked about the fate of this person after death, Harris and colleagues created two stories. These narratives highlighted either the biological or religious aspects of a person’s death, and then researchers asked about the person’s fate. In one study, researchers asked children and adults about the outcome of a person when the person was described as a corpse.

This description elicited a common secular conception of death—i.e. when biological functions cease, the person dies. In another narration, the person was characterized according to the prevailing afterlife beliefs. For example, in the study in Spain and Vanuatu, the person was described as with God. In Madagascar, the person was described as in the tomb, like all ancestors. These descriptions elicited religious conceptions of death—i.e. that the person survives death. In the context of the religious narrative, however, participants tended to claim that most mental processes continued after death. Thus, adults were more, not less likely, to endorse the afterlife.

In Chapter 5 of the book (The Nature of the World), we covered the theory by Legare and colleagues that people use coexistence reasoning when they think about why things happen, including biological and supernatural explanations for events. When it comes to thinking about death, people also reason, according to more than one view of the world. Harris and colleagues (including Legare) proposed that older children and adults are inclined to adopt two parallel concepts of death. One is a biological conception of death, in which people think of the deceased as a corpse. This conception corresponds to many secular understandings of death, where the person ceases to exist when their biological functions cease.

The second is a religious conception of death, in which people think of the deceased as someone who has departed this life but lives on somewhere in some form. This conception corresponds to concepts of the afterlife in many cultures. These ideas coexist and can be individually elicited depending upon the context within which questions are framed. Their findings present a more nuanced and context-dependent account of afterlife beliefs than cognitive theories had previously acknowledged. More importantly, Harris and colleagues propose that people hold two concepts of death, biological and religious, which are elicited in different contexts. Thus, people can endorse the idea of an afterlife, but in other settings, to accept that death brings an end to biological functions.

So far, in the chapter, we have covered cognitive and contextual theories of death and the afterlife. While similar in many aspects, they differ according to the default or early emerging, cognitive view of death, and the extent to which cultural learning affects this conceptualization. As we will see in the next section, it is not only the research teams of Bering and Harris that disagree over the cognitive default view of death. Scholars have proposed many predispositions that they claim bias people towards the belief in an afterlife.

Participation 1: Theories about children’s concepts of death

Divide up into groups of about 3–4 students. Work together as a group.

Briefly summarize the work so far in this chapter on children’s concepts of death and the afterlife, a few sentences for each theory is sufficient.

Explain differences in the claims that the researchers are making.

Consider why these differences exist (e.g. theoretical background, methods etc.).

Decide which theory you agree with most.





Key points

Harris and colleagues conducted studies with children and adults in Spain and the non-western country, Madagascar.

They found a few patterns to children’s reasoning before the age of seven. At around age seven children tended to deny the continuity of all states at death, but older children and adults tended to view mental states as continuing after death.

Contrary to Bering, Harris, and colleagues concluded that young children do not start as immortalists, but gradually become extinctivists—as they come to understand the biology of death. They later adopt a biological view of death, and eventually, in part due to the influence of culturally endorsed ideas about the afterlife, come to view the person as continuing to exist. They suggest that enculturation has a significant impact on cognitive intuitions about death.

Based on studies in Spain, rural Madagascar, and Vanuatu, Harris, and colleagues proposed that people hold multiple ideas about the fate of the person after death, one based in biology—where states cease at death, and one based in culturally endorsed beliefs about the afterlife—where the person exists in some form after death. These ideas can be activated in different contexts.

Based on studies in Vanuatu and Texas, Harris and colleagues claimed that in specific contexts, people also assume a default view of people in the afterlife as embodied.

Cognitive and contextual theories of the afterlife differ on what they take to be the early emerging cognitive view of death, and the extent to which they propose context and cultural learning impact this conceptualization.





Summary of cognitive and contextual theories of afterlife beliefs

Researchers agree that adults tend to assume that the afterlife entails immortality for people.

They differ, however, according to whether they consider personal immortality as the cognitive default view, endorsed by young children, or whether the idea of psychological immortality is acquired later through exposure to beliefs about the afterlife.

While all acknowledge that cognitive constraints are embedded in cultural norms, scholars differ in the extent to which they think that religious indoctrination and enculturation impact intuitive assumptions about the fate of the person after death.





Intuitions that favor afterlife beliefs


In the previous section, we discovered that across cultures, people tend to assume that a person continues to survive after biological death. In this section, we consider theories about intuitive biases that cognitive scientists of religion claim facilitate the spread of afterlife beliefs.





Simulation constraints


Recall the studies by Bering and colleagues covered earlier in the chapter. They found that older children and adults reasoned that a person’s mental states were more likely to continue after death than states related to the person’s physical body. While we can imagine what it is like not to have psychobiological states, not to feel hungry, or not need to use the bathroom, other states like thinking and feeling are especially difficult to represent as ceasing to exist at the point of death. Bering has argued that due to the difficulty in imagining the cessation of our own mental states, the expectation of psychological immortality is the natural product of a default cognitive stance.

This stance is underpinned by a constraint of the imagination, that Bering called a simulation constraint. Bering argued (as did other scholars such as Freud and Nagel, many years prior) that it is impossible to conceive (i.e. to simulate) of ourselves as being “dead” and permanently lacking consciousness because we use mental states to represent all experiences. Bering often quotes Sartre’s short story “The Wall,” to illustrate this point. In the story, a group of prisoners believe that they are about to be shot dead by a firing squad, and one prisoner begins to speak. “Something’s the matter … I see my corpse; that’s not hard, but I’m the one who sees it, with my eyes. I’ve got to think … think that I won’t see anything anymore, and the world will go on for the others. We aren’t made to think that.9”

Indeed, trying to think about what it would be like to be dead seems almost impossible. Likewise, trying to think about what happens when other people are dead is also tricky, although some ideas about death seem to be easier to think about than others. This constraint does not mean that you cannot imagine what life would be like after you are dead. We are all capable of thinking about who would attend our funeral, but such a construal requires a first-person perceptive through which you envision these future events. As Justin Barrett put it, you may find it almost impossible to experience what it is like not to think consciously, so simulating what a dead person is not thinking is tough.10

Philosopher Shaun Nichols elaborated upon Bering’s theory. Nichols proposed that thinking about death represents an imaginative obstacle. The paradox is this; we use our imagination to represent a future in which we do not exist, yet we hit a barrier of creating this representation because our mind wants to represent ourselves in that future in one way or another. The imaginative obstacle means that you cannot imagine a future in which you do not exist because this is a contradiction. When we try to imagine a time after our biological death, Nichols maintains, we hit this imaginative obstacle. Thus, according to Bering and Nichols, it is easier to represent your dead self, and correspondingly, dead others, as continuing to exist mentally—just elsewhere, whether in a different body or different realm.11

Bering’s theory of a simulation constraint is based upon a philosophical theory, generally referred to as a simulation account, about how we reason about minds in general. This simulation account assumes that our understanding of other minds is not based on a theory we have about minds. In other words, we do not have to draw upon what we have theorized about people’s beliefs, desires, intentions, goals, and so on. Instead, we arrive at an understanding of other people’s minds through simulation or cognitive empathy—a more direct route, if you like, between reasoning about oneself and then applying this to others, without the need for a naïve theory. This account tends to draw upon explanations about how we reason about our death to explain how we then reason about the death of others. Correspondingly, much of Bering and Nichols’ anecdotes used to support their theories draw from trying to imagine our death. Yet other theorists have focused on how we think about the death of others as the key to why afterlife beliefs are so easily facilitated. They tend to emphasize that humans reason about others in terms of a theory of other minds, instead of drawing directly upon our own experience. They are outlined in the next section.

Key points

Bering argued that we have a simulation constraint when reasoning about our death. The limitation is that it is impossible to conceive of ourselves as being “dead” and permanently lacking consciousness because we use mental states to represent all experiences.

Nichols elaborated on Bering’s claim and proposed that thinking about death represents an imaginative obstacle. We use our imagination to represent a future in which we do not exist, yet our mind wants to represent ourselves in that future in one way or another.

According to Bering and Nichols, it is easier to represent your dead self as continuing to exist mentally in the afterlife.





Folk-dualism


Bering proposed that people’s inherent tendency for folk-dualism (also known as mind-body dualism) can contribute towards an explanation of why afterlife beliefs are so cross-culturally prevalent. Namely, that people reason as though minds and bodies are separate, and that minds can continue after biological death. The idea that people tend to reason as though they are intuitive mind-body dualists, and that these intuitions underpin beliefs about the afterlife, was first proposed by psychologist Paul Bloom.

Four claims underpin the theory of folk-dualism as outlined by Bloom. First, Bloom contends that we base our representations of people in the afterlife on representations of ordinary people, more generally. This claim is shared by most scholars in the cognitive science of religion. The next three points distinguish Bloom’s view from other scholars in CSR and are more contentious. Second, Bloom contends that we naturally represent other people as having minds separate from bodies. He claims that we are predisposed to represent others as constituted by two independent and autonomous entities: material bodies and immaterial minds. Bloom proposes that although people are tracked fundamentally as objects— susceptible to the laws of physics so that they can be pushed, pulled, and so on—they are also represented as psychological beings, guided in their behavior by underlying mental states (e.g. beliefs, desires, intentions). This perceived psychological continuity enables others to attribute a continuous and numerical identity to people, even though they may undergo physical changes (e.g. grow older, gain weight, and so on). Naturally representing ordinary people as having minds separate from bodies explains why people think they can survive with intact psychological features even though they experienced bodily death.

Third, Bloom claims that people do not think that their identity is constituted by their physical bodies, but rather, by their psychological features. As Bloom put it (2004: 191), “we do not feel as if we are our bodies; we feel as if we occupy them.12” The fourth claim then explains why it is possible and plausible to imagine people in the afterlife occupying all sorts of different bodies—and how we can represent their psychology as intact, they are “the same person” as in life. What is common to all popular notions of the afterlife is that you—the things that make you who you are, whether you regard these as mental states or traits, such as thinking, remembering your past, or your unique personality or something else, continues after bodily death. The very definition of the afterlife is personal immortality. Bloom claims that what retains your identity is your mental state, not your physical embodiment. Bloom suggests that this even makes it possible for us to think about people in the afterlife as disembodied minds. Not only can we represent the mind and body as separate, but identity can reside solely in the mind. Thus, people can recognize that the body dies at the point of biological death, but yet intuitively reason as though the mind, which retains their identity, continues in the afterlife.

Many cognitive scientists of religion accept some version of this explanation of why ideas about the afterlife are acquired so easily, especially the idea that people can think about others as having minds and bodies. For instance, experimental cross-cultural research confirmed that people could easily reason about others in terms of persons and bodies, body dependent, and independent (i.e. mental) states.13 Also, quantitative textual analyses on ancient Chinese texts revealed that authors referred distinctly to minds and bodies to conceptualize persons.14 Further, one study of near-death experiences (NDE, where a person is either close to, or experiences clinical death) found that 58 percent of people felt as if they inhabited a new body at the time of the experience. Sometimes, they even reported lacking any body at the time of the experience.15 Anthropologist Michael Kinsella conducted ethnographic fieldwork of near-death experience groups in the US. He claims that many people articulate some version of mind-body dualism in their accounts and expectations of NDE.16 I also found this to be the case when investigating people’s reasoning about reincarnation. Specifically, I discovered that people have little difficulty representing themselves as occupying a new body but retaining their identity in another lifetime.17



Figure 6.1 Folk-dualism is the intuition that bodies and minds are separate. Some researchers propose that this explains why ideas about life after death spread so rapidly. (Image credit: Denis Simonov/Shutterstock.com).





Embodiment theories


More recently, CSR scholars have begun to question the explanatory power of the theory of folk-dualism. Some theorists propose a more nuanced account, and others outright reject the claim that people are intuitively represented as disembodied in the afterlife. We review these theories below.





Embodiment in the afterlife in some contexts


Religious studies scholar Istvan Czachesz argues that people are mind-body dualists by default. Yet in some theological representations of the afterlife, at least, the person is depicted as physically embodied and occupying the same body, especially when it emphasizes core tenets. For instance, in depictions of the afterlife, such as the Apocalypse of Peter, the same physical body is described in the resurrection as in life because it meshed with the idea that bodies contribute towards sin and are tormented in hell. In other words, the concept of punishment was more easily imagined as happening to the same person. Thus, people were able to accept that the body continued.18 Of course, CSR makes the distinction between theological versions of the afterlife, and commonly held folk-representations of the afterlife, and seeks to explain mainly the latter. Yet, in some circumstances, such as thinking about our deceased loved one doing something in the afterlife or the possibility of punishment, we are more likely to evoke the idea of a physical body.

In my own research, I attempted to nuanced the discussion concerning the role of the body in the afterlife. I found that even though people espoused a view of reincarnation where the deceased person was reborn into a new body when deciding who had been reborn as whom, they regarded distinctive physical similarities between a living and dead person as evidence that they were the same person. I proposed that even though people hold an explicit concept of reincarnation as entailing a new physical body when stakes on correct identification are high, people implicitly revert to habitual and reliable strategies they use every day to identify others. Namely, by their physical continuity, and especially, by distinctive physical features.19 Thus, intuitive conceptions about the afterlife may be more easily overridden by other considerations and be more context-dependent than researchers have acknowledged.





Social embodiment in the afterlife


Philosopher Mitch Hodge challenges the assumption that people are represented in the afterlife as disembodied. Drawing upon cultural representations of the afterlife, he argues that we intuitively represent supernatural agents as embodied to some extent. Hodge is careful to delineate between embodiment in general, and social embodiment more specifically. He proposes that we do not represent people in the afterlife as wholly embodied, composed of internal organs, bones, defecating, or sleeping. Instead, we represent them as if they are socially embodied in the same way we imagine someone who is not within our present perceptual presence or how we would a fictional character, such as Sherlock Holmes.

For instance, when we think about loved ones at work, we imagine what they might be doing that is socially relevant to the job that they do. Talking on the phone or talking to a colleague, writing an email, and so on. We also represent the parts of their bodies that are necessary for that representation: a head, a mouth, eyes, arms, hands, ears, and so on. Likewise, when we think of loved ones in the afterlife, we represent the parts of their bodies that are necessary for that particular representation. We also represent those embodied characteristics that allow us to identify that representation as our loved ones in this life or another place (hair color, wearing glasses20).

Hodge argues that dualism is not the default intuitive stance when it comes to reasoning about the afterlife.21 Often people are represented in the afterlife as having the same body as in their earthly existence. This view is supported by the findings of Harris and colleagues in their studies in Vanuatu, where participants reasoned as though people retained their biological processes and bodily parts in the afterlife.





Embodied people in the afterlife


As we discuss in Chapter 7 (Supernatural Agents), the anthropologist Pascal Boyer has proposed that we represent deceased loved ones in the afterlife fundamentally as still people.22 He explains that this is because we use our existing concepts of people to understand and represent supernatural agents. Most scholars in CSR share this view including those we have reviewed thus far in the chapter. Scholars disagree, however, on what this intuitive view of persons entails. Drawing on Boyer’s theory, psychologist Michael Barlev proposes that contra Bloom, the person concept contains representations of people’s mental and physical properties that are likely not intuitively separate or separable.23 Thus, according to Barlev, the default view of supernatural agents, such as God—but also by extension, an individual in the afterlife—is that of an embodied person. The theory that people use existing templates of people to represent God has received empirical support.24 Still, this theory has not directly been tested for representations of people in the afterlife. It offers a direct challenge to the theory of folk-dualism as explaining how we represent deceased people in the afterlife.



Figure 6.2 In specific contexts, the representation of people in the afterlife as physically embodied is as intuitive as the representation of people as psychologically immortal. (Image credit: Ure/Shutterstock.com).

Key points

Bloom has proposed that people are intuitive mind-body dualists and that these intuitions underpin ideas about the afterlife. The mind and body are construed as separate entities, identity resides in the mind, and thus people are represented in the afterlife as disembodied minds.

Many cognitive scientists of religion accept some version of this explanation of why ideas about the afterlife are acquired so easily. There is much support for the idea that we can think about other people as having minds and bodies and that in the afterlife, identity is associated with psychological continuity.

Others, such as Barlev, Boyer, and Hodge, question whether dualism is the default intuitive stance when it comes to reasoning about the afterlife.

Other research, such as that of Czachesz and White, implies that whether or not we employ the body in representations of the afterlife, it is more context-dependent than is typically acknowledged in standard accounts in CSR.





Psychological essentialism


Other researchers, including psychologists Maira Roazzi, Melanie Nyhof, and Carl Johnson, have questioned the claim that people assume that identity resides in the mind during life and in the afterlife. They suggest that this claim is perhaps an ethnocentric assumption, based on western Cartesian philosophy.25 From cross-cultural empirical research, these scholars propose that children and adults have a tripartite view of persons, composed of a body, mind, and something akin to a soul or essence. This latter explanation is more aligned with the folk theory of psychological essentialism.

We encountered the theory of psychological essentialism in Chapter 5 (The Nature of the World). Psychological essentialism is an intuition that favors creationism as an explanation for the origins of the world, discovered by the developmental psychologist Susan Gelman.26 To recap, psychological essentialism is a naïve (i.e. early developing, pre-scientific) theory about the identity of things, including category members. So, for instance, children will reason that tigers have a natural and immutable essence, a tiger-ness, that makes them roar, and stays the same even though the tiger can change its appearance (e.g. grows bigger). Children and adults tend to find this theory compelling when it comes to explaining what makes individuals within a category, such as people, the same over time.27 For example, children reason as though they remain the same person even though they may change their appearance or grow older.28,29

Children and adults tend to view the mind as harboring mental properties of the person, such as their thoughts, memories, and preferences.30 They also tend to reason that people who have changed mentally—gained knowledge, lost memories, etc.—are still the same person as they were before these changes.31 As the mind may be the closest concept to the identity-retaining “essence,” participants may choose it as more likely to continue.

Crucially, as psychologist Rebekah Richert and Harris discovered, when given the opportunity, participants tended to assign continued identity in life and the afterlife to the soul, not to the mind.32 This finding is precisely what Astuti and Harris also discovered in the studies in Madagascar mentioned earlier in the chapter. In their studies, even though participants thought that the mind was more likely to continue than the body after death, they also reasoned that the spirit was more likely to continue than the mind or body.33 One reasonable interpretation from these findings is that people reason about the afterlife as entailing personal immortality, and personal immortality tends to include psychological immortality but fundamentally ensures the survival of the person’s soul or essence.

Key points

Some scholars propose that children and adults do not have a dualistic view of the person as composed of mind and body. Instead, they have a tripartite view of persons, consisting of a body, mind, and something akin to a soul or essence.

Gelman argues that people are psychological essentialists, perceiving individuals as having an immutable essence that retains their identity over dramatic physical changes.

Other researchers have proposed that our inherent tendency towards imbuing people with immutable essences despite physical changes explains why we reason that people continue in the afterlife.

Even though mental properties are also typically retained in depictions of people in the afterlife, the essence is not the same as the mind and is better described as a soul.

In studies, participants choose the mind as more likely to continue than physical states, but when given the option, they chose the soul as the most likely to continue overall.





Theory of mind, emotional attachment, enduring mental models and offline social reasoning


Think for a second, if you will, about what happens when someone else dies. On the one hand, you can think about the corpse as the product of death. You know, at least at an explicit level, that the person is biologically dead—although this may take some time to sink in. On the other hand, you are also likely to find it extremely difficult to represent the person as psychologically dead, no matter how much time passes. How can this thinking, feeling person that you loved—well, stop thinking and feeling? While it is relatively easy to represent a dead person as no longer having biological processes, such as breathing, it seems comparatively more difficult to describe a deceased person as no longer having mental processes, such as thinking. One reason for this is likely to do with the fact that physical processes are more accessible than psychological processes. When a loved one or pet dies, we can physically observe that they no longer breathe, eat, or use the bathroom, etc., but we cannot physically see whether or not they are thinking, remembering or dreaming.





Theory of mind and representing the deceased as mentally active


Anthropologist Pascal Boyer (2001) has argued that dead bodies represent a contradiction in our thinking about persons. On the one hand, people explicitly understand that the physical body is inanimate, although we do not readily assume an inanimate person is dead. As psychologist Clark Barrett and colleagues have argued, the animacy system—i.e. the expectation that living things move—does not shut off whenever we see a motionless corpse.34 After all, living entities have to sleep, and it is hardly surprising that sleep is used as a euphemism for death in many languages.35 Typically, it takes time, and other cues of death, such as a cold body, to help us represent the person as not living. Yet this type of representation—of an immobile body—is more straightforward to comprehend than the corpse as a non-thinking person.

In his explanation, Boyer implies that our inbuilt theories about other peoples’ minds (i.e. theory of mind) are responsible for the difficulty in accepting that corpses can no longer think. As we have discussed in previous chapters, theory of mind is a hypothesized cognitive ability. One theoretical account of this ability proposes that even from a young age, we automatically explain ourselves and other people’s behavior regarding a theory of their beliefs, desires, intentions, and goals. We habitually track unobservable mental states for persons throughout our lifetime. It is difficult, almost impossible, to stop representing the person as psychologically active because they are inanimate.

Boyer proposes that thinking about a person as continuing psychologically in another realm is an unintended consequence (i.e. a by-product) of our tendency to think about people psychologically in this realm. That we have a theory of mind means that we always think about other people’s mental states, and this tendency extends when we think about people even when they are dead. Similar representation systems may have been adaptive when the person is alive—for example, they help predict people’s actions. They are, however, not adaptive in the context of death. In other words, representing a dead person as having desires, intentions, and goals has no benefits to our survival.





Emotional attachment and enduring mental models


Other related theories about grief have the potential to further our understanding of why belief in the afterlife is so cognitively attractive. Some scholars have proposed that some symptoms of grief, such as unconsciously expecting the person to appear in the vicinity, is viewed as a by-product of emotional attachment36 and cognitive systems.37 Emotional attachment motivates us to stay in close contact with people and to enable us to have close relationships with them. This tendency is one reason, for example, why young children do not like to be unexpectedly separated from their parents—think about the distress of a young child who lost his mother in a shopping mall. Cognitive systems also generate enduring mental models of others, so that out of sight does not mean out of mind, which may give rise to afterlife beliefs. These functions of attachment and enduring mental models are essential when the other party is alive—otherwise, maintaining close relationships would virtually be impossible—yet they are futile when the person is dead. In evolutionary terms, it does not benefit your survival to represent someone dead as continuing to exist in the afterlife.





Offline social reasoning and the deceased existing in another place


Bering has proposed another cognitive bias that seems to dovetail well with the cognitive systems offered by grief researchers, offline social reasoning.38 In everyday contexts, out of sight does not mean out of mind. As our mental rosters are ill-equipped to update the list of social players in our world, and for excellent reasons—it would be cognitively taxing and evolutionarily maladaptive to do so. Our ability to represent others who are not physically present (i.e. offline social reasoning) also enables us to construe the dead as though they continue to exist. Offline social reasoning enables humans to think about people who are not present in our immediate vicinity. We can easily imagine what a family member whom we have not seen in many months, or even years, is doing at a given moment. We are thus also able to think about a person as existing in another place after death.

As Hodge rightly points out,39 Another common aspect of afterlife beliefs is that death entails a journey and change of location. After death, people are often represented as beginning a journey where they physically move from this world to another place. In this journey, they may end up succumbing to perils, such as being devoured by a crocodile god, returning to a cycle of rebirth where they are reborn in another form, or being reunited with their maker. Despite differences in the details, the afterlife is typically represented by ordinary people as a place.

One apt illustration of this assumption is in the classic novel, The Great Divorce.40 Readers often delight in reading about the recently dead who journey on a bus ride through various places. The passengers decide where to get off, including at a grey town, which turns out to be purgatory or hell, and beautiful countryside, which turns out to be the foothills of heaven. There is something perfectly reasonable about the idea that people travel to another realm when they die. Yet the concept of an afterlife could, in theory, be a state of mind rather than a physical location. In other words, when you think about it logically, there is no reason why a person would have to go anywhere after they die, what if the afterlife was just a feeling of being happy, satisfied, or at peace for example?

Hodge has proposed that the tendency to engage in offline social reasoning also explains why we quickly think about a deceased loved one doing something in another sphere of existence.41 Harris adopts a similar view where he elaborates on the cognitive biases that may enrich the explanation of the results of the cross-cultural studies that he and colleagues conducted.42 To recap, Harris and colleagues found that older children and adults have two parallel concepts of death that they adopt in different contexts. One is based on biology and often evokes a common secular idea of death; another is supported by ideas about the afterlife and evokes a religious concept of death.

In later works, Harris proposed that the religious concept of the afterlife is underpinned by a bias towards representing attachment figures as continuing to exist when they are not physically present and despite their prolonged absence. Harris contends that children use their memories of a loved one to simulate what they would be doing in another place when they are not physically present. This capacity requires some abilities that become consolidated in children, such as object permanence, retaining memories of a loved one, and being able to use those memories to imagine the person as existing elsewhere. When these maturing abilities mesh with highly accessible cultural ideas about life after death, older children extend this ability to imagine people in the afterlife in ways that also reflect culturally endorsed views.

Another observation worth noting is that we often assume that an afterlife is a similar place to the world we inhabit. Our intuitive assumptions inform representations of people in the afterlife about people. Yet representations of the afterlife as a place are also informed and constrained by human imagination and cognitive processing abilities. For instance, consider an afterlife that has four dimensions—or levels that we perceive to be the reality, such as height, width, depth, and time. This idea would be relatively easy to imagine since these dimensions surround our everyday experience of the world.

Yet consider entertaining the idea of an afterlife that consists of five, six, or even seven dimensions, measured by abstract notions such as their position in the world since the beginning of time. These ideas would be more difficult to spread without additional support at the cultural level because they are almost impossible to imagine. It is easy to understand why cultural ideas that endorse the view that a person goes to another realm when they die, much like this world, and continue to engage in everyday activities, spreads easily. In short, our imagination is not unbounded, but rather, constrained. Likewise, ideas about the afterlife that meet our intuitive expectations about the current world are more likely to be readily adopted.

Key points

Boyer proposes that our intuitive theories about other peoples’ minds (i.e. theory of mind) are responsible for the difficulty in accepting that dead people can no longer think.

Harris and grief researchers propose that emotional attachment systems and enduring mental models of people also enable us to continue to think about the person.

Bering has proposed that the ability to reason about someone doing something somewhere when he or she is not physically present (offline social reasoning) also explains why we can so easily imagine the person in another place after death.

Hodge, Bering, and Harris have proposed that the tendency to engage in offline social reasoning also explains why we quickly think about a deceased loved one doing something in another sphere of existence.

The afterlife is often represented as a place that is similar to this world. Our experiences of the world constrain ideas about the afterlife as a physical location.





Summary of intuitions that favor afterlife beliefs

Cognitive scientists of religion have proposed that cognitive predispositions help to explain why ideas about the afterlife are cross-culturally recurrent, especially the idea that the mind or soul survives biological death, and that the person continues to exist in another physical location that is much like this world.

Scholars have proposed many predispositions to explain the ease with which people endorse ideas about the afterlife. These include folk-dualism, psychological essentialism, simulation constraints, theory of mind, emotional attachment, enduring mental models, and offline social reasoning.





Participation 2: The cognitive foundations of ideas

Table 3.3 in Chapter 3 (Research Questions) provided examples of the cognitive foundations of religious ideas. Based on this table and this chapter:

Provide a brief definition of the following cognitive tendencies: (a) simulation constraints (b) folk-dualism (c) theory of mind (d) psychological essentialism (e) offline social reasoning, and (f) embodiment.

Explain (in a few sentences for each) how each bias enriches the understanding of (a) why people believe in an afterlife (b) why people represent the afterlife in similar ways.





So far, in the chapter, we have considered cognitive and contextual theories of afterlife beliefs, which are proposed by cognitive scientists of religion. As we cover in the final chapter of the book (Chapter 11: Conclusion), cognitive theories of religion are sometimes criticized for not endorsing emotional or motivational components of religious thought and experiences. In contrast to explanations about belief in the afterlife as a result of cognitive processes, motivational theories focus on the motivation of people to believe in the first place. For instance, terror management theorists see belief in an afterlife as a defense mechanism against the anxiety of death. In the next section, we consider theories that purport to explain the motivation for people to believe that life continues after biological death.





Who wants to live forever? Motivational theories of afterlife beliefs


Have you ever sat down and thought about your own death? Not just a fleeting thought, but thought seriously about what it would be like to die? For the materialists among you, perhaps you will find comfort in the fact that you will not know you are dead. Maybe not. At least in the Western world, where death is a taboo subject, and reminders of death are removed at every opportunity. We go to such efforts in the West to avoid the reality of our mortality. Recent research has shown that even many Tibetan monks in training, who deny that there is a permanent self, are petrified of death.43 These observations bring us to the fundamental question, what’s so scary about death?

Throughout the ages, scholars have conjectured why we fear death. Some people may fear how they will die; whether it will be unexpected and painful, others may lament upon the loss of social relationships in this world, their hopes, dreams, and memories, and the very loss of themselves. As the famous philosopher, Nagel put it, “The thought that the world will go on without you, that you will become nothing, is tough to take in.44 “Fear of the unknown may also play a role in fostering the trepidation with which at least some humans face death. Yet consider the point made by Socrates (a philosopher in ancient Greece, who is widely regarded as one of the founders of Western philosophy) that those who think they know what death entails may also fear it. According to his student Plato, Socrates said that: “to fear death, gentlemen, is no other than to think oneself wise when one is not, to think one knows what one does not know. No one knows whether death may not be the greatest of all blessings for a man, yet men fear it as if he or she knew that it is the greatest of evils.45”

Many of the earliest psychological theories explained belief in the afterlife (and indeed, belief in religion in general) as man’s response to this fear of death. Freud most famously proposed a version of this theory in the early twentieth century and most elaborated upon in his book The Future of an Illusion.46 Freud’s account included many historical claims about religion that have since been discredited, such as the idea that humans killed their original father and sought to replace him with a fictional God. Still, his view that the afterlife arose from the need to escape death remains influential in scholarly writings on the subject. It is a simple yet powerful idea. People are petrified of their own mortality and are motivated to assuage this fear, so they create the concept of an afterlife where they continue after biological death. They wish to escape death, and they fulfill these wishes by the creation of an afterlife; thus, their wishes are fulfilled. The afterlife is merely wish fulfillment.

Of course, there is no way of tracing the exact origins of afterlife beliefs, no decisive way of knowing whether fear of death motivated their initial creation. Yet a more empirically tractable question concerns whether death anxiety currently motivates belief in the afterlife (and likewise adherence to a religion in general). Freud’s basic thesis was expounded upon by later theorists47 and later re-emerged in a more sophisticated and contemporary form in social psychology as terror management theory (TMT).48





Belief in the afterlife as terror management


Terror management theorists seek to explain why people currently embrace specific ideas, including the afterlife. They claim that people are petrified of death as annihilation and are motivated by a self-preservation instinct. They manage this terror by embracing ideas that offer immortality (such as a belief in the afterlife), which relieves this fear. There is mixed empirical support for each of these sub-components of the theory. First, take the claim that humans are petrified of death. While few would doubt that self-preservation is instinctual (i.e. a zebra needs no encouragement to run from a lion) the existential fear of death in humans (i.e. the desire not to die in the abstract) is more difficult to prove. It turns out that when you ask people what they fear, death is typically mentioned less than ten percent of the time.49 People are more concerned with current social and mundane fears.

Terror management theorists maintain that some fears, like terrorism, are ultimately explained by the fear of death. Other TMT theorists maintain that the fear of death is so extreme that people cannot think about it. According to these theorists, people suppress it, pushing the concern to the bottom of their consciousness. Thus, fear of death is not salient and inaccessible to explicit, higher-level reasoning, such as asking people questions about whether they fear death. TMT has been critiqued as being unfalsifiable. Whatever the outcome, it seems that some version of TMT wins; people are explicitly afraid of death, which they freely admit, or people are so scared of death that they disguise their fear of death.

Rather than asking if people fear death, some theorists have devised ingenious experiments to make the idea that one will die salient (i.e. noticeable or apparent) in the minds of participants. This reminder is then followed by measuring something that experimenters think is affected by a fear of death to see if making the realization that one will die more apparent has an impact. This effect occurs by merely reminding people of their own mortality, for example, getting them to think and write about death, or more subtly, by interviewing people in front of locations that remind them of death, such as the entrance to a cemetery50 or a funeral home.51

One part of TMT has received some support. This is the claim that people manage terror by investing in things that seem to offer immortality. Yet most TMT theorists have examined the effects of mortality salience on what they call symbolic immortality, such as the means to symbolically live on after one’s death, through, for example having children or writing a book or promoting the values of a religious group. Few researchers have examined the effects of mortality salience on literal immortality, which is directly escaping death through belief in an afterlife.

Although TMT theorists have not specified a prediction, according to the theory of TMT, we would expect a relationship between fear of death, the strength of religious belief, and belief in the afterlife. In other words, the more one fears their own destruction, the stronger they ought to believe in the existence of the afterlife. Yet the evidence for this relationship between fear of death and afterlife beliefs is mixed. Some studies have investigated the relationship between fear of death and belief in religion in general. Results were inconclusive. Researchers found that those who are religious are more, equally, or less afraid of death.52,53 Many studies have found that making death more apparent strengthens religious belief for those who are already religious. Still, results are inconsistent when people are not religious.54,55

Psychologist Jonathan Jong and colleagues have argued that the problem with prior studies is that they are still dependent upon participants’ self-report, which taps only into explicit reasoning. They conducted a study on mortality salience and judgments about supernatural entities (e.g. God).56 Jong and collegues found that writing about one’s death (i.e. mortality salience) did not strengthen explicit beliefs in supernatural entities. This was not the case, however, when they used a property verification task, which depended upon implicit processing.

In the property verification task, participants had to click “real” or “imaginary” as fast as they could on a computer screen when words about supernatural entities flashed on the screen. Those who wrote about their own death, regardless of religious belief, tended to be quicker at categorizing supernatural words as real, than those who feared death less. These findings suggest that explicit tasks may not be sensitive enough to tap into implicit processing concerning beliefs. That fear of death may compel people—well, New Zealand undergraduate psychology students at least—to believe in God. As the saying goes, “there are no atheists in foxholes,” which suggests that in the height of anxiety, such as soldiers fighting in trenches during a war, people turn to religion for comfort. For now, the empirical question of whether fear of death compels people to believe in an afterlife remains open.

Key points

TMT theorists claim that people are petrified of death as annihilation and are motivated by a self-preservation instinct to manage this terror by denying death or embracing ideas that offer symbolic immortality (such as writing a book) or literal immortality (such as a belief in the afterlife), which relieves this fear.

TMT is often criticized for being unfalsifiable.

Evidence for the relationship between fear of death and belief in an afterlife is, at best, inconclusive.

Jong and colleagues have argued that the results of previous studies are mixed because researchers rely on specific tasks and consciously available ideas, which do not get at implicit processing and unconscious assumptions. Their research offers support for the claim that fear of death may compel people to believe in God.





The origins of fear of death


In addition to empirical objections, there are theoretical reasons for pausing to consider the explanatory power of TMT. Most obviously, the theory assumes that an afterlife is desirable, or at the least, less anxiety-producing than the thought of annihilation of oneself. Yet as anthropologists have long pointed out, conceptualizations of the afterlife are often not at all comforting. Jong and colleagues summarize a few of these include the Calvinist belief in a God who predetermines souls to salvation or damnation, the ancient Mesopotamian belief that people are thrown into a terrifying world filled with monsters, or the fire and brimstone preaching common in 18th Century Christian revivalist movements.57

Furthermore, doctrines and teachings often assume that people have to behave in ways that please the gods to attain entry into an afterlife like heaven. They also assume that another type of afterlife—such as hell—can seem even worse than biological death, may await them should they fail (eternal damnation, anyone?). Another possibility is that people are so petrified of death that they find life an appealing alternative in whatever form it is presented to them.58

So, what are the origins of this fear? Some scholars who study our fear of death claim that death anxiety is a uniquely human trait that may have arisen as a by-product of self-awareness. Thus “I know that I exist, and I know that I will die.” It may also be potentially maladaptive in this form of existential anxiety. The motivation for self-preservation is quite obviously adaptive to survival, but all animals share this instinct. By contrast, terror management theorists would assume that if we fell prey to our imaginations, death anxiety would be crippling. For instance, occasionally, people—often those who have experienced the recent death of a loved one— have thanatophobia, a condition characterized by an obsessive fear of death. In severe cases, the sufferer ceases to function physically and emotionally. For instance, he or she may refuse to leave the house, suffer from anxiety attacks, become depressed, and unable to distinguish between reality and unreality.59 TMT theorists maintain that people can deny this reality through the adoption of afterlife beliefs.

Key points

TMT is sometimes criticized for assuming that an afterlife is more desirable than the thought of personal annihilation.

TMT proposes that fear of death emerges as a by-product of self-awareness. Knowing we exist entails knowing that we will die.





Fear of death facilitates the spread of afterlife beliefs


Philosopher Shaun Nichols proposes a more reasonable theory to explain the relationship between the fear of death and the motivation to believe in an afterlife. Nichols does not focus on trying to explain the origins of afterlife beliefs, but rather, the prevalence of specific ideas about the afterlife within and across cultures. This focus is typical of CSR scholars, but Nichols’s account is unique because he combines both motivational and cognitive factors.

Drawing on the epidemiological approach proposed by Dan Sperber (covered in Chapter 5: The Nature of the World), Nichols argues that motivationally attractive representations of the afterlife are better remembered and transmitted. Thus, in addition to sociocultural factors, human psychology can explain why specific ideas about the afterlife become prevalent. Taking a historical perspective, Nichols supports his claim by drawing from Abrahamic religions. He proposes that many failed descendants of Abrahamic religions do not preserve motivationally attractive elements, including the idea of an afterlife. For example, the Deistic view that God created the world with no guarantee of immortality (or divine justice for that matter), or in the case of early Judaism, the Sadducees’ rejection of the existence of an afterlife. Nichols coded doctrines in Christianity, Judaism, and Islam as motivationally attractive or not, mainly based on Freud’s writings. He found that motivationally appealing doctrines (including the idea of a harmonious afterlife) were more likely to persist into the descendant religion than motivationally neutral ideas.

This historical analysis is not without its weaknesses, however. For instance, it relies on Nichols’ interpretation and does not take account of sociocultural factors, including past contact between traditions. Overall, this study does not provide evidence that the motivation to believe in an afterlife (preferably a pleasant one) causes people to believe or even causes religious doctrines to succeed. What Nichols is arguing, instead, is that motivationally attractive elements have a psychological advantage when they are introduced to a population. This advantage, when coupled with other sociocultural forces—such as wealth and cultural domination, make the doctrine more readily adopted, resilient to change, and more faithfully transmitted by ordinary people.

Key points

Nichols combines cognitive and motivational factors to account for the success of some popular theological ideas about the afterlife.

He draws on the epidemiology of representations theory by Sperber, and the ideas of TMT, to argue that motivationally attractive depictions of the afterlife are better remembered and transmitted.





Summary of motivational theories of afterlife beliefs


Many theorists have contemplated the question of why humans are motivated to believe in the afterlife. Freud tried to explain the origins of afterlife beliefs. While TMT theorists largely abandoned this endeavor of finding the origins of afterlife beliefs, they continue to adopt the basic argument that fear of death motivates people to believe that life continues after death. TMT has, however, received mixed empirical support, and it is uncertain whether it is the fear of death, or the denial of the fear of death, that causes people to adopt a belief in the afterlife. Shaun Nichols provides a more nuanced account of the role of death anxiety. His account holds that in addition to other social factors, religious doctrines that include an idea of life after death, and those that include particularly appealing versions of the afterlife, are more likely to be accepted by people and transmitted to others. It seems that what people want to happen after their death may well affect what they are likely to believe.

Participation 3: Afterlife documentary

Imagine that you have landed a new job as a documentarian. Your first assignment is to create a 30-minute documentary called “why do people believe in the afterlife?” Based on your background research of reading this chapter:

Prepare an outline. Include 3–5 main points the documentary will make, a list of people you will interview, and what images you will include.

Create a 5-minute voice-over narrative for the documentary. You may write this down, or record it on an electronic device, such as an iPhone.

In groups of 3–4 students, offer feedback on each member’s outline and voice-over. Consider questions such as: Did they present the material accurately? Did they misrepresent someone’s work? Would ordinary people understand the claims they are making?

Revise your outline and voice-over to improve them, based upon the feedback you received.





Summary of motivational theories of afterlife beliefs

TMT theorists explain belief in the afterlife as a product of people’s fear of death as annihilation.

Based on the self-awareness that we exist and will therefore die, and motivated by a self-preservation instinct, TMT claims that people manage this terror by embracing ideas that offer literal immortality.

There is mixed empirical support for the theory, including a relationship between fear of death and belief in the afterlife. Jong maintains that this is due to methodological weaknesses of studies that tap into people’s explicit reasoning about death.

Others critique the underlying assumption in TMT that the afterlife is more desirable than the thought of personal annihilation.

Nichols combines cognitive and motivational factors to account for the success of some popular theological ideas about the afterlife.





The epistemic implications of theories on the existence of the afterlife


As we discuss in Chapter 11 (Conclusion), a question that often follows from reading theories about the afterlife concerns their epistemic implications. In other words, what implications do cognitive, contextual, and motivational theories have for the truth, rationality, and justification of afterlife beliefs? Do they say whether belief in the afterlife is reasonable, justified or warranted? Also, do they prove or disprove the existence of the afterlife?

Most TMT theorists claim that, following Freud, a belief in the afterlife is a product of wishful thinking, it does not exist. By contrast, cognitive and contextual theories say little about these questions. First, it is essential to note that cognitive scientists of religion are not claiming that predispositions or enculturation thoroughly explain why people believe. Instead, they are proposing that mind and culture help explain why specific ideas about life after death (for example, the notion of psychological immortality in the afterlife) become popular and spread. The ease with which these ideas about the afterlife spread is unrelated to their truth value—consider string theory or evolutionary theory, which are profoundly counterintuitive yet scientifically upheld.

Of course, those outside CSR who are concerned about the truth value of religion may interpret these findings to mean something other than cognitive naturalness. They may propose, for example, that God causes people to believe in the afterlife or that people believe in the afterlife because it is true. Others may seek to explain belief away by reducing it to nothing but the mind (a form of ontological reductionism). For example, that religion is in the mind and, therefore, an illusion. Others may claim that people believe in ideas about life after death because others culturally endorse them. Yet CSR is not concerned with questions about whether or not the afterlife (or some version of it) exists. Cognitive scientists of religion propose that such issues are outside the scope of the psychological sciences. In their methods, at least, researchers remain agnostic to the possibility of an afterlife.





Chapter summary


There are many different psychological accounts of why people believe in life after biological death. For simplicity, these accounts can be divided up into the following categories: cognitive, contextual, and motivational theories. Cognitive scientists of religion have tended to propose accounts that belong to the cognitive and contextual types of approaches. These theories often posit psychological tendencies and constraints to explain the natural inclination to accept ideas about the afterlife. These tendencies and limitations include the inability to comprehend one’s annihilation or absence, the tendency to see bodies, minds, and souls as separate, and the mind or soul as containing identity after the death of the physical body. Contextual theories attribute a more significant role to the cultural transmission of ideas about the afterlife to explain why people accept and believe in such ideas.

Cognitive theories concentrate more on the question of why ideas about the afterlife are recurrent across cultures. They focus less on the issue of why afterlife beliefs may differ, which are better accounted for by contextual theories. They also say less about why people have a commitment to these ideas, which may be better explained by motivational theories. Many early motivational theories can be traced back to Freud. These theories were concerned with explaining the origins of belief in life after death, for example, explaining why they emerged in the first place. By contrast, terror management theorists are more concerned with the question of why people currently believe in the afterlife, rather than the origins of such beliefs. Motivational theories claim that we believe in an afterlife because we are motivated to do so. Motivational theories may enhance the explanatory potential of cognitive theories of the afterlife. When coupled with cognitive biases that predispose humans to represent their continued existence, fear of annihilation, and fear of absence from the world are likely to increase the likelihood of endorsing ideas about the afterlife.

Chapter summary

Cognitive scientists of religion have proposed that cognitive predispositions help to explain the inclination to believe in the afterlife. They also explain why specific ideas are cross-culturally recurrent, especially the idea that the mind or soul survives biological death, and that the person continues to exist in another physical location that is much like this world.

Scholars have proposed many predispositions to explain the ease with which people endorse ideas about the afterlife.

Contextual theories attribute a more significant role in the cultural transmission of ideas about the afterlife to explain why people accept and believe in such ideas.

TMT theorists are also concerned with the question of why people currently believe in the afterlife, but they draw on reasons why people are motivated to believe.

TMT claims that we believe in an afterlife because a self-preservation instinct motivates us to embrace ideas about life after death.

Together, cognitive, contextual, and motivational theories may produce a more compelling explanation for why so people around the world believe in an afterlife. They also help to explain the stability and variance of ideas about the afterlife within and across cultures.





Discussion questions

To what extent do theories about psychological tendencies and constraints and cultural learning explain why people believe that life continues after death?

What are the main contributions of CSR to the study of the afterlife?

Freud’s thesis confronts us with a fundamental question: is the afterlife what we want? Thinking about conceptualizations of the afterlife that you are familiar with; do you agree or disagree with this question?

Do you think motivational and cognitive theories are incompatible, or can they jointly explain why people believe in the afterlife?





Research case study: Reincarnation beliefs

In many places around the globe, biological birth does not mark a person’s entrance into the world, but rather, their return to it from a previous life in another bodily form. Cross-cultural studies have recorded the presence of reincarnation beliefs in around 30 percent of world cultures, and approximately 20 percent of Americans believe that reincarnation is plausible. Why are ideas about reincarnation so recurrent?

Anthropologists have documented the diversity of forms that reincarnation beliefs and practices take around the globe. These include the relationship to one’s ethical conduct (i.e. karma), whether and how one escapes the cycle of rebirth, and the functions of society (e.g. a system for the distribution of names, wealth, and even child-rearing practices). Traditional accounts explain the transmissive success of reincarnation beliefs by locating them in their historically situated sociocultural contexts. For example, people are more concerned with uncovering their past life identity than the identity of others in America because it suits a quintessentially modern, eclectic brand of New Age spirituality and religious individualism that has become immensely popular in the West. While insightful, these accounts say less about why ideas about reincarnation persist across cultures more generally.

I have adopted a cognitive approach to addressing the question of why the belief in reincarnation is cross-culturally recurrent. I researched reincarnation beliefs using systematic comparisons of archival, ethnographic records on reincarnation, cross-cultural studies with Jains in South India, and western adults with mixed religious beliefs, and interviews with US spiritual seekers who hold the conviction that they have lived before. Based on the results of my research, I proposed that by looking beyond the variation in local forms of reincarnation beliefs and practices, it is possible to determine similarities in basic ideas underpinning reincarnation. Drawing from theories in the social cognitive sciences, I argued that specific ideas about reincarnation are generated readily, remembered, and communicated in part because they meet cognitively optimal assumptions about what human survival entails and what constitutes evidence for it. There are thus natural foundations to reincarnation beliefs, and these foundations help explain their recurrence. These can be summarized by the following:

Personal immortality:

The imaginative obstacle (i.e. the inability to readily conceive of our own, and others’, death) may facilitate the idea that people survive death in the first place.

The readiness to entertain reincarnation as a possibility for loved ones may be influenced by our ability to represent others who are not physically present (i.e. offline social reasoning). This tendency also enables us to describe the dead as though they continue to exist.

As TMT theorists have claimed, there is also a motivational appeal to the idea that we are immortal. Fear of annihilation may drive the likelihood of endorsing beliefs about the afterlife. Even though some representations of reincarnation include the possibility of increased pain and suffering in the next lifetime, it may be easier—and more psychologically appealing—to accept the potential of the self as existing and suffering than not existing at all. Such motivation also extends towards the ones we love. Given the social investments that go into relationships, people do not easily represent absent others as removed from their social world.



Practices designed to identify a reincarnated person by inspecting the appearance of newborn children may serve to fulfill a desire to be reunited with deceased loved ones.

Psychological immortality:

People are conceptualized as surviving reincarnation mentally, just elsewhere, in a different body or a different realm. Conceptualizations of rebirth reflect the widespread assumption that people are constituted by minds, not bodies (i.e. folk-dualism).

Research has shown that being in a hypothetical conscious state without memories appears especially difficult to imagine. I found that people assume that episodic memories (i.e. autobiographical events that one can recall having experienced at a particular place and time) survive reincarnation. Memories tell people something about themselves over time. They also enable the continuation of established relationships (i.e. if people do not remember you, then the connection has been irreparably damaged).



Embodied survival:

Reincarnation also entails that the person occupies a new physical body after death. Yet, people assume that physical similarities between a living child and a dead person are evidence that the person has returned as a child. These physical similarities tend to be distinctive features such as unusual and rare birthmarks and skin irregularities. They provide a convenient (and reliable) means of evidence that they are the same person. People are employing the same default empirical devices as those used in the everyday social world to recognize people. Such features are convenient, unique, and easy to detect.



The afterlife is a place:

Offline social reasoning is also likely to be partly responsible for the tendency for people to think about a deceased loved one doing something in another sphere of existence. The most accessible representation of the afterlife is that people return to where they originated (this world). Also, having the afterlife as the here-and-now enables the possibility of continued social relationships with the dead.





Conclusion


Ideas about reincarnation entail underlying assumptions: namely, that the essential identity and aspects of an individual exist apart from the body, survives biological death, and is reborn in another human form in this world. I argue that taking account of basic human tendencies to think about people in death and the afterlife, in addition to cultural and historical factors, can provide scholars with an enriched understanding of why reincarnation has become a widely endorsed concept. It also helps explain how and why it is used to determine the features of social systems of tribal and world religions.

Discussion questions

In your own words, summarize the claims the researcher is making.

What are the differences and similarities between this research and previous research on reincarnation?

What do you think demarks this research as typical of the CSR approach to religion?

Which of these aspects do you think best and least explain why the idea of reincarnation is popular?

What do you think are the real-world implications of this theory on how ordinary people and the media represent reincarnation?





Further reading

White, C., Kelly, B., and Nichols, S. “Remembering past lives: institutions about memory and personal identity in reincarnation.” in The Cognitive Science of Religion and its Philosophical Implications, eds. Cruz, H. & Nichols, R., 169–196. London: Bloomsbury Academic, 2015.

White, C. “Who wants to live forever? Explaining the cross-cultural recurrence of reincarnation beliefs,” Journal of Cognition and Culture 17, (2017): 419–436.

White, C. “The cognitive foundations of reincarnation.” Method and Theory in the Study of Religion (2016): 1–23.

White, Claire, Michael Kinsella, and Jesse Bering. “How to know you’ve survived death: A cognitive account of the popularity of contemporary post-mortem survival narratives.” Method & Theory in the Study of Religion 30, no. 3 (2018): 279–299.





Selected further reading


Articles


Harris, Paul L. Children’s Understanding of Death: From Biology to Religion. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society (in Press).





Books


Bering, Jesse. The Belief Instinct: The Psychology of Souls, Destiny, and the Meaning of Life. New York: W.W. Norton & Company, 2012.

Bloom, Paul. Descartes’ Baby: How the Science of Child Development Explains What Makes us Human. Manhattan: Random House, 2005.

Jong, Jonathan, and Jamin Halberstadt. Death Anxiety and Religious Belief: An Existential Psychology of Religion. New York: Bloomsbury Publishing, 2016.



Notes

1 Jesse M. Bering, “Intuitive conceptions of dead agents’ minds: The natural foundations of afterlife beliefs as phenomenological boundary.” Journal of Cognition and Culture 2, no. 4 (2002): 263–308.

2 Jesse M. Bering and David F. Bjorklund, “The natural emergence of reasoning about the afterlife as a developmental regularity.” Developmental Psychology 40, no. 2 (2004): 217.

3 Jesse M. Bering, Carlos Hernández Blasi, and David F. Bjorklund, “The development of afterlife beliefs in religiously and secularly schooled children.” British Journal of Developmental Psychology 23, no. 4 (2005): 587–607.

4 Natalie A. Emmons and Deborah Kelemen, “The development of children’s prelife reasoning: Evidence from two cultures.” Child Development 85, no. 4 (2014): 1617–1633.

5 Huang, Junwei, Lehua Cheng, and Jing Zhu. “Intuitive conceptions of dead persons’ mentality: A cross-cultural replication and more.” International Journal for the Psychology of Religion 23, no. 1 (2013): 29–41.

6 Paul L. Harris, and Marta Giménez, “Children’s acceptance of conflicting testimony: The case of death.” Journal of Cognition and Culture 5, no. 1 (2005): 143–164.

7 Rita Astuti and Paul L. Harris, “Understanding mortality and the life of the ancestors in rural Madagascar.” Cognitive Science 32, no. 4 (2008): 713–740.

8 Watson‐Jones, Rachel E., Justin T.A. Busch, Paul L. Harris, and Cristine H. Legare. “Does the body survive death? Cultural variation in beliefs about life everlasting.” Cognitive Science 41, no. S3 (2017): 455–476.

9 Jean-Paul Sartre, The Wall (Intimacy), and Other Stories. Vol. 272. New York: New Directions Publishing, 1969, 8.

10 Justin L Barrett, Why Would Anyone Believe in God? Lanham, MD: AltaMira Press, 2004, 58.

11 Shaun Nichols, “Imagination and immortality: Thinking of me.” Synthese 159, no. 2 (2007): 215–233.

12 Paul Bloom, Descartes’ Baby: How the Science of Child Development, Explains What Makes Us Human. Manhattan: Random House, 2005, 191.

13 Emma Cohen, Emily Burdett, Nicola Knight, and Justin Barrett, “Cross‐cultural similarities and differences in person‐body reasoning: Experimental evidence from the United Kingdom and Brazilian Amazon.” Cognitive Science 35, no. 7 (2011): 1282–1304.

14 Edward Slingerland and Maciej Chudek, “The prevalence of mind-body dualism in early China.” Cognitive Science 35, no. 5 (2011): 997–1007.

15 Bruce Greyson and Ian Stevenson, “The phenomenology of near-death experiences.” The American Journal of Psychiatry (1980).

16 Michael Kinsella, “Near-death experiences and networked spirituality: The emergence of an afterlife movement,” Journal of the American Academy of Religion 85, no. 1 (2017): 168–198.

17 Claire White, Michael Kinsella, and Jesse M. Bering, (In press) “How to know you’ve survived death: A cognitive account of the popularity of contemporary post-mortem survival narratives.” Method and Theory in the Study of Religion.

18 Ivstan Czachesz, “Why body matters in the afterlife mind reading and body imagery in synoptic tradition and the apocalypse of Peter.” In The Human Body in Death and Resurrection, ed. Tobias Nicklas, Friedrich Reiterer, and Joseph Verheyden. Berlin: DeGruyter, 2009, 391–411.

19 Claire White, “Cross-cultural similarities in reasoning about personal continuity in reincarnation: Evidence from South India.” Religion, Brain, and Behavior 6, no. 2, (2016): 130–153.

20 Hodge, K. Mitch. “On imagining the afterlife.” Journal of Cognition and Culture 11, no. 3–4 (2011): 367–389.

21 K. Mitch Hodge, “Descartes’ mistake: How afterlife beliefs challenge the assumption that humans are intuitive Cartesian substance dualists.” Journal of Cognition and Culture 8, no. 3 (2008): 387–415.

22 Boyer, Pascal. “Religious thought and behavior as by-products of brain function.” Trends in cognitive sciences 7, no. 3 (2003): 119–124.

23 Barlev, M. On the ubiquity of beliefs in disembodied beings and on the default function integration of mind and body representations. Under review: Cognitive Science.

24 Barlev, Michael, Spencer Mermelstein, Adam S. Cohen, and Tamsin C. German. “The primacy of the embodied person concept in representations of disembodied extraordinary beings.” Under review: Perspectives in psychological science.

25 Maira Roazzi, Melanie Nyhof, and Carl Johnson, “Mind, soul and spirit: Conceptions of immaterial identity in different cultures.” International Journal for the Psychology of Religion 23, no. 1 (2013): 75–86.

26 Susan A Gelman, The Essential Child: Origins of Essentialism in Everyday Thought. New York: Oxford University Press, 2003.

27 Susan A Gelman, The Essential Child: Origins of Essentialism in Everyday Thought. New York: Oxford University Press, 2003.

28 Grant Gutheil and Karl S. Rosengren, “A rose by any other name: Preschoolers’ understanding of individual identity across name and appearance changes.” British Journal of Developmental Psychology 14, no. 4 (1996): 477–498.

29 Greta G. Fein, and Suzann Eshleman, “Individuals and dimensions in children’s judgment of same and different.” Developmental Psychology 10, no. 6 (1974): 793.

30 Corriveau, Kathleen H., Elisabeth S. Pasquini, and Paul L. Harris. “‘If it’s in your mind, it’s in your knowledge’: Children’s developing anatomy of identity.” Cognitive Development 20, no. 2 (2005): 321–340; Richert, Rebekah A., and Paul L. Harris. “Dualism revisited: Body vs. mind vs. soul.” Journal of Cognition and Culture 8, no. 1 (2008): 99–115.

31 Blok, Sergey, George Newman, and Lance J. Rips. “Individuals and their concepts.” In Categorization Inside and Outside the Laboratory. 2005: 127–149.

32 Rebekah A. Richert and Paul L. Harris, “Dualism revisited: Body vs. mind vs. soul.” Journal of Cognition and Culture 8, no. 1 (2008): 99–115.

33 Astuti and Harris, “Understanding mortality,” 713–740.

34 H. Clark Barrett and Tanya Behne, “Children’s understanding of death as the cessation of agency: A test using sleep versus death.” Cognition 96, no. 2 (2005): 93–108.

35 Marín-Arrese, Juana I. “To die, to sleep a contrastive study of metaphors for death and dying in English and Spanish.” Language Sciences 18, no. 1–2 (1996): 37–52.

36 John Archer, “Grief from an evolutionary perspective.” In Handbook of Bereavement Research: Consequences, Coping and Care, eds. Margaret S. Stroebe, Robert O. Hansson, Wolfgang Ed Stroebe, and Henk Ed Schut. Washington DC: American Psychological Association, 2001, 263–284.

37 Claire White and M.T. Fessler, (2018). “An evolutionary account of vigilance in grief.” Evolution, Medicine, and Public Health 1, 34–42.

38 J. M Bering, “The cognitive science of souls: Clarifications and extensions of the evolutionary model.” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 29, no. 5, (2006): 486–493.

39 K. Mitch Hodge, “Dead survivors, the living dead, and concepts of death.” Review of Philosophy and Psychology: 1–27, (forthcoming).

40 C. S. Lewis. The Great Divorce: A Dream. San Francisco: Harper, 1946.

41 K. Mitch Hodge, “On imagining the afterlife.” The Journal of Cognition and Culture, 11, (2011a): 367–389.

42 Harris, Paul. L. (2018). Children’s understanding of death: From biology to religion. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 373: 20170266.

43 Nichols, Shaun, Nina Strohminger, Arun Rai, and Jay Garfield. “Death and the self.” Cognitive Science (2018): 1–19.

44 Thomas Nagel, What Does it All Mean?: A Very Short Introduction to Philosophy. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1987, 93.

45 Plato, Plato in Twelve Volumes, Vol. 1 translated by Harold North Fowler; Introduction by W.R.M. Lamb. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1966, 29.

46 Sigmund Freud. The Future of an Illusion. Peterborough: Broadview Press, 2012.

47 Ernest Becker. The Denial of Death. New York: Simon and Schuster, 2007.

48 Jeff Greenberg, Tom Pyszczynski, and Sheldon Solomon. “The causes and consequences of a need for self-esteem: A terror management theory.” Public Self and Private Self 189 (1986): 189–212.

49 Jonathan Jong and Jamin Halberstadt, Death Anxiety, and Religious Belief: An Existential Psychology of Religion. New York: Bloomsbury Publishing, 2016, 93.

50 Eva Jonas, Immo Fritsche, and Jeff Greenberg, “Currencies as cultural symbols–an existential psychological perspective on reactions of Germans toward the Euro.” Journal of Economic Psychology 26, no. 1 (2005): 129–146.

51 Tom Pyszczynski, Robert A. Wicklund, Stefan Floresku, Holgar Koch, Gerardine Gauch, Sheldon Solomon, and Jeff Greenberg, “Whistling in the dark: Exaggerated consensus estimates in response to incidental reminders of mortality.” Psychological Science 7, no. 6 (1996): 332–336.

52 James M. Donovan, “Defining religion.” In Selected Readings in the Anthropology of Religion. Westport: Greenwood Publishing Group, 2003, 61–98.

53 Paul Wink and Julia Scott, “Does religiousness buffer against the fear of death and dying in late adulthood? Findings from a longitudinal study.” The Journals of Gerontology Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences 60, no. 4 (2005): 207–214.

54 Michael Osarchuk and Sherman J. Tatz. “Effect of induced fear of death on belief in afterlife.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 27, no. 2 (1973): 256.

55 John W. Burling, “Death concerns and symbolic aspects of the self: The effects of mortality salience on status concern and religiosity.” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 19, no. 1 (1993): 100–105.

56 Jonathan Jong, Jamin Halberstadt, and Matthias Bluemke, “Foxhole atheism, revisited: The effects of mortality salience on explicit and implicit religious belief.” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 48, no. 5 (2012): 983–989.

57 Jong, Halberstadt, and Bluemke, “Foxhole atheism, revisited,” 7.

58 Van Tongeren, D.R., Pennington, A.R., McIntosh, D.N., Newton, T., Green, J.D., Davis, D.E., and Hook, J.N. (2017). “Where, o death, is thy sting? The meaning-providing function of beliefs in literal immortality.” Mental Health, Religion & Culture, 1–15.

59 “Fear of Death Phobia: Thanatophobia,” Fear Of, accessed April 2018, http://www.fearof.net/fear-of-death-phobia-thanatophobia/.





