                                  V

             THE      URBAN       REVOLUTION
                     IN MESOPOTAMIA

q   METALLURGY,        the wheel, the ox-cart, the pack-ass, and
- the sailing ship provided the foundations for a new eco-
  nomic organization. Without it the new materials would
    remain luxuries, the new crafts would not function, the
    new devices would be just conveniences. The societies
_ living, albeit precariously, on the Syrian steppes or the
  plateaux of Iran, /like those inhabiting the Mediterranean
_ coasts and temperate Europe, could still scrape along with-
_ out feeling the imperious need to face the formidable task
_ of reconstructing the whole fabric of neolithic barbarism.
  The alluvial valleys of the great rivers offered a more
  exacting environment, but also greater material rewards
  for its exploitation. In them Copper Age villages turned
  into Bronze Age cities by processes more fully described
  in Man Makes Himself.
     In a small tract no larger than Denmark, on the Tigris-
_ Euphrates delta, the ancient Sumer (Shinar in the Bible),
  the transformation can be followed step by step in the
  archaeological record. Sumer was new land only recently
  raised above the waters of the Persian Gulf by the silt
  carried down by the two rivers. It was still covered with
  vast swamps, full of towering reeds, interrupted by arid
  banks of mud and sand, and periodically inundated by
  floods. Through tortuous channels among the reeds the
_muddy waters flowed sluggishly to the sea. But the waters
  teemed with fish, the reed brakes were alive with wild
  fowl, wild pig, and other game, and on every emergent
  patch of soil grew date palms offering every year a reliable
    crop of nutritive fruit.
      By contrast to the arid desert on either side, this jungle
    must have seemed a paradise. If once the flood waters
go            WHAT    HAPPENED       IN   HISTORY

could be controlled and canalized, the swamps drained, :
and the arid banks watered, it could be made a Garden of
Eden. The soil was so fertile that a hundred-fold return
was not impossible. Actually, documents dating from 2500
B.C. indicate that the average yield on a field of barley was ©
eighty-six times the sowing. Here, then, farmers could easily
produce a surplus above their domestic needs.
   They would have to; raw materials requisite for equip-
ment were not so bountifully provided. From alluvial mud -
you cannot pick up stones or flints suitable for even the
simplest cutting tools. Even such substances, as well as
timber and stone for building, had to be imported from
outside the delta. But the river channels not only unite
the whole plain but provide moving roads on which boats
can easily transport the essential materials from the
mountainous lands upstream or from across the Persian
Gulf. Trade was necessary, but also relatively easy. Inci-
dentally, if material for axes and knives had to be imported
in any case, copper would be found more economical than
the less durable stones and flints.
   The first pioneers arrived in Sumer with an equipment
similar to that found in countless Copper Age settlement
mounds in Iran and no less closely resembling that of
Halafian villages in Syria and Assyria (p. 73). The oldest
settlement yet recognized is marked by a tiny shrine at _
Eridu. Successive reconstructions and enlargements of the
shrine converted its site into a tell surmounted by the
historical temple of the god, Ea. The sixth reconstruction
of the primeval shrine formed the centre of a village of
reed huts of the al ’Ubaid culture described on p. 73.
Remains of similar al ’Ubaid villages have been found
on the sites of most historical cities - Erech, Eridu, Lagash,
                                                                    |
Ur - in Sumer, but not yet farther upstream in what
became Akkad.
   At all these sites the barbarian villages of the first al’ Ubaid
colonists are separated from the oldest ‘historical’ cities
(in which legible written documents occur) by fifty or more
feet of debris, accumulated as in Syrian and Iranian tells
       _   THE   URBAN   REVOLUTION     IN   MESOPOTAMIA        gt
                  .             .   5
   from successive reconstructions of the nuclear settlements.
   Though cult was celebrated at all levels on the same hal-
_ lowed spot, e.g., at Eridu, changes in ceramic styles, the
   introduction of the potter’s wheel, the gradual substitution
 _ of cylinder seals for stamps, and so on must reflect an influx
   of fresh settlers with new traditions, who amalgamated
   with the pioneers to form a stratified society with composite
   traditions. Between the al ’Ubaid culture and the first
   historical or Early Dynastic civilization, archaeologists dis-
   tinguish at least two phases, designated respectively Uruk
   and Jemdet Nasr, both of which are represented not only
   in Sumer but also in the later Akkad, as far north as-the
| junction of the Diyala and Tigris near Baghdad, and up
   the Euphrates to Mari, opposite the mouth of the Khabur.
   So, too, from later written records, philologists deduce the
   presence of three linguistic groups — ‘ Japhetites’ (known
   only inferentially from a few place-names) ; Semites (speaking
  a language akin to Hebrew and Arabic); and the dominant
_ Sumerians. (It is not yet possible to attach these linguistic
    labels to the archaeologists’ cultures, but it is known that
    Sumerian was being written in Sumer before the close of
    the Uruk phase, and the Sumerian script was being used
    to transcribe Semitic names at Mari near the beginning
    of the Early Dynastic phase.)
       Before the end of the Uruk phase at Erech, the ruins of
    successive settlements had already formed a tell some sixty
_ feet high. At the top one is no longer standing in a village
- green but in the square of a cathedral city. In the fore-
_ ground lie the ruins of a gigantic temple measuring over all
    245 feet by 100 feet (cf. the Assyrian shrines mentioned on
_ page 74) later dedicated to the goddess Inanna. Behind,
  - attached to the temple of Anu, rises an artificial mountain
    or ziggurat, thirty-five feet high. It is built of mud and sun-
    dried bricks, but its steeply-sloping walls have been con-
     solidated by hammering into the brickwork while still wet
 _ thousands of pottery goblets. A flight of steps leads up to
_ the summit — a platform covered with asphalt. On it stands
    a miniature temple measuring over all 73 feet by 57 feet
|
ee oe   ao
         ee ee        ee    eee
  ¥
                                                  2      2




        92           WHAT     HAPPENED    IN   HISTORY

        6 ins., containing a long cult room with narrow chambers"
        on either side and an altar or an idol at one end. The walls, —
        of white-washed brick and imported timbers, were em-_
        bellished with niches and buttresses and pierced with
        clerestory windows; the doors were framed with imported
        pinewood and closed with mats.
           The erection of these monumental temples and artificial —
        mountains, the manufacture of the bricks and pottery |
        goblets, the importation of pinewood (from Syria or the
        Iranian mountains), and of lapis lazuli, silver, lead, and
        copper to adorn the shrines presuppose a substantial labour |
        force - a large population. In point of view of size the |
        community has expanded from a village to a city. It has|
        grown rich too.
           The artisans, labourers, and transport workers may have
        been ‘volunteers’ inspired by religious enthusiasm. But if
        they were not paid for their labour, they must at least have |
        been nourished while at work. A surplus of foodstuffs must,
        therefore, have been available for their support. The
        fertility of the soil that enabled the farmer to produce far
        more than he could consume supplied this. But its expendi-
        ture on temples suggests what later records confirm, that '
      _ ‘gods’ concentrated it and made it available for distribution |
        among their working servants. Perhaps these gods were|
        projections of ancestral society and were regarded as the
        creators, and therefore the eminent owners, of the soil that
        society itself had reclaimed from desert and marsh by the
        collective labour of ancestral generations.
           But the gods, being fictions, must have had real repre-
        sentatives, nominally their specialized servants, who must|
        have done much to give concrete form to the imaginary
        beings, and by interpreting must have invented their |
        desires. Temples presuppose priesthoods. Did these begin |
        in ‘secret societies’, such as among some modern barbarian |
        tribes have monopolized once communal rituals (p. on
        By the beginning of historical records the Sumerian priests |
        formed corporations as eternal as the gods they served and |
        maintained; individual priests might die, but the vacant|
     a *




           THE   URBAN   REVOLUTION     IN   MESOPOTAMIA        93

   seats would find new occupants. Presumably these had
   already in the Fourth Millennium undertaken the not
 - unprofitable task of administering the gods’ estates and
   directing the works on which their surplus wealth was
   expended.
      The construction of a temple was a co-operative task.
   The labour of the hundreds of participants must be co-
   ordinated and directed. The whole must be planned
   accurately in advance. The outlines of the temple were in
   fact laid out with strings before the walls were begun. The
   ground plan of a temple, marked out on the bitumen floor
   by the thin red lines left by a coloured string, has actually
ee
ee
Ae
ee
ee
   been found on the summit of the artificial mountain at
a Erech rather earlier than the one described above. From
   other cities and/later times we have temple plans drawn
    to scale on clay tablets. The Sumerians believed that such
    plans were designed by the gods themselves and revealed
    in dreams. But the real architects were presumably the
See
ee  priests.
       In a later temple, still belonging to the Uruk phase at
    Erech, and in the next phase in Akkad too, clay tablets
    turn up scratched with shorthand pictures and numerals.
   They are accounts, the direct precursors of the oldest
    tablets that we can read to-day. As administrators of the
    temple estates, the priests must give account of their
    stewardship to a jealous master and their colleagues in the
    perpetual corporation. So they have agreed upon a con-
    ventional method of recording receipts and expenditures in
 _ written signs that shall be intelligible to all their colleagues
    and successors; they have invented writing. Soon after
    3000 B.c. the writing becomes fully intelligible to modern
   philologists too, and the documents speak to us across the
    millennia. With their aid let us examine the Sumerian
    cities of the Early Dynastic period, the first half of the
  Third Millennium B.c.
     The city itself is girt with a brick wall and a fosse, within
  the shelter of which man found for the first time a world
  of his own, relatively secure from the immediate pressure of
94.        | WHAT HAPPENED IN HISTORY
raw external nature. It stands in an artificial landscape -
of gardens, fields, and pastures created out of reed swamp
and desert by the collective activity of preceding generations _
in building dykes and digging canals. The canals that drain
the land and make it fruitful also provide the citizens with —
water and fish and bring to the quays merchandise from afar.
   Even in physical size the city is contrasted with the older —
village. Though insignificant in comparison with London ~
or New York, it represents a new magnitude in human
settlement. The built-up area of Ur occupied 150 acres;
on the analogy of contemporary Near Eastern cities that
would accommodate 24,000 souls. A governor of Lagash,
one of the smaller cities of Sumer about which we happen
to be exceptionally well informed, claims to rule over ten
shars of men — a round number, literally thirty-six thousand,
and perhaps applying only to adult males. The populations
of Lagash, Umma, and Khafajah are reliably estimated to
have been 19,000, 16,000, and 12,000 respectively during
the Third Millennium.
   The spiritual and economic unity of the new aggregate
was expressed most obviously in the temples of the gods,
raised on an artificial platform and dominated by the
towering ziggurat, but comprising also granaries, maga-
zines, and workshops. The gods, as representatives of the
tribe and clans, own the farm land created by social labour;
town land is apparently individually owned already, while
pasture remains common. The tribal territory of Lagash,
for example, appears divided into the estates of some twenty
deities, eminent domain over them all being perhaps
retained by the chief god of the city or tribe. His consort,
Bati (whose temple accounts alone have been preserved
almost intact), thus owned seventeen square miles. As with
the arable land of a barbarian clan, the use of three-
quarters of this area was allotted to individual families in
plots of varying size. The rest Baii retained as a ‘personal
estate’, worked for her by wage-earners, by tenants paying
the equivalent of a seventh or an eighth of the produce as
rent, or by the customary labour of the remaining ‘clansmen’.
                                                           rt. “
                                                          eet         eeere
          rien   vie   ae

          THE    URBAN      REVOLUTION   IN'MESOPOTAMIA          95

        Then in her temple worked twenty-one bakers, receiving
     ‘wages’ in barley, and assisted by twenty-seven female
     slaves, twenty-five brewers with six slave assistants, forty
     women engaged in. preparing wool from the goddess’s
     flocks, female spinners, female weavers, a male smith, and
     other artisans, as well as officials, clerks, and priests. The
     temple also owned and provided its employees with equip-
     ment — metal tools, ploughs, plough animals, wagons, and
     boats. Baii possessed further breeding stock, including a
     stud bull imported from Elam. (Stock was liable to de-
     teriorate on the sultry plains if not crossed periodically
      with mountain breeds.)
-        So the temple appears as a sort of divine household, an
    - enormously enlarged version of the patriarchal household of
      barbarism. But in this household the several tasks which
      were performed collectively by the members of a neolithic
      household (p. 60) have been differentiated and divided
      between specialists, each of whom concentrates on per-
      forming one of the functions which in a neolithic economy
      would be only one item in the daily toil. So the several
     operations of the textile industry, all of which would have
     been completed by the barbarian housewife, have been
     allotted to three distinct groups of craflswomen. The
     specialists thus withdrawn from direct food production are
     nourished by the surplus produced by the god’s tenants
     and concentrated in his granaries.
        The new class of specialist craftsmen which was arising
     before the revolution is provided for in the same way and
     fits easily into the temple organization. But, if thereby
     assured of food and shelter, the smith, for instance, loses
     the freedom and prestige earned by his skill under bar-
     barism (p. 78). He must sell his skill and his products to
     the head of the household and will be dependent upon the
     household store for his raw materials. The same fate
     threatens other craftsmen who arise about this time —
     glaziers, jewellers, seal-cutters.
         The system of divine households ensured the rational
     exploitation of the land, the maintenance of essential canals,
 “ee   oF    gal   Pa oe




96           WHAT          HAPPENED   IN   HISTORY   :   i

and the production of a surplus on a scale large enough to -
support a substantially increased population. But the divine —
households were not self-contained units, though all united
under the overlordship of Ningirsu. The urban population
was hardly exhausted in the foregoing enumeration based
upon early temple wage-lists. It included professional
merchants or traders, who would not all belong to any
particular divine household and so seldom figure in the
lists of temple employees that are our principal source for
knowledge of professions in Early Dynastic times. ‘The arch-
aeological record in any case gives abundant evidence for
the activity of traders.
  Imports, as remarked on page go, were essential for life on
an alluvial plain. By 3000 B.c. copper or bronze, timber for
building, stone, at least for querns and door-sockets (in the
ancient East wooden doors were not hinged, but pivoted on
a hollowed stone set at the base of the jamb) had become
necessities to the urban population. For the gods, at least,
gold, silver, lead, lapis lazuli and other precious substances
were regarded as necessities, too. These and other materials
were, in fact, imported, and that fairly regularly, judging by
the quantities found in ruins, and still more in graves from
the Jemdet phase on. Copper came chiefly from Oman
(Magan) on the Persian Gulf, but probably also from the
eastern mountains; tin may have been obtained from
Drangiana in eastern Iran, from Syria, from Asia Minor,
or even from Europe. The Taurus mountains were a main
source of silver and lead. Timber came from the mountains
to the north-east, and perhaps also from the coastal ranges
of Syria, the best stone from Oman, lapis lazuli from Badak-
shan in north-eastern Afghanistan, mother-of-pearl from
the Persian Gulf, sank shells from peninsular India. Trade
was, indeed, so extensive and so active that it brought
from cities in the Indus valley manufactured articles — seal-
amulets, beads and, perhaps, even pottery bases.
   The personnel engaged in this traffic must have been
heterogeneous. For reasons adduced on page 62 it may well
have been partly recruited from savages surviving on the
          THE    URBAN   REVOLUTION       IN   MESOPOTAMIA      97

     desert fringe, or at least from nomadic tribes devoted
     mainly to pastoralism. These may well have been Semites
     who in later historical times were everywhere conspicuous
     as traders. The conditions of commerce must have been
     exacting. Caravans must cross swamps, deserts, and moun-
     tain ranges; flotillas had not only to thread their ways
     along the canals and tortuous river channels between
     shoals and marshes, but also to brave the open waters of
      the Persian Gulf and perhaps also of the Arabian Sea.
     Both must    traverse   the territories of foreign tribes, who
     had to be either induced by bribes or forced by arms to
     permit passage and to supply water and other necessities.
     So transport was expensive. The merchants needed, besides
     trading stock, supplies and equipment for the journey, and
     means of bribery, and defence.
        Semi-permanent agencies must be established at the
     termini for the collection of freight and cargo, just as
     European business houses have established ‘factories’ and
     colonies on the coasts of Africa and China or in the cities
     of the Levant and Istanbul. Many business documents and
     letters have survived that belonged to such a merchant
     colony established at the beginning of the Second Millen-
     nium at Kanes, on the plateau of Asia Minor, and engaged
,
——
2.


     in the export of copper, silver, and lead from the Turkish
:F   mines. References in later epics imply that this colony
     existed already about 2500 B.c.
|        Owing to these conditions ‘trade’ in the Orient was a
F
      more potent agency in the diffusion of culture than it is
      to-day. Free craftsmen might travel with the caravans
      seeking a market for their skill, while slaves would form
      part of the merchandise. These, together with the whole
      caravan or ship’s company, must be accommodated in the
      home city. Foreigners in a strange land would demand the
      comforts of their own religion just as much as English
      colonies in a Catholic or Mohammedan country expect an
      Anglican service every Sunday. So a scene carved by a
      local Sumerian artist on a vase, recovered from a ruined
      city on the Diyala, depicts an Indian cult being celebrated
98           WHAT    HAPPENED      IN   HISTORY

apparently in a local shrine in Akkad. If cults were thus —
transmitted, useful arts and crafts could be diffused just as
easily. Trade promoted the pooling of human experience.
   Under such conditions the commerce essential to their
maintenance would increase the heterogeneity of the cities’ —
populations. The latter already consisted, according to the
testimony of philology and archaeology, of disparate lingu-
istic and cultural stocks. The indispensable merchants,
compelled by their profession to travel, could not well be
obliged to trade with one city alone, and craftsmen, too,
could still sell their skills abroad; in the early accounts from
Lagash we read of a man from the neighbouring city of
Umma working in Baii’s brewery. As a social order for
uniting such disparate elements, the barbarian principle
of kinship was becoming a threadbare fiction.
   Now, traces of totemism can in fact be detected in the
symbols of the deities and in representations of cult scenes
in which the participants are dressed as animals. The
divine estates, plots on which were allotted — perhaps perio-
dically — to the deity’s ‘people’, may well be derived
from the communally owned clan lands distributed annually
for cultivation by the clansmen in many barbarian societies,
But any approximation to equality of lots in such common
farmland has disappeared by the time of the earliest
Lagash accounts. While many of Baii’s ‘people’ seem to
have held only 0.8 to 2.5 acres, a high temple official held
35.5 acres. Moreover, though all members of a divine
household may have been in theory servants of the god,
the conditions of service were very different for the priestly
administrators on the one hand and the tenants, wage-
earners, and slaves on the other. The share farmers and agri-
cultural labourers received only a fraction of the produce of
their labour. From the surplus collected by the temple the
 bakers and brewers and other artisans were paid only a
modest wage in barley; the slaves who helped them presu-
 mably got little beyond their bare keep.
    Indeed, before 2500 B.c. the divine households had ceased
 to be anything like happy families. The abuses that
  |   THE URBAN REVOLUTION             IN MESOPOTAMIA           99
disturbed the households’ harmony are quaintly set forth by
Urukagina of Lagash in a decree aimed at restoring the old
order ‘as it had existed from the beginning’. Favoured
priests practised various forms of extortion (overcharging
for burials, for instance), and treated the god’s (i.e. the
community’s) land, cattle, equipment, and servants as their
own private property or personal slaves. Then ‘the High
Priest came into the garden of the poor ... and took wood
therefrom.’ ‘If a great man’s house adjoined that of an
ordinary citizen’, the former might annex the humble
dwelling without paying any proper compensation to its
owner. ‘If a fair ass be born to a subject and his overlord
say, “I will buy it,” ’ the privileged purchaser seldom paid
‘as much as satisfied the owner’s heart’. For all its clumsy
language, this archaic text gives us unmistakable glimpses
of a real conflict/of classes.                      ;
   The surplus    produced   by the new   economy      was, in fact,
concentrated in the hands of     a  relativel y small    class. Such
concentration was doubtless necessary for       the   accumula  tion
of absolutely small individual contributions into reserves
sufficient for the great tasks imposed on civilized society. But
it split society into classes and produced a further contra-
diction in the new economy. For it limited the expansion
of industry and consequently. the absorption of the surplus
rural population.
    In so far as only ‘gods’ and their favourite servants were
in a position to purchase the products of the new industries,
 the effective demand for such products would remain small.
Only a few craftsmen could be sure of a livelihood in
 supplying it. For the rest, as in a neolithic economy, the
 offspring of a prolific peasantry must find new lands to till.
 So while reclamation works, the warfare against desert and
 swamp, might satisfy this need, warfare against neigh-
 bouring cities to seize the land their citizens had already
 reclaimed might be made to seem an easier outlet for the
 overflow, as in a barbarian community.
    Be that as it may, though all the cities of Sumer and
 Akkad enjoyed a uniform culture and though, or because,
100          WHAT    HAPPENED     IN   HISTORY

all were dependent on the waters of the same rivers, each
was politically independent and ready to fight its neigh-
bours. Almost the oldest legible documents, other than
account tablets, describe wars between the adjacent cities
of Lagash and Umma for the possession of a strip of frontier
territory. Metal war gear forms a prominent item in the
furniture of all early graves. Even in the Uruk phase some
seals were engraved with battle scenes. Of course citizens
might also have to repel onslaughts by starveling barbarians
from the desert fringe who cast envious eyes on urban
wealth and on the cities’ lands, created by centuries of toil.
   A new institution was needed to restrain these conflicts.
By the beginning of historical times the State had emerged,
but it was embodied in the single person of the city-governor
or king, who may be just ‘corn-king’ and war-chief amal- —
gamated and writ large. The later Sumerian clerks pre-—
tended that ‘kingship had descended from the heavens’
thousands of years before the mythical Deluge, Noah’s
Flood of Hebrew tradition. In the archaeological record ©
palaces and royal insignia are entirely overshadowed by
temples and their furniture during the Uruk and Jemdet
Nasr phases. But the symbols on some early seals may be —
pictographic representations of royal titles. And as soon as
decipherable inscriptions begin, perhaps about 2750 B.c.,
 ‘royal’ names occur.                                          :
    The earliest city governors generally style themselves
 ‘tenant-farmer’ (of the god) — ishakku — only rarely lugal or
 ‘king’. But as representative of the State a governor of
 Lagash, Urukagina, intervenes in the reform decree on
 page 99 to check the exaction of the rich; he appears in fact
 ‘as a power apparently standing above society, but neces-
 sary to moderate the conflict of classes and keep it within
 the bounds of order’.
    ‘The city governor may have owed his authority on the
 one hand to a magical identification with the chief god of
 the city; he may, that is, have been the actor who played |
 the réle of the deity in some such fertility drama as was
 described on page 65. It is certain that in later times the
       THE   URBAN     REVOLUTION      IN   MESOPOTAMIA       IOI

_“ king did impersonate the god in this way at great annual
    festivals. On the other hand, the magical authority of the
    ishakku was at least reinforced by the temporal power
    earned by leadership in war. The king as victor, smiting
    his enemies, is a favourite theme in Early Dynastic art.
       As vicegerent on earth of the head of the local pantheon
    the city governor united the several ‘divine households’
    into a sort of vaster family, albeit this time purely meta-
    phorically. At Lagash the several deities worshipped by
    the citizens were imagined as related like the members of
    a patriarchal household. So under Urukagina the ishakku
    was high priest of the chief god, Ningirsu; his wife was
    high-priestess of Ningirsu’s consort, Baii, and so on. As
    war-chief the ishakku commanded the citizen army. Never-
  _ theless in the earliest historical documents it is the gods of
  the cities who go, to war and win victories; the prize at
_ stake is not described as a strip of the territory of, say,
   Lagash, but as the field of Ningirsu; when a peace treaty
 _ is concluded it is drawn up in the names of the belligerents’
 _ deities.
      As representative of the ‘tribal’ god the ishakku receives
   the largest plot of the clan lands — at Lagash he enjoyed the
     use of 608 acres of Baii’s estate alone — and ‘taxes’, the
     civilized counterparts of the gifts customarily offered to a
     barbarian chief. On behalf of the god too he receives a
     major share of the booty won by the victorious deity. The
     city governor thus came to concentrate a considerable
ee
et
ee
Pe
pe
ee
ee
ee   portion of the land’s surplus produce. The gods themselves
     might be indebted to the governor’s munificence. In early
     inscriptions these dwell with special pride on the building
     or adornment of temples. But they also recall the expendi-
     ture of the accumulated surplus on reproductive works -
   _ the digging of canals and the building of granaries. They
aT
~~_  record also expeditions sent to Oman and other foreign
  countries for métal, stone, timber, and other war materials,
  needed by the crafts. The artisans were to this extent
  indebted to the ishakku for the requisite supplies. ‘The
  industrial population were dependent on the city governor
                                          Lye
 102                      IN HISTORY.
              WHAT HAPPENED
for their raw materials.’ Indeed after 2500 B.c. trade in|
metals, vital for the armament industry, became at least—
at times and in theory a royal monopoly. In any case the —
 king, as the State, must have been the principal purchaser
 of metal and similar commodities and so dominated the
market.
    Nevertheless the city state in Mesopotamia did not (as
 Heichelheim alleges) attain the exclusive position of a
 modern totalitarian State; the ishakku was never quite a
 Fuhrer. The temple corporations could always maintain a
‘certain freedom, both economic and intellectual; however
 much they might depend on the city governor’s muni-
 ficence, the perpetual corporations of priests were more
 permanent than any temporal dynasties. Rulers might be
 deposed by internal revolutions or subjugated by foreign
 rivals. The priesthood maintained its continuity in spite of
 dynastic changes; conquerors generally respected the
 temples and often embellished them as generously as native
 governors. At the same time always down to 2400 B.c.
 and often thereafter till 1800 the small area of Sumer and
 Akkad was divided among a multitude of independent city
 states, which offered alternative markets for exotic mer-
 chandise, industrial products, and the skill of artisans.
    Naturally, ambitious city governors sought in the contra-
 diction mentioned on page 99 an excuse for eliminating such
 competition by establishing hegemonies for themselves, their
 gods, and their cities. By 2000 B.c. the clerical historians of
 Sumer believed that one city or another had always enjoyed
 such a supreme sovereignty over the whole land. Some
 moderns too have seen in the universal worship of deities
 like Enlil, whose chief temple was at Nippur, the reflexion
 of political union in prehistoric times. But such contem-
 porary documents as survive give no definite evidence of
 the supremacy of one city over all the rest until about 2400
 B.c. Lugalzaggizi of Umma conquered a number of cities.
 Even his ‘empire’ was transient. It was first a little later
 that a Semite, Sargon, the upstart ruler of a new city, Agade
 (tradition says he was the son of a gardener) achieved a real
           *
                       f

     THE       URBAN       REVOLUTION   IN   MESOPOTAMIA   108

unification which endured for about a century. His achieve-
ment was repeated by the Sumerian kings of Ur, by Ham-
murabi of Babylon and others. But with Sargon the Early
Dynastic period ends.
   The new economic order not only invested barbaric
chieftainship with the sanctity of kingship and bestowed
upon its holders the authority of a territorial State. It also
by its very nature called forth a novel method of trans-
mitting human experience — accurate and impersonal — and
generated sciences of a new kind — exact and capable of
predicting results precisely. The invention of writing,. the
creation of a script, during the Uruk phase in Sumer has
already been mentioned in passing on page 93. It deserves
more than a passing reference, not only because the step
was fraught with portentous consequences for the subse-
quent history of mankind, but also because nowhere else
in the world is the whole process of building up a system
of writing — a written language in fact — illustrated by a
series of contemporary documents from the first experi-
ments to the final adoption of an agreed orthography; for,
very luckily for us, the Sumerians employed from the start
as writing materials tablets of clay which by baking were
made imperishable.
   As explained already, perpetual corporations of priests
found themselves charged with the heavy task of adminis-
tering the unprecedented accumulations of wealth belong-
ing to the Sumerian deities. The administration by such
corporations of the temples’ revenues on behalf of a divine
master required the keeping of accurate records of all
receipts and expenditures; a god’s servants must be able
to give account of their stewardship. The record must be
intelligible not only to the official who made it, but to his
successor and all the partners in the joint undertaking.
No private system of reminders like the knot in the hand-
kerchief was any use. The head of the brewery must note
down what quantities of barley he received and how much
beer and of what strength he delivered and note it in
synibols that not only reminded him of something, i.e.,
104          WHAT    HAPPENED      IN   HISTORY               a

meant something to him, but meant the same thing to his
successor, to the controller of the granaries, and to other |
colleagues.                                                    |
   The invention of a system of writing was just the agree-
ment on the meanings to be attached to the symbols by
the society using them for its common ends. The symbols
(characters) on the oldest tablets are mostly pictures which
are often self-explanatory. They may be called pictograms
(and a script composed of them pictographic). But even the
simplest pictogram is more or less conventional. To denote
an ass it is not necessary to draw painfully on the tablet a i
photographic portrait of an individual ass: a simplified and
abbreviated shorthand sketch will suffice. The abbrevia-
tions used on the oldest tablets still show a certain variety;
but they rapidly become standardized. This means that a
particular shorthand version of an ass was gradually agreed
upon and sanctioned by the consensus of the corporation.
   The idea was just a development of that underlying the
designs on seals from al ’Ubaid times, for these had been
imprinted on clay and already bore symbolic meaning
(p. 73). Even the particular abbreviations used as characters |
had sometimes been suggested by seal engravings.
   Now many things to be recorded could not conveniently |
be represented by pictures at all. The difficulty was over-
come by agreeing to attach a quite arbitrary meaning to a
picture. For instance, a spouted jar was taken to stand for
a given measure of volume, say a gur. By drawing strokes
on the body of the jar a gur of barley (two strokes) might be
distinguished from a gur of beer (three strokes). This was
being done already in the Fourth Millennium s.c. The
signs stood not only for things but for ideas or words
(names). In technical language the script was no longer
purely pictographic, but also ideographic. It would have
been possible by adopting new pictures and agreeing upon
further arbitrary modifications and combinations to expand
the system to express most of the ideas to be recorded. Later
on the Chinese actually took this course.
   The Sumerians adopted a different line. Most of the
      THE   URBAN    REVOLUTION      IN   MESOPOTAMIA     105

  common Sumerian names were words of one syllable; the
  word for mouth, for instance, is ka. So the picture of the
  human head which stood for the word ka and the idea
  ‘mouth’, also stood for the sound ka. It thus got a phonetic
  value and could be used as a phonetic symbol or phono-
  gram. By combinations of such phonograms it was now
  possible to spell out names and compound words instead
  of inventing new signs (ideograms) for them. The Sumerians
  worked out this idea in Early Dynastic times. They pre-
  served a number of their conventional pictures and still
  used them as ideograms. But they also used them phoneti-
- cally to spell out words. Very often they spelt a word and
  also added an ideogram (in this context termed a determina-
  tive) to suggest what sort of a word it was. Hence the
  number of current signs was not increased with the develop-
  ment of the script (as it was in China), but was actually
  reduced; in the earliest tablets of the Uruk phase some
  2,000 signs may have been used; soon after 3000 B.c. the
  number current had been reduced to 800, by 2500 B.c.
 to about 600.
    At the same time the signs themselves were simplified.
 For convenience and speed of writing the pictures were
 made so cursory that they often bear no recognizable
 similarity to the object denoted by the ideogram. Ultimately
 they were no longer traced but formed by the impressions
 of a wedge-shaped stylus that was stamped into the clay.
 The Mesopotamian script is therefore called cuneiform
 (wedge-shaped). The script was apparently devised by
 Sumerians for writing the Sumerian language in the
 manner just described. But the urban populations were
 cosmopolitan and comprised in Akkad at least a large
 Semitic element. Just after 2500 B.c. at latest Sumerian
 characters were being used phonetically to transcribe the
 names of Semitic kings. Soon Semites came to employ the
 script for official and business documents in the (Semitic)
 Akkadian tongue, spelling out the Semitic words as well
 as using ideograms.
    A’ numeral notation was as necessary as a script. For
             WHAT    HAPPENED      IN   HISTORY

recording the reindeer slain in a communal hunt or the
sheep in a village flock notches on a tally stick would meet
all the requirements of savages and barbarians. For enumer-
ating the vast herds of a civilized temple or the contents of a
city granary such a notation would be intolerably clumsy.
A convention must be agreed upon to save the trouble of
making hundreds of notches on the tally or hundreds of
dots on the tablet that replaced it. Numbers below ten
were simply indicated in the old way by groups of from
one to nine semi-circular impressions made with a reed
held obliquely. But ten was denoted by a new symbol, the
circle made by stamping the reed vertically into the clay,
20 by two such, and so on. In measuring volumes of beer
a new symbol, a large semi-circle made with a larger
reed, was introduced to denote 60, but in measuring grain —
this stood for 100 in the oldest tablets. So a decimal (1, 10,
100 ...) and a sexagesimal (1, 10, 60, 3600 ...) notation
were once used concurrently. In Sumer the decimal system
was abandoned and the so-called sexagesimal reckoning
alone used after 2500 B.c.
   Fractions other than two-thirds were always expressed
as aliquot parts, i.e. fractions with the numerator unity:
fractions with a numerator more than one would have to
be resolved into a sum of aliquot parts, e.g., would become
4 + }. Of course, in the practical arithmetic of the Fourth
and Third Millennia it was hardly.ever necessary to use
these clumsy sums, for it dealt with concrete measures and
weights. Five-sixths of a mina would be written 50 shekels
and so on.
    Owing to its conventional character the system of writing
and ciphering had to be perpetuated by education. To
fulfil their duties as administrators priests had to learn to
read and write; that is to say they had to be taught the
meanings and the phonetic values arbitrarily assigned to
the characters by their colleagues, just as every child has to
be taught the meanings attached by its society to the sounds
of its spoken language (p. 11). Schools became a necessary
adjunct to the temple. Of course they helped to standardize
                                                     mee ae   so   =



   :    ea)                        ‘
       THE    URBAN   REVOLUTION       IN   MESOPOTAMIA    107

and maintain the approved conventions. Since in every
temple and in every city from Jemdet Nasr times the same
signs and the same: conventions were accepted and em-
ployed, the priestly corporations must have co-operated at
least in their educational work on an ‘international’ scale.
   The oldest surviving collections of tablets include, beside
accounts, lists of signs. The latter may have begun as simple
records of the conventions agreed upon; some such record
would be essential from the start to fix and maintain the
standards approved. They were doubtless copied for use in
schools where they would be no less necessary. By Early
Dynastic times they had grown into regular dictionaries.
Of course, as the first lists were collections of ideograms and
they fixed the form, an alphabetical arrangement, such as
seems both natural and convenient to us, was impracticable.
 Instead, words denoted by similar picture-signs were
grouped together — for instance all words denoted by an
 abbreviated picture of a vase (phonetic value duk) and
 modifications thereof form a group. As a result not only
various kinds of vases, but also contents of vases, such as
beer and milk, and even measures would be classed
together. The same principle was generally followed when
dictionaries of spelt words came to be compiled in addition
to the lists of ideograms. These lists, moreover, are confined
to nouns — names; verbs and adjectives are not included.
Later the lists of ideograms and of words were expanded
by the addition of a column giving the Semitic (Akkadian)
equivalent.
   Both the monumental works carried out by States and
temples with co-operative labour and the business activities
of the priestly corporations and private merchants required
the standardization of weights and measures, agreements
by society for the use of common units. Measurement is of
course necessary even for savages and barbarians. But for
their simple needs the concrete standards of comparison
supplied ready-made by nature suffice - the length of a
finger, a palm, or a forearm, the weight of a grain or a
jar full. If, for instance, a farmer were cutting rafters to
108          WHAT    HAPPENED      IN   HISTORY

span his barn he could measure the space to be bridged as
sO many times his forearm (so many cubits) and use his
forearm to measure off the requisite lengths on his timbers.
But if a hundred or more labourers were cutting rafters
for a Sumerian temple, serious trouble might occur if each
man used his own arm as a measuring rod. Men’s arms
are not all of the same length, and some beams measured
by their aid might fail to span the temple, while others
would project beyond its walls. The personal or natural
cubit (forearm) must therefore be replaced by a social or
conventional cubit, accepted by all co-workers as a stand-
ard of comparison. The agreed standard must then be in-
scribed on measuring rods of wood or metal that replaced
individual limbs. Naturally it was found convenient to make
the conventional cubit a simple multiple (in practice five
times) of the ‘finger’, the next unit of measurement below
it, and an aliquot part (one-sixth) of the next highest unit,
the reed, and so on.
    In the same way conventional standard ‘ grains’ or ‘loads’
replaced the varying natural grains and actual loads in
measuring cereals and other materials for social purposes.
The new conventional units of weight were related nu-
merically in the same simple way as units of length, and
were represented by carved weights of haematite such as
are often found by excavators. Incidentally a balance must
have been invented before such standards could be estab-
lished and used.
   Finally the organized co-operation of an urban popula-
tion requires more accurate divisions of time than are
needed in a rural village. The Sumerians agreed to divide
day and night into twelve double-hours (hence our twenty-
four-hour day) and devised instruments — a sort of sundial
and a water-clock worked on the principle of the hour-glass
~— for measuring these intervals. But for the year they were
content to keep a lunar calendar, though learned clerks,
by observation of the heavens, knew the length of the
sidereal year and at least in later times corrected discrepan-
cies between the calendar and the seasons by intercalating
    ‘THE   URBAN    REVOLUTION       IN   MESOPOTAMIA      109

an. extra month when astronomical observations indicated
the need for correction.
   Exact sciences were the direct outcome of the foregoing
social agreements. The complicated economy that had
evoked these demanded also arithmetic and geometry that
could foretell quantitative results. The Sumerian clerks
were not interested in the properties of numbers as such,
nor in the measurement of abstract empty space (they
probably could not conceive anything of the sort), or even
of uncultivable desert and unharvested sea. They did need
to know - at least approximately — how much seed should
be laid aside for sowing the god’s fields, how many bricks
should be ordered for a temple wall, how much earth must
be dug for a ziggurat or a dyke and how many men would
be needed to finish the job in the appointed time; the unit
for area was a measure of grain, the word for ‘volume’
means literally ‘mass of earth’. The chequer patterns so
easily made on mats of coloured reeds and particularly
popular on painted vases of the Jemdet Nasr phase gave
visual demonstrations of our rule that the area of a rectangle
can be obtained by multiplying length by breadth. A
brickstack gave the corresponding ‘formula’ for volume.
   The very form of the numerical notation would have
graphically illustrated the simplest rules of reckoning had
they not already been familiar from counting on the fingers.
Multiplication is just repeated addition; ‘24 by 4’ means
‘add four twenty-fours together’. Before 1500 B.c. the
Sumerians had noted the results of such additions and
drawn up multiplication tables such as we learn at school.
Even on pictographic tablets of the Fourth Millennium the
areas of fields are calculated as length by breadth. Very
soon the ratio of the circumference ofa circle to its diameter,
what we call z, had been approximately worked out by
actual measurement. The Sumerians accepted the rough
approximation 3. This was accurate enough for estimating
the contents of a cylindrical granary which would of course
be checked by weighing or gauging the number of bricks
required for a column drum where a few spares would
IIo          WHAT    HAPPENED     IN   HISTORY      _

not matter and irregularities in shape could easily be
amended.
   The arithmetical and geometrical rules that the Sumerian
clerks applied are the true prototypes of the quantitative
‘laws’ of modern science. They reduced to a generalized
numerical form relations that had been actually observed
and measured between classes of objects in the external
world. They told men what to do in order to obtain a
desired result. Obviously we need not bother to ask the
names of the laws’ discoverers. They are too patently social
products called forth by the needs of a society affected by
the urban revolution and discovered with the aid of the
spiritual equipment produced by the revolution.
   Observations on the stars proved so successful in fore-
telling when to begin agricultural operations that the
Sumerians were induced to hope by the same means to
predict the unpredictable. In other words astronomy led
to astrology, in pursuit of which the motions of heavenly
bodies were studied not unprofitably by the Sumerians’
cultural heirs.
   The urban revolution provoked or at least         cums
another convention that likewise led to standardization,
generalization, and quantization. The exchange of goods
and services had been increased so greatly by the new
economy as to demand a common standard in terms of
which the several kinds of goods could be measured and
‘valued’. This conventional standard of value would at the
same time serve as a medium of exchange with which all
services could be rewarded (i.e., wages paid) and every
commodity purchased. The first standard socially approved
was apparently barley, the staff of life that everyone needed
and to obtain which they must work and produce goods;
even in Early Dynastic times wages and rents were still
most frequently paid in barley.
   But already metal - silver and, for small sums, copper -
had been generally accepted as the most convenient
medium and standard, and so it remained in Mesopotamia
for two millennia.   The   units, however,   were       not coins,
      THE   URBAN    REVOLUTION      IN   MESOPOTAMIA      III

  guaranteed as to quality and weight by a State, but
 ‘quantities weighed out for each transaction in accordance
with the approved standards of weight. Nevertheless the
  adoption of a conventional metallic standard is equivalent
  to the transition to a money economy from what is termed a
  natural economy. In the latter individual objects were
  bartered one against the other; now all can be priced at
  so many shekels of silver or gurs of barley and thus com-
  pared quantitatively.
      Wealth can now be estimated not in foodstuffs, slaves,
  and commodities, which can themselves be consumed, used,
  and enjoyed, but in terms of the ‘commodity of commodi-
  ties’, the general abstract medium which cannot itself be
  consumed but can be exchanged for any consumable
  commodity or useful service. As a consequence ‘production
  for the market’ of objects to be sold for silver can begin to
  replace production for use of commodities desired by the
  maker himself or ordered by somebody who desires them
  and promises the maker an immediate and chosen recom-
  pense.                ‘
      Moreover, the new generalized wealth is regarded as
   possessing the property naturally inherent in the primary
   form of wealth — corn and cattle — of multiplying and
 reproducing itself. Like grain and livestock it may be
   treated as capital and used to secure an increase — profit.
   Censequently interest will be charged on any loans. In
   Mesopotamian society the — largely Semitic - merchant
  class that became increasingly prominent and prosperous
  from the days of Sargon developed and exploited these
  ideas brilliantly. They were destined to have revolutionary
   effects completing the breakdown of gentile organization,
   begetting a new middle class, and oiling the machinery of
  production. In Sumerian society of the Early Dynastic age
   the solvent process was only beginning.
      In Elam, east of Mesopotamia, the lower valley of the
   Kerkha, that even in 700 B.c. still flowed directly into the
   Persian Gulf east of the Tigris-Euphrates delta, offered an
  environment very similar to that of Sumer, but on a smaller
112             WHAT      HAPPENED        IN   HISTORY

scale. Here the excavations at Susa reveal, albeit less clearly
than at Ur or Erech, the successive stages of the urban
revolution. The several steps seem strictly parallel to those
described above down to the end of the Uruk phase. Till
that point the similarities in ceramics and seal designs are
striking. Even the pictographic script (termed proto-
Elamite), traced on clay tablets, that marks the culmination
of the revolution, shares many conventions with the
Sumerian writing of the Uruk and Jemdet Nasr tablets,
though the numeral notation seems exclusively decimal.
No doubt Elamite civilization was not only based on the
same elements as Sumerian but also organized in much the
same way.
   In the sequel Elam and Sumer developed along divergent
lines, or rather Elam did not share in the progress of the
Early Dynastic age. So the proto-Elamite pictographic
writing does not spontaneously develop into a script that
we can read. At the end of the Third Millennium it was
simply superseded by developed cuneiform that was adapted
to transcribe the local language. Our knowledge of Elam
in the interval is indirect and fragmentary.
   Susa had remained an influential military power and
commercial centre. The Elamites successfully raided Sumer
and Akkad and extended their domains inland to Sialk in
Iran (p. 72). Their trade reached India as well as Meso-
potamia. But in the end Elam became a province of the
Mesopotamian economic system and culture just as from
about 2100 to 2000 B.c. she was even politically incorporated
as a tributary in the Empire of the Sumerian Third Dynasty
of Ur.



    Note. While it will not affect the over-all picture and need not worry
the general reader, students should note that since this book was written
it has become the fashion to deflate Mesopotamian dates prior to 2350
B.c. (Sargon of Agade). So they might replace 3000. B.c. by 2500 and
  oe corresponding reductions throughout chapters IV and V. (June,
1957)-
                                                  Tee    ey a




                               VI

    EARLY       BRONZE         AGE     CIVILIZATION
                IN EGYPT         AND     INDIA

  IN the Nile Valley the urban revolution that we have traced
  as a process in Mesopotamia can be studied only after its
  culmination. This coincided with the union of the whole of
  Egypt under the absolute rule of a sovereign king who was
 _also a god — an event comparable to Sargon’s unification of
  Mesopotamia, but more than five centuries earlier. The
  preparatory stages can be inferred only precariously from
  later legends and from indirect indications in the archaeo-
  logical record. Only the wide marshy Delta offered the
  challenge and reward that had evoked the artificial en-
  vironment of Sumerian cities. But archaeologically man’s
  response is not directly known; the early settlements are
  buried deep in Nile silt under modern towns and cultivated
  fields. Indirect evidence comes from Upper Egypt.
      South of Cairo the narrow valley through the barren
  desert plateaux has analogies, real but remote, with Sumer.
_ It too was occupied by a chain of swamps covered with a
  jungle of papyrus that sheltered waterfowl and game and
   dangerous hippopotami. Through the swamps the Nile
   provides a perfect highway for transport. Its annual inun-
   dation, more regular and better timed for agricultural
   operations than the Tigris and Euphrates floods, will
   automatically irrigate such land as human labour has
   reclaimed. Within the valley neither timber for building
   nor metal is available.
      On the other hand the desert on both sides offers supplies
_ of good flint for knives and axes. Between the valley’s pre-
_ cipitous sides there are strips of desert still raised above the
- floods from which the swampy valley-bottom could be
   exploited. On these settled the so-called Predynastic
_ Egyptians in much the same stage of culture as the societies

|
e
114          WHAT    HAPPENED     IN   HISTORY

described at Merimde and the Fayum on page 53. Within |
the valley these settlers, by combining for a resolute assault |
on swamps and wild beasts, succeeded in creating an |
artificial environment in which they prospered and
multiplied.
   They appear grouped in apparently autonomous villages, _
each perhaps occupied by a totemic clan. Later the totems, |
the animals, plants, or natural objects from which the
villagers may have believed themselves descended, became
the emblems and standards of the counties or nomes into
which Egypt was divided in historical times. In the earliest
stages, termed Badarian and Amratian, the villagers still
relied largely on hunting and fishing. But they did grow
grains by natural irrigation and breed stock on the meadows.
They could build large boats of bundles of papyrus for navi-
gation on the river. For painting their eyes, malachite was
obtained regularly from Sinai, perhaps by barter with
desert hunters. The villagers were acquainted with gold and
copper (perhaps derived from the reduction of malachite, a
carbonate of copper), but they treated metal as a superior |
sort of stone without appreciating the advantages conferred |
by its fusibility.
   The remarkable preservation of bodies buried in the dry |
desert sand seems already to have suggested particularly |
lively speculations about the future life and started a quest |
for ‘immortality’. The need for ‘a good burial’ certainly |
provided a motive for the accumulation of surplus wealth
and magic jewels. Our knowledge of the Predynastic people |
is derived mainly from their graves, which are richly fur-
nished with jars of food and drink, hunting tackle and fish-
ing gear and toilet articles — particularly an almost cere-
monial set of slate palettes, rubbers, and decorated porches
for eye-paint.
   Next in the Gerzean stage the importance of hunting|
waned; the villagers devoted themselves to farming and
fishing. Implements and weapons of cast copper and new
imported materials, many such as lapis lazuli of Asiatic
origin, began to reach Upper Egypt. Ships, flying standards |
           EARLY    BRONZE     AGE   CIVILIZATION           II5

  that in historical times belonged to counties in the Delta and
  on the Mediterranean coast, visited the southern villages;
  they are depicted there on vases from Gerzean graves that
  may themselves have been made in the north. The new
  materials certainly denote the influx of new ideas and new
  techniques emerge; the chemistry of glazing was discovered
  and faience was made.
     The Asiatic substances and products of the Delta found in
  Upper Egypt may denote an infiltration of Semites and even
  a political domination of the Valley by the Delta, of Upper
  Egypt by Lower; later legends tell of a conquest of the South
- by ‘Followers of Horus’ from the North and of the subse-
  quent formation of two kingdoms of Upper and Lower
  Egypt respectively. But the archaeological record attests
  neither kings nor specialized craftsmen nor the use of
  writing.
     Finally in the Late Gerzean phase sailing boats of the type
  reputedly native to the Persian Gulf (p. 84) reached Upper
  Egypt. They are depicted on the rocky walls of dry wadis
  between the Nile and the Red Sea and on a tomb at Falcon-
  town (Hierakonpolis, in historical times the county town of
  the Falcon nome and presumably the capital of the Falcon
  clan). On the tomb walls they are seen in battle with native
  papyrus boats. The same scene of a naval battle is carved on
  an ivory knife-handle found at Gebel-el-Arak, significantly
  near the Nile end of a cross desert route to the Red Sea. Its
  other side depicts a figure whose costume is quite alien to
  Egypt but agrees precisely with that shown on a basalt stele
  from the Jemdet Nasr city at Erech in Sumer. Moreover, in
  contemporary Egyptian art we find motives, at no other
  time popular on the Nile, but familiar on the Tigris-
  Euphrates from the Uruk period on. However indirectly,
  Sumerian ideas were surely influencing Upper Egypt;
  Nilotic barbarism was being fertilized by contact with
  Mesopotamian civilization.
     To the same phase belong a-series of ivories and slate
  palettes carved with pictures of animals in combat, mytho-
  logical versions of struggles between totemic clans and in
=   ve




                      WHAT    HAPPENED     IN HISTORY

         particular of the victories of the Falcon clan. This clan may |
         already have occupied the walled town covering twelve
         and a half acres, the ruins of which mark its capital.         |
            Meanwhile some tombs become increasingly elaborate
         and richly furnished; one at Falcon-town is lined with
         bricks and adorned with painted scenes. A growing con-
         trast between rich and poor tombs marks a division of
         society into classes, if not the emergence of chiefs. It cul-
         minates in the so-called Royal Tombs of Abydos in Upper
         Egypt. The simple trench in the sand that held the predy-
         nastic dead has now grown into a huge excavation, at the
         bottom of which is a miniature palace — it measured 26 ft.
         long by 15 ft. wide by 10} ft. high in Bro — built of bricks”
         and imported timber, surrounded with storerooms and a
         range of small tombs for court officials who must serve their
         lord even in death.
            The Royal Tombs are crowded with jars of grain, fruits
          and liquors, superb vases of stone and precious metal,
          ornaments of gold, turquoise, lapis lazuli and other gems,
          arms, and toilet articles of copper. These attest the concen-
         tration of unheard-of wealth, the existence of a multitude
         of specialized and expert craftsmen, extensive foreign trade
         And in the Royal Tombs the first written documents
         appear; a system of writing, the hieroglyphic script, has been
         invented. The archaeological record merges in the literary.
         record. The latter explains what has happened.                 |
            ‘Menes’, chief of the Falcon    clan and  himself magically
         identified with its totem, the divine Falcon (Horus), has con-
         quered the rest of the Valley and the Delta and welded the
         independent villages and clans into a single State - we!
         might almost say a single household. The head of this State:
         is not the tenant-farmer of a god, but himself a god, made
         immortal by magic rites and guaranteeing by his own magi
         the fertility of flocks and crops. By right of conquest he ad
         absorbed — in the cannibalistic terminology appropriate tos
         barbarism the texts say ‘devoured’ — the local totems that
          personified the ancestral generations who created the lan
          out of swamp and desert. Therefore, like the Sumerian city;
           EARLY BRONZE        AGE   CIVILIZATION           117
| god, he holds eminent domain over the whole land of
  Egypt and is entitled to a tribute of offerings and services
  from its cultivators.
     Thus the pharaoh instead of the temple concentrates in
  his treasures the surplus products of the land - a surplus
  that dwarfs into insignificance the revenue of any Sumerian
  temple or city-governor. The symbol of this concentration
  is not a temple — temples to local and national gods exist but
_ by favour of and with endowments from the king — but a
  monumental tomb. It is designed to preserve the physical
  remains of the god-king and so to ensure the continuance of
  his magic work on behalf of his land. As the land’s popula-
_tion and wealth increased, the tombs were made ever
 grander and stronger, until the maximum was reached
 under Cheops (Khufu) of Dynasty IV. His Great Pyramid
measures 755 ft. on a side and rises to a height of 481 ft. It
 contains some 2,300,000 blocks each weighing on an
_average 24 tons. The blocks were quarried on the east side
_of the valley, floated across during the inundation, and then
 dragged up an enormous stone ramp toa plateau, 100 ft.
 above the river, on which the pyramids stand. A tradition
preserved by the Greek historian Herodotus and accepted
_by Petrie reports that the pyramid demanded the labour
 of 100,000 men for twenty years.
    But the pharaohs used part of the vast surplus they con-
trolled in ways that even modern sceptics will admit as
 practical. Menes himself girt with the ‘White Wall’ Mem-
_phis, a new city at the apex of the Delta. A king of Dynasty
I had himself depicted ‘cutting the first sod’ of a new canal.
_The pharaohs sent expeditions supported by the royal army
 to Sinai to mine copper. The State equipped and manned
 ships to sail to Byblos for the Cedars of Lebanon; by the end
 of the Third Dynasty these sea-going ships might attain a
length of 170 ft., though 70 to 100 ft. was more normal. As
 military chiefs the early pharaohs organized a system of
 frontier defences that kept out raiding Asiatics, Libyans, and
Nubians. Finally they enforced internal peace, suppressing
the wasteful feuds between neighbouring villages that have
xs


     ,
118          WHAT     HAPPENED      IN   HISTORY

always plagued the Nile valley whenever the central
government is weak.
   A civil service appointed by the real god fulfilled the
functions of the self-appointed servants of a Sumerian deity.
As a perpetual corporation engaged in collecting and ad-
ministering the enormous revenues of Egypt it too required
a script to record receipts and expenditures. In Egypt as in
Sumer pictures were assigned conventional meanings, and
in the hieroglyphic script the characters preserved their pic-
torial form for over 3,000 years.
   The earliest hieroglyphs are better pictures than the
Sumerian ideograms of the Uruk phase and show no less
variability. Nevertheless, they hardly represent the begin-
nings of Egyptian writing; for they co-exist from the first
with simplified cursive forms, precursors of the hzeratic script
that throughout historical times was used concurrently with
the hieroglyphic without ever replacing it. The cursive signs
are written in ink on pottery or wood in the Royal Tombs,
later on papyrus. The hieroglyphs and their cursive forms
presumably are pure ideograms, but as in Sumer many soon
acquired phonetic values too; some indeed came to stand
not for syllables as in Sumer but for single consonants. The
Egyptians had in fact all the elements of an alphabet. But
they continued, like the Sumerians and Babylonians, to use
ideographic, syllabic, and consonantal signs side by side.
   Writing accordingly must remain a mystery, a specialized
profession too abstruse to be combined with manual avoca-
tions. The initiates, the clerks, formed a class apart to whom
alone was open the coveted career of a government official
or the steward of a great estate. But the clergy did not form
a caste; for the recruitment of officials schools were main-
tained by the Treasury and later literature seems to imply
that a lad has a choice between going to school, spe
ship to a craft, or agricultural work.
   Though the principles of Egyptian writing were essen-
tially the same as those followed by the Sumerians, even the
pictographic forms are quite different in the two areas. So!
too the Egyptians devised a numeral notation constructed
               EARLY      BRONZE    AGE     CIVILIZATION        TI9

    on the same principle as the Sumerian, but on a purely
    decimal basis with different signs for units, tens, and powers
    of ten. Again for the same reasons as the Sumerians the
    Egyptians had to standardize weights and measures, but
    they gave different values to the units. Even for the conven-
    tional division of time they adopted the principle of ‘seasonal
    hours’ — daylight and dark were each equally divided
    into hours, the lengths of which would vary with the season.
       Writing, being a mystery, was not used to transmit craft
    lore, and its adepts being ‘exempt from all manual: tasks’
    were divorced from the practical science applied in the
    workshop. But as in Sumer the urban revolution had genera-
 ted learned sciences and pseudosciences transmitted in
  writing — arithmetic, geometry, astronomy, medicine, theo-
  logy. Treatises on’ these survive only from ‘the Second
  Millennium. But it is plain from the results achieved and
  attested in the monuments that the Egyptians under the
 early dynasties were already successfully applying the simple
 arithmetical and geometrical rules illustrated by examples
in the later ‘mathematical papyri’.
_ From these we see that in arithmetic the Egyptian clerks
 were behind their Sumerian colleagues. In fractions they
 too were tied to aliquot parts (p. 106), but they had not
tabulated the results of additions to form multiplication
 tables beyond the first — ‘twice one is two, etc.’ Multiplica-
tion therefore was laboriously performed by the tedious
 process termed duplation, a combination of multiplication
 by two and addition. In geometry on the contrary they used
‘more accurate formulae, owing presumably to better obser-
 vation. Owing to the importance of pyramids in funerary
 cult, the Egyptian clerks were expert in calculating the
 *batter’ of a pyramid so as to enable the mason to cut the
 facing blocks of such a monument accurately. They had
discovered, moreover, the curious formula for the volume of
a truncated pyramid: 1/3 A (a?+-ab+-6?), where a stands for
dength of base and 6 length at top — which was never used in
    Mesopotamia.    Even this formula could be obtained by
    Measurement.    But    the   Egyptian    approximation   to 7,
      *

r




bs
120          WHAT     HAPPENED      IN HISTORY

(16/9), much more accurate than the Sumerians’ 3, isnot.
easily explained.
   The greatest achievement of Egyptian science and one
unmistakably inspired by the conditions of the urban revo-
lution in the Nile valley was the creation of a solar calendar
that is the immediate ancestor of our own. Pharaoh’s
officials from the days of the first kings measured and
recorded each year the height of the Nile flood on which the
Egyptian harvest depends and on which taxes can accor-
dingly be assessed before jthe harvest. By collating these
records they found that in fifty years or more the average|
interval between floods is to the nearest day 365 days. On
this basis they established an official calendar which for a |
century or more must have really helped Egyptian agri-
culture by indicating to the farmers when to start agricul-
tural operations; in Egypt the whole cycle of agriculture is
pivoted round the inundation.
   When the accumulated effect of the six hours’ error had)
produced a manifest discrepancy between the calendar year
and the natural phenomena it should predict, it was too
late — or too soon — for calendar reform. But by the Thir
Dynasty observations on the stars disclosed in the heliacall
rising of Sirius in the latitude of Cairo a herald of the flood
The bureaucracy, used the sidereal year based on this ob
servation to correct the abortive official calendar, to instruct
their peasants when to start work on the fields.                3
  So, about 3000 B.c., an economic revolution not onl
provided Egyptian craftsmen with a livelihood and raw
materials, but also called forth writing and learned science
and produced a State. But the social and economic organ
ization conferred upon Egypt by Menes and his successor:
as agents of the revolution was centralized and totalitariay
in harmony, with the homogeneity of a land watered by 4
single river and isolated by deserts.                        :
   In theory, at least, the whole land belonged to th;
Pharaoh, and its surplus produce was concentrated in roy.
granaries and treasuries. In practice a substantial share w.
assigned to a nobility of office — the ministers of state an
                                                             a    eae




                                                            121

povernors of counties (nomarchs). At first, at least, these
  re appointed by Pharaoh and held office at his pleasure.
Indeed, to the king they owed literally their immortal souls;
for had not the king devoured and digested the totem souls
of the clans, and by his own magic won immortality? On
 avourite officials the king might graciously bestow souls
  nd immortality by granting them individually, as their
tombstones proclaim, the right to build, and facilities for
     uilding and endowing, the monumental tombs essential
for the future life.
_ In practice, ministers and governors were reciiikesk from
      limited circle — perhaps royal children, the companions
  f the first conquerors and the families of such local chiefs
     s had made timely submission. They enjoyed the use and
     evenue of landed /estates or whole counties which were
     rganized as self-contained ‘households’, miniatures of the
  oyal ‘household’ of which they formed parts. Later such
      tates came to be inherited by the holders’ children, and
  eventually disposable by will. After the Pyramid Age
-governorships too became hereditary, and the governors
  ‘reated their counties as their own estates or principalities,
though owing dues and services to Pharaoh.
 _ Even local and national gods depended for their temples
  ind offerings upon the king who was also a god; in theory
 he alone worshipped the gods on behalf of the nation. In
 practice he appointed priests who actually presented the
  offerings ‘for the life, prosperity and health of the Pharaoh’.
  These offices, too, may have been filled in some cases by
descendants of the local priesthoods or ‘secret societies’ who
  had served the totems of pre-dynastic clans. They too might
i           hereditary. Permanent endowments in land were
consecrated to the service of the temples and the mainten-
     ce of their priests. So too from the First Dynasty parts of
the royal domain had been dedicated to the service of the
  departed kings whose tombs were combined with mortuary
 ‘temples, and to the support of chantry priests. Later nobles’
  tombs too were similarly endowed - at first by the king,
  later by their future occupants.
 122             WHAT   HAPPENED      IN   HISTORY                “!

   Thus priests and clerks started out as officials of the
 totalitarian State, members of the Pharaoh’s ‘household’,
 supported by the royal revenue. In time the former gained
 ‘households’ of their own; clerks might find an alternative
 livelihood in the ‘households’ of the nobles and the temples.
    The specialist craftsmen and industrial workers, placed
 in Pharaoh’s great ‘household’, were guaranteed sustenance
 from the surplus collected in the royal granaries, and were
 supplied with metal tools and raw materials from the king’s
 stock. By the Pyramid Age we find smiths, carpenters, jewel-
 lers, masons,    boat-builders,   potters,   and   other   artisans
 permanently attached also to the mortuary foundations and
 the nobles’ estates; for such were largely self-contained |
 economic units aiming at supplying their own needs in
 industrial products as well as foodstuffs. In each case the}
 craftsmen can have enjoyed very little economic freedom:
 probably indeed they, like the cultivators, changed hands
 with the estate on which they worked. The crafts plied were
 the same as in Mesopotamia, but their individual products!
 were quite different. So even the simplest Egyptian copper}
 tools can be readily distinguished from the Sumerian. The;
 potter’s wheel was adopted only under the Third Dynasty, |
 and then in a less efficient form than the Asiatic. Tinj
 bronze seems to have been unknown. For textiles flax, but!
 not wool, was used.
     The requisite foreign materials — copper from Sinai, gol
  from Nubia, ebony, perfumes, and spices from Arabia or
  Somaliland, lapis lazuli and other magic gems from Asia +
  were secured largely by expeditions despatched by the}
_ State, manned by royal servants and led by government
  officials. There was thus much less scope for merchants i
  Egypt than in Mesopotamia.
     Within the ‘households’ a natural economy reigned:            ——

  paintings in tombs illustrate market scenes where a pot ig
  bartered for a fish, a bundle of onions for a fan, a wooden
  box for a jar of ointment. Nevertheless, metals (gold an
  copper) were socially recognized as standards of value an
  rings served as currency in certain transactions.
,         EARLY     BRONZE   AGE   CIVILIZATION          123

   The great peasant masses — the farmers and fishers who
supplied the foodstuffs to maintain themselves and the
whole economy as well as collecting the raw materials
(hides, fibres, papyrus) for industry — multiplied exceed-
ingly. The union of Egypt had put an end to deadly feuds
between villages; the Pharaohs’ frontier policy protected
the cultivator from the depredations of raiding nomads;
public works had added to the arable land; the calendar
permitted rural operations to be rationally planned; the
surplus grain stored in the royal granaries might provide
relief in time of famine.
    On the other hand, these reserves had been collected by
 force. Their producers had little left for the purchase of
 industrial products. Save when directly employed by a king
 or a noble they could not afford metal tools, but made shift
 with a neolithic equipment of stone hoes and wooden
 ploughs and mattocks. By gift and by dedications, later
 even by testament, peasants were disposed of together with
 the land they cultivated as if they had been part of its
 livestock. They were liable to compulsory labour, digging
 canals, towing barges upstream, quarrying and trans-
 porting stone, building pyramids and the like. When thus
 removed from agricultural production they were presum-
 ably fed and clothed by the State or the noble employer —
perhaps better than a free neolithic cultivator. In any case,
in the Second Millennium King Seti I records that he
‘provided each of the thousand labourers employed on
building his temple with ‘4 lb. bread, 2 bundles of vege-
‘tables and a roast of meat daily, and a clean linen garment
‘twice a month’!
    Under this regime the enormous wealth produced by the
‘new economy in Egypt was more highly concentrated than
in Mesopotamia.     Industry was cramped within narrow
bounds. Export trade absorbed relatively few industrial
products; for imports were either taken as tribute without
payment, or paid for in gold and foodstuffs. Internally the
market for industrial products and craftsmanship was
limited to the State and the dependent nobility. To these
  fa DO Tate) RedesSie




124                      WHAT HAPPENED. IN HISTORY |
preparations for the future life constituted the main object
for the accumulation and expenditure of wealth. An extrav-
agant proportion of the surplus they collected was buried —
in tombs. (To the chagrin of the scientific robbers of the
twentieth century, a flourishing industry of tomb-robbery
rapidly restored a not inconsiderable fraction of the buried
treasure to circulation; the avarice of nobles and officials
in time diverted to mundane use the produce of mortuary
estates dedicated to feed and cheer the corpses in their
tombs !)
    ‘Ancient Egypt,’ writes Keynes satirically, “was doubly
fortunate, and doubtless owed to this its fabled wealth, in
 that it possessed two activities, namely, pyramid building
and the search for precious metals, the fruits of which, since
they could not serve the needs of men by being consumed,
did not stale with abundance. Two pyramids, two masses
for the dead, are twice as good as one; not so two railways
from London to York.’ In the event the bounds of these
activities were reached with the pyramids of the Fourth
Dynasty Pharaohs. Not even the fabulous reserves of fertile
Egypt could support indefinitely such unproductive expen-
diture. The economic system began to shrink. The nobles’
great estates became increasingly self-contained ‘house-
holds’, a relapse towards neolithic self-sufficiency. After the
Fourth Dynasty they could aim at political autonomy, too.
The Old Kingdom dissolved in political and economic
anarchy about 2475 B.C.


Before 2500 B.c. a third Bronze Age civilization, sym-
bolized by populous cities, highly skilled industries, far-flung
commerce, and a pictographic script, had emerged in India.
On the flood-plains of the Indus and its five tributaries (the
Punjab) peoples of mixed origin and diverse racial types
had combined to create artificial islands of culture in a|
desert jungle. The natural environment differed from the
Mesopotamian and Egyptian in its vaster expanse, in the
regime of the flood, in its scrub of ugly useless trees and in
}       :     EARLY    BRONZE    AGE   CIVILIZATION           125

the animals sheltered by these trees. It agreed in the low
rainfall and the lack of building timber, good stone, and
metal. The Indus and its tributaries provided moving roads
for the transport even of heavy goods over long distances;
foodstuffs could be collected from a wide area to support
 large urban populations.
      Over a huge triangle, four times the area of Sumer,
 bounded on the west by the mountains of Baluchistan and
 Waziristan, on the north by the Himalayas and on the east
 by the Thar desert, reigned a civilization as uniform as that
 of Mesopotamia or Egypt. The physical remains of the
 artificial world in which it flourished are equally imposing.
 The cities, as large as those of Sumer, are built almost
entirely of kiln-fired bricks, the manufacture of which must
have consumed stupendous quantities of laboriously
 gathered fuel (presumably the ugly trees that disfigure the
 desert). The ruins of Mohenjo-daro, in Sind, cover at least
 a square mile; at Harappa, 400 miles farther north, the
 walled area visible in 1853 had a perimeter of 24 miles, but
 buildings once extended farther. Since then bricks from its
ruins have provided ballast for a hundred miles of railway
 line and material for the modern village of five thousand
 souls. Yet the mounds are still impressive.
    The cities were devastated by several severe floods. After
 each inundation the lower floors of the houses were filled up
‘with brick so that the whole quarters of a city now rest on
an artificial platform, 20 feet or so high. We can, therefore,
 infer populations at least as large as those of contemporary
 Mesopotamian cities supported by the surplus produced by
‘a rural peasantry. The latter cultivated the same grains
‘and bred the same beasts as their Sumerian colleagues, but
perhaps grew rice also and certainly kept zebu cattle,
 domestic fowls, and probably elephants, but apparently no
 asses or camels,
    The same variety of specialized crafts as in Mesopotamia
    is attested in the archaeological record, and often the pro-
    cesses are identical in both countries. For example, the
    potters used (as they still do) the same sort of fast spinning
 126          WHAT    HAPPENED      IN HISTORY

 wheel, and the smiths alloyed copper with tin to make
 bronze. On the other hand the craftsmen’s products are
 quite different. Even the simplest metal tools made in India
 — axes, saws, daggers, and spearheads — can be distinguished
 at a glance from Sumerian or Egyptian products. Weavers
 worked cotton, not wool or flax. The chemistry of glazes
 was understood; vases and ornaments were made of
 faience, and even pottery vessels were occasionally glazed.
    Carts with solid wheels, such as are used in Sind to-day,
 as well as boats, were available to transport produce to the
 cities. The raw materials for industry had to be imported
 from long distances; deodara wood was obtained from the
 Himalayas, copper from Rajputana and perhaps Balu-
chistan, sank shell from southern India. Tin, gold, and
 various precious stones, including lapis lazuli (which was,
 however, rare), were brought from countries outside India
 altogether.                                                     |
    Regular supplies of these materials can have been ob- |
 tained only as the result of extensive trade. Indeed, as eq
 marked on page 96, manufactures from the Indus cities
 reached even the markets on the Tigris and Euphrates.|
 Conversely, a few Sumerian devices in art, Mesopotamian
 toilet sets and a cylinder seal were copied on the Indus. |
 Trade was not confined to raw materials and luxury articlel|
 fish, regularly imported from the Arabian Sea coast |
 augmented the food-supplies of Mohenjo-daro.                    |
    The stalls of water-sellers and other retailers have been)
 recognized among the cities’ ruins, giving quite the im-'
 pression of a modern Indian bazaar and implying an inter-;)
 change of goods by small-scale transactions such as takes
 place there. The floor of the water-stall at Mohenjo-daro
 was found strewn with the shattered fragments of roa
 clay cups. Presumably these were turned out on such at
 scale that each client of the stall, after drinking, threw away
 his cup as is done in India still, or - with papier maché
 cups — in American trains and restaurants.
    It would seem to follow that the craftsmen of the Indie
 cities were, to a large extent, producing ‘for the market’,
               EARLY       BRONZE      AGE     CIVILIZATION             127

  What, if any, form of currency and standard of value had
  been accepted by society to facilitate the exchange of com-
  modities     is, however,       uncertain.    Magazines    attached    to
  many spacious and commodious private houses mark their
  owners as merchants. Their number and size indicate a
  strong and prosperous merchant community.
    In India, too, extreme concentration of the social surplus
  by a divine monarch, or a small priestly caste, may be
  deduced from a strongly walled citadel unearthed in the
   heart of Harappa during 1944. In its shadow stood symboli-
   cally a vast granary measuring 150 feet by 56 feet. At
   Mohenjo-daro a similar citadel actually enclosed the
. granary in which the rulers’ real wealth was accumulated.
   Commodious two-storeyed houses of baked brick, pro-
   vided with bathrooms and a porter’s lodge and covering
   as much as 97 feet by 83 feet, may be contrasted with
   monotonous rows of mud brick tenements, each consisting
   of only two rooms and a court, and not exceeding 56
 _ feet by 30 feet in over-all area. The contrast doubtless re-
   flects a division of society into classes, but it would seem only
~ into merchants or ‘ business men’, 3g and labourers or artisans.
  A surprising wealth of ornaments of gold, silver, precious
  stones, and faience, of vessels of beaten copper and of metal
_ implements and weapons, has been collected from the ruins.
 Most appear to come from the houses ascribed to ‘rich
_merchants’. But a hoard of copper tools and gold bangles
turned up in the ‘workmen’s quarters’ at Harappa.
     Many well-planned streets and a magnificent system
  of drains, regularly cleared out, reflects the vigilance of
  some regular municipal government. Its authority was
  strong enough to secure the observance of town-planning
  bye-laws and the maintenance of the approved lines for
-streets     and   lanes   over    several     reconstructions   rendered
' necessary by floods.
     In any case, society in the Indus valley could agree upon
  a conventional script and numeral notation (on a decimal
  basis), and on standards of weights and measures (different
  from the Sumerian and Egyptian). The script was current
128          WHAT    HAPPENED      IN HISTORY
throughout the huge province of Indus civilization. Itsyé
characters are conventionalized pictograms like the hiero-
glyphic, early Sumerian, and proto-Elamite writings, though ©
quite distinct from these. The values of the characters,
whether ideographic or phonetic, and the meanings of the —
words they transcribe are alike unknown. Only brief in-—
scriptions, too short for decipherment without a bi-lingual
but most probably incantations, survive, mostly on ‘seals’
which were never used for sealing anything and were per-
haps just carried as amulets. Of course the letters were not
invented for this purpose, but the documents for which they
were primarily devised (on Sumerian and Cretan analogies,
accounts) have perished with the unknown material on
which they were written.
    With this equipment the Bronze Age citizens of the Indus )
valley could have — and, indeed, must have — developed
 exact science as well as Sumerians and Egyptians, and for
 the same imperious reasons. For instance, a free use in
 decorative art of squares inscribed in compass-drawn inter-
 secting circles suggests a study of geometry. But the results
 of such sciences are not directly known.
    Small clay figures of women, scenes on ‘seals’ and ritual
 objects, notably large stone lingas and yonis (phalli and
 vulvae), give glimpses of totemic survivals, of magic fertility
 rites and of personal deities arising out of them. Some of the
 rites thus disclosed unmistakably foreshadow practices dis-
tinctive of later Hinduism;     the latter represents   certain
 deities under the same forms as the Indus art. Indus art
 itself used patterns, and was inspired by principles, quite
 different from those accepted in Egypt and Mesopotamia.
 Representations of the human form are unusually natural-
 istic; a small bronze figure of a dancing girl breathes an
 air of movement and vitality that cannot be matched
 elsewhere till the classical period of Greece.
    This imposing civilization perished utterly as a result
 of internal decay accelerated by the shock of barbarian
 raids (p. 168). Only since 1920 have its dumb outlines
 been rescued from complete oblivion by archaeologists.
             EARLY    BRONZE   AGE   CIVILIZATION            129

    Its antiquity can be determined solely by the importation
    of Indus products into Mesopotamia during the Third
~ Millennium.
      Nevertheless, since Indus manufactures were imported
   into Sumer and Akkad, and Indus cults were actually»
   celebrated there (p. 97), the forgotten civilization must have
   made direct if undefinable contributions to the cultural
   tradition we inherit through Mesopotamia. Moreover, the
   technical traditions of the Bronze Age craftsmen, at least
   of potters and wainwrights, persist locally until. to-day.
   Fashions of dress, established in the Indus cities, are still
   observed in contemporary India. Hindu rituals and deities
   have roots in the cults depicted in the prehistoric art. So
   classical Hindu science too, and through it occidental
Le
   science, may be indebted to the prehistoric to an unexpected
   degree. From this standpoint the Bronze Age civilization of
   India has not utterly perished; ‘for its work continueth, far
   beyond our knowing’.




ee
aes
ee
ASose
(en




SSR
rE
ae
