             NEOLITHIC            BARBARISM

 THE escape from the impasse of savagery was an economic
 and scientific revolution that made the participants active
 partners with nature instead of parasites on nature. The
 occasion for the revolution was the climatic crisis that ended
 the pleistocene epoch; the melting of the northern ice sheets
 not only converted the steppes and tundras of Europe into
 temperate forests, but also initiated the transformation of the |
 prairies south of the Mediterranean and in Hither Asia inte
 deserts interrupted by oases. The revolutionaries were noi|
 the most advanced savages of the Old Stone Age — the|
 Magdalenians were all too successfully specialized for
exploiting the pleistocene environment — but humbler
groups who had created less specialized and less brilliant
cultures farther south. Among them while men hunted, }
women — we must suppose — had collected among other
edibles the seeds of wild grasses, ancestral to our wheat and|
barley. The decisive step was deliberately to sow such seeds on}
suitable soil and cultivate the sown land by weeding and other |
measures, A society that acted thus was henceforth actively
producing food, augmenting its own food supply. Potentially
it could increase the supply to support a growing population.
   This was the first step in the neolithic revolution, and
suffices to distinguish barbarism from savagery. In the
archaeological record it is, perhaps, illustrated in certain
caves in Mount Carmel and elsewhere in Palestine. The
Natufians, as the caves’ inhabitants have been named,
hunted with an equipment of flints very similar to those
current among mesolithic peoples in Europe. But they used
some flints, mounted in rib-bones, as sickles for cutting grass
stems or straw; a peculiar lustre on the flints proves this,
but unfortunately does not disclose what sort of grass was
cut, still less whether it were cultivated or wild.
                                     Poke eT    See     eT   -




                     NEOLITHIC BARBARISM                         49
     Many barbarian societies known to ethnographers to-day
  have gone no further than the cultivation of some cereal or
  other plant. But the neolithic societies of Hither Asia, the
  Mediterranean region, and cis-Alpine Europe, whose culture
  we inherit, also domesticated certain food animals. It
  happens that just in those regions of Hither Asia where
  ancestors of wheat and barley grew spontaneously, there
  lived also wild sheep, goats, cattle, and pigs. Now the hunters
  whose wives were cultivators had something to offer some
  of the beasts they had hunted - the stubble on grain plots
  and the husks of the grain. As suitable animals became
_ increasingly hemmed in to the oases by the desert, men
_ might study their habits and, instead of killing them off-
   hand, might tame them and make them dependent. One
 _ school of ethnographers holds that stockbreeding arises
 _ directly from hunting without the intervention of cultiva-
     tion. Mixed farming would be due to the conquest of cul-
_ tivators by pastoralists, producing mixed or stratified
     societies. But the oldest neolithic societies known to the
  _ archaeological record consist of mixed farmers who have
     already domesticated some or all of the beasts named above.
_ Their abstinence and their foresight in finding water and
   _ pastures and warding off beasts of prey allow the flock
     and herds to multiply. Their accumulated observations on
_ their charges have perhaps already disclosed that the latter
  can not only be tame game, reserves of food and skins, but
  also living larders and walking wardrobes. Cows, goats, and
- ewes can be induced to provide food in the form of milk
_ without being killed; selected varieties of sheep grow yearly
    a woolly fleece (wool sheep seem to be the result of selective
  - breeding; in most wild sheep the coat is hairy and only a
__ thin down represents what becomes wool).
_      The new aggressive attitude to the environment did
    not stop short at producing new food supplies.. Most
_ known neolithic societies and most neolithic barbarians
E of recent times also created new substances which do not
    occur ready-made in nature. By heating friable and plastic
    clay, the farmer’s wife can induce a chemical change (driving
out the ‘water of constitution’ from the hydrated alumin
silicate that is the principal component of clay) and pro.
duce fottery, a substance with quite different sensible
qualities — no longer plastic and no longer disintegrated by
water. By the rotary motion of spinning she can convert
certain natural fibres — wool and flax, later also cotton and
silk — into threads byastill mysterious rearrangement of
the molecules.
   From their plastic clay the potters built up with sicilAall
hands new shapes, suggested, indeed, by older vessels cut out |
of wood or soft stone or gourds, but still free constructions |
that allow some play for the constructive fancy. From their
threads the womenfolk wove fabrics, using an elaborate
mechanism — the loom. The new ideas of construction were
applied to habitations, too; neolithic households normally
live in built huts of mud, reeds, logs, stone, or withies
plastered with clay. To assist them in these activities
neolithic societies manufactured a greatly enlarged assort- |
ment of specialized tools. Among these an axe-head, made
from fine-grained rock sharpened by grinding, is generally, |
but not universally, conspicuous. Archaeologists take the|
polished stone axe as the hall-mark of a neolithic equip-.
ment. But it is not quite unknown to savages and not
invariably employed by barbarians whose economy is or
was neolithic.                                                   |
   The foregoing incomplete inventory (which may be}
supplemented by reference to Man Makes Himself) will show |
how enormously neolithic equipment was richer than that|
of any palaeolithic or mesolithic savagery. Barbarism results |
from applying a regular complex of scientific discoveries |
and inventions. In the archaeological record, as in ethno-
graphy, most of the traits just enumerated are found already|
fully developed and applied. But they are applied in
different ways and to the production of distinct forms in}
each province and by each society that can be distinguished. |
Archaeology reveals no single neolithic culture, but a num-|
ber of distinct cultures. These may have been differentiated |
by divergent applications of common basic traditions,
                    NEOLITHIC BARBARISM                          51
   adjusted perhaps to varying local opportunities and needs.
   Such is the contention of the diffusionists. If it be accepted,
 ; itfollows that the ‘neolithic revolution’ began a very long
  time ago.
   ~ On the other hand, no trace of the revolution’s effects has
 Bsyet been detected in any geological deposit assignable to the
 pleistocene. Within the succeeding holocene, the geological
 ‘present, its antiquity can best be inferred in the East
 Mediterranean area. There the early invention of writing
_ provides a horizon, dateable by historical records, about
 3000 B.c. There, too, communities were forced to live on the
 ‘same site for many successive generations. The clustered
 huts of reeds or mud would decay with the passage of
 time, but new structures would be built upon the ruins.
 yiEventually the accumulated debris forms a regular hill or
  tell, The valleys and coastal plains of Greece, the plateaux of —
    Asia Minor (Turkey) and Iran, the steppes of Syria and
aT Curkestan   are studded    with thousands    of such tells. In
_ Hither Asia and Iran an ‘historical horizon’ — street levels
      I and house floors on which have been dropped objects
    ; fashionable about 3000 B.c. — can often be recognized high
       up in the mounds. Working back from this level by dead
      reckoning, the depth of the underlying deposits gives a
      ‘rough indication of the age of the oldest village on the
      ‘site.
       - More accurate indications have been given since 1950
    » pby ‘radio-carbon dates’ based on the amount of the radio-
  _ active isotope, C14, still left in organic substances that have
     Bcased to absorb fresh supplies from the atmosphere. An
      unexpected antiquity, about 7000 B.c., has been thus attri-
      buted to the earliest farming settlembnt thus dated — the
  _ oasis village of Jericho in the Jordan valley. The village was
   _ surprisingly large — perhaps 8 acres in area — and, still more
    _ surprisingly, was defended by a rock-cut ditch, 27 feet wide
      and 5 feet deep, and a stone-built rampart. Its earliest
   _ inhabitants supported themselves by hunting and collecting,
      but also by growing crops, watered by a perennial spring,
       and grazing sheep and goats, but probably not kine, on
 ANTE   otfoee ca eSPe
                     ;Ae Cetra




 52            WHAT     HAPPENED   IN HISTORY     |    .     a

irrigated meadow land. But in contrast to later, more familiar
  villagers, they used no ground stone axes and did not con-
 vert clay into pottery by firing. So Jericho I is said to
 illustrate a pre-pottery neolithic stage. The same stage is
 represented in a second village, Jericho II, built on the site
 a thousand years later by a fresh people, and still later,
 about 4750 B.c., at Jarmo in Kurdistan. The farmers of
 Jarmo were cultivating cereals that still show clear traces of
 their origin in the wild grasses of the region, but bred cows
 as well as sheep and goats. They did use axes, or rather
 adzes, of ground stone and made unbaked clay figurines of
 women. But they made no pottery, and used instead, as
 even the Jerichoans had done, vessels of stone and doubtless
 also of wood.                         .
    The next stage can be illustrated by the village at the
 base of a tell at Sialk on the western edge of the Persian
 desert near Kashan. Here, as at Jericho a perennial spring
 would not only attract game and wild fowl, but provide
water for the irrigation of small plots. The builders of the -
first village at the base of the tell hunted with slings and ~
clubs the game that congregated round the waters. But they
bred cattle, sheep, and goats. They grew cereals by irriga-
tion and reaped them with sickles of bone armed with flint
teeth like the Natufians’. They spun and wove some un-
determined fibres and made vases out of stone and pottery.
They even knew how to decorate their pots with patterns
painted in dark colour on a background that after firing
was pale pink and thus enhanced the likeness of the vases
to the plaited-grass baskets which had suggested many of |
the shapes.
    West of the Nile small communities settled about 4300 _
B.c. on the shore of a lake that then filled the Fayum de-
pression to a height of 180 feet above the level of the present
lake. All that remains of the settlements are middens — the
heaps of food-refuse left by the settlers. The debris from their
repasts, as well as immense numbers of flint arrow-heads,
bone harpoons, and bone dart-heads prove that the Fayu-
mis hunted the game that watered at the lake and the wild
                      NEOLITHIC BARBARISM                     53
 - fowl that nested on its reedy banks, and speared the fish
   swarming in its waters. But bones of cattle, sheep or goats,
 _ and pigs, presumably domestic, occur with remains of
 _ game in the middens. Near-by straw-lined pits were found
   filled with grains of emmer wheat and barley. From the
   volume of the grain that could be stored in the silos it has
_ been deduced that the cereals alone could not have sup-
_ ported the community; they must have provided, rather, a
_ reserve supply of food and supplemented a diet consisting
' mainly of game. On the other hand, the grains are already
   definitely cultivated forms, many stages removed from wild
 _ grass seeds; the barley from the Fayum is, indeed, almost
   identical with that now cultivated by the barbarous socie-
_ ties of North Africa.
      Moreover, granaries were dug and lined with straw to
_ preserve the crop. Special tools — sickles consisting of fiint
 _ teeth mounted ina straight wooden handle — were made to
   reap the crop and stone querns to convert it into flour.
_ Society’s equipment has been enriched with new artificial
_ materials — pottery for vessels and linen for clothing — and
_ new implements, axe-heads sharpened by grinding and
_ polishing, spindles, looms.
      On the western edge of the delta a few miles north of
_ Cairo, Austrian excavators at Merimde explored avillage
_ of flimsy huts sprawling over some six acres. Again, the
_ food refuse and relics of equipment for hunting and fishing
 _ demonstrate the predominant importance of hunting, fowl-
_ ing, fishing, and gathering. But bones show, too, that pigs,
     cattle, sheep, and goats were bred. Beside each hut site were
Pane
ase
    granaries    containing barley and emmer, and remains of
_ threshing floors where the grains were separated from the ©
 chaff. All the new equipment found at the Fayum sites
_ recurs at Merimde, too. Moreover, here the arrangement of
     the huts in regular rows, along streets in fact, reflects a
 recognized social order and organization of the communal
ul



’ life.
Bt In Europe the neolithic economy could be illustrated
more fully from a great variety of well-excavated sites.
54           WHAT    HAPPENED      IN HISTORY
While these disclose a bewildering variety of distinct cul-
tures, often more primitive — that is to say, poorer — in
equipment than those of the Near East, the oldest all show.
a significant divergence from the economy just described.
In the oldest neolithic settlements so far known north of
the Alps the productive activities ofgrain-growing and
stock-breeding are so far dominant that hunting has been
relegated to a secondary role. They no longer cage        a
‘mixed economy’, properly so called.                        :
   For instance, all over Central Europe from the Drave to,
-the Baltic and from the Vistula to the Meuse, wherever
patches of loess offer easily cultivated soils neither swampy
nor densely forested, we find what are termed Danubian|
villages and cemeteries. In all, remains of wheats and barley.
stone hoeblades, sickles, andl querns, as well as their loca.
tions, emphasize    the importance    of cereal   cultivation.
Bones of cattle, pigs, and sheep occur, too, but in relatively
small numbers. Bones of game, on the contrary, are prac-
tically non-existent and hunting tools extremely rare. Over
this vast territory the Danubians’ equipment is astonishingly
uniform: pots, axes, ornaments everywhere preserve the
same traditional shape. They must be the products of a!
single people who had spread. As their pots seem to
imitate vessels made from gourds, it is inferred that the
Danubians themselves came from a warm southerly region
where gourds will harden, as they will not north of the
Hungarian plain. They seem, moreover, to have brought
with them from the south a superstitious attachment to the
shells of a Mediterranean mussel, Spondylus gaederepi, which}
they imported even into Central Germany and the Rhine-
land for ornaments and amulets.
   The process of Danubian expansion has been illustrated
by the excavation of a complete village at K6ln-Lindenthal,
near Cologne. The settlement at one time consisted of 21
gabled long houses, neatly grouped parallel to one another
in a fenced area of 6} acres within which were enclosed vari-
ous irregular hollows, dug originally to provide clay for
house walls and pots but later converted into rubbish-pits
                   - NEOLITHIC     BARBARISM         *
  _    pig-sties or working places. Some houses measured as much
    as 100 feet in length with a width of 20 feet, enough
_ to accommodate a clan rather than asingle natural family.
   But after perhaps ten years these were deserted; the villagers
   left the site, only to return again after an indeterminate
    interval. Presumably they had found they could no longer
  _ secure decent crops from the exhausted plots round the
 _ village and had shifted bag and baggage to fertile virgin soil.
 _      The Danubians were adopting what seems the simplest
 _ device for escaping the effects of soil exhaustion through
  repeated cropping. It is a solution adopted still by barbarian
 cultivators in Africa, Assam, and elsewhere. But the Danu-
  _bians had found out that if they let the brushwood grow
 _ over their deserted plots and then burned down the scrub,
 _ they could then reap good crops once more; the ashes from

 _ of its lost virtue. So the village was rebuilt on the old site,
_ with a slightly different alignment of its houses, and then
_ again deserted for a while.
     After several repetitions of this cycle the Danubians
  whose fashions in pottery decoration had meanwhile
_ changed somewhat were obliged to surround the latest vil-
_ lage with a defensive ditch and rampart to exclude human
_ foes — apparently a new people, the so-called Westerners,
_ whose earlier settlements are known in Switzerland, France,
 _ Belgium, and Britain.
  _    These settlements emphasize another aspect of neolithic
_ economy. The Westerners, too, cultivated cereals and also
 _ flax, and, perhaps, apples. But cattle formed the staple
_ source of food; in their kitchen refuse the bones of cattle
_ far outnumbered those of any other animal. The bones of
  _ game are relatively scarce — in Switzerland only 30 per
    cent, in Normandy as little as 2.5 per cent, of the total food
    animals. So in Western Europe, too, the productive activity
_ of the herdsman had ousted the gathering of the huntsman
 _ from its primacy in the social economy of the earliest
  neolithic communities.
       But while pastoralists, these Westerners were no more
Oe   I   a    RNC   Ph ee ae   eee




         56             “WHAT        HAPPENED   IN HISTORY
         nomadic than the Danubians. On the shores of the Swiss
         lakes they laboriously built wooden houses raised on piles.
         On the South English downs and on hills overlooking the
         Rhine they encircled encampments with multiple ditches
         quarried in the solid chalk and supplemented by stockades.
         Their equipment was of the same kind as the Danubians’,
         but the forms of the individual tools are quite different.
         They preferred axes for carpentry while the Danubians
         relied exclusively on adzes. Their pots seem to imitate
         leather vessels. These and other articles in Western equip-
         ment are so strongly reminiscent of those used at Merimde
         and in the Fayum that the Westerners’ traditions seem to
         derive from North Africa. They may have been gradually
         spread by a quest for fresh pastures comparable to the
         Danubians’ search for virgin soil. But in each case the
         gathering economy that must still have been dominant in
         the first phases of the revolution had been largely discarded
         to make way for a purer neolithic food production.
            These five concrete examples must suffice to suggest the
         complexity of the neolithic revolution, the expansion of its
         results, and the divergent applications to which it could give
         rise. These points could be amplified by further reference
         to the archaeological record or by ethnographical citations.
         Four thousand years ago archaeology discloses societies
         practising a neolithic economy dispersed over Eurasia from
         Ireland to China. Barbarian communities on a comparable
         level live, or lived quite recently, in parts of Africa, round
         the Pacific, and in the Americas. All shared such basic arts
         as the cultivation of plants, manufacture of pottery, con-
         struction of houses, and sharpening of axe-heads by grind-
         ing; only the Amerinds lack a true loom, but stock-breeding
         had a more restricted vogue outside Eurasia and was
         practically strange to America. However, the concrete ap-
         plication of the principles diverges enormously.
            Our debt to preliterate barbarians is heavy. Every single
         cultivated food plant of any importance has been dis-
         covered by some nameless barbarian society. So we find
         neolithic peoples relying not only on wheats and barleys, —
                                    ete Werte    ee




                    NEOLITHIC       BARBARISM                  57
   but on rice, millet, and maize, or even on yams, manioc,
   squashes, or other plants that are not cereals at all. The
   methods of cultivation found appropriate for each species
   are naturally different. Even for cultivation of the same
   species — wheat and barley, for example — different geo-
   logical and climatic conditions impose corresponding
   differences in method. Particularly in arid regions like Iran
   natural or artificial irrigation is the normal procedure. In
   a well-watered temperate zone like Europe rain will supply
   the necessary moisture, but a plot will not yield a decent
   crop for more than two or three successive years: The
   simplest escape from this dilemma is to clear a new plot
   every year and, when all the land round the village has been
   used up, to shift bag and baggage and start again on virgin
   soil. This was the solution adopted by the Danubians in
   prehistoric Europe and still applied by some African tribes,
   such as the Lango, by the hill tribes of Assam and other
   peoples. Its former prevalence helps to explain the world-
   wide expansion of neolithic cultures.
      Such agricultural nomadism is a bar to any luxury in
   domestic architecture and household furniture, but these
   inconveniences might be overlooked as long as land seemed
   unlimited. But even in prehistoric times some societies were
   finding out ways of restoring fertility to exhausted plots or
   preventing exhaustion. If a plot be allowed to go back to
   bush and then cleared again by burning, the ashes will
   have restored to the soil much of its lost virtue. Mixed
   farmers can graze stock on plots they have cleared for
   crops, and then the droppings of the flocks and herds will
   serve as fertilizers and permit of a new crop being grown
   in time.   Or human    excreta   or animal   manure   can   be
  deliberately collected and applied to exhausted fields,
_ effecting a more rapid regeneration. One or other of these
  devices must have been employed in Greece and the Balkans
   in late neolithic times, for there we find successive settle-
   ments built upon the same site just as much as among the
   irrigation cultivators of Hither Asia.
     ‘To accomplish the neolithic revolution mankind, or
             WHAT    HAPPENED     IN   HISTORY

rather womankind, had not only to discover suitable inn’ "
and appropriate methods for their cultivation, but must —
also devise special implements for tilling the soil, reaping —
and storing the crop, and converting it into foods. For —
breaking up the ground the commonest implement used by —
modern barbarians is just a pointed stick that may be
weighted with a perforated stone near the point. But most —
African tribes prepare the ground with a hoe, and hoes were _
demonstrably used by the prehistoric Danubians, and
probably by other European and Asiatic peoples. Cereals
were first reaped with sickles composed of flint teeth set in
a straight wood or bone handle, as among the Natufians_
and Fayumis, or in an animal’s jaw-bone or a wooden
imitation thereof.                               t
   It is an essential element in the neolithic economy that
sufficient food shall be gathered at each harvest and stored
to last till the next crop is ripe, normally in a year’s time.
Granaries or storehouses were accordingly a prominent
feature in any barbarian village, and have been identified
in such early prehistoric settlements as Merimde, the
Fayum, and Kéln-Lindenthal. Wheat and barley need to
be separated from the husk by threshing and winnowing, —
and then ground into flour. The grinding could be done
by pounding in a mortar, but the standard procedure was
to rub the grains on a saucer-shaped or saddle-shaped |
stone with a bun-shaped or sausage-shaped rubbing-stone.
Such querns must, however, be made of tough stone, or
the meal will contain as much grit as flour.
   The flour can be easily converted into porridge or into
flat cakes, but to make it into bread requires a knowledge
of some biochemistry — the use of the micro-organism,
yeast — and also a specially constructed oven. Moreover,
the same biochemical process as was used to make bread
rise opened to mankind a new world of enchantment.
All modern barbarians prepare some sort of fermented
liquor. By the dawn of history beer was being brewed in
Egypt and Mesopotamia and it was already established
as the appropriate drink to stimulate the oldest Sumerian |
                                                             |
                                                               eee ee

                      NEOLITHIC    BARBARISM                   59
     gods to potent beneficence. By 3000 B.c., indeed, intoxicants
     had become necessities to most societies in Europe and
_    Hither Asia, and a whole service of jars, jugs, beakers,
     strainers, and drinking-tubes had come into fashion for
     their ceremonial consumption.
        All the foregoing inventions and discoveries were, judged
    by ethnographic evidence, the work of the women. To that
     sex, too, may by the same token be credited the chemistry
     of pot-making, the physics of spinning, the mechanics of
     the loom, and the botany of flax and cotton. On the other
     hand, in the prehistoric societies we have cited and in
     others like them in Europe and right across Asia to China,
    the feminine achievements have been welded into asingle
i
    economy with others attributable to men. For among —
    modern barbarians the care of flocks and herds and the’
    processes and equipment pertaining thereto fall to the men.
    In the archaeological record the neolithic economy is an
    economy of mixed farming, and we must now see how such
    an economy works.
       The neolithic populations of Europe and Hither Asia
    are normally found living in small communities — villages
    or hamlets, When fully explored these have been found to
    cover areas from 1} to 63 acres. The community that lived
    at Skara Brae in Orkney comprised not more than eight
    households; in Central Europe and Southern Russia
    twenty-five to thirty-five households seems to have been a
    not uncommon number.
       Such spatial aggregates formed social organisms whose
    members all co-operated for collective tasks. In the western
    villages on Alpine moors the several houses are connected
    up by corduroy streets, at Skara Brae in Orkney by covered
    alleys. Such public ways must be communal not individual
    works. Many neolithic villages in western Europe and in
    the Balkans are surrounded by ditches, fences, or stockades,
    as a protection against wild beasts or human foes, and these,
    too, must have been erected by collective effort. It has been
    calculated that to dig the defensive ditch round the latest
    village at Kéln-Lindenthal must have taken nearly three
60           WHAT    HAPPENED       IN   HISTORY

thousand man-days of labour. The arrangement of the
dwellings along definite streets noticed already at Merimde
in Egypt again gives expression to some form of social
organization, and a similar orderliness has been reported |
in some Western villages from south-western Germany and
again in south Russian settlements.
   But there is no need to assume any industrial specializa-
tion within the village apart from a division of labour
between the sexes. On the analogy of modern barbarians
each neolithic household would grow and prepare its own
food, make,its own pots, clothes, tools and other requisites.
The women would till the plots, grind and cook the grain,
spin, weave and manufacture clothes, build and bake the
pots and prepare some ornaments and magic articles. Men
on the other hand may have cleared the plots, built the
huts, tended the live-stock, hunted and manufactured the
needful tools and weapons.
   Moreover each village could be self-sufficing. It grew its
own food and could make all essential equipment from
materials locally available — stone, bone, wood, clay, and
so on. This potential self-sufficiency of the territorial com-
munity and the absence of specialization within it may be
taken as the differentiae of neolithic barbarism to distinguish
it from civilization and the higher barbarisms of the Metal
Ages. A corollary therefrom is that a neolithic economy
offers no material inducement to the peasant to produce
more than he needs to support himself and his family and
provide for the next harvest. If each household does that,
the community can survive without a surplus.
   Probably no known neolithic community conformed
strictly to these standards. Even in the earliest neolithic
villages and graves archaeologists have found materials
brought from long distances. Shells from the Mediterranean
and from the Red Sea were strung on necklaces by the
Fayumis. At Sialk and at Anau (in the Merv oasis) small
ornaments were made from native copper and semi-
precious stones that had been transported a hundred miles
or so. The Danubian peasants in Hungary, Bohemia,
                    NEOLITHIC      BARBARISM                   61
_ Central Germany, and the Rhineland wore bracelets and
    beads made from shells of Spondylus gaederopi imported
    from the Mediterranean.
       Imports were not entirely restricted to such luxury
    articles. Neidermendig lava from near Mayen on the
    Moselle, a good tough stone, was used for querns by the
   Danubians even in the Meuse valley in Belgium and perhaps
   even by the Westerners of southern England. Good cutting
   stones — obsidian   in Hither Asia and Central Europe, high-
   grade flints and attractive greenstones for axe-heads — were
   transported quite long distances. Even pots, presumably
   containing something, were brought from the Main valley
 _ to Kéln-Lindenthal, fifty miles down the Rhine, and were
   often interchanged between neolithic villages in Thessaly.
   Ethnographers have described quite intensive trade over.
   long distances between barbarians whose equipment is
   still formally neolithic.
       Moreover, the neolithic economy seems to have found
   room for some rudiments of intercommunal specialization,
   even in early prehistoric times. In Egypt, Sicily, Portugal,
   France, England, Belgium, Sweden, and Poland neolithic
   groups were mining flints. The miners had evolved a quite
   elaborate technique for sinking shafts through the solid chalk
   and cutting subterranean galleries to exploit seams of good
   nodules, From their winnings they manufactured axes, which
   are found distributed over wide areas. The miners were in
   fact highly skilled specialists. They almost certainly lived by
   bartering their products for the surplus corn and meat pro-
   duced by farmers. In Melanesia and New Guinea to-day a
   very few villages specialize in making pottery and supply
   other communities over a wide area even across the sea.
       Societies of savages continued and continue to exist side
   by side with food-producers. The latter now barter farm
   produce with hunters and gatherers in exchange for game
   and jungle products. The same complementary relationship
   may have existed in the past. The neolithic herdsmen and
   miners of the English South Downs used vast quantities of
   stags’ antlers as picks, though bones of deer are not
conspicuous among the refuse from their repasts. The antlers
may have been supplied by descendants of mesolithic—
huntsmen who continued to live on the greens and country
north of the Downs.                                          |
   Now in pursuit of game hunters are wont        to wander
farther and more frequently than even the most primitive
cultivators and herdsmen. They might profitably combine —
hunting trips with the transportation of those exotic sub-
stances that neolithic villages certainly did somehow ob-
tain. In Britain the distribution to Wiltshire and Anglesey
of axes made from Graig Llwydd rock at Penmaen Mawr in
North Wales appears to be associated with a type of pottery
favoured:  by descendants of the native mesolithic stock as
contrasted with the immigrant Western food-producers. In
brief professional merchants   may have been recruited in
part from residual food-gatherers.
   So the self-sufficiency of the neolithic community was
potential rather than actual, just as such a community was
seldom strictly sedentary. Intercourse with other groups was
probably more frequent and more extensive than among
palaeolithic food gatherers. The pooling of human ex-
perience had to that extent been accelerated by the neo-
lithic revolution.
  Nevertheless, fixed in an oasis in the desert, huddled in a
valley bottom between rugged mountains, or hemmed in by
trackless forests to a glade, neolithic villagers enjoyed only
occasional contact with the outside world. For the greater
part of the time they were engaged in adapting their
economy and their equipment to astrictly specialized and
localized environment. The latter would offer each society
its own distinct opportunities for discoveries and inventions.
So each group would develop peculiar traditions appro-
priate to its own circumstances. This is just what archae-
ology and ethnography reveal.
  There is no ‘neolithic culture’, but a limitless multitude
of neolithic cultures. Each is distinguished by the varieties
of plants cultivated or of animals bred, by a different
balance between cultivation and _ stock-breeding, by
                              r                    .

                         NEOLITHIC      BARBARISM

_ divergences in the location of settlements, in the plan and
          construction of houses, the shape and material of axes and
_         other tools, the form and decoration of the pots and by
        _ still greater disparities in burial rites, fashions in amulets
      _ and styles of art. Each culture represents an approximate
       _ adaptation to a specific environment with an ideology more
          or less adequate thereto. The diversity results from a multi-
     _ plicity of minor discoveries or inventions, at first purely local
    _ and conditioned by geological or climatic or botanical pecu-
          liarities, or from arbitrary, i.e. unexplained, idiosyncrasies.
              Hence we cannot speak of ‘neolithic science’, but only of
    _ ‘neolithic sciences’. Barbarian societies had at their disposal
      __and successfully applied a richer stock of scientific traditions,
     __ based often on more active experimentation, than ancestral
      _ savages. They included indeed new sciences such as the.
          chemistry of potting, the biochemistry of baking and brew-
          ing, agricultural botany and the like, quite unknown in the
          Old Stone Age. But these traditions were handed on and
          enriched by each society in its own way. There was, for
          example, no universal potters’ lore, but as many traditional
           recipes as there were societies. Even though such traditions
          seem to us only variations on a single theme, the women
         who transmitted them can hardly have discriminated
          between the essential theme and its accidental embellish-
           ments. The practical technical prescriptions of barbarian
           science were, for sure, inextricably entangled with a mass
           of futile spells and rituals. Even the intelligent and highly
           civilized Greeks still feared a demon who used to crack the
           pots while they were being fired, so they affixed a hideous
       Gorgon mask to the kiln to scare him away.
           Nevertheless the intercourse that demonstrably took place
       between neolithic societies did involve some interchange of
       technical ideas. In this process comparison would help to
       sift out non-essentials. The subsequent history of science is
       largely taken up with the diffusion of useful ideas beyond
       the environment that originally inspired them and with
       the selection of the effective processes from among the
       traditional rituals in which they were once embedded.
64           WHAT    HAPPENED      IN HISTORY
   Still less would it be legitimate to speak of ‘neolithic
religion’, though barbarian societies behaved and behave as
if they needed ideological support no’ less than savages.
Most neolithic societies buried the dead (either in regular
cemeteries or under and beside their houses) with still more
pomp than had palaeolithic hunters. In the Mediterranean
world, indeed, mortuary traditions inspired the excavation
with terrific labour of subterranean replicas of the deceased’s
house; in western and northern Europe these were repro-
duced in gigantic stones and artificially put under ground by-
burial under enormous cairns at the cost of still greater
social effort. That the dead so reverently committed to the
earth were supposed somehow to affect the crops that
sprang from the earth is for some societies a plausible
inference that cannot, however, be generalized. Ritual
burial is not practised by quite all barbarians and has not
yet been demonstrated archaeologically for all neolithic
societies in Europe.
   Female figurines were moulded in clay or carved in stone
or bone by neolithic societies in Egypt, Syria, Iran, all
round the Mediterranean and in south-eastern Europe, and
occasionally even in England. Such figurines are generally
interpreted as images of the ‘ Mother Goddess’; it is inferred
that the earth from whose bosom the grain sprouts has been
imagined as a woman who may be influenced like a woman
by entreaties (prayers) and bribes (sacrifices), as well as
‘controlled’ by imitative rites and incantations. These
figurines in fact seem in some cases to be the direct ances-
tresses of images of admitted goddesses made by historical
societies in Mesopotamia, Syria, and Greece. The male
partner in fertilization is, however, represented only by
phalli of clay or stone that were carved in Anatolia, the
Balkans, and England.
   Now magic must have still been practised in neolithic
times despite the enlarged real control over nature possessed
by barbarian societies. We have direct proof of this in the
amulets made by neolithic peoples all round the Mediter-
ranean and already at Merimde (p. 53); there, for instance,
                 aes: ie A,   oe ae, F
                -—



                      NEOLITHIC          BARBARISM                       65
, miniature   stone   axes    were       perforated   for hanging   on    a
__ necklace, presumably in the belief that such a model would
   confer upon its wearer something of the queer power or
  mana inherent in the new tool. Indeed Thurnwald asserts
  that ‘it is above all in societies where skill in craftsmanship
  is highly developed that importance is attached to magical
  precautions and ceremonies’. Naturally the magic of bar-
  barians as of savages would find expression. In particular a
  ceremonial union of the sexes would symbolize and so
  ‘cause’ the fertilization of nature. But among grain-growers
  at least the fertility drama has to assume a more individu-
  alized form than in savage rituals. From a cycle of myths
  and cult practices widespread among the ancient peoples
  of Hither Asia and the Mediterranean basin, it has- been
    inferred that the ceremonial marriage became restricted
    to a selected pair. For the male actor impersonates the
   grain (or vegetation in general) and assumes for a time a
- Jeader’s role: he becomes a ‘corn king’. But like the grain
    he must be buried and rise again. In mortal society that
    means he must be slain and replaced by a young and
    vigorous successor. In such actors the productive forces .of
  - nature assume personal forms and become ‘goddesses’ and
    ‘gods’.
        But if society be persuaded that the corn king’s death
    can be replaced by the slaughter of a captive or made
    purely symbolical by magic rites, the ‘corn king’ would be
    on the way to becoming a temporal king too — a transition
    which would be facilitated had he also functioned as a
     war chief. This is one way in which ‘divine kings’ such as
     we meet at the dawn of history may have arisen. Whether
     such kingship or chieftainship actually had arisen in neo-
     lithic times in Hither Asia or Europe cannot be directly
     established. In Egypt and Mesopotamia and Greece
     historical kings did perform many of the functions in
   fertility rituals attributed to the hypothetical corn king.
     Many modern barbarians acknowledge hereditary chiefs
     whose authority is as much magical as military. In neo-
     lithic Europe a single house marked out by its greater size
             WHAT    HAPPENED IN HISTORY          >

and central position in some Western villages has
explained as the residence of a chief. The great stone tom
of the Atlantic coasts and the vast long barrows of Britai
have been interpreted as chieftains’ sepulchres. But not
even German believers in the ‘leadership principle’ have}
been able to detect any indications of chieftainship in a:
Danubian village like K6ln-Lindenthal.
    In any case it may be assumed that the clan structure and
community based on ‘kinship” survived the neolithic
revolution unscathed. Among barbarians to-day land is
normally held by the clan in common. If not tilled collec-;
tively, plots are allotted to individual ‘families’ for use only;
and are generally redistributed annually. Pastures are of}
course commons. Among pure cultivators, owing to the}
role of the women’s contributions to the collective economy, |
kinship is naturally reckoned in the female line, and the! 4
system of ‘mother.right’ prevails. With stock-breeding, on
the contrary, economic and social influence passes to the}
males and kinship is patrilinear.
    The neolithic revolution was vindicated biologically by}
the numerical increase in the species, Homo sapiens, that
followed it. Small though they were, neolithic communities |
were substantially larger and far more numerous than|
palaeolithic or mesolithic groups. From Hither Asia, Egypt!
and Europe literally thousands of skeletons have survived!
from the period between the neolithic revolution and the}
urban revolution or the transition to a Bronze Age economy,|
as against the few hundred human fossils from the whole of|
the Old Stone Age. Yet the Old Stone Age must have}
lasted ten to fifty times as long as the New!
  . The growth of neolithic population was eventually limited
by contradictions in the new economy. The expansion in
numbers involved expansion in space. Additional families|
could be supported only by cultivating fresh plots and|
finding fresh pastures for growing flocks and herds. Food-|
producers within the limits of barbarism just had _ to|
spread. Each self-sufficing village must keep budding o
daughter villages. The worldwide expansion of the}
                                                                 di Tee   a




                                                                67
  neolithic economy bears witness to this process. In practice
 of course the food-producers often expanded at the expense
_of food-gatherers. And the latter did not always submit
passively to expulsion or extinction; sometimes savages
_adopted and adapted the economy of encroaching bar-
_barians. The neolithic cultures of Northern Europe seem
 to be due mainly to mesolithic forest-folk who had secured
_ stock and grains from advancing Danubians and other
- farmers and had learned from them how to make pots,
  _ spin, and weave. Such disciples swelled the flood of expand-
   _ ing peasantry and accelerated its advance. In the long run
      various streams met. Proximity gave opportunity for ex-
    changing experience and pooling knowledge.
        But contact is‘not likely to be always amicable. For each
   and all are competing for the same sort of land, and the
    ‘supply is not unlimited. Such competition might of itself
    lead to war. The earliest Danubians seem to have been
     peaceful folk; weapons of war as against hunters’ tools are
    absent from their graves. Their villages lacked military
     defences. It is no accident that the latest village of Kéln-
   _Lindenthal was defended by elaborate fortifications and
    that weapons were buried in contemporary graves. In the
     later phases of the neolithic period in Europe, armaments
   - in the form of stone battle-axes and flint daggers became
 _ the most conspicuous items of funerary furniture.
         In central and northern Europe we almost see the state
    of war of all against all arising as unoccupied but easily
     cultivable land became scarce. Elsewhere the same process
                                                                the
_ is traceable, if less explicitly. In the successive layers of
  settlement tells in the Balkans, Greece, Anatolia, Syria, and
                                                              s
__ Iran we see radical changes in culture. Such abrupt change
                                                        by
  are taken to symbolize the replacement of one society
    another with different social traditions — in other words,
                                                              by
 _ the conquest, expulsion, or enslavement of one people
~ another. Such changes of popula   tion  effecte d by war are.a
   ‘recurrent feature of barbarian life as described by ethno-
  _graphers in North America, Africa, and the Pacific.
     Naturally to seize the grain-plots and pastures that others
                                   Wi       Deansub
                                        (eile         &          o  Ste
                                                                    >
                                                          dy    bes th      eg
                                                4              Rien   tee        a5,




68           WHAT    HAPPENED     IN HISTORY

have been cultivating and grazing allows no addition to the
total population those lands supported; it is no solution to
the contradiction. War and slaughter diminish rather than |
increase the human species.
    Nevertheless change of culture in the archaeological
record need not always mean the extinction of the older |
society; the result may be a ‘mixed culture’ in which items
of the older equipment persist, implying the survival of
some members of the society formerly established on the >
site. In Central Europe late neolithic cultures exhibit some |
traits derived from the native Danubian traditions com- |
bined with others that had been developed on the wooded |
plains of the North. Some of the older Danubian stock |
must have been left alive even though they may have been
enslaved by the Northerners. Mixed cultures may denote
stratified societies divided into rulers and ruled. In any
case they are richer than either of the component cultures _
in that they result from the blending of two social traditions _
evoked by distinct environments. They illustrate one of the ©
most important processes in the pooling of human ex-
perience. Moreover, they probably symbolize the incipient
break-up of the clan and ‘kinship’ organization of society. —
    A second defect in the neolithic economy was the very |
self-sufficiency the barbarian village prized so highly. Such |
a community had indeed far greater control over its food- |
supply and environment than any group of savages, and
could reasonably plan ahead to meet future eventualities. -
But all its labours and plans might be frustrated by events -
still beyond its control: droughts or floods, tempests or |
frosts, blights, or hail-storms might annihilate crops and |
herds. And even a local failure might spell famine and
annihilation for the self-contained and isolated community.
Its reserves were too small to tidt it over any prolonged:
succession of disasters or to let it take preventive measures —
on an effective scale.
    The urban revolution eventually offered an escape from
both contradictions. .
                               IV

            THE     HIGHER          BARBARISM
               OF    THE     COPPER        AGE

THE worst contradictions in the neolithic economy were
_ transcended when farmers were persuaded or compelled to
_wring from the soil a surplus above their own domestic
 ‘requirements, and when this surplus was made available to
“support new economic classes not directly engaged in
_ producing their own food. The possibility of producing the
  requisite surplus was inherent in the very nature of the
neolithic economy. Its realization, however, required addi-
  tions to the stock of applied science at the disposal of all
_barbarians, as well as a modification in social and economic
_relations. The thousand years or so immediately preceding
;3000 B.C. were perhaps more fertile in fruitful inventions
_and discoveries than any period in human history prior to
the sixteenth century a.p. Its achievements made possible
that economic reorganization of society that I term the
 urban revolution.
__ The neolithic revolution took place in the grey night of
  ‘remote prehistory. From a few peaks faintly lit by the
reflected light of an archaeological sun and by inferences
  from the landscape subsequently revealed we have recon-
 structed very tentatively the course of this first revolution.
 The second takes place almost before our eyes in the full
¢ twilight of prehistory and reaches its climax only with the
  dawn of history. It must therefore be described.
      Its theatre can be provisionally delimited; it is bounded
feon the west by the Sahara and the Mediterranean, on the
east by the Thar desert and the Himalayas, on the north
   by the Eurasiatic mountain spine — Balkans, Caucasus,
   Elburz, Hindu-Kush - and on the south, as it happens, by
  the Tropic of Cancer. The geological, physiographical, and
  ‘climatic conditions of this zone proved propitious to the
revolutionary development. It provided the raw materials}
for the decisive discoveries. It offered inducements to in-
tensive social organization and rich rewards for large-scaley
co-operation. It gave facilities for communications bywhichy
new knowledge might be pooled and essential materials col-
lected and concentrated. Finally its cloudless skies presented!
‘nightly the impressive spectacle of the uniform motion of they
 heavenly bodies that in other latitudes is too often veiled.
    The whole belt is relatively arid, though it was bette
 watered in prehistoric times than to-day. Permanent settle-|
 ment is possible only beside a river or a perennial spring.;
 Agriculture is largely dependent on irrigation; though you
 may ‘catch a crop’ watered by showers in Palestine and
 Syria or from the flooding of a torrent even in Arabia,}
 irrigation alone guarantees success. At the same time}
 several varieties of fruit tree and the vine grew wild in thes
 region; the prospect of a regular crop of dates, olives, figs
 or grapes every year is a powerful inducement to remain
 fixed where the plants grow. The orchardist must abandon
 the nomadism that may still appeal to the grain-grower.        :
    The digging and maintenance of irrigation      channels are
 social tasks even more than the construction of defensive!
 ramparts or the laying out of streets (p. 59) .The community
 as a whole must apportion to individual users the water thus
 canalized by collective effort. Now control of water puts in}
 society’s hands a potent force to supplement sugernaeieeal
 sanctions. Society can exclude from access to the channel i
 recalcitrants   who   will not conform     to rules of conduct
 generally approved. Banishment in an arid zone is a more
 drastic penalty than in a temperate or tropical clime where}
 land and water are still relatively abundant.
    The zone is interrupted by mountains and desert unfit)
 for habitation. But around and between these are mor
 hospitable steppes over which villages can be dotted no
 too sparsely and herdsmen may wander with their flocks,}
 so that intercourse is on the whole easier than in fores ‘|
 and jungles. The western part of the crucial belt has beeni
 termed by Breasted the Fertile Crescent.
   Oy
 “oa    LE E   HIGHER   BARBARISM    OF   THE   COPPER   AGE    71
 5
 _ The Crescent’s western horn is Egypt. There the narrow
valley of the Nile forms a thread of greenery through the
   forbidding desert of the plateau. The annual flood irrigates
   a strip of either bank and the broad Delta to the north.
  At the same time the river affords a moving road on which
   even bulky goods can be transported between the First
    Yataract and the Mediterranean. The valleys and plains
_ of Palestine and the narrow strip of coast land in Syria form
     continuation of the Crescent where the rainfall is sufficient
  to allow even of dry cultivation. Thence east of Lebanon
 and Anti-Lebanon a broad belt of steppe extends to the
Tranian mountains beyond the Tigris. Throughout this
‘saddle’ — the ancient Syria and Assyria (the Mosul vilayet)
 — the winter rains suffice to provide pasture for sheep and
  even to water precarious crops of corn. But permanent
 settlement is in effect restricted to oases and the banks of
‘many streams issuing from the Armenian mountains — the
 Euphrates, Balikh, Khabur, Tigris, Zab. Finally the eastern
 horn is formed by the lower Tigris-Euphrates valley, in
 which the two rivers fulfil the function of the Nile in irriga-
tion and transport.
     Beyond its border chains the Iranian plateau is desert
 at the centre. But on the mountain slopes all round rise
    rings and streams sufficient to water fields and gardens.
   inally beyond the mountains of Baluchistan lie Sind and
    e Punjab. Here Mesopotamian conditions recur on an
 immensely larger scale, with the Indus and six tributaries
 to irrigate and carry freight.
_ The archaeological record begins in small oases on steppes
 and plateaux. Despite the threat of drought the difficulties
  of taming the soil were less formidable there than on the
  flood plains of the major rivers. By small beginnings
 societies had the chance of learning the techniques of
  rrigation and drainage.   _
_ Such a society has been encountered already at Sialk in
"western Iran (p. 51). The earliest culture found there can
be matched at other sites upon the plateau and northward
‘up ‘to Anau       in the Merv      oasis in Russian     Turkistan
                          ST     edenee ee aba asia3th:
                               a ty                A     er
                                         rN,  eked   Nise Wiles   ees
                                     x     ax  ‘                D     +



7            WHAT      HAPPENED           IN HISTORY                           a
(Turkmenian S.S.R.). At Sialk a second phase can be seen in
the villages built on the ruins of those described. The houses
are no longer built just of packed clay (pzsé), but of moulded
bricks, dried in the sun. Gathering is less prominent in the |
communal economy; horses have been added to the do- |
mestic stock. Shells are brought across the mountains from |
the Persian Gulf. Copper is commoner, but it is still treated |
as a superior sort of stone worked by cold hammering.
Equipment    is made    from     local bone,             stone,       and   chert |
supplemented by a little imported obsidian. But special|
kilns are built for firing pots.
   Then with Sialk III the village was removed to a new|
site, close by the old and watered by the same spring.
Equipment is still mainly home-made from local materials.
But copper is worked intelligently by casting to make axes
and other implements that must still be luxuries. Gold and |
silver are imported and lapis lazuli from northern Afghanis- |
tan. Potters appear who make vessels quickly on a fast|
spinning wheel instead of building them up by hand. And
men use seals to mark their property. Finally Sialk IV is a
colony of literate Elamites who have achieved civilization |
in the alluvial valley of the Kerkha and impose it upon
the barbarian mountaineers about 3000 B.c.                   j
   The same sort of stages can be recognized in Syria and
Assyria, though it cannot be proved that these are parallel |
in time with those disclosed at Sialk in Iran. From                          Ras|
Shamra on the coast of Syria (near Alexandretta) to |j
Nineveh and Tepe Gawra, east of the Tigris, the village
ruins at the bottom of the tells disclose a ‘neolithic’ culture, |
not identical with those of Iran and Egypt, but probably |
parallel thereto though still very imperfectly known. The |                        .
next set of settlements, representing phase II, were built |
by people with different traditions from the first but sur- |
prisingly homogeneous throughout the whole belt. Archaeo- |
logists call them Halafians, after Tell Halaf on the Khabur, |
where their distinctive products were first identified. They |
too lived as mixed farmers and relied for their equipment )
mainly on local stones and bones. But even on the Upper
      THE   HIGHER    BARBARISM       OF    THE   COPPER    AGE   73

_ Khabur they received shells brought from the Persian Gulf
_ while obsidian imported from the volcanic mountains              of
_ Armenia was extensively employed; indeed a Halafian
_ village near Lake Van seems to have been inhabited by an
_ industrial community engaged in quarrying the volcanic
_ glass for export, like the neolithic flint-miners in England.
  Moreover the Halafians were almost certainly acquainted
; with metal, if not with intelligent metallurgy. Vases were
 _ superbly decorated with polychrome designs and fired in
_ specially constructed kilns as if their makers were becoming
 professionals. Amulets were not only carved into the like-
 _ ness of ‘potent’ objects, but were also engraved with equally
  _ magical patterns. So they could be, and were, used as seals:
 _ stamped on a blob of clay affixed to a jar-stopper or bundle
 _ the pattern and so its magic was transferred to the clay,
_ put a ‘tabu’ on the object and marked it as someone’s
 property. Finally the villagers co-operated in erecting
' shrines to local deities. And so did their contemporaries,
  the first colonists of lower Mesopotamia.             For the first
  shrine of Ea at Eridu must have been founded in this
_ phase.
     In phase III the Halafian culture disappears to make
. room for another, presumably borne by new settlers and
_ called, not very euphoniously, the al ’Ubaid culture, after
  a site in Lower Mesopotamia near Ur. The break in
- tradition is not indeed complete. The old shrines were
  reconstructed on a larger scale on their hallowed sites; so
_ the old local gods survived         and   therefore   some   of the
: community of worshippers that had imagined them. The
  largest of three shrines grouped round a court at Tepe
 ‘Gawra now measured over all 40 ft. by 28 ft. and was built
_ of sun-dried bricks, painted on the outside. But in general
_ domestic architecture   declined.    On the other hand metal
  was now worked intelligently by casting, though in Syria
 and northern Iraq the al ’Ubaid people seem to have been
  normally content to go on using local stone instead of
 organizing their economy to secure regular supplies of
 metal, while potters still made vases by hand. Nevertheless
             WHAT    HAPPENED      IN HISTORY
the amulets had been developed into specialized square or
button seals with a loop on the back, and engraved on the
face with animal figures instead of purely gcomots
patterns.
   In Syria some sites were temporarily deserted after phase
III, but some villages in Assyria, notably what was to
become Nineveh and Tepe Gawra only 15 miles away,
grew into regular little townships. At Tepe Gawra the
shrines, whose repeated reconstruction on the same spot
proves the continuity of tradition through all the drastic
changes in material culture, have now grown into little
temples built of kiln-burnt bricks and divided into several
rooms. They still form a group of three round a court, but
one now covers an over-all area of 57 ft. by 43 ft. Clay
models of carts and even covered wagons leave no doubt
that wheeled vehicles were familiar. And pots are made
on the wheel too. Objects of copper or even poor bronze
are not very rare. But axes, sickle-teeth, and the rest of the
industrial equipment and even weapons were still normally
made of stone and other local materials. Lapis lazuli from
Afghanistan, small manufactured articles from Sumer, and
other luxuries are indeed imported. But fundamentally the
self-sufficiency of neolithic economy has been preserved.
Yet the imports from the south show that these Assyrian
villages -were contemporary with genuine cities in Lower
Mesopotamia.
   On the relatively well-watered steppes of northern Iraq
arable lands and pastures were still so abundant that no
overpowering need compelled villagers to transform their
economy. It was simpler to use the plentiful local materials
for equipment than to organize the importation of regular
supplies of metal to replace them. First in the next phase,
V, were elements of a new economy imposed in Assyria as
at Sialk in Iran. But this imposition is almost historical.
It can be better explained when the urban revolution has
been examined in southern Iraq.
   Communities like Sialk III and the comparable al Ubaid
villages in Syria, as well as others similarly equipped on the
          ns


   _ THE HIGHER BARBARISM OF THE COPPER AGE                   75
  plateau ofAsia Minor, in Cyprus, and in peninsular Greece,
 disposed of all the technical knowledge and apparatus of
 civilization. The economic organization and social frame-
_ work were alone deficient. During the thousand odd years
_ of the Chalcolithic Age the peoples of the Near East had
_made discoveries pregnant with revolutionary consequences
_ - the metallurgy of copper and bronze, the harnessing of
_ animal motive power, wheeled vehicles, the potters’ wheel,
  bricks, the seal. Even before 3,000 B.c. these achievements
 _ were being diffused at least to the Aegean and to Turkistan
    and India. In a thousand years or so they will reach China
_ and Britain. But, save for two localized centres of bronze
  working in Mexico and Peru, none reached the New
~ World, Oceania, or Africa south of the Sahara till late
    historical times. The significance and nature of the ad- .
 ~ vances noted above in the archaeological record must now
_ be underlined.
_ The implications and revolutionary consequences of
-metallurgy have been explained in detail in Man Makes
_ Himself, as well as in more technical books on archaeology.
_ In practite it meant the combination of four major dis-
 coveries: (1) the malleability of copper; (2) its fusibility;
 _ (3) the reduction of copper from ores; and (4) alloys. Copper,
_ native or produced by reduction, may have seemed a
_ superior sort of stone that can not only be sharpened to
   cut like flint, but can also be bent, shaped by hammering,
' and even beaten out into sheets which can be cut up.
_ This property seems to have been known and utilized in
 Sialk I, by the Badarians and Amratians of Egypt men-
_ tioned in the next chapter, and was familiar to the pre-
 - Columbian Indians of North America. By itself it did not
_ take man very far.
_     Secondly, when heated, copper becomes as plastic as
_ potter’s clay; nay, it will become liquid and will assume
_the shape of any container or mould into which it is poured.
  Yet on cooling it not only retains this shape, but becomes —
   as hard as stone and can be given as good a cutting edge
 as‘flint. For tools copper possesses all the virtues” of the
76     ;     WHAT    HAPPENED      IN   HISTORY

older materials — stone, bone, wood - with others super-
added. In fashioning a tool out of the old materials the
only thing to do was to detach bits from a larger lump or
matrix. An implement of copper, like a pot of clay, can
be made by joining pieces together indissolubly; in practice,
it is generally the mould, often made of clay, that is built
up, liquid metal being then run in till the cavity is full.
The sole limit to the size of the mould and therefore of the
casting, the metal implement, is the operators’ technical
skill. And of course the shapes that can be given to the
casting are equally unlimited. Moreover, the form of the
casting can be further modified by hammering, as copper
is malleable. Finally, a metal tool is more durable than one
of stone or bone. A copper axe or knife neither cuts better
nor keeps its edge longer than a stone axe or a flint blade.
But, apart from a very limited amount of resharpening,
once a flint or stone tool is broken not all the king’s horses
nor all the king’s men can put‘it together again. A copper
tool can not only be resharpened by whetting or hammer-
ing; if broken, it can be recast with trifling loss and a new
tool turned out as good as the old.
    The utilization of these advantages required in practice
a complex of ingenious inventions — a furnace with a draught
to produce the relatively high temperature requisite for
fusion (in the event bellows were invented, but their use
is not directly demonstrated before 1500 B.c. in Egypt and
1000 in Europe), crucibles to contain the molten metal,
tongs to lift them with, and above all moulds to confer
upon the casting the desired shape.
   Thirdly, this superior stone, that occurs very rarely in
the metallic state in the Old World, can be produced
artificially by heating with charcoal several much com-
moner sorts of stone or earth, the ores we call oxides,
carbonates, silicates, and sulphides of copper. None of these
looks in the least like metallic copper nor possesses its desi-
rable qualities, but they are fortunately brightly coloured
and so the sort of stones early man looked for as pigments or
charms. The discovery of the magical transubstantiation
                                     ,   rir wats   ep re         i




      THE   HIGHER    BARBARISM     OF   THE        COPPER      AGE    eh

  of these crystalline minerals into metallic copper unlocked
   adequate supplies of the metal. It had been made by the
_ time of Sialk III and the al ’Ubaid phase in Syria. It was
 followed in the Near East by the reduction of other metals
_ ~silver, lead, and tin — and so led on to the fourth discovery
_that was certainly the latest in time.
_ Casting is easier, and the product is more reliable, if to
the copper there can be deliberately added antimony,
_ arsenic, lead or, best of all, tin. By 3000 B.c. the advantages
  of an alloy of copper and tin had been realized in India,
_Mesopotamia, Asia Minor, and Greece; bronze had been dis-
 covered. (In the sequel bronze means this alloy of copper
and tin unless otherwise stated,)
  _ The sciences applied in metallurgy are more abstruse
than those employed in agriculture or even pot-making.
_ The chemical change effected by smelting is much more
 _ unexpected than that which transforms clay into pottery.
  The conversion of crystalline or powdery green or blue
_ ores into tough red copper is a veritable transubstantiation.
   The change from the solid to the liquid state and back
    again, controlled in casting, is hardly less startling. The
actual    manipulations   themselves     are more           intricate and
_ exacting even than those involved in pot-making, spinning,
_ or boat-building.
     Hence it is not surprising that in the earliest historical
_ societies, as among contemporary barbarians, metallurgists
are always specialists. Probably from the first metallurgy
_ was a craft as well as a technique. Smiths and miners not
only possess peculiar skills, they have also been initiated
_ into ‘mysteries’. Presumably their craft lore was transmitted
 by the same concrete methods of precept and example as
_ hunting lore or textile skill. But it was not divulged to all
  members of the community as these would be; not every
Belansman was trained as a smith. The operations of mining
 and smelting and casting are too elaborate and demand
 too continuous attention to be normally conducted in the
  intervals of tilling fields or minding cattle. Metallurgy is a
 full-time job.
78           ‘   WHAT HAPPENED             IN HISTORY
   These occupations are the first industries not normally |
conducted within the household to provide for domestic
needs, but to meet the demands of others. The operators—
must therefore rely for their sustenance mainly on surplus —,
foodstuffs produced by their customers. After the magicians,—
they may be the first class to be withdrawn from direct
food-production. They are therefore not immediately de-—
pendent on the land for food; their livelihood depends
upon the possession of portable suis. and generally also of
portable goods, which they exchange for food.
     Such   craftsmen    are   therefore   less amenable   to social
discipline than fishermen or farmers, less dependent on
territorial society than even the magician; for his authority |
is rooted in the ‘subjective’ beliefs and superstitions of his —
fellow clansmen.        But the craftsman     might find a market —
for his objective skill and substantial wares even among
strangers. The rare metal objects that we have encountered 4
in the Copper Age villages were very likely made by ‘
itinerant smiths travelling about the country with ingots —
of metal and producing* implements on the spot ‘to order’. -
This was demonstrably the case in the European Bronze
Age. It is the rule for iron workers in Negro Africa to-day. —
The tinker in rural Europe is a survival of the same
system.
   Now, as the craftsmen were the practical bearers of the
scientific traditions of barbarism, their ability to migrate
contributed materially to the diffusion of discoveries and
the pooling of experience. The comparative uniformity of j
the very earliest metal products, anterior to the urban_
revolution, may be explained as the result of such diffusion.
Metallurgical lore is the first approximation to international
science. But it remains craft lore. All the practical science
of the ancient smiths and miners was certainly embedded
in an unpractical matrix of magic ritual. Assyrian texts,
even in the First Millennium B.c., contain hints of what.
such rituals may have involved — foetuses and virgins’
blood. So do the remains of a bronze-workers’ encampment
in Heathery Burn Cave (Co. Durham) in England. To- da
       m     Ae
     OF us        vs   3          {
 _ THE HIGHER BARBARISM OF THE COPPER AGE                      79
   rbarian smiths’ operations are surrounded with a com-
 dex of magical precautions.
  In the second place, the transmission of such lore by
   pprenticeship is largely imitative and therefore con-
   ervative. The processes need not be described in abstract
   erms. All the apprentice need do is to imitate as closely
as possible every operation of the master. In so doing he
  has no opportunity of introducing a variation which might
be beneficial.
     Finally, craft lore is liable to be secret. It is passed on
 from father to son or from master to apprentice. Craftsmen
  hus tend to form guilds or clans which will guard jealously
  he mysteries of the craft. Among barbarians we find here-
  jitary craft-clans organized on the same ‘kinship’ basis as
   avage clans.
 _ The adoption of metal tools will thus make room for a
    ew class that had no place in a pure neolithic economy.
      t it will at the same time destroy the self-sufficiency
 distinctive of that economy. The individual householder
  sacrifices his independence in so far as he regards as
  necessities metal tools that he cannot make himself but
  must acquire by barter from the smith. He must henceforth
  produce a surplus beyond his domestic needs to support
    pecialists who produce not food but indigestible ores,
  ngots, and axes.
  _ The neolithic village, too, will have to sacrifice its highly-
erized self-sufficiency. Copper ore is by no means common:
 the lodes are generally located among infertile mountains;
 very few villages can have had a copper mine in the im-
  mediate vicinity. Nearly always the raw material at least
  will have to be imported; its regular use involves the
  organization of a regular supply — trade, in fact, and that
  10 longer a luxury trade. As soon as metal is regarded as
  4 necessity and no longer a luxury, the local unit becomes
  by that very fact dependent on imported materials. Society
   nust intensify its production of foodstuffs to support the
     ecialists engaged in mining, extracting, and working the:
   xewly necessary material.
80            WHAT   HAPPENED     IN   HISTORY
                          I            \          h              ?

   Now, owing to the relative rarity of copper and the
absolute rarity of tin (as soon as the alloy becomes the
standard metal), and owing further to the difficulties of
transporting heavy materials, the surplus required to sup-
port the essential specialists is large. Bronze equipment
involves a great deal of social labour; it is inevitably
expensive. The advantages enumerated on page 75 do not
appear in themselves to have been sufficient to induce
peasants to produce the requisite surplus, to stimulate an
‘effective demand’, as modern economists would say. ‘wo
factors seem to have contributed to that end, to convert
metal into a necessity.
   On the one hand, under the peculiar            ada       of
alluvial valleys like the Tigris-Euphrates delta, where even
stone is scarce, the greater durability of copper or bronze
tools may have made them actually more economical than
stone or obsidian. On the other hand, in war, especially
for in-fighting, a copper knife or dagger is much more
reliable than a flint one; the latter may break just at the
awkward moment when you must stab your enemy or
perish. The first metal objects, apart from small trinkets, to
be commonly or regularly deposited in graves are, in ce
weapons, not tools. In practice we shall find that such
depositions are common only after the urban revolution in
the alluvial valleys had produced a new economic order
which made the demand effective. But in the meantime
another series of independent discoveries and inventions
had simplified the satisfaction. of the demand by reducing
 transport costs.
   Having tamed cattle to provide meat and then milk,
some societies hit upon the idea of shifting to the shoulders
of oxen part of the heavy burden of toil. The first step,
perhaps, was to make a pair of oxen drag over a field a
variant on the hoe that women had hitherto wielded — a
plough. Besides the plough itself, a yoke and harness had
to be invented, by means of which the beast’s tractive
power could be imparted to it. Fortunately the broad
shoulders of the ox give purchase for the yoke without
       THE   HIGHER    BARBARISM     OF   THE   COPPER   AGE    8I

  impeding the animal’s movement or respiration. Ploughs
 _ being at first made entirely of wood, no direct evidence as
  _ to the invention’s antiquity is available. Written or inscribed
  documents attest the use of ploughs in Mesopotamia and
  _ Egypt by 3000 B.c., and in India not much later. Soon
_ after 1400 B.c. ploughing is similarly attested in China, and
   not very much later pictures of ploughs were carved on the
rocks of distant Sweden. So by 1000 B.c. the plough, like
bronze, had attained the limits of its ancient diffusion
(p. 161).
_ The plough changed farming from plot cultivation to
 agriculture (the tillage of fields), and welded indissolubly
cultivation and stock-breeding. It relieved women of the
most exacting drudgery, but deprived them of their mon-
 opoly over the cereal crops and the social status that con-
_ ferred. Among     barbarians,   whereas women     normally hoe
 _plots, it is men who plough fields. And in even the oldest
    Sumerian and Egyptian documents the ploughmen really
_ are males. To support the heavy work plough-oxen need
 _ better fodder than can be got by grazing on the steppe;
 _ they are generally kept in stalls and fed on specially-grown
    hay, or even barley. So stall dung .became available to
 _ fertilize the fields. But the most decisive innovation was
_ that by harnessing the ox man began to control and use a
 _ motive power other than that furnished by his own muscu-
_ lar energy. The ox was the first step to the steam engine
    and petrol motor.
 _     The new motive power could be applied in other ways.
_ On the dusty plains of Hither Asia as on the snows of
_ Northern Europe heavy loads can most conveniently be
  _ transported on sledges. As a sledge was known in Northern
_s Europe in mesolithic times (p. 44), it was almost certainly
_ known in Hither Asia before 4000 B.c. Of course, a yoke
 _ of oxen can pull a sledge as easily as a plough. The same
  _ harness will serve in both cases. There is no more evidence
_ for prehistoric sledges than for ploughs, but sledges were
-still being used — at feast for funerals — in Mesopotamia as
_ late as 2600 B.c.
                                                  4)



 82            WHAT   HAPPENED     IN HISTORY          |.

    Long before that transport had been revolutionized by
 the application of rotary motion, by the invention of the
 wheel. There are ambiguous indications of its use in North
 Syria as early as the Tell-Halaf phase. In any case, the
 models from Gawra (p. 74) show two-wheeled and four-—
 wheeled carts already in general use about 3000 B.c. From
 Sumerian sculptures and actual specimens from tombs of.
 the Third Millennium the details of their construction can
 be deduced. The wheels consisted of three pieces of solid
 wood mortised together and bound with leather tyres
 attached with copper nails, The wheels turned in one piece
 with the axles, which could be secured to the body of the
 sledge-wagon merely with leather thongs.
   Carts like these can still be seen in use in Sardinia,
 Turkey, and Sind. Though heavy and clumsy, they are
 durable, and denote an immense advance on porterage or
 sledge transport. They are, indeed, the lineal ancestors of
 the automobile. By about 2000 B.c. wheeled vehicles were |
 in use from the Indus valley to the Syrian coasts. In Egypt,
 however, no wheeled vehicles were in use before 1600 B.c.
- But the invention had reached Crete by 2000 B.c., and
 ‘before the end of the Second Millennium was known from
  China to Sweden. But in the interval, by crossing with
 other inventions, vehicular transport had been materially
 accelerated.
    Man’s (or generally woman’s) shoulders were the oldest
 means of transport. But when animal motive power came
 into use, it was natural to transfer the pack to the shoulders
 of some dumb beast. For this purpose the ox is not well
 adapted. The oldest pack animal would seem to have been
 the ass, a native of East Africa. Before 3000 B.c. the tame.
 ass was known in Egypt, and presumably used for transport.
 Asses were certainly so used in Syria and Mesopotamia
 early in the Third Millennium. But there was a wild ass,
 the onager, in Hither Asia which was domesticated, too, so
 that it is not clear how far the pack asses of the Orient were
 of African origin.
      In the Fourth Millennium horses’ bones have been found
                                                 p                            eo eae we
                  eae     ty   Apt er
                                 ing   LA   b.       LJ   .
                                                              "4
                                                                   4

                                a     oT
    pame
             Pr   ee tc
      Peay   iv

   “THE HIGHER BARBARISM                             OF THE COPPER AGE   83
at Sialk, in Iran, and at Anau, in Turkestan. A native
habitat for horses lay probably in that direction, and the
Merv oasis would be a quite likely centre for their domesti-
cation. But, of course, horses can be kept to provide meat
and milk, as they were by the Mongols and the Scythians.
  et they can be used for riding, driving, and as pack
 nimals. Riding as a means of accelerating travel and facili-
 ating intercourse is a factor to be reckoned with, but the
 xtent of equitation and of the use of horses in general
 yefore 2000 B.C. is still problematical.
  That is all that can be said at the moment of the use of
 amels, too. Since 1000 B.c. transport and communication
 cross the deserts of Hither Asia have depended on the
  hip of the desert’. But long before that, camel bones
turned up in a layer at Anau, equated with Sialk I or II,
  vhile there is an isolated model of a camel from an Egyptian
   rave said to be a little older than 3000 B.c, So some
 societies may have disposed of this means of cross-country
transport even in the Fourth Millennium.
_ In any case, travel by land had been accelerated by
 3000 B.c. by harnessing Asiatic asses or horses, or both (for
 safety let us say ‘equids’, which embraces both species) to
   ght two-wheeled cars or chariots. The harness (familiar
  from Sumerian pictures in the Third Millennium) employed
  was that already devised to control the ox. But as these
   nfortunate equids do not possess broad shoulders like the
     , tractive power was transmitted to the yoke by a breast-
                                                             to
  band across the animal’s throat against which it had
 pull. In so doing the wretched beast was half-choking
                                                            al
  imself. Despite the loss of power thus caused, the Orient
                                                           d,
 harness was copied wherever the horse-chariot was adopte
                                                      was in-
 ind was not finally. reformed till the horse-collar
                                             about  the ninth
‘yented in Dark-Age Europe somewhere
 century A.D.
                                                        the
   So before the end of the Fourth Millennium 8.c.
                                                       had
 strength of oxen, horses, and asses, and the wheel
                                       motiv e power   and
‘provided Oriental societies with the
                                               super seded
equipment for land transport which were not
ROR   gn cor ee   ra   oe Ny Memeo Gee




         84                   WHAT       HAPPENED   IN HISTORY
         till the nineteenth century. And by 3000 B.c. wind was
         providing motive power for water transport, too. Even
         palaeolithic hunters must have possessed some sort of rafts.
         and canoes. Mesolithic Europeans could succeed in crossing
         the stormy seas between Ulster and Kintyre; their neolithic
         successors made still more adventurous journeys. The Poly-
         nesians, of Oceania, though equipped only with stone tools,
         could build boats over one hundred feet long, capable of
         accommodating more than a hundred persons and pro-
         visions, in which they made journeys of a thousand miles
         or more. The Polynesian boats were equipped with sails,
         and sailing boats are frequently represented in the Mediter-
         ranean and Egypt during the Third Millennium. But the
         oldest evidence for the sail is provided by a model from an
         al ’Ubaid grave at Eridu and then by late Egyptian vases.
         The boats depicted on the latter are believed to be foreign
         to the Nile valley, but perhaps at home on the Persian
         Gulf. In any case they prove that the sail had reached
         Egypt before 3000 B.c. By this invention man for the
         first time harnessed an inorganic force to provide motive
         power. In this respect it remained unique till the invention
         of the water-wheel at the end of the First Millennium B.c.
         The clumsy square sails depicted on the Egyptian vases
         needed much improvement before ships could be man-
         oeuvred freely, but they must still rank as the direct pre-
         cursors of those that propelled shipping till the nineteenth
          century. In any case, whether sailed, paddled, rowed, or
          merely hauled from the banks of rivers or canals, the boats
          of the Fourth Millennium could transport heavy and bulky
          loads far more economically than pack-asses or ox-carts.
          The commerce of antiquity, in so far as it handled cheap
          and popular goods in bulk, was mainly waterborne.
             The new means of transport just described, by simplifying
          the distribution of goods, naturally furthered the emergence
          of the new class of artisans dependent on imported materials.
          They may themselves have evoked new specialists. The
          construction of wagons and boats calls for great skill in
          carpentry. Before the linguistic ancestors of the Hindus,
       THE    HIGHER   BARBARISM     OF   THE   COPPER   AGE   85
_ Greeks, and other Indo-European peoples split up, Carpentry
  seems to have been already a specialized craft, since the
_ carpenter is the only craftsman denoted by a word common
_ to Sanskrit, Greek, and other branches of the linguistic
_ family. Nevertheless, ethnography shows that farmers do
_ construct carts and boats without calling in professionals.
_ We cannot, therefore, deduce the specialization of boat-
_ builders or wainwrights before the urban revolution. But
one craftsman beside the smith is attested by archae-
_ ology.
 _     From a lump of plastic clay thrown on the centre of a
_ wheel spinning fast on a vertical pivot, an expert hand-can
    elicit in a ‘couple of minutes a vessel that it might take
   several days to build up by hand. And the vessel thus made
 _will be perfectly symmetrical. On the other hand, its
_ production requires extreme dexterity that must be labori-
_ ously acquired through long apprenticeship. Ethnography
_ shows that potters who use the wheel are normally male
_ specialists, no longer women for whom potting is just a
_ household task like cooking and spinning, In antiquity, too,
_ it may be assumed that the use of the wheel indicates the
_ industrialization of ceramic production, the emergence of a
_ new specialized craft.             f
_    Since his equipment is very simple and his raw material
_ is available everywhere, the expert potter may be a per-
- ambulating craftsman as easily as the smith. In Crete and
  the Aegean to-day potters, with their ‘families’ and their
 wheel, travel from village to village and from island to
 _ island, turning out in each what local taste demands. We
_ have a little direct evidence for such itinerants in the
   Second Millennium from Crete and Aegina. Perhaps,
indeed,      the earliest wheel-made      pots were   everywhere
, produced by such travelling workers. In any case, potters
_ did exhibit the same mobility as characterizes other early
 craftsmen. They, too, might be emancipated from the
  restrictions of territorial society; potters’ lore could become
  intertribal, if not international.
     Hence the wheel early invaded the ceramic industry
86           WHAT    HAPPENED     IN HISTORY        ~~

throughout Hither Asia. We have met it in phase III o
the Copper Age of Assyria, at Sialk III in Iran, and by—
2500 B.G. it was firmly established in India. In Egypt, on j
the contrary, the potters’ wheel arrived only after the
urban revolution under Dynasty III, and in a less efficient
form than in Asia, but still a thousand years before wheeled
vehicles were known beside the Nile. In Europe, the rela-
tions between these two applications of the wheel were
reversed. North of the Alps wheeled vehicles were known
by the Second Millennium, the potter’s wheel not till the
end of the First.
   In contrast to the predominantly female contributions —
described in chapter III, the discoveries and inventions just
considered seem all due to the men, and certainly strength-
ened their economic position. By relieving women of a lot
of heavy but essential tasks in the way of hoeing, carrying
burdens, and making pots, they cut away the economic
foundations of mother-right. Moreover, the new specialists
will not really fit in to the old kinship organization. Even
if the potter settles permanently in a village, he is obviously
not a clansman in any physiological sense. His membership
of the local group and his duties therein are determined by
residence and function. A new basis is needed for a social
order that embraces such strangers. Moreover, their number
may have been augmented by the conquests and mixtures of
populations deduced from the change of cultures in the
archaeological record.
   Now, among barbarians where some of the innovations
here discussed have been adopted, sociologists expect to
find the patriarchal ‘family’, and even that form of it in
which the household comprises married sons, their wives
and children, and perhaps even slaves, as well as the
patriarch. In such a society personal property may extend
from ornaments and ciothes, implements and weapons, to
flocks and herds — and slaves — capital goods which can
increase. And now a man who has distinguished himself
as a ‘war-chief’ (in matriarchal society often a temporary
and elective office), has a chance of consolidating his
    =
        THE   HIGHER   BARBARISM    OF   THE   COPPER   AGE    87

  authority on an economic basis by wealth in cattle or
  servants. As this wealth will pass to his sons, so the authority
  it gives may become hereditary. But to become royal power
  it must be consecrated, perhaps in some such way as that
  suggested on page 65. But another institution may ease the
  transition.
     Among barbarians on this sort of level of technical and
  economic development some of the fertility and other
  rituals that had been performed communally by all clans-
  men in savagery are often found to have been monopolized
  by ‘secret societies’, initiation into which must be purchased
  by feasts and presents. Within such a society there are
  generally grades; advancement up this ladder of rank is,
   like initiation, a‘sacramental rite, but it must be none the
   less purchased. The members of such a society normally
   remain fishers or hunters or herdsmen or farmers. If they
   became specialists and were exempted like craftsmen from
 _ these productive avocations, they would become professional
   priests. And if rank be hierarchical, the richest and highest
   will be very like kings. The archaeological material just
   described gives some hints that this sort of development had
   been going on in the Copper Age in Syria.
      Seals, such as we met already in Halafian villages (p. 73),
   no doubt start as amulets that confer mana on their lucky
   wearers. But as well as, or instead of, being carved into the
   shape of a totem or a ‘thing of power’, they are engraved
   with magic patterns or representations of the totem. This
   pattern with its magic could be transferred to a lump of
   clay. By pressing his seal-amulet on such a lump affixed to
   the stopper of a jar, an individual could put a ‘tabu’ on it,
   transfer part of his personality to it, and mark it as his
_ property. Even Halafians used amulet-seals in this way,
   presumably indicating a recognition of proprietary rights.
   Incidentally, the standardized symbols engraved on the
   seal for this purpose will help to provide the characters
   for a conventional script when the urban revolution has
   made writing necessary.
      The repeated reconstruction on the same spot of the



—
88           WHAT    HAPPENED      IN HISTORY

shrines at Gawra through all the abrupt changes of other
aspects of material and spiritual culture (pp. 73-4) can
best be explained by assuming that, despite all changes of
population, some society of votaries maintained its corporate
personality. The hypothetical corporations may correspond
to the ‘secret societies’ of modern barbarians or to the
priesthoods into which these develop. By the fourth phase
at Gawra the shrines had already assumed the distinctive
form that farther south is attested as the house of a god
where stands his cult image and the altar for sacrifices.
The colours with which they are painted are those pre-
scribed as symbolic and magical in later theological litera-
ture. The shrines are, then, the lineal precursors of temples
 that will symbolize the world order, and give some justi-
fication for assuming the worship or cult of personalized
deities.
    Now, the abrupt changes in secular architecture, pottery,
 and burial rites, noted at Gawra and other Syrian. tells,
 must reflect substantial changes in population. It is difficult
 to believe such changes were peaceable. Just as much as in
 temperate Europe (p. 67), and, indeed, even sooner, growing
 populations had to find an outlet for surplus families by
 stealing other people’s land. Presumably the Halafians had
 supplanted older ‘neolithic’ communities, to be replaced
 in their turn by the al ’Ubaid people. In that case the
 changes of archaeological ‘cultures’ must be the results of
 wars of conquest that would afford the chief the oppor-
 tunity of winning secular power. But the vanquished need
 not have been exterminated. If some survived as guardians
 of the ritual tradition of a local god, others may have been
 left alive as serfs or slaves. Men would have been ‘domesti-
 cated’, like oxen and asses. Conquests would have produced
 stratified societies, divided into masters and slaves, em-
 bryos of the class division revealed in the oldest historical
 cities.
                                  meen
                                    ee       ae




