- GIVILIZATION                             230
     “THE DECLINE AND FALL OF
 - THE ANCIENT       WORLD                 260
                         PREFACE

How has Man progressed during the several hundred thousand
years of his existence on the Earth? That is the question to
 which this book offers an answer which does not pretend to.
 exhaustive. It is thus an extension of the account of Ma:
 progress in the long ages before the dawn of written histo iS
 advanced five years ago in Man Makes Himself (Watts & Co.)
 indeed in chapters II-V I have had to recapitulate in a ‘co m
 pressed form many events and conclusions set forth more ft
 there. But in other respects I have had to amplify what I tk
 wrote to adjust it to the wider perspective. For in the s
 sequent chapters I trespass upon the domains of
 history in which written records disclose aspects of
 endeavour that can only be inferred speculatively |
 historic archaeology. Yet here, too, I have tried to kee
 foreground the concrete archaeolgical facts of the sam
as those available in prehistoric times. ee if on


be the main stream of human progress and even so have
to close my account some fifteen hundred years ago.
                                     V. GorDON     CHILDE
  Edinburgh, October 1941                             aa




and exciting of these new results have been included i
present edition, but no substantial rewriting has been nee
nor attempted.
      .


  March   1954
                        a
                            .     a ieee Tekh
                                yer           ’   (     Sy,
                                          a




                                      I

       ~ ARCHAEOLOGY                          AND     HISTORY
      RITTEN history contains a very patchy and incomplete
      ord of what mankind has accomplished in parts of the
      rld during the last five thousand years. The period sur-
       ed is at best about one hundredth part of the time during
      ich men have been active on our planet. The picture pre-
      ted is frankly chaotic; it is hard to recognize in it any
         ing pattern, any directional trends. Archaeology sur-
       $ a period a hundred times as long. In this-enlarged field
       tudy it does disclose general trends, cumulative changes
     ‘oceeding in one main direction and towards recognizable
     ults.
 oy Aided by archaeology, history with its prelude prehistory
_ becomes a continuation of natural history. The latter studies
in  the geological record the ‘evolution’ of various species of
      g creatures as the result of ‘natural selection’ — the
      ival and multiplication of those bodily adapted to their
  environments. Man is the last great species to emerge; in the
     logical record his fossil remains would occur in the top-
   ost layers, so that in this literal sense man is the highest
     duct of the process. Prehistory can watch the survival
_and multiplication of this species through improvements in


     their environments to them. And archaeology can trace the
       me process in historical times, with the additional aid of
       ritten records, as well as in regions where the dawn of
       tten history has been retarded. Without any change of
      ethod it can follow down to the present day the working

     _ Our species, man in the widest sense, has succeeded in
         iving and multiplying chiefly by improving his equip-
banipetent that man acts on and reacts to the exter
world, draws sustenance therefrom and escapes its peril
in technical language adapts himself to his environmen
even adjusts his environment to his needs. Man’s eq
ment, however, differs significantly from that of othe
animals. These carry their whole equipment about v
them as parts of their bodies; the rabbit carries paws to di
with, the lion claws and teeth for tearing his prey, the b
carpenter’s tusks, most beasts hairy or furry coats to ke


some that he started with during            ee times. Iti
replaced by tools, extracorporeal organs that he makes, u:Ise
and discards at will; he makes picks and shovels for diggin

cutting wood, clothing to keep him warm in cold w
houses of wood, brick, or stone to provide shelter. Some
early ‘men’ indeed had projecting canine teeth set in


not inflict mortal wounds.
   As with other animals, there is of course a bodily|
logical basis to man’s equipment. It may be summed u
two words, hands and brains. Relieved of the bur eI
carrying our bodies, our forefeet have developed into
cate instruments capable of an amazing variety of subtl
accurate movements. To control the latter and to link tl
up with impressions from outside received by the eye:
other sense organs we have become possessed of a peculi
complicated nervous system and an creep Hayy big
complicated brain.
   The detachable and extracorporeal cha          of the1
                                                        rest
of human equipment has obvious advantages. Itis m re
convenient and more adaptable than other animals’ eq
           d digging tools, but cannot compete with a cat’s as
          apons, while feliné paws are poor spades. Men can make
i        th tools and weapons.        In brief, an animal’s hereditary
    a equipment is adapted to performing a limited number of
         operations in a particular    environment.   Man’s extracor-
           al equipment can be adjusted to an almost infinite
           ber of operations in almost any environment — ‘can be’,
         te, not ‘is’.
         As against these advantages man has to learn not Sal to
          e but also to make his equipment. A chick soon finds
        tself equipped with feathers, wings, beak, and claws. It
         rtainly has to learn their use — how to keep its feathers —
-     clean, for instance. But this is very simple and will not take
        long. A human infant arrives with no such outfit and it will
         t grow spontaneously. The round pebbles on the ground
         ‘not in themselves suggest knives. Many processes and
       stages must intervene before the wallaby’s skin can be
        ansferred to the child’s back as a coat.
           Even the simplest tool made out of a broken bough or a
             pped stone is the fruit of long experience — of trials and
           .


        srrors, impressions noticed, remembered, and compared. The
     _ skill to make it has been acquired by observation, by recol-
       lection, and by experiment. It may seem an exaggeration,
         ut it is yet true to say that any tool is an embodiment of
        cience. For it is a practical application of remembered, com-
         yared, and collected experiences of the same kind as are
    _ systematized and summarized in scientific formulas, des-
    - criptions, and prescriptions.
     _ Happily the individual infant is not left to accumulate in
       its own person the requisite experience or itself to make all
      the trials and mistakes. A baby does not indeed inherit at
       yirth a physical mechanism of nerve-paths stamped in the
     : germ-plasm of the race and predisposing it to make automa-
     tically and instinctively the appropriate bodily movements.
                                               7



10           WHAT    HAPPENED      IN HISTORY       _
But it is born heir to a social tradition. Its parents an
elders will teach it how to make and use equipment i
accordance with the experience gathered by ancestral
generations. And the equipment it uses is itself just a-con- |
crete expression of this social tradition. A tool is a social 4
product and man isa social animal.
   Because it has so much to learn, a human infant is pecu-
liarly delicate and helpless, and its helplessness lasts longer _
than with the young of other animals. The physical counter-
part of learning is the storing of impressions and the build-
ing up of connexions between the various nerve-centres in
the brain. Meanwhile the brain must keep on growing. To
allow of such growth the skull-bones protecting the infant’s
brain remains very loosely joined together; only slowly doy.
the junctions (or sutures) knit up. While the brain is thus — is
unprotected it is very vulnerable; an infant can be Killed
terribly easily.                                           A


must keep together for several eae until the infants are 4
reared. In our species the natural family of parents an
children is a more stable and durable association he “a
among species whose young mature faster. In practice, how- —
ever, human families seem generally to live together in —
larger societies comparable to the herds and packs of gre- _
garious animals. Indeed, man is to some extent a gregarious _
animal.                                                     o
   Now in human, as in animal, societies the elder genera- —
tions transmit by example to the younger the collective —
experience accumulated by the group— what they in turn —
have learned in like fashion from their elders and parents. —
Animal education can all be done by example; a chick
learns how to peck and what to peck at by copying the hen.
For human infants who have so much to learn the imitative   _
method would be fatally slow. In human societies instruc- 5
tion is by precept as well as by example. Human societies     _
have gradually devised tools for communication between _
their members. In so doing they have brought forth a new
                                                          “
                 ARCHAEOLOGY         AND    HISTORY        ;      Il
 _ sort of equipment which can conveniently be labelled
     spiritual.
   _ Owing to the structure of the larynx, tongue muscles and
     other organs human beings, in common with some other
   creatures, are capable of emitting a very large range of
      noises that are technically called articulate sounds. Living in
     societies and possessing expansive brains, men have been
     able to invest these sounds with conventional meanings. By
     agreement sounds become words, signals for action and
     symbols for objects and events familiar to other members of
    the group. (Note, incidentally, that gestures too can be given
        eanings in the same way, though less conveniently): The
     cries of birds and the bleats of sheep have meanings in this
   sense; on hearing the signal all members of the flock act in
   _the appropriaté way. It means to them at least action and
     provokes an appropriate response in the creatures’ be-
_ haviour. Among men spoken words (and of course also
   gestures) fulfil the same function, but on a tremendously
    richer scale.
   _ Men’s first words may perhaps have carried their mean-
     ings on the face of them. Our word ‘peewit’ simulates the
     cry of the bird thus named. Paget suggests that the shape
     assumed by the lips in pronouncing a word may pictorially
    mimic the thing indicated. In any case such self-explanatory
     noises would not carry us very far. Most words used even by
  the lowest savages bear no recognizable similarity to what
  they denote. They are purely conventional; that is, meanings
k have to be attached to them artificially by some sort of tacit
jagreement between members of the society using them. The
     process becomes explicit when a conference of chemists
     agrees on the name for a new element. It is usually far more
  _ subtle.
        It is just because the meanings of words are thus conven-
 tional that children have to be taught to talk. Learning to
q talk means essentially learning what meanings the society
   ‘to which the child belongs attaches to noises that it can
    make. Incidentally this is a substantial addition to the for-
    midable list of things a poor human infant has to learn. It
victim cannot understand       ee is said to him, i.e., cann
remember the meanings attached to the noises he he
Even the earliest ‘human’ skulls bear marks of a swellin
the brain in the speech regions, so that language seems as
and universal a human trait as tool-making.
   Language transforms the process of social tradition; p
cept accelerates education. By example a mother can sh
her offspring what to do when a savage beast appears.-
many young things find such concrete lessons fatal! By pre-
cept, she can explain in advance what to do if the savag:
beast does appear — a method of instruction much m re
economical of life! In general by imitating your fellows°
learn how to act in a concrete case actually present.
the aid of language you can be taught how to mee
emergency before it arrives. Language is the vehicle fo
transmission of the social heritage of experience; byit
means experience  — the results of trials and errors, what
happen and what to do — is collected and transm



biological inheritance — but also that of all their group.-
only can parents describe to their descendants the crises 0



Human experience can be pooled. In learning to make a ;
use your equipment you are being initiated into this pooled iY
experience.
   Language is more than a mere vehicle of tradition,
affects what is transmitted. The socially accepted meanin
of a word (or other symbol) is almost necessarily somewhz
abstract. The word ‘banana’ stands for a class of objects
having in common    certain visible, tangible, odorous, and    —
above all edible qualities. In using it we make abstraction
  omething of this abstract character. By its very nature
     nguage involves classification. On the practical side, by
     ample you learn to imitate accurately and in detail a
     rticular set of manipulative movements. By precept you
     n be taught the sort of movements to perform, but you
       ‘still left a little room for variation. In engineering the
       trast between apprenticeship and a university education
   eally goes back to this. Language makes tradition rational.
     Reasoning has been defined as ‘the ability to solve pro-
  blems without going through a physical process of trial and
   rror’. Instead of trying to do a thing with your hands and
    erhaps burning your fingers, you do it in your head using
     as — images or symbols of the actions which would be
   avolved. Other animals than men certainly behave as if
  they reasoned in this sense. Faced with a banana midway
  yp a tube, open at both ends but too long to reach up, a
      mpanzee discovered how to push the banana with a
     ck from one end and then grab it from the other, without
   oing through a number of futile movements, by sitting and
    reasoning’. The ape must have imagined the banana in
        ous non-existent positions before it hit upon the trick.
      t it did not have to go very far from the concrete situation
_ with which it was actually confronted. What is distinctive of
 human reasoning is that it can go immensely farther from
 the actual present situation than any other animal’s reason-
 ing ever seems to get it. In this distinctive advance language
 has surely been a very great help.
    Reasoning and all that we call thinking, including the ~
-chimpanzee’s, must involve mental operations with what
Vsaychologists call images. A visual image, a mental picture of,
 say, a banana, is always liable to be a picture of a particular
  banana ina particular setting. A word on the contrary is, as
 explained, more general and abstract, having eliminated
  ust those accidental features that gives individuality to any
real banana. Mental images of words (pictures of the sound
  14            WHAT    HAPPENED       IN HISTORY
  or of the muscular movements entailed in utteringit) fo:
  very convenient counters for thinking with. Thinking with —
  their aid necessarily possesses just that quality of abstract-_
  ness and generality that animal thinking seems to lack. Men ©
  can think, as well as talk, about the class of objects called
  ‘bananas’; the chimpanzee never gets further than ‘that
  banana in that tube’. In this way the social instrument
  termed language has contributed to what is grandilo
  quently described as ‘man’s emancipation from bondage to.
  the concrete’.                                                 4
     To reason is to operate with symbols ‘in the head’ and not i
  with things or actions in the external world. Conventional—
  words are symbols, though by no means the only kind. You—
  can put such symbols together and combine them in all —
  sorts of ways in your head without moving a muscle. The {
  term ‘idea’ is generally used for what words and other
  symbols denote, mean, or refer to. In a sense ‘banana’ does |
  not refer to anything you can see, touch, smell, or even eat,a
  but only to an idea — the ‘ideal ey . Still this idea is.
  happily represented by plenty of substantial edible bananas.
  even if none of them quite comes up to the standard of the
  ideal banana. But in society men make names for and talk
  about ideas which cannot in fact be seen, smelt, handled
  tasted like bananas — ideas such as two-headed eagle, mana, —
~ electricity, cause. All these are social products, like the words *
  that express them. Societies behave as if they stood for real—
 things. In fact men seem to be impelled to far more strenu-|
 ous and sustained action by the idea of two-headed eagle,
 immortality, or freedom than by the most succulent
 bananas!
    Without going in for any metaphysical subtleties, socially
 approved and sustained ideas that inspire such action ie
 be treated by history as just as real as those which stand for
 the more substantial objects of archaeological study. In E
 practice ideas form as effective an element in the environ-
 ment of any human society as do mountains, trees, animals,
 the weather and the rest of external nature. Societies, that is,
 behave as if they were reacting to a spiritual environment as —
ii),
zy                  ARCHAEOLOGY         AND HISTORY                  15
P
‘    well as to a material environment. To deal with this spiritual
     environment they behave as if they needed a spiritual
 _ €quipment just as much as they need a material equipment
  _ of tools.
_       This spiritual equipment is not confined to ideas which
_ can be - and are — translated into tools and weapons that
_ work successfully in controlling and transforming external
  _ nature, nor yet to the language which is the vehicle for ideas.
   _ It includes also what is often termed society’s ideology — its
re
Pen _ superstitions, religious beliefs, loyalties, and artistic ideals.
    Apparently in pursuit of ideologies and inspired by ideas,
  _men perform actions of a kind never observed among other
_animals. At least 100,000 years ago those strange-looking
;creatures termed Neanderthal men ceremonially buried
  their dead children and relatives, and provided them with
,food and tools. Every known human society to-day, however
E savage, performs rites — often quite painful — and abstains
_ from pleasures that are available to them. The motives for
_ —and stimuli to — these actions and abstentions to-day, and
-Presumably i in the past too, are socially sanctioned ideas
    of the sort denoted by our words ‘immortality’, ‘magic’,
es“god’. Such actions are strange to the rest of the animal
_kingdom, presumably because brutes do not use a language
   symbolism and hence cannot form such abstract ideas.
: Flints over a hundred thousand years old seem to have
  been fashioned with more care and delicacy than was
:requisite for mere utilitarian efficiency. It looks as if their
_ author had wanted to make an implement that was not only
_ serviceable but also beautiful. More than 25,000 years ago
 _ people began painting their bodies and hanging round their
   necks shells and beads, made with considerable labour.
_ To-day all over the world we find people knocking out their
_ teeth, binding their feet, deforming their bodies with corsets
_or submitting to some other mutilation in obedience to the
   dictates of fashion. Such behaviour again seems peculiar to
the human species. It results from and gives expression to an
ideology.
_ So with the aid of abstract ideas men have evolved and
however remote from obvious biological none, is foun
practice to be biologically useful — that is, favourable to
species’ survival. Without such spiritual equipment not
only do societies tend to disintegrate, but the individua
composing them may just stop bothering to keep alive. Th
‘destruction of religion’ among primitive peoples is alw.
cited by experts as a major cause in their extinction in co




have ee            to that by       ue aoadienes They ae
ceased to increase sufficiently to prevent the diminuti
the island’s population.’
   Evidently societies of men ‘cannot live by bread alot
But if ‘every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of
does not directly or indirectly promote the growth a
biological and economic prosperity of the society that sancti-
fies them, that society and its god with it will vanish u
mately. It is this natural selection that guarantees that
long run the ideals of a society are ‘just translations and in
sions in men’s minds of the material’. The religion o
Eddystone Islanders provided a motive for living and ke
economic system functioning. But in practice head-hu
kept down the numbers of the islanders. So it ee



judged by historical selection. But the verdict may be lor
 delayed.                                                  j
   An ideology is evidently a social product. ‘Notonly


 reality, their power to influence pevb to their pei
 by society. Seemingly absurd beliefs can win and maint
    ence provided every member of the group accepts them
and has been taught to believe in them from childhood. It
    never occur to any one to question a belief universally
    - Few of us have any better grounds for believing in
   ms than for believing in witches. Our society inculcates
     former belief and ridicules the latter, but other societies
   verse the judgements. Of course a number of acknow-
   dged experts have seen germs under the microscope. But
  “ill more experts in medieval Europe and in Negro Africa
   ave seen witches functioning. The superiority of our belief
  ;in the long run established if antiseptics and vaccines
    cceed better in preventing deaths, and so permitting
   cial growth, than do incantations and witch-burnings.
_ Not the least important function of an ideology is to hold
society together and lubricate its workings. And in this guise
at least ideology reacts on technology and material equip-
ment. For, like spiritual equipment, material equipment is a
social product not only in the sense that it springs from social
tradition. In practice the production and use of tools also
       ires co-operation between members of a society. To-day

       s housing, clothing, and satisfaction for other needs only

 as a result of the co-operation of a vast and highly com-
 plicated productive organization or economy. Cut off from
   lis we should be very uncomfortable and should probably
‘starve. Theoretically ‘primitive man’, with simpler wants
and more rudimentary equipment, could shift for himself
   one. In practice even the rudest savages live in groups
   rganized to co-operate in getting food and preparing
  :quipment as well as in performing ceremonies. Among the
 Australian aborigines, for instance, we find a division of
labour between the sexes in hunting and gathering as well
as in making implements and vessels. There is also a division
of the product of this co-operative activity.
_ Even the student of material culture has to study a society
is a co-operative organization for producing means to
 atisfy its needs, for reproducing itself - and for producing
 ew needs. He wants to see its economy working. But its
18           WHAT    HAPPENED     IN   HISTORY

economy affects, and is affected by, its ideology. The
‘materialist concept of history’ asserts that the economy —
determines the ideology. It is safer and more accurate to —
repeat in other words what has been stated already: in the ©
long run an ideology can survive only if it facilitates the —
smooth and efficient functioning of the economy. If it —
hamper that, the society — and with it the ideology — must —
perish in the end. But the reckoning may be long postponed.
An obsolete ideology can hamper an economy and impede|         ‘
its change for longer than Marxists admit.
    Pdcally social tradition is one: the man of to-day is_
theoretically heir to all the ages, and inherits the accumu- %
lated experience of all his forerunners. This ideal is, how- —
ever, far from realization. Mankind does not form one —
society to-day, but is divided into many distinct societies;
all the available evidence suggests that this division was not
less. but even greater in the past as far as archaeology can -
penetrate. Each society may have not only different lan-—
guage conventions, but also equally different conventions—     i
about spiritual and even material equipment; for each has |
preserved, transmitted, and built up its own peculiar tradi- 4
tion.
   The babel of tongues is painfully obvious to-day; it will -
suffice here to recall that each language is the product of a”
social tradition, and itself reacts upon other traditional
modes of behaving and of thinking. Less familiar is the way —
in which divergences of tradition affect even material cul-_
ture. Americans use knives and forks differently from
Englishmen, and the difference in usage finds concrete
expression in subtle differences in the shapes of the knives
and forks themselves. In Ireland and Wales rural workers
use long-handled shovels; in England and Scotland the
handles are much shorter. The work accomplished i is in each
case the same, though the handling of the tool is, of course,
different. The differences are purely conventional. They |
reflect divergences in the social tradition. As such diver-
gences are concretely expressed in the forms of the tool
employed, they fall within the purview of archaeology, and”
                                                                -
                                                                ie




                                                                yi
                   ARCHAEOLOGY        AND   HISTORY                19

    can be followed into a remote past when no written records
    permit the recognition of linguistic differences.
       Man-like creatures appear some four to five hundred
    thousand years ago dispersed from England to China, and
    from Germany to the Transvaal. We can only assume that
    they lived in social groups and that these were small,
    sparsely scattered and mutually isolated. Under such con-
    ditions we should expect that each would develop rather
    different traditions in accordance with the varying climatic
    and other environmental conditions with which they had to
    contend. And, in fact, among the earliest undoubted pro-
    ducts of human handiwork in the oldest certain tools,
  7 regional differences in the methods   of shaping stones and in
    the forms given to the resultant implements can be detected.
_   They are seemingly arbitrary, not conditioned either by the
    nature of the material or by the use to which the product
    must be put. Like knives and forks in England and America,
    and shovels in England and Wales, these differences in
    technique and form must correspond to divergent traditions
    developed and practised by distinct societies — bands,
    hordes, troops, clans, tribes, or what you will. As time goes
    on and the archaeological record becomes fuller, more and
    more differences can be detected and affect an ever widen-
    ing range of concrete products. One of the principal aims
    of prehistoric archaeology has been to define the several social
    traditions expressed in the differences among their relics.
       Archaeologists classify the objects of their study not only
    by function into knives, axes, huts, tombs, and so on, but
   also into different ‘types’ of knives, axes, dwellings and
   graves. The several types of knife or tomb each fulfil
  roughly the same function; the differences between them
   repose upon divergences in the social tradition prescribing
   the methods of their preparation and use. In each functional
  class archaeologists can distinguish a variety of types current
 _ over a restricted area at a given period in archaeological
   time. The totality of recognized types current simultane-
   ously in a given area is termed a ‘culture’. Archaeology is
   liable to become a study of cultures rather than of culture!




a
    The variety of types is testimony to the multiple
social traditions governing their manufacture and employ
ment, The remarkable uniformity of types in a given loc
and chronological group or ‘culture’ just discloses t.
uniformity and rigidity of the traditions actuating thx
makers. As the peculiarities of the component types a
determined by convention rather than by function, th
culture must correspond to a social group which sanctifi
the distinctive conventions and carries the social traditio
It would be rash to try to define precisely what sort of so
group corresponds to the archaeologist’s ‘culture’. Since
language is such an important vehicle in the formation and
transmission of social tradition, the group distinguished b
possession of a distinct ‘culture’ might be expected also t
speak a distinct language.
   Now is is a priori likely that divergences in linguistic co
ventions are at least as old as divergences in material eq
ment or burial rites. The extraordinary multiplicity of
tinct languages or mutually incomprehensible dial
among savages who have remained near the economic l
of pleistocene men gives some positive justification for t
assumption. The aboriginal Australians, estimated as som:
200,000 in all, spoke no less than five hundred languages.
In the 150,000 square miles of California Kroeber
tinguishes thirty-one families of languages and at least 135
dialects. Again, when the first written documents begin
reveal men’s speech, we find several widely diverge
linguistic traditions established in the tiny areas we can at
first survey — Egyptian, Sumerian, Semitic (Akkadian
and Elamite, with hints of others in personal and geograph
cal names. As writing spreads, ever new tongues are
revealed — Nasili, Luvian, Hurrian, Proto-Hattic, Phoeni- ©
cian, Chinese, Greek, Persian, Urartian, Etruscan, Latin,—
Celtic ... to name only the most notable. The tendenc
for the traditional conventions of language to diverge is still
observable even where the English language is standard- —
ized by awidely-circulated printed literature. ‘Next Friday’ os
in England becomes ‘Friday first’ in Scotland; when you —
                                      r eae   PUR a     Aree   age   os Pe   sy

                      ye
                     >

                     ARCHAEOLOGY         AND          HISTORY                     21
      2

    cross the Atlantic ‘lorry’ must be translated ‘truck’. The
   _tendency which can resist the standardizing effect ofwriting
    and the unprecedented facilities for travel, must have
. worked more rapidly and more effectively before writing
    and regular means of communication were available.
_ Linguistic divergences must be just as old as the cultural
 _ divergences traceable directly in the archaeological record.
  __ Nevertheless culture and language need not coincide. The
  differences in equipment between Denmark, England,
 _ France, and Germany are insignificant in comparison with
     the differences between Danish, English, French, and Ger-
  _man. Material equipment is more permanent than spoken
 _ words; its preparation and use can be learned by example
   as well as by precept. Useful devices can - and do - leap
     linguistic frontiers. But if the culture does not necessarily
  represent a linguistic group, it is generally a local group
 _ occupying a continuous geographical area.
  _ Regarding cultures as geographical units, the differences
 between them appear less arbitrary and more significant.
_ They can be partially explained as adjustments to different
_ environments. The various species of lower animals are
  generally adapted to life under particular conditions of
     climate, soil, and plant-life; many of their differentiae, the
    features that distinguish one species from another, have
_ been established by natural selection precisely because they
_   proved favourable to survival under such a specific set of
 hygeographical   conditions: that, for instance, is obviously
a  true of the mountain hare with his variable coat, and the
zq# lowland hares that do not turn white in winter. The human
 species is not physiologically adapted to any particular
environment. Its adaptation is secured by its extracor-
_ poreal equipment of tools, clothes, houses, and the rest. By
_ devising suitable equipment a human society can fit itself
     to live under almost all conditions.             Fire, clothing, houses
and an appropriate diet enable men to endure arctic cold
_ and tropic heat equally well.
          Material culture is thus largely a response to an environ-
_ment: it consists of the devices evolved to meet needs evoked
i
as
Mar    eTeT eeae    a   Le ee   ae




      22           WHAT HAPPENED IN HISTORY
                                                                \
      by particular climatic conditions, to take advantage of local t
      sources of food and to secure protection against wild beasts,

      societies have been prompted to invent different devices and _
      to discover how to use different natural substances for food, —
      fuel, shelter, and tools. Forest dwellers can develop wood-—
      working, carpenters’ tools, log-cabins, and carved orna-
      ments; steppe folk must make larger use of bone, basketry, ©
      and leather, can do without axes and dwell perforce in skin—
      tents or in subterranean shelters.                            q
         In response to the promptings of its own peculiar environ-
      ment, each society may be expected to evolve distinctive —
      processes and devices. But luckily the appropriate inven-—
      tions and discoveries are not confined to the regions where -
      they were evolved. Societies may migrate to regions which
      have evoked other responses in other societies. The migrant
      society does not throw away its traditional equipment to
      adopt that appropriate to its new home; more usually the
      immigrant and the native traditions blend: Again inven-—
      tions and discoveries do transgress the boundaries of
      locality and linguistic convention; they can be — and are —
      diffused from one society to another; despite all obstacles of
      space and language. The richness of our own cultural tradi-
      tion is due very largely to diffusion, to the adoption by our
      progressive societies of ideas created by many distinct |
      groups in response to the diverse conditions and oppor-—
      tunities of many regions. For instance, as staple vegetable-
      foods we have added to the wheat, barley, and fruits of
      Hither Asia, rice from East Asia, maize, potatoes, marrows, _
      and other plants from North America, bananas from tropi-
      cal Africa, and so on; our alimentary tradition has been
      enriched froth every quarter of the globe.                     E
          Prehistory and history do indeed show how culture grows-
      more and more diversified through the differentiation of
      societies in response to special stimuli — geographical, techni-
      cal, or ideological. What is, however, even more striking is _
      the growth of intercourse and interchange between socie-
      ties. If the streams of cultural tradition go on multiplying
    ey nonetheless tend to converge more and more, and to
 flow into a single river. A main stream with ever-growing
 emphasis dominates the whole drainage system to canalize
  the waters of fresh springs. Cultures are tending to merge
     0 culture.
     If our own culture can claim to be in the main stream, it
     only because our cultural tradition has captured and
     de tributary a larger volume of once parallel traditions.
      ile in historical times the main stream flows from
     esopotamia and Egypt through Greece and Rome,
     zantium and Islam, to Atlantic Europe and America, it
    as been repeatedly swollen by the diversion into it of
    urrents from   Indian,    Chinese,   Mexican,   and   Peruvian
 civilizations, and from countless barbarisms and savageries.
   thinese and Indian civilizations have indeed not failed to
  absorb currents from one another and from farther west.
 But, on the whole, they have hitherto discharged these into
     cid unchanging      backwaters.     The   civilizations of the
   fAayas and the Incas, on the other hand, have ceased to run
   ltogether, save in so far as their waters are carried on in the
     in stream of modern Atlantic civilization. In the sequel
     shall be frankly concerned primarily with the course of
  the main stream,     even   though we have to diverge from
_ time to time to trace its enrichment from lateral tributaries.
  _ If the whole long process disclosed in the archaeological
   and literary records be surveyed, a single directional trend
   is most obvious in the economic sphere in the methods
  whereby the most progressive societies secure a livelihood.
      n this domain it will be possible to recognize radical and
       deed revolutionary innovations, each followed by such
       creases in population that, were reliable statistics avail-
     ble, each would be reflected by a conspicuous kink in the
     opulation graph. These revolutions can accordingly be
      sed to mark off phases or stages in the historical process
which may be summarized in advance as follows.
    (1) The story begins perhaps 500,000, perhaps 250,000
 years ago, with man emerging as a rare animal and a food-
- gatherer, that lived like any other beast of prey a parasite on
      We   aa     Sstl Ge

                WHAT        HAPPENED IN HISTO
other creatures by catching and collecting what food n
happened to provide. This gathering economy, corresp
ing to what Morgan terms savagery, provided the sole so
of livelihood open to any human society during nearly

the whole of what archaeologists call the Palaeolithic or 0 |
Stone Age, and geologists name the pletstocene. Itiisstill Pree

of Malaya or Central Africa, in the deserts of a
western Australia and South Africa, and in the Arcti
regions.
  (2) Perhaps not more than 8,000 years ago, some
societies, first apparently in the Near East, by actively co-
operating with nature began to increase the supplies of foo
available by cultivating plants and often also by breedi
domestic animals. The new food-producing economy is dis-
tinctive of what Morgan calls barbarism, and is represente
in its simplest form in what archaeologists term the JVeol:
or New Stone Age. But in the economic sense, at least, ne
lithic does not correspond to a period of time, since the
Maoris of New Zealand were still neolithic in equipment _
and economy in A.D. 1800. Moreover, many societies tha
economically are still barbarian have learned to use iro1
or bronze tools and weapons, although the full industr
use, at least, of bronze was possible only after the ne:
economic revolution.
   (3) This was initiated in the alluvial valleys of the Ni
the Tigris-Euphrates, and the Indus about five thous.
years ago, with the transformation of some riverside villa
into cities. Society persuaded or compelled the farmers
produce a surplus of foodstuffs over and above their dom
tic requirements, and by concentrating this surplus usedit1
support a new urban population of specialized craftsmen,
merchants, priests, officials, and clerks. Writing was, as will‘
be shown, a necessary by-product of this urban revolution
which ushers in civilization and initiates the historical record
   (a) The first two thousand years of civilization coincide.‘
with what archaeologists describe as the Bronze Age, because
         ons. ‘Both are sO expensive as normally to be available
          to gods, kings, chiefs, and the employees of temples and
        ies. The social surplus, derived primarily from sub-
      ence agriculture by irrigation, was concentrated in the
     nds of a relatively narrow circle of priests and officials,
     nose limited expenditure limited also the growth of the
      ban industrial and commercial population.
       b) The Early Iron Age, initiated by the divulgation of an
    onomical method of producing wrought iron about
  1200 B.G., meant the popularization of metal equipment. At
 thhe same time in the Near East the invention of an alpha-
  betical script popularized writing, which had hitherto been
     mystery confined to a small class of learned clerks, while
       r 700 B.c. small change in coined money facilitated
    tail transactions. In the Classical or Graeco-Roman economy,
        g these popular innovations combined with the facilities
    r cheap transport offered by the Mediterranean, the sur-
     us, now partly derived from specialized farming, was more
     dely distributed among an upper middle class of mer-
     ants, financiers, and capitalist farmers. This permitted a
     table growth of population, at least in the Mediterranean
  basin, which was, however, ultimately checked by the
    lative impoverishment or actual enslavement of the
     imary producers and artisans.
 BCC) Feudalism in Europe tied to the soil the hitherto
  semi-nomadic barbarian cultivator, ultimately increasing
_the productivity of the temperate forest zone. But it emanci-
   sated him from chattel slavery of the Roman pattern, while
 tk e guild system secured to the artisan as well as to the mer-
    2ant not only freedom but an unprecedented economic
    atus. So eventually trade and industry, superimposed
      on a more intensive and settled agriculture and now using
    ater power, promoted an unparalleled growth in the
 European population.
    (d) Finally the discovery of the New World and of seaways
  to India and the Far East opened to Atlantic Europe a
  world market. In exchange for mass-produced popular
ood societies on the Atlantic eaheariee
draw upon the food stock of the whole> worl it




phases.
                                   II

               PALAEOLITHIC              SAVAGERY

      [ue first chapter of human history is still interwoven with
   atural history. Prehistoric anthropology studies what is to
     known of man’s physical evolution, the bodily changes in
 the human animal. Prehistoric archaeology shows how man
became human by labour and studies the improvement of
 his extracorporeal equipment. Both the anthropological and
   .e archaeological records cover a span of time roughly a
   indred times as long as that covered by the oldest written
record. The emergence of man and the manufacture of
the first tools may be put somewhere about five hundred
thousand years ago. That is the age assigned on one
 Rew to the beginning of the pleistocene epoch, the last
    lume in the geological record before the holocene or recent,
   hich may begin ten thousand years ago and is far from

      _ Such figures are only approximate and are in any case so
         ge that they mean relatively little to most people. What




        oT Much of what is now the North Sea must have been
dry     land, and men could have followed the equivalent |of


    en’ began to make tools, men lived to see quite important
hills thrown up by the folding of the earth’s crust. One
    ool, indeed, holds that such gigantic cracks as the Rift
Valley in Africa opened up when men were already inhabit-
ra
        o@that continent.
      - Catastrophic changes in climate undoubtedly affected the
       shole earth; three or four Ice Ages followed one another in
      :
5
high latitudes, and were accompanied by periods of torren
rain in now arid sub-tropical zones. The snow caps
glaciers that to-day cover the high Norwegian mountains
grew slowly bigger, crept down the valleys, and eventually
spread out in a huge ice sheet over the plain of Northe
Europe. Ice caps developed on the Scottish Highlands, to
and thence ice sheets spread out over Ireland and over En
land to join the Scandinavian ice sheet to the east. T
Alpine glaciers likewise crept down stream. The Rh6
glacier that now terminates high above the Lake of Gene
flowed down tillit reached almost to Lyons in France. Now
glaciers are not rivers that have frozen, but rivers of ice that4.
flow at not more than ten or twenty feet a year. In Green-
land and Antarctica we can still see ice sheets like those  th
covered England and northern Europe in the pleistocene.
they ‘flow’ at the rate of about a quarter of a mile pe
annum. So one can guess how long it took for the Scottish
ice to reach Cambridge or the Scandinavian ice to cover
Berlin. And the process of retreat, the melting of the hu
ice masses, was almost as slow.
  But melt they did. The climate grew warm enough fi
hippopotami and tigers to live in Norfolk, and for rhod
dendrons, now at home in Portugal, to grow in the Tyr
And then the ice spread once more, only to contract agai
Indeed, most geologists admit four major Ice Ages or glac
periods separated by three inter-glacial warm interva
Some authorities would, in fact, admit a still larger number —
of glacials and inter-glacials.                                 ;
    Meanwhile man witnessed new species of animals emer:
and become established by natural selection, sometimes on
to die out. In the first inter-glacial some very curious cre
tures — the sabre-toothed tiger, the little three-toed horse a
the southern elephant — survivors from the pliocene, wer
still competing with newer varieties that eventually replaces
them. To withstand the cold of the ice ages species of elephan
and rhinoceros — the mammoth and the woolly rhinoceros
acquired hairy coats. Such variations were presumably        es
tablished bya process ofnatural selection extending over ma:
                 PALAEOLITHIC      SAVAGERY

  generations — and elephants are notoriously slow breeders.
_ The most curious of all the Species emerging was, how-
ever, Man himself. The first ‘men’ differ so radically in
their bony structure from any race living to-day that zoo-
-logists classify them in distinct species or genera and refuse
_ to them the scientific name for modern man, Homo sapiens.
 Such can be called hominids, ‘men-like creatures’, or just
Femen’ in inverted commas. The oldest fossil hominids
;exhibit many ‘simian traits’, features proper to apes that
modern men can do without for reasons hinted at on p. 8
ipond more fully explained in Man Makes Himself.
         ‘Pithecanthropus, the ape-man oFJava, had avery thick
Pa    but very small skull with a cranial capacity varying
      from 1,100 to 750 cubic centimetres — on an average
      about midway between that of chimpanzees and
    +


      modern man. His forehead sloped back behind a bony
      visor or torus that protected the eyes and supported
      the massive architecture of skull and jaw. Buta rudi-
      mentary swelling over the area devoted to speech in
ee our brains shows that Java man was already talking
ee
See
poET
~ =
      and investing sounds with socially approved meanings.
er:   But his jowl was disproportionately large and his jaw
      chinless. Sinanthropus, the generic name for the hominids
Se
aS
eae
      found in the cave of Chou-kou-tien, near Peking,
 ‘    exhibits the same sort of peculiarities.’
r
_ Thus in Lower Pleistocene times the anthropological
  record disclosed, as might be anticipated, the emergence of
_species and genera intermediate in some ways between apes
  and men in the full sense of that term. The extreme rarity
_ of documents illustrating this phase of evolution is signifi-
_ cant. In digging drains or railway cuttings or other excava-
  tions through the gravels of ancient rivers or the debris of
_ pleistocene ice-sheets, or where erosion has laid bare old
-seashores and river banks, the fossilized bones of sabre-
— toothed tigers, rhinoceros, and mammoth may often be
_ picked up. But down to the approach of the last ice age only
four incomplete fragments of fossil hominids are known in

|
‘
30           WHAT     HAPPENED      IN   HISTORY

the whole of Europe, although scientists and amateurs are q
everywhere on the look-out for ‘missing links’. Four fossils
to represent the hominid population of our Continent dur- —
ing say 200,000 years! Asia has proved more productive.
Java men and China men combined now take us into the ~
twenties. Still the rarity of human fossils does justify the con- —
clusion that during the first millennium or so of their existence
‘men’ were rare animals. The minute groups of hominids —
cannot have seemed dangerous competitors to the contem-
porary mammoths, cave-bears, tigers, and hippopotami.
    This conclusion is not really falsified by the evidence of
archaeology. It is true that cartloads of tools, made by early
hominids, can be picked up on the high veldt where once
 the Vaal and Zambesi flowed. Admittedly museums’
 cellars in France and England are crammed with imple-
 ments dug up in equally ancient gravels. But a single
 hominid might in a day make, use and discard three or four
 such tools. The many tons of them spread over a couple of
 hundred thousand years of 365 days do not attest a vast
multitude of tool makers.
   They do tell all that is to be learned directly of the
development of that extracorporeal equipment that was to
make its users masters of all the brutes. Admittedly the first
beginnings of that development elude the grasp of arch-
aeology. A critical moment was when men learned to con-
trol and later to initiate the chemical process of combus-
tion — to use the terrible red flower from which other jungle
dwellers flee in terror. But evidence for the use of fire is
unobtainable in the conditions under which the oldest
archaeological remains are normally unearthed. Still in the
earliest known    ‘home’,   the cave of Chou-kou-tien,     near
Peking, charred bones indicate that even that odd hominid
Sinanthropus was controlling and using fire. Similarly the
first tools must have been natural objects only slightly
modified to serve human needs. In so far as they were of
wood, these have perished irretrievably. Those made of
durable stone are so like natural chips as to be scarcely
recognizable. The archaeological controversy about what
               PALAEOLITHIC       SAVAGERY                 31

are termed ‘eoliths’ centres around just such doubtful
products.
   When in lower, or on a modern view only in early middle,
pleistocene times unmistakable tools, stones patently shaped
in an intelligent and purposeful way, do appear, their use is
still uncertain. Probably each had many uses; tools were not
yet specialized as with us to specific ends, but the same
roughly-chipped flint served all purposes from dispatching a
tiger to scraping the hairs off his hide or digging up roots.
Gradual improvements can be detected as traditional skill
was slowly accumulated; instead of just knocking off coarse
chips by banging one stone against another, some men
found out howto detach neater flakes by blows with a
billet of wood. And we can observe methods of flint working
diverging in different areas as divergent traditions grow up »
among distinct social groups.
    Throughout Africa, in western Europe, and in southern
India the favourite and most carefully shaped tools were
made by knocking bits off a large lump or core till this was
reduced, to one of four or five standard forms. The products
can all be classified as core tools and are currently designated
hand-axes. In Europe during the ice age and in northern
Eurasia we meet on the other hand almost exclusively
what are termed flake-tools. Their makers do not seem to
have cared much what shape was ultimately assumed by
the parent lump or core; they were primarily interested in
 the flakes detached and trimmed these up to form imple-
ments, less rigorously standardized than hand-axes. Finally
 the tools made by China man and the earliest implements
 (termed Soan) from northern India and the Malay Penin-
sula cannot be classed as either core or flake tools, but are
regarded as representative ofa distinct ‘chopper’ or ‘pebble’
cycle.
   The divergent traditions thus revealed no doubt reflect
different responses to differing environments. But they are
essentially conventional and conditioned by distinct social
traditions. No factor of climate or habitat obviously obliges
a tool maker to choose the core rather than the flakes
                                             My
             WHAT    HAPPENED      IN HISTORY

detached from it. And no less striking than the divergences —
between the main cycles are the uniformity and continui
within each. Notably in the core-tool province the same
peculiar forms were given to hand-axes from the Cape of —
Good Hope to the Mediterranean and from the Atlantic ‘
coasts to central India. For a couple of glacial cycles we —
can detect only minor variations and improvements on a €
small assortment of traditional forms. And in each part of q
the province these variations succeed one another in the
same order. It looks as if some sort of intercourse were
being maintained among the widely-scattered groups so
that ideas were interchanged and technical experience
was pooled.
   Finally, many of the later tools; particularly of the hand-
axe class, display extraordinary care and delicacy of work-—
manship. One feels that more trouble has been expended |
on their production than was needed just to make them —
work, Their authors were trying to make something not
only useful, but also beautiful. If so, the tools in question—
 are really works of art, expressions of aesthetic feeling. But
 this expression was conditioned by the traditions of the —
 group that used hand-axes. Some not quite unambiguous~
 indications (an imperfect jaw of doubtful geological age
 from Kanam in Kenya and the occipital bone of a skull
 found in a gravel pit at Swanscombe, Kent) suggest that
 the hand-axe makers may have been more like ourselves
 than Pithecanthropus or Sinanthropus; they may have been
‘our evolutionary ancestors, a status some would deny to
 the fossil men of Asia and even to Homo heidelbergensis, the ©
proud but unhappily unknown possessor of a massive fossil
jaw found in a deep sandpit at Mauer in Wiirttemberg.
    It may be assumed that all early hominids were just
gatherers. Hand-axes would serve as well for digging up
‘edible roots as for hunters’ weapons. Sinanthropus was
 almost certainly carnivorous; the animal bones from his
 cave seem to have been split deliberately by the hominid.
 Among the bones thus treated are those of hominids too.
‘So Sinanthropus may have been a cannibal. Probably all
                                       PRE        Ung oe eee

                   PALAEOLITHIC       SAVAGERY                    33
_ hominids were in fact omnivorous; they ate whatever they
   could get. Not the least important lesson they had to learn
   by experience and transmit by social tradition was what
   was safely edible and what was poisonous. Their mistakes
 _ are not recorded in. the archaeological record, but the
   simplest surviving savages have learned the necessary
   lessons and embodied them in their traditions. The deter-
mination     of edible plants and animals,        the discovery of
        ways of collecting or catching them, the recognition of the
      _ appropriate times and seasons were steps towards science.
        In jungle lore lie the roots of botany and zoology, of
     _ astronomy and climatology, while the control offire and
        the manufacture of tools initiate the traditions that emerge
        as physics and chemistry.
           Only towards the close of middle pleistocene times, on
        one chronology about 140,000 years ago, does the archaeo-
        logist’s picture of hominid life become clear enough to
        allow an economy to be tentatively sketched. As the last
        great ice age was approaching, men were sufficiently well
emoma
 e
 e,
        equipped to evict other denizens and themselves to find
        shelter in caves. There we find true homes.
           The best-known groups thus inhabiting Europe all belong
 - to a curious race termed Neanderthal and perhaps specifi-
        cally distinct from Homo sapiens. Though their brain-cases
        are as capacious as those of many Europeans to-day, there
     _ is a huge bony vizor or torus above the eyes instead of two
        eyebrow-ridges; the forehead is retreating, the jowl enor-
        mous, a chin lacking. The head was so balanced on the
        spine that it hung forward; the structure of legs and feet
        permitted only a shuffling gait.
           Many authorities believe that Neanderthal man repre-
        sents a distinct species of humanity specialized and adapted
        for living under Arctic conditions and that the species
        became extinct when those conditions passed away.
        Whether any ‘Neanderthal blood runs in the veins’ ‘of
        Europeans or other modern races is doubted. Hominids
        exhibiting many Neanderthal features, such as the supra-
        orbital torus, retreating forehead and excessively heavy jowl,




.
34           WHAT    HAPPENED      IN HISTORY

have been found in recent years in Palestine, South Africa,
and Java. While some anthropologists incline to regard
these as representing in a general way a stage in the
evolution of Homo sapiens, others regard most of them as
aberrant branches from the main human stem that had
gone up an evolutionary blind alley and then died out.
But some of the Palestinian fossils admittedly exhibit traits
such as a rudimentary chin that suggest at least hybridiza-
tion with Homo sapiens, and men of the latter type did exist,
making flake tools, during the last interglacial.
   Whatever their biological status, Neanderthalers and
their other middle palaeolithic contemporaries must be
credited with positive contributions to human culture. All
possessed a more varied and differentiated equipment than
their predecessors. It includes specialized weapons (repre-
sented by spear-heads), as well as distinct tools for scraping
and chopping. Most of these are made from flakes. Rarely
in Europe, regularly in Hither Asia and Africa these are
made by an ingenious process, known as the Levallois
technique, requiring much foresight and scientific planning
ahead; for the desired shape was blocked out on the core
before the flake was detached.
   In the case of the European Neanderthalers we know a
good deal of their economy and culture as well as of their
skeletons and implements. They lived by hunting, princi-
pally the mammoths, woolly rhinoceros, and other thick-
skinned beasts that browsed on the tundras along the
margins of the European ice-sheet and in Siberia. Evidently
such big game could not be pursued profitably by isolated
families. The Neanderthalers must have hunted together as
organized packs, and, however small these may have been,
their economy required some social organization.
   For all their primitive bodies they needed a spiritual
culture too. For their dead relatives they devised and
socially sanctified burial rites which they perhaps fondly
hoped would somehow reverse or cancel death. They buried
the bodies in specially excavated graves, sometimes placing
stones to protect them from the pressure of the earth. The
                      PALAEOLITHIC      SAVAGERY                  35
     . graves were normally dug in the caves that the living used
    _ for homes. Sometimes they are situated near to hearths as
       if in the hope that the fire’s heat would restore to the cold
       corpse the warmth of life. The bodies are placed in de-
       liberately chosen attitudes, generally doubled up. In one
      grave the skull had been separated from the trunk. Joints
      of meat and implements were regularly buried with the
      corpse. Neanderthalers must have imagined that life some-
      how continued so that the dead experienced the same needs
      as the living. From middle palaeolithic times ceremonial
    _ burial can be traced continuously, till to-day the wreaths,
       the nodding plumes and the wake embody a complex of
       ideas which, however much altered in the transmission, are
       at least a hundred thousand years old.
    _     This was not all. In some Alpine caves heaps of bones |
      and skulls, particularly of cave bears, have been found
       deliberately, one might say ceremonially, arranged. The
       arrangement suggests the rituals still performed by hunting
       tribes in Siberia to avert the wrath of the bear spirit and
       ensure the multiplication of bears to hunt. Perhaps then
_     we have here proof of hunting magic, if not worship, before
_ the last ice age. In any case even the rude Neanderthaler
    had an ideology.
        Despite the seemingly unfavourable conditions prevailing
    _ we get the impression that humanity had multiplied. In
      any case we have from Europe at least five times as many
      middle palaeolithic as lower palaeolithic skeletons, though
   the phase lasted perhaps only a fifth as long. But the
 _ Neanderthal stock and its industrial traditions too seem to
_ yanish abruptly frorn Europe at the close of the first phase
_ of the last ice age. In the more genial interval which ensued
   modern men appear already fully formed and with skeletons
   at least that would be hard to distinguish from recent
           imens in an anatomical museum.
         Men of modern type, fully fledged ‘wise men’, appear
      in the anthropological record much about the same time
      not only in Europe but also in North and East Africa,
     in. Palestine and even in China       (in an upper cave at
Chou-kou-tien).. They emerge already differentiated into
several distinct varieties or races. Even in Europe anato-
mists distinguish the faintly negroid Grimaldi race, the tall
C16-Magnon stock, a shorter Combe Capelle variety sometimes
round-headed,    perhaps a Briinn type exhibiting possibly
Neanderthaloid traits, while a later skull from Chancelade
 is said to resemble that of modern Eskimos. Such variety
 among the earliest modern men enhances the plausibility
 of the theory that direct ancestors of Homo sapiens had been
 evolving earlier in the pleistocene, even though most
 earlier fossil documents so far authenticated are more like
Neanderthalers.                                                 §
   In the archaeological record modern men appear in the
 upper palaeolithic enormously better equipped than any
 group so far distinguished in lower or middle palaeolithic
 times. The new equipment is found from the first differ-
 entiated by divergent social traditions, doubtless in response
 to varying environments, so that archaeologists can hence-
 forth distinguish several cultures corresponding to several
 social groups. The best-defined of these are (1) the Chatel-_
 perronian of France; (2) the Aurignacian found in Hither
Asia, the Crimea, the Balkans, Central Europe and, after
the Chatelperronian, in France; (3) the Gravettian of the
north Pontic zone, which succeeds the Aurignacian in
Central Europe and France and spreads to England and >
Spain (all the foregoing used to be treated as mere phases
of a single culture termed Aurignacian); (4) the Aterian of
Africa; and (5) possibly later the Capsian in North Africa.
Subsequently other local cultures crystallize out, notably |
the Solutrean and the Magdalenian in Western Europe |
(these are strictly local cultures, though their names, like |
Aurignacian, are used in the older text-books to designate |
periods within the upper palaeolithic). None of these social |
groups defined by archaeology demonstrably coincides with |
any of the races distinguished by anatomists; for instance,
Grimaldians and Cré-Magnons alike used a Gravettian|
equipment in the famous Grottes de Grimaldi near Men- |
tone.
                                                              ih
     Common to all these upper palaeolithic societies are the
  use of bone and ivory for tools and distinctive traditions in
 flint-work. All had learned how to prepare a lump of
  flint or obsidian so that a whole series of long narrow
  flakes, termed blades, could be struck off a single core once
  the long preliminaries had been executed. The method was
  more economical in material and, in the long run, in labour
_too than even the Levallois technique, which, however, was
 still employed extensively by the Aterians and other
 societies in Africa, Siberia, and China. Moreover, common
 to all upper palaeolithic groups in the Old World is an
  ingenious instrument termed a burin or graver — a blade
_ pointed by removing a facet along one edge in such a way
  that it can be repeatedly repointed by simply removing
 another facet. /
    Economically upper palaeolithic societies must still be |
 designated savage inasmuch as they relied for a livelihood
 on hunting, fishing, and collecting. But their methods and
 equipment have undergone an almost revolutionary im-
 provement. From the collective experience of ancestral
 generations they have learned how to take full advantage
 of natural conditions and how to manufacture ingenious
 new engines.
    The several hunting communities who occupied Europe
 had still to brave the severities of a subarctic climate; for
 the great ice sheet still covered the northern plains, though
 the mountain glaciers had retreated, albeit only tempor-
 arily. But, equipped to support these disabilities, they
 entered a land of steppes and tundras where vast herds of
 mammoths, reindeer, bison, wild cattle, and horses offered
 an easy prey to organized hunts. On the plains of South
 Russia and Central Europe the Gravettians pitched their
 camps along the routes the herds of big game must follow
 on seasonal migrations from winter to summer pastures.
 Along the Don the sites were cleverly chosen in river
 valleys which provided shelter against blizzards but adja-
 cent to the mouths of lateral gullies which could be used
 as natural corrals to trap the herds. Immense piles of bones
38           WHAT    HAPPENED     IN HISTORY
testify to the success rewarding the choice of such locations.
   Artificial protection against the cold was provided by
tents, presumably of skins, or even by substantial ‘houses’,
dug in the soft loess soil and roofed by skins and turfs
similar to those inhabited by arctic hunters to-day. As wood
was scarce the hunters burned bones to keep them warm —
the bone heaps may take the place of wood-piles —- and
could construct fireplaces provided with sunken flues to
supply a draught to this fuel. They made clothes of skins,
since the scrapers for preparing these and needles for sewing
them together are found. A statuette from Mal’ta in
Siberia seems to be clad in a trousered suit of furs such as
Eskimos wear.
   In the Dordogne and on the slopes of the Pyrenees and
Cantabrian mountains ample caves offered shelter to Aurig-
nacians and Gravettians who hunted on the adjacent
plateaux and plains. Yearly the salmon ran up the rivers _
to breed, and the Magdalenians      at least had learned to
catch the fish with hook and line or spear them with |
‘harpoons’ of reindeer antler.
   Upper palaeolithic hunting tackle had been enriched by ~
many fresh inventions. The Aterians and Capsians in
Africa certainly, their European and Asiatic contemporaries
probably, employed the bow, the first composite mechanism
devised by man; the total energy gradually expended by
the archer’s muscles is stored up in the bent wood or horn
so that the whole can be concentrated at one point and
released simultaneously. The Magdalenians and probably
also other upper palaeolithic societies used the spear-
thrower, another mechanical device for increasing the
range of a missile and the accuracy of its aim.              .
    Specialized tools were needed and used for manufacturing
this tackle and for satisfying the new needs for housing,
clothing, and adornment. Men were no longer content to
extemporize tools to meet immediate needs, but had: the
 foresight to make tools for making tools — secondary and
 tertiary tools, in fact. In addition to wood and stone, men
 had now secured mastery over other materials, notably
                                      ae            ee ee



               PALAEOLITHIC      SAVAGERY                   39

bone, antler, and ivory. For sharpening these a new process
was employed — polishing, which applied to stone used to
serve old-fashioned archaeologists as a criterion of the new
stone age. Moreover antlers, bones, and even flat stones
were sometimes perforated with circular holes. If not
requiring the use of a drill, perforation seems to imply
some application of rotary motion, so preparing the way
for such critical inventions as the wheel.
   The pursuit of large gregarious animals by Aurignacians,
Gravettians, and the rest required the co-operation of a
group larger than the natural family, even more certainly
than among Neanderthalers. But speculations as to how
such groups were organized are hardly profitable. Some
division of labour between the sexes may be deduced from
modern analogies, but each ‘family’ or ‘household’ could
probably manufacture its own equipment. And each group
could be self-contained and self-sufficing.
   Yet there are indications of interchange of products — in
fact of a sort of ‘trade’ between distinct communities,
though the articles traded were normally luxuries not in-
dispensable. Mediterranean shells have been found in the
caves of the Dordogne (west-central France). Some of the
flint found at Gagarino on the Don seems to have been
brought from exposures more than seventy miles down
stream, perhaps at Kostienki, where there was another
large camp. Finally, the bones of sea-fish are so common
in Magdalenian refuse heaps in the Dordogne that it looks
as if there may have been a regular interchange of com-
modities between coastal and inland communities living
in France contemporary with mammoths and reindeer.
Such intercommunal specialization can be illustrated among
recent savages on the same economic plane as the Mag-
dalenians. Evidently upper palaeolithic groups were not
entirely isolated from one another. The interchange of
material objects attested by archaeology gave opportunity
also for the pooling of ideas.
   Upper palaeolithic societies had further elaborated that
spiritual equipment already vaguely attested among
 Neanderthalers   and earlier. Dead    Grimaldians    and Cré-
 Magnons    were interred with even greater ceremony than
  Neanderthalers. Their graves were furnished with food,
  implements, and ornaments. Often the bones are found
  reddened with ochre. The mourning relatives had sprinkled
  the corpse with the red powder, surely in the pathetic hope
  that by restoring to the pallid skin the colour that sym-
  bolized life they would also restore the missing life itself.
  Such a confusion of the symbol with the thing symbolized
  lies at the root of ‘sympathetic magic’. It is symptomatic of
_ the tenacity of tradition that the practice of sprinkling the
  dead with ochre persisted for 20,000 years, long after
  experience should have convinced everyone of its futility. _
      Magic rites to ensure the food-supply, to promote the
  multiplication of the hunted game and secure success in
 the chase, were also devised. The Gravettians used to carve
 little figures of women out of stone or mammoth ivory, or
 model them in clay and ash. Archaeologists term these
 Venus figures (Venuses). But they are generally hideous;
 most have no faces, but the sexual characters are always
 emphasized. They were surely used in some sort of fertility
 ritual to ensure the multiplication of game; Zamiatnin
 suggests puppet plays imitating and so magically causing
 the generative process. In any case they must mean that
 the Gravettians grasped the generative function of women,
 and sought magically to extend it to the animals and plants
 that nourished them.
    In France Gravettians and their Magdalenian descen-|
 dants elaborated other rites. In the deep recesses of lime-
 stone caverns, perhaps two miles beneath the earth, the
 impenetrable gloom lit only by the feeble flame of fat
 burning in a stone lamp with moss wick, and often on rock
 surfaces accessible only by standing on a helper’s shoulders,
 artist-magicians painted or engraved the rhinoceros, mam-
 moth, bison, reindeer, that they must eat. As surely as a|
 pictured bison was conjured up on the cave wall by the
 master’s skilful strokes, so surely would a real bison emerge|
 for his associates to kill and eat. The beasts are always highly
           _-- PALAEOLITHIC SAVAGERY                           ary:
         ividualized, actual portraits not abstract shorthand
          bols (p. 14). They reflect minute and deliberate ob-
      ervation of real models. But the models so carefully studied
    and so accurately reproduced were very likely dead beasts.
       In fact, so important was this magic art in the estimation
   of upper palaeolithic society that the artist magicians may
  _have been liberated from the exacting tasks of the chase to
   concentrate on the reputedly more productive ritual; they
   would be assigned a share in the proceeds of the hunt in
  return for a purely spiritual participation in its trials and
   dangers. At least, the pictures are so masterly that they seem
   to be the work of trained and specialized craftsmen. In
   fact, from the Magdalenian site of Limeuil (Dordogne) we
    possess a collection of stone slivers and pebbles on which are
 _ scratched what look like small-scale trial pieces for the cave
    pictures; some show correction as if by a master’s hand.
    The collection may be scraps from the copy-books of a
  school of artists. Thus we dimly discern the emergence of
    the first specialists — the first men to be supported out of a
   social surplus of foodstuffs to collecting which they had
    made no direct contribution. But of course the Magda-
  lenians regarded their magical contributions as just as
_ important as the acumen of the tracker, the precision of
   the archer, and the valour of the huntsman.
       The economic prerogatives of the specialized magician
   are based upon socially sanctioned superstition. But the
   surplus that the magician thus appropriated was available
_ only because just at this time the hunting grounds and
   rivers of France were exceptionally well stocked with game
 _and fish. When forest invaded the steppe at the end of the
 ice age, magic was of no avail; bison, reindeer, and man-
 -moth vanished, and with them the Magdalenians and their
art.
    At the close of the last ice age, when the tundra zone was
% hifting north, the reindeer migrated, too, and men followed
_ them, Every summer a band of hunters from farther south
 used to repair to Holstein and encamp besidea little mere
at Meiendorf, not far from Hamburg. They succeeded in
42           WHAT    HAPPENED      IN   HISTORY-.
                                                           h

slaughtering hundreds of reindeer. But the first kill of each
season was not eaten. Its body, weighted with a stone, was
cast into the mere, presumably as an offering to the spirit
of the herd or the genius of the land. If this interpretation
be correct, the idea of sacrifice and some correlative con-
ception of spirits to be placated and conciliated had been
reached by these rude savages at least 10,000 years ago.
So even in the savagery of the Old Stone Age we can discern
the germs of religion, the propitiation by a collective social
sacrifice of spirits, conceived as having human emotions
and desires, in contrast to the vaguer and impersonal forces.
that magic is supposed to ‘control’, often for individual
rather than social ends.
   Art, too, enriched the spiritual culture of upper palaeo-
lithic societies. The engravings and paintings in the French
caves are admired as beautiful by artists to-day. If they
were executed for prosaically utilitarian magical purposes,
that did not debar the artist from an aesthetic satisfaction
in making his drawing beautiful, even though he could see
it no more than Beethoven could hear the Ninth Symphony.
Music, as well as graphic art, may have played a part in
Magdalenian magic, since bone pipes and whistles have
been found in the caves.
   With the same duality of motive, hunting tackle was
embellished with life-like carvings and engravings of
animals by the Gravettians and Magdalenians of France
and Spain. All upper palaeolithic peoples tried to increase
their beauty and enhance their personalities by mutilating
their bodies or decking them with ornaments. In Africa a
tooth was knocked out — at the behest of fashion, no doubt, |
but also as a ritual act. Everywhere shells or animals’ teeth |
were collected, pierced, and strung together to serve as
necklaces. But they were not only personal ornaments but |
also charms. Cowrie shells were so highly valued as to be’
brought from the Mediterranean to the Dordogne; they |
were valued because they resemble the vulva and therefore
confer fertility. Bracelets might be made from mammoth’s
tusks. One from Mezin in the Ukraine is carved very |
                                                     Peer     ee ee




                    PALAEOLITHIC        SAVAGERY                   43

        beautifully with a purely ‘ornamental’ geometric pattern —
         the meander. But to Australian black-fellows patterns
         equally devoid of representational content have a meaning,
         tell a story and work magic. Art and fashion are as defi-
        nitely rooted in the Old Stone Age as magic and super-
        stition. They were as necessary socially then as now. It
        is permissible to doubt whether the ‘Highland Cattle’
        on the sitting-room wall or the diamond necklace on the
        dowager’s throat be an advance on the bison in the lime-
        stone cave or the shell necklace of the Cré-Magnon
        savage.
            In Ice Age Europe savagery produced a dazzling culture
        and, judging by the relatively numerous skeletons that sur-
        vive, supported a substantially increased population. But
eee
eee
veee    this cultural efflorescence, this expansion of population were
        made possible by the food supply bounteously provided by
——
_—
     - glacial conditions and an economy narrowly specialized to
~—      exploit these. With the end of the ice age these conditions
        passed away. As the glaciers melted, forest invaded tundras
        and steppes, and the herds of mammoth, reindeer, bison,
        and horse migrated or died out. With their disappearance
       the culture of societies which preyed upon them also
      withered away. In early holocene times, during what
       archaeologists term the mesolithic phase, we find instead of
       the Gravettian and Magdalenian cave-men small groups
       scattered about in the vast forest in open glades, on the
       shore of sea or meres and along river banks hunting and
       snaring forest game, wild fowl, and fish.
           By contrast to what had passed away, the mesolithic
       societies leave an impression of extreme poverty. Neverthe-
       less, all seem to have enjoyed one advantage: in mesolithic
  sites in Portugal, France, the Baltic region, and the Crimea,
- bones of dogs are first found. Now it is precisely in hunting
  red deer, wild boar, hares, and similar game that dogs could
  help men. The wolfish or jackal ancestor of the domestic
  dog may have begun hanging round camp fires, a tolerated
  scavenger, much earlier. In mesolithic Europe he is first
  disclosed as a partner in man’s food quest, exploiting man’s
 44           WHAT    HAPPENED      IN HISTOR           ¢   Ohad


  superior cunning, but helping in the hunt and rewarc d
  with offal from the catch.                                   a
                                                                   i
     Again the mesolithic societies inhabiting the wooded plai 1
  extending from the central English Pennine chain to the
. Urals seem the first in Europe to have devised any equip-_
  ment for dealing with timber — and the forest was the out-
  standing factor differentiating the holocene from the late
  pleistocene environment. Beginning with splitting tools ~
  handle wedges — of antler, such as had been employed al
  ready in late pleistocene times in south-eastern Europe (Ru-
  mania and Hungary), the mesolithic forest-folk armed their.
  wedges with blades of flint or of stone, sharpened like the
  antler tools by grinding. Eventually they thus created a regu-
  lar kit of carpenter’s tools of axes, adzes, and gouges with
  which, among other achievements, they could solve the prob-
  lem of transport over snow and ice by making sledges. (Run-
  ners of sledges found embedded in mesolithic peat in Finnish
  bogs are, perhaps, the oldest surviving vehicles.)
    Savages, in fact, could — and did — advance after the end|
 of the Old Stone Age, though remaining savages. But}
 within the limits of savagery the scope for progress was very|
 small, and. its pace as slow as in the pleistocene period.,
 Some societies, by an economic revolution, emerged from|
 savagery and progressed much faster. So it would be tedious,
 were it possible, to enumerate the timid steps forward made
 by savage societies from the end of the Ice Age till the
 present day.
    The fate of the most brilliant savagery of the past — the
 Magdalenian cultures of France — will have sufficiently}
 disclosed the biological limitations of that economy. A}
 happy conjunction of circumstances, quite outside their
 own control, provided the Magdalenians with sufficient}
 food to support a growing population, obtainable with so
 little effort that they had leisure to embellish life with aj
 brilliant spiritual culture. But the magic superstructure}
 did nothing to increase the supplies of food which, after all,
 were not inexhaustible. So population was limited and
 eventually waned with the specially favourable conditions.
                    PALAEOLITHIC      SAVAGERY                   45
      _ The same conclusions could be drawn from an ethno-
     graphic study of modern savages. Red Indian tribes on the
     north-west coast of America, by exploiting salmon runs
     and similar resources as the Magdalenians had done,
     attained an even richer culture and were relatively very
_ numerous. Kroeber estimates that the population density
  _ in the more favoured regions was as high as 1.7 to a square
  mile. But that is quite exceptional for savagery. Even on
_ the Pacific coast the same author puts the density in other
 _ regions as low as 0.26 per square mile, while on the prairies
_ the hunting population would not have exceeded 0.11 per
  square mile. In the whole continent of Australia ‘the
 _ aboriginal population is believed never to have exceeded
 _ 200,000 — a density of only 0.03 per square mile.
   _ However approximate such estimates may be, they give
_a fair idea of the inherent defects of savagery as an economy.
_ It led to an impasse — a contradiction — and, had that con-
_ tradiction never been surmounted, Homo sapiens would have
  remained a rare animal — as the savage in fact is.
 wae   ‘Still, on the margins of tropical jungles, deserts, and ice-
ag
   fields, isolated tribes have continued to eke out an existence
|   with a palaeolithic economy long enough for recent anthro-
   _pologists to be able to study their spiritual culture. From
  _ the reports of these observers it is possible to deduce what
    sort of ideology effectively lubricates the operations of a
    food-gathering economy. Such deductions cannot disclose
  with scientific precision what savages in the Old Stone Age
    actually believed, or how Moustierian or Gravettian socie-
  _ ties were organized — that is unknowable — , but are relevant
    in as much as ‘survivals’ from inferentially savage ideo-
   logies seem to clog the workings of barbarian and civilized
|   economies.
_      Contemporary savage tribes are generally groups of clans
which, being more stable, overshadow or'even replace the
family as an institution. All clansmen are regarded as related
    in virtue of mystical descent from a totem ‘ancestor’. The


|
 totem is generally an edible animal, insect, or plant, im-
_             in the tribal economy, more rarely a natural
                               saSei




     .
46           WHAT    HAPPENED          IN   HISTORY

phenomenon, a feature of the landscape or a man-made
implement. ‘Descent’ is reckoned sometimes in the male
sometimes in the female, line. The system of kinship which—Me
determines the mutual rights and duties of clan-members ©
and, in particular, who may marry whom, is frequently
‘classificatory’. Not only the natural father, but also all
paternal (or maternal) uncles, etc., are classed as ‘fathers’,
first and second paternal (or under a matrilinear system,
maternal) cousins are classed as brothers, and so on.
Membership of the clan is theoretically based on ‘blood’,
practically on ceremonial initiation at puberty. While
‘kinship’ guarantees the ‘right’ to initiation, the same rites.
may secure adoption into the clan. Hence the relationship
of clansmen may be more or less fictitious.
   Hunting and fishing grounds, and the food obtained
therefrom, are generally owned and enjoyed in common.
But something like personal property in weapons, vessels, —
and finery and even in spells or dances may be recognized.
   Old men generally enjoy authority and prestige that
entitles them to a major share in women or any other sort
of ‘wealth’. But, particularly in America, these privileges
have often been monopolized by hereditary ‘chiefs’ who
can sometimes accumulate considerable wealth. Occasional
or endemic warfare between tribes or even between clans
is reported even in Australia, and more often in America,
where it serves to enhance the prestige of chiefs.
   The ideology of savages seems to be expressed in words
(spells) and imitative actions, rites, that symbolize changes
in the real world that society wishes to bring about. Each
totemic clan performs periodically dramatic ceremonies
supposed to ensure the multiplication of the ancestral
animals or plants. It looks as if the symbol were confused
with the result. The savage behaves as if he thought that
with spells and rites he can control natural phenomena
 that we now hold cannot be controlled by these means, if
 at all. All such operations are here termed magical. But it
 must not be assumed that they are, in fact, performed for
 any such clearly formulated reasons. That would be no
                                                      ira




                     PALAEOLITHIC      SAVAGERY                  47

   more legitimate than if a Negro in A.D. 2050 inferred that
_ Europeans of 1950 wore white collars to avoid sore throats.
   Nor can it be assumed that, besides magically ‘controlling’
   nature, savages do not ever also invoke the interposition of
   supernatural beings that might be termed ‘personal’ and
   divine. On the contrary, Australian aborigines and others
   tell stories or myths about such beings. The impersonation
   of the totem by clansmen might lead to the personification
   of the ancestor. The word-book to a dramatic ceremony
   may become a myth.
      Finally magic, though it cannot produce the results its
 _ practitioners are supposed to desire, can be biologically
   useful. Totemic ceremonies and abstinences, for instance,
   promote not only social solidarity but also. the efficiency
   of the hunter both by giving him confidence, and by
   familiarizing him with the habits of the totem. Moreover,
     the clansmen’s abstinence from the totem as food does, at
     least, retard the destruction of this source of livelihood for
     the rest of the tribe.
        The foregoing remarks are not intended to define the
     religion or the social organization of all savages. There is,
     in fact, as much variety of spiritual and of material culture
    among modern savages as there was at least of material
    culture among the men of the Old Stone Age described
    more fully in this chapter.




ee
0!
a




Se
eee
Slhl8S.
                               DE

