GOVERNMENT, RELIGION AND SCIENCE
         IN THE IRON AGE

Tue economic changes of the Iron Age naturally found
political expression. In the Orient indeed the Iron Age”
inherited the monarchical traditions of the Bronze Age.
Assyria, Babylonia, and Egypt were just continuations of
Bronze Age States and preserved divine kingship with
minor modifications, as they preserved so much of the old
economy. The new kingdoms like Israel, Lydia, Phrygia, and
Armenia (Urartu) tried to imitate them. The Medes and
Persians took over the imperial machines that. they had
conquered, though they improved them in details. The
Chous created a feudal monarchy rather like the Egyptian
Middle Kingdom.
   In Mediterranean Europe, on the contrary, theocratic _
monarchy on the Oriental pattern had never become firmly _
entrenched, even in Crete. The Mycenaean kinglets in |
Greece were ruined before the barbarian invaders arrived _
(p. 184). Admittedly the conquerors themselves had acknow-
ledged patriarchal monarchs and war-chiefs. But when
peace returned they, ruling over a small and poor territory, |
could not aspire to the pomp of an Oriental court, and could |
not maintain their positions above the richer landholders
among their vassals. For with iron weapons these were no
longer dependent on royal arsenals, but could arm them- |
selves and even equip pirate vessels to win as privateers |
booty for themselves and their clients. So monarchy with- |
ered away or was reduced to a purely ritual office in most
 Greek States and also in Italy and the Phoenician colonies.
    The typical Greek State and many Etruscan and Phoeni- |
cian States too were becoming republics before the end of |
 the Dark Age; magistrates elected for a year took over
 executive power, while general policy was determined by a
                                          awe       ee




         GOVERNMENT,        RELIGION    AND     SCIENCE         205
 ‘council’ of elders (senate) and an assembly of leading
 families or clans. When barbarian kinship organization had .
 broken down and a money economy had made land a
 commodity privately owned, the clan chief became the big
landlord; the machinery of government fell into the hands
 of an hereditary landed gentry or aristocracy (rule of the
 ‘best’). It was used to protect the creditor against the
 debtor and the landlord against the tenant and share-
 farmer with such effect that Attica was becoming de-
 populated and general strikes were provoked at Rome.
    But in commercial and industrial cities the landed aristo-
-cracy was forced, not without a struggle, to share its power
with a new plutocracy. Turned into cash the proceeds of
industry were no Jéss potent than rents from land, and the
‘profits of trade appeared no less honourable than pirates’
 booty. First perhaps in Ionia, then in Peninsular Greece, the
‘new merchant class successfully challenged the prerogatives
of the landed gentry. The qualifications for executive office,
‘seats on the council and assembly votes were reckoned in
‘money as well as, or instead of, in areas of land owned.
-Aristocracy gave place to oligarchy.
_ In their struggles the middle-class often sought allies
among the poor — small freeholders in debt, tenants and
share-farmers,   even   landless artisans and labourers.       The
development of tactics appropriate to Iron Age armament
had given even these military value. Victory no longer
depended upon the prowess of chariotry, the preserve of the
‘ich landowner, but on the valour of an infantry recruited
from yeoman farmers. Moreover, at sea — and in Greece
‘sea-power was decisive — even a labourer, too poor to afford
body armour, could serve his city in the fleet at an oar. In
fact he’ could claim with justice and some hope of success a
vote in the election of magistrates and in the legislative
‘assembly. The concession of such claims would transform
 the State into what the Greeks called democracy (rule by the
Brie).
 The conflict between the several classes often broke out
into open violence — stasis. It gave, moreover,          ambitious
individuals, generally men who had grown rich in com-
merce or manufacture or in the control of mines and
manipulation of currency, the chance to make themselves
dictators with the support of one of the contending parties.
Such were termed tyrants — a pre-Indo-European word |
appropriate to a despot of the Oriental type. And in fact,|
like these, tyrants did often protect the weak against op-
pression by the strong (p. 160), and expend much of their
private wealth on reproductive public works and the
beautification of their cities, and encourage the develop- |
ment of new industries. But they never became divine kings, |
and seldom founded dynasties. Most were expelled by oli-
garchic or democratic revolutions.                              ;
    In Athens — Athens means not only the city but the whole
of Attica, a district larger and more diversified than the
territory of most Greek cities — after the expulsion of the |
local tyrants, democracy was made completely effective.
Industry was put on an equal footing with commerce and |
farming. The old clans were deprived of political influence. |
Property qualifications for magistracies were abolished, and |
most offices were filled by lot instead of by election. Every/
citizen was expected to attend assemblies and to sit on|
juries. To make this effectively possible, assemblymen and
jurors as well as magistrates and councillors were paid, ash
 we should say, ‘for time lost’. Democracy was not only
 politically conceded but also economically established.
     It worked. In the latter part of the fifth century country-|
 men did in fact attend the assembly and vote on questianey
 of general policy. The leaders, who had at first been mainly)
 landed gentlemen, were now often craftsmen or merchants|
 ~a tanner, a lamp-maker, a manufacturer of musical instru-
 ments. The democratic State provided for its citizens free
 dramas and public buildings. The cost of these services, as
 also of the navy, was defrayed partly by the richer citizens
 no doubt under pressure from ‘public opinion’, but noth
 under the compulsion of confiscatory taxation. The con-
  tracts for public works were divided up into small items fo 1
 which any competent citizen or alien might compete.              |
          (      ,   i)


              GOVERNMENT,     RELIGION     AND   SCIENCE        207

         Fifth-century Athens thus provides the first adequately
    documented example of a thorough-going popular govern-
    ment. Its popular character must not be exaggerated. In the
    first place women had no place in public life. The wives of
    citizens were almost as completely secluded as women in
_ Mohammedan countries to-day, and at law were in a worse
  _ position than their Assyrian and Babylonian sisters. Second-
_ly, citizenship was now a hereditary privilege from which
    resident aliens were rigorously excluded. Yet on Gomme’s
_ estimate these included a tenth of the total population and
comprised most of the craftsmen and manufacturers.
    Finally industry was based on slavery; even the small
i farmer generally owned a slave or two, and the majority of
fthe employees in mines and factories and even the policemen
 _ were slaves. Though citizens did work on their farms, ply
    crafts, take on small contracts for public works, work as
    wage-labourers for fellow-citizens and even in mines, they
      ecured leisure for politics and culture largely at the expense
    of their wives, of aliens who had no share in the government,
    and of slaves who had no rights whatever.
     _ Moreover, the revenues of Athens which paid magistrates,
fyjurors, and assemblymen were swollen by two exceptional
sources. The richest silver-mines in the Aegean lay in Attica
K
    at Laurion; exploited mainly by slaves under local con-
tractors, they yielded a rich harvest of royalties to the State.
“Secondly, Athens was an imperial city, nourished by the
_tribute of subjects. It is true that the Athenian Empire began
  as a league of free cities against Persia. The tribute was a
    ‘substitute for the ships that the allies had originally
    equipped and manned for the common defence. But after
¢450 B.c. the allies felt themselves subjects and tried to rebel;
‘theimperial people were diverting some of their contribu-
 tions to the adornment of Athens and their own support.
   Thus the Athenian ‘people’ was in a sense only an
  cial large and diversified ruling class. The appear-
“ance of economic democracy had been achieved not so much
 by an even distribution of the wealth it produced as by
    using. the proceeds of exploitation to relieve the poverty of
208           WHAT    HAPPENED      IN   HISTORY

its poor sections. When external supplies were cut off by.
the loss of the empire, the conflict of poor and rich broke
out again in violence. In the sequel Athens lost her full
autonomy and returned to a moderate oligarchy with
foreign support in the late fourth century.
   Rome, on the contrary, illustrates the growth of oligarchy.
On the expulsion of the Etruscan kings, the organs of
government - the magistrates (consuls) and the council
(senate) — fell into the hands of an ‘aristocracy’, the patricians,
owing their power not only to landed wealth but also to the
status of their ancestors as military conquerors. Like the
Greek aristocrats, they used these organs against the plebs,
who included both artisans and small farmers and also
some members of defeated clans who had been enriched
by the money economy. In the sequel the plebs by ‘seces-
sion’ — a sort of general strike — won not only safeguards for
debtors and the right to intermarry with patricians and so
obtain a share in their estates, but also certain political
privileges — votes and magistracies.
   In practice only large landholders and to a minor degree
successful moneylenders profited by these concessions. The
small farmers were ruined by compulsory service in con-
tinuous wars, and so forced to relinquish their holdings to
their richer neighbours. Effective government and the inter-
pretation of law were monopolized by the Senate which
was now composed of ex-magistrates. While all citizens
were entitled to vote in the election of magistrates, the
voting was managed in such a way that the rich landowners
with their dependents could control the election, while the
expenses of office-holders were so heavy that only the rich
could support them. Finally religious offices were reserved |
to the old families and could be used to invalidate any incon- |
venient decisions by the people; for public business could |
be transacted only when hereditary officials had declared
the omens auspicious in accordance with a system of prog- |
nostication which they had learned from Mesopotamia
through the Etruscans. (The Etruscans, for instance, had |
introduced the Babylonian method of divination from the }
            GOVERNMENT,      RELIGION     AND    SCIENCE          209

livers of sacrificial victims which they had themselves
 learned in Asia Minor, probably through the Hittites.)
    Under Senatorial government Rome would rise in three
 centuries from a modest country township to an imperial
 capital whose military power dominated the whole Italian
 Peninsula, Sicily, Spain, North Africa, and even Greece.
 But the yeoman farmers whose arms had won this power
 would have lost their lands which would be absorbed by
 the great landowners and worked - scientifically — by
 slaves. The tribute from the conquered lands would enrich
only the Senatorial oligarchy and a new middle class of
 usurers,    tax-farmers,   and   contractors,   while   hordes     of
 captives would compete in the labour market with the dis-
 possessed peasantry and native artisans.
                                  *

  The social ferment of the Iron Age began to dissolve the
  established ideologies that corporations of anonymous
  priests and clerks had wrought into dogmatic theologies in
  the Bronze Age. Even in the old Oriental States as divine
  kings were dethroned and empires broken up by barbarians,
  conceptions of an empire of gods in imitation of earthly
  empires must have been shaken. Though the Babylonian
  priesthoods celebrated the traditional cults more zealously
- than ever, the old Sumerian idea of Fate (p. 136) seems to
   have come to the fore again.
      Still more among the new barbarian peoples in contact
   with civilization and under the corrosive influence of money
   did ideologies reflecting the old tribal structure of society
   disintegrate.
     Cheap iron tools and weapons had offered release from
  complete dependence on the group to individuals who were
   neither divine kings nor war-chiefs, and were dissolving
   society into units as discrete as the coins into which social
   wealth was now divisible. Alphabetic writing opened the
   doors of learning to all without initiation through the con-
   servative discipline of priestly seminaries or the schools of
   totalitarian States. The task of reconstructing society’s
              WHAT    HAPPENED      IN HISTORY
spiritual equipment therefore fell on individuals unfettered
by dependence on perpetual corporations with their con-
servative traditions.
   All over the civilized world, but above all in societies that
 had recently emerged from tribal barbarism, men were
 venturing to seek new solutions to the questions posed by
 the old order’s dissolution, and to seek them no longer
 through traditional channels and established institutions.
 Prophets dared to receive direct revelations from the deity —
 that collective soul substance of barbarians that had com-
 prehended and transcended all the members ofa tribe.
 Philosophers appealed to the ‘reason’ innate as they sup-
 posed in all their fellows — which also is in a sense just the
 collective experience of society transmitted and interpreted in
 accordance with commonly-accepted principles. Particularly
 in the sixth century did pioneers who dared to receive personal
 ‘revelations’ find popular support, or patrons on which to
found new religions; bold reasoners found sufficient numbers
reasoning like themselves to form schools of philosophy. ''
    In China, Lao-tse and Confucius are supposed then to '
have taught a rational morality, founding Taoism and|
Confucianism in the sixth century. In India, Gautama the
Buddha reputedly ‘attained enlightenment’ shortly before||
500 B.c. He was certainly not a member of the priestly ||
caste, the Brahmans, but allegedly the son of a small raja. :
He preached salvation as escape from the wheel of births
and deaths into an indefinable state of nirvana. The doctrine
of the wheel, the theory of the transmigration and rein-
carnation of souls, he took from the Brahmanic theologians.
But the means of escape were no longer sacrificial bribes|
and magical ceremonies, but moral virtues, notably
obedience to parents, respect for all living creatures, and
truthfulness. By the conversion of the Maurya emperor,
Asoka (273-231 B.c.), Buddhism was to become a rich
established church with all the trappings of sacerdotalism
and magic ritual. But it did bring forth monasticism, and|
its missionary zeal was one of the most potent instruments |
in diffusing civilization in Central and Eastern Asia.           |
             GOVERNMENT,      RELIGION    AND SCIENCE         211
       Zarathushtra (Zoroaster), who lived somewhere in
     Eastern Iran some time between   1000 and 500 B.c., believed
     himself called by Ahura Wasda (Ormuzd) to purify
     Iranian religion from polytheism, devil-worship, magic, and
_ritualism. So the old tribal gods (the devds of the Vedic
     Aryans) become in his hymns evil spirits, the commercial
     sacrifice is condemned, the will of the one god sustains the
     cosmic order — the idea of cosmic order itself may be the
     fruit of the Babylonians’ astronomical observations (reveal-
     ing uniformities in the movements of the heavenly bodies)
     fertilized by their notions of society as governed by known
_ and established laws that had been current since the time of
      Hammurabi. As champion of ‘the cattle-tending husband-
      man’ against the’ nomads, Zarathushtra may be said to
    _ appeal to the Iranian peasant masses. But his success was
      apparently due to the patronage of a great landed noble-
      man, Vistaspa, and his teachings became the creed of a rich
      State church with a new priesthood and fresh ritualism, if
     not under Darius, at least under the Arsacid kings after
      50 B.C.
         The Hebrew prophets again — Amos, Hosea, Isaiah, and
      their successors — relied on revelations. But they moralized
  the barbaric tribal god of the patriarchs, Yahveh, and
  denounced polytheism, idolatry, and magic. Their Yahveh
_ had no need of the flesh of goats and the blood of bulls
  offered as bribes. ‘What doth the Lord require of thee but
  to do justly and to love mercy and to walk humbly with thy
  God?’ At the same time the prophetic movement reflects
  a reaction of a free peasantry against the economic and
  political absolutism of kings who from Solomon on were
  trying to ape Egyptian and Assyrian monarchs.
     The prophets thus spiritualized old gods and moralized
_ existing cults. The deity became personal, but ina spiritual
  sense incapable of being confined in carvings of wood and
  stone, however skilful and ornate. He is no longer just one
     among   many   gods with whom     he contends on behalf of,
     and with the aid of, his tribal worshippers, like Amon-Ra,
i    Marduk, or the old Yahveh. He is exclusive. God of gods;



ety
 212          WHAT     HAPPENED      IN   HISTORY

 potentially at least he is God of all men, not only of Assyrians |
 or Egyptians (p. 161).
    An element of coun            magic, indeed, survives, in as
 much as even the prophetic religions promise the devotee
 rewards in this world or the next. But these rewards are no
 longer to be obtained by compulsive magical rites; the
 deities’ favour is not to be wooed by draughts of beer as in
 Sumer, or of intoxicating soma as in Vedic India. The way
 to salvation is to act morally ~ to do justly, to speak the
truth, in general to behave towards one’s fellows in the way
most societies, even barbarian and Bronze Age, recognize
as right.                                                        ;
    But of course any doctrine that promises salvation as the
reward for righteousness must also threaten damnation as.
the penalty for evil doing. In the inspired vision of the
prophet the negative sanction is overshadowed by the
positive message. But as the religions become more and
more institutionalized and sacerdotalized, the sufferings of
the damned are dwelt on with increasing gusto. So, like the
Egyptian papyri of the Second Millennium (p. 157), later
Buddhist and Zoroastrian scriptures and paintings give
lively descriptions of hells and their torments.
   Finally, as the one God is now maker of all men, mankind
becomes potentially one society. It is no longer to his fellow-
tribesmen or his fellow-citizens alone that the God-fearing
righteous man owes justice, truth, and mercy, but, if not to
all men, at least to a community of the faithful that should
embrace all men, irrespective of race or political allegiance.
‘These fruitful ideas are certainly implicit in the teachings of
Gautama, Zarathushtra, Amos and the rest. They became
explicit in Buddhism, Mithraism, and other religions after
300 B.c. The idea of humanity as a single society, all of
whose members owe one another common moral obliga-
tions, is an ideological counterpart of an international
economy based on the interchange of commodities between
all its parts, such as became effectively manifest in the
second phase of the Iron Age.
   In Greece during the Bronze Age minstrels who had been
              GOVERNMENT,        RELIGION    AND    SCIENCE      213

      welcome at the heroes’ courts, instead of priestly corpora-
      tions, had defined a theology depicting the gods in the like-
      ness of their warlike patrons, acknowledging the suzerainty
      of Olympian Zeus as did the turbulent war-lords that of the
      King of Mycenae. In the Iron Age the appropriate com-
      mercial sacrifices or bribes were still publicly offered to the
      Olympian gods, and temples were still built for them by the
      cities. But when the Mycenaean castles were vacated by
 _ their mortal     models,   the Homeric    “gods left the earthly
      Olympus and vanished into the sky. Nature, dispeopled of
      gods, was left free for Science’ on the one hand, for the
      vaguer magic forces ‘controlled’ by the old peasantry and
      the new barbarian tribes on the other.
         From the old magic rites were begotten ‘mystery relig-
      ions’ — the cult of Dionysus or Bacchus, the god of wine,
      imported from barbaric Thrace, Orphism, the Eleusinian
      mysteries — and mythical philosophies, including those of
      Pythagoras and Plato, all appealing to individuals as such
      rather than to society as an organized whole. Mystery
      religions provided an ideology for the masses — the dis-
      possessed peasantry, the miners and even the slaves —
      promising them salvation, spiritual balm for their material
      and economic woes. Bacchus offered union with the deity
      through divine frenzy, ‘Orpheus,’ like Buddha, release from
      the wheel of births and deaths (p. 210), Eleusis immortality.
      But the paths to salvation were mainly magic rituals —
      initiations and purifications taken straight from totemism —
      dramatic fertility rites of rustic barbarians such as had
      procured immortality first to pharaoh and then to all
      Egyptians who could pay for it (pp. 137, 157). Naturally
      the impure, the uninitiated, were threatened with hell. The
      Orphics contrasted gloomy Tartarus with the Elysian fields
      to which the initiates travelled after death. By the fifth
      century the fear of hell was a potent factor in Greek life,
      though scarcely alluded to in classical literature. From the
      Italian and Sicilian colonies the doctrine spread to the
      Etruscans, whose tombs are sometimes adorned with pic-
      tures of the tortures of the damned. But the aim of the



“—s
  214          WHAT HAPPENED IN HISTORY
 mysteries was not ‘to teach their votaries a body of dogmas,
 but to put them in a certain emotional state’.               4,
    The philosophical mystics for their part appealed to a
 more sophisticated clientéle with a subtler magic. Pythag-
 oras of Samos (flourished about 530 B.c.), for instance, for
 escape from the wheel of life prescribed, in addition to tabus
 and rites taken straight from barbarism, civilized sciences
 and art; his disciples formed brotherhoods that are more
 akin to barbarians’ secret societies and the Orphics’ church
 than to scientific schools; the same is true of the Brahmanic
 philosophical schools of Iron Age India. But the Pythag-
 oreans, regarding the contemplative life as the greatest
 purification, incidentally studied arithmetic, geometry, and
   astronomy as a means thereto, not without practical results.
   In the meantime other philosophies, originating in Ionia,
  had been leading more directly to Natural Science.
     The founders of what is termed Natural Philosophy—
_ Thales (?625-540) and Anaximander (2600-530) of Miletus,
  Herakleitos (?550-475) of Ephesus— were in fact primarily
  concerned with the social questions that commercial con- |
  tact with the Orient and the new currency had made urgent |
  in Ionia. At first at least philosophers were no more con-
  cerned with an abstract ‘nature’ unrelated to human society _
  than the theologians of Sumer and Egypt. ‘The principal.
  object of Greek speculation,’ according to Cornford, ‘is not
  external nature as revealed by the senses, but a representa- |
  tion of reality as a supra-sensible extended substance which
  is at first both alive and divine.’ ... ‘Its aim is to create a
  new tool, a conceptual model of reality,’ just as the aim of
  the Sumerian lists may have been (p. 136). The model was,
  as in Mesopotamia, provided by the order of society, but
  of a society emerging into Iron Age, not Bronze Age, |
  civilization. The Greek name for the order of nature, cosmos,
  is derived from a root that in the earlier Greek of Homer |
  is applied to the marshalling of clans for war and the
  settlement of tribes on the land.
     The Iron Age, in fact, presented the problems of society
  n a new light, and the agents and the instruments for their
  olution were different. The morality and the cosmogony
of the Bronze Age Orient had been the collective specula-
‘tions of corporations of priests or temple households;
‘Brahmanical philosophy in India, too, was elucubrated by
a priestly caste. Greek philosophy of the Iron Age was the
personal speculation of individuals emancipated from com-
plete dependence on the group by iron tools and coined
 money.
    In Iron Age philosophy — in India as well as in Gre -
the problem of the individual and society, the One and the
Many, occupied the forefront. It had, indeed, begun to
appear on the horizon when the first magician emerged
from the horde in the Old Stone Age, and: was clearly
‘discernible in the Bronze Age when divine kings and war-
lords acquired individuality and ‘souls’. But it fully dawned
only in the Iron Age society of pirate captains, merchant
shipowners, currency jugglers, and tyrants.
_ So Bronze Age speculation had taken Nature as a whole,
_as society was a whole, manifestly united in dependence on
the divine monarch, and as the temple estate was a whole
collectively exploited in the interests of the household and
its divine head. But Iron Age philosophy broke nature too
into parts, as the community was’ divided into individuals
and the city’s territory into private holdings and estates. In
 Ionia Anaximander already explained qualitative differ-
 ences as due to ‘thickening and thinning’, i.e. as quantita-
tive like the differences in political status based on the
property qualifications of citizens (p. 205). Finally between
500 and 420 B.c. the atomists, Leukippos (of Miletus) and
Demokritos (of Abdera), set out to resolve external nature
‘into discrete indivisible bits or particles (atoms), just as the
“new currency resolved wealth into discontinuous particles —
coins, Thus they created the atomic theory that proved
‘such a superb instrument of discovery in modern chemistry
_and physics.
_   What was really distinctive in Greek speculation was that
216          WHAT    HAPPENED     IN HISTORY                5
the philosophers    appealed again and again not to the
wisdom of the ancients or divine revelations, but to facts of
common experience, and the practice of the crafts. (Their
Hindu contemporaries were hampered by inheriting from
the Bronze Age the sacred hymns of the Veda (p. 168) and
ritual manuals verbally remembered.)
   The natural philosphers diligently observed natural
phenomena and systematized their observations. Anaxi-
mander outlined a vague idea of organic evolution based
upon accurate observations of the habits of fishes and
animals. Xenophanes (of Colophon, ? 565-475 B.c.) ob-
served and correctly explained fossils. Moreover, they
applied measurement to their observations, if only to a
limited extent, more than their Bronze Age precursors; did
not coins enable Greek society to measure even rank more
accurately than the unminted money of the Bronze Age? |
By measuring the chords of the lyre Pythagoras (or
one of his disciples) not only laid the foundation for the |
theory of music, but also was led to discover the mathe- |
matical properties of what we call harmonic progressions. |
   But the Greek philosophers did not have to rely exclu- |
sively on their own observations; they were admittedly
acquainted with the genuine achievements of Babylonian |
and Egyptian science. In arithmetic, geometry, and astron-
omy Greek science built on foundations laid on the Nile |
and the Euphrates. Thales, the first natural philosopher,
was reputedly halfa Phoenician, and is said to have studied
geometry in Egypt. Pythagoras too is reputed to hae
learned his geometry in Egypt.
   He and his disciples certainly pursued the study of
mathematics, albeit often for mystical and magical ends.
Pythagoras seems to have thought that the ‘nature’ of |
things was somehow expressible in numbers, much as the |
Sumerians may have supposed that a thing’s ‘nature’ could
be grasped with its name; after all, in contemporary Greece
a man’s function in society and so his ‘nature’ was officially
determined by the number of coins he owned. At the same
time the constant and uniform properties of number
                           —_—        -2
              reo   Te           77
      8   —   ‘       Yr
     o—                                              :           ©


              GOVERNMENT,                   RELIGION      AND   SCIENCE        217

  appeared to reveal a permanent and changeless Order in
   which men might find refuge at a time when the structure
_ of society was manifestly in a state of flux.
      In any case, many interesting and curious properties of
   numbers were discovered. These discoveries seemed to
   reveal magical properties, and the numbers possessing them
   were given fanciful names like ‘amicable numbers’ by the
   Pythagoreans. But even these, to say nothing of progressions
 and the like, have turned out to be helpful in the modern
 theory of probability.
    But the Greeks could not advance very far in pure arith-
metic owing to clumsy systems of numeral notation. For
 the practical business of accountancy they used the count-
 ing-board, or abacus — a device probably invented by the
 Phoenicians and still employed in Russia and Oriental
 countries to-day. But neither the abacus nor the notations
 devised to record results obtained thereon lend themselves
 to higher mathematics;                    for fractions, for instance, the Greeks
  were confined to aliquot parts like the Egyptians (p. 119).
  They overcame the obstacle by using geometry. And geo-
  metry, like pure number, seemed to reveal a permanent
  and changeless order.
      The Greek geometers generalized truths familiar to their
  Oriental predecessors. For instance, Pythagoras may have
_ learned from Egyptian architects (the ancient writers speak
  of cord-knotters, harpedonaptat) the trick of constructing an
  accurate right-angle with the aid of a cord divided in the
  proportions 3, 4 and 5, or 5, 12 and 13; it was demonstrably
  used by the Brahmans of India for constructing altars a
  little, if at all, later. With this would go the converse fact,
  familiar to the Babylonians in the Second Millennium (p.
  179), that in a right-angled triangle whose sides are in these
  proportions the square on the side opposite the right angle
  (the hypotenuse) is equal to the sum of the squares on the
  two sides containing it. Then Pythagoras is credited with
  having established by the sort of construction still used in
  school geometries that in any right-angled triangle the
  square on the hypotenuse is equal to the sum of the squares




Pe
 probably erroneously, the Theorem of Pythagoras.        .   a
   In fact the Greek geometers by ‘pure geometry’, i.e. by
laboratory experiments, by tracing out figures in the sand
or with strings, and by cutting up globes and cubes and
cones, did find out constant properties common to any
triangle or other figure that they could construct. (The
‘proof’ ofa theorem begins, e.g. ‘Let ABC be any triangle...’
and then directs you to try out certain constructions'on it.)
Hence they inferred that these properties held good of all
triangles or other figures. So by induction they generalized
observations, many of which must have been familiar to
Babylonians and Egyptians, and discovered new geometri-
cal properties of the same kind.                              q
    With their aid the Greeks were enabled to obtain approxi- _
 mations to surds and other irrationals (e.g. 4/2) and to solve |
 quadratic equations that had defeated the Babylonians.
 They found, too, that the stars did appear to trace out in
 the sky figures that men could describe in the laboratory |
with compasses, and that applications of geometrical rules
would help them to locate planets in the heavens and ships _
at sea and to divide sundials more accurately. With the aid
of geometrical figures engineers could plan a tunnel to
convey water a third of a mile under a mountain, as at |
Samos in the sixth century.                                   -,
    It did not therefore matter so much that the foregoing
discoveries had been made in pursuit of magical and
mystical ends. Yet the baleful effects of their origin still
persist. The Greek philosophers thought that the ‘universal’
truths of mathematics revealed to them an immutable and
eternal reality behind the changing panorama of historical
appearances, that geometry would provide a model of
timeless Nature as a Sumerian temple or Egyptian pyramid
had. Some, indeed, like Plato, inferred that the truths of
geometry were not inferences from experimental facts -
from figures that men drew and constructed — but ‘mem-
ories’ of the properties of ideal triangles apprehended by
reason. Upon this confusion was based the theory of a |
         GOVERNMENT,       RELIGION     AND   SCIENCE      219

  uprasensible eternal world of ideas independent of obser-
vation that has haunted idealist philosophy ever since. But
even experimental scientists to-day, despite Einstein and
 Darwin, seem loath to abandon the search for an eternal
 changeless unhistorical reality of which pure mathematics
 could be the model.
    Astronomy the Greeks, like other farmers, had to study
 first for the regulation of the calendar. Even before 700 B.c.
 Hesiod’s poem, Works and Days, illustrates the role of the
‘stars as guides to agricultural operations and the early
 transmission in literary form of this rural lore. But the
 Greeks were perforce a sea-faring people. Lacking a corn-
pass, they had to rely on the stars to steer by. They had
 therefore a very practical incentive to observe them >
accurately and, moreover, opportunities to note phenomena
 that a priest, permanently stationed in the same aE
 would lack.
   For instance, a sailor would notice that as he sailed boule
the pole star came nearer and nearer the horizon. By
 measuring its altitude (as an angle) he could get a good idea
as to how far he had progressed on his voyage across the
Mediterranean.
    In their study of the stars the Greeks doubtless benefited
also from the results collected by the Babylonians and
Egyptians. By the Second Millennium the Babylonians had
compiled a great catalogue of stars. Copies of it found a
 place in the Royal Library of the Hittite capital in Central
Asia Minor, so that knowledge of its contents had spread
 well towards the Aegean before 1200 B.c. After 1100 the list
 had been revised in Assyria, while after 800 the Babylonian
 texts begin to give the stars’ positions and heliacal settings
on a system like our. ‘equatorial co-ordinates’. Moreover,
 from 747 B.c. the Babylonians had begun to reckon years
 from a fixed conventional point, as we do ‘from the Birth
 of Christ’, and to date events from the ‘Era of Nabonassar’.
 Hitherto celestial as well as terrestrial events had been
 dated at best to ‘the nth year of King N’.
_ With the data thus collected the Babylonian astronomers
220           WHAT     HAPPENED      IN   HISTORY

were able to calculate in advance the relative positions of
the sun and moon and of the planets; in other words, they
could predict when eclipses were to be expected. Now
Thales is ‘reported (by a tradition going back to Herodotus
in the early fifth century) to have foretold an eclipse of the
sun, almost certainly that of 585 .c. His prediction cannot
have been based on his own observations alone, so he presum-
ably based his deductions on data derived from Mesopotamia.
   His success does not, of course, mean that either he or his
teachers understood the ‘cause’ of eclipses. That was clearly
stated by Anaxagoras (of Klazomenai, ? 500-430 B.c.) a
century later. The explanation seems to have been due to a
purely Greek development in which the new geometry was
bodily applied to accurately measured and recorded obser- :
vations. Some Greeks had freed themselves from traditional
superstitions sufficiently to treat the heavenly bodies as
objects to be measured and weighed instead of (or as well
as) the vehicles of a deity or symbols of a supernatural |
Fate. Nevertheless, about 450 B.c. Anaxagoras was con-
demned for impiety in democratic Athens, and in 413 an
Athenian general postponed fora montha vital military opera-
tion because an eclipse of the moon occurred as an evil omen! |
   At the same time scientific astronomy was preparing the|
way for a mathematical geography. With the immense|
enlargement of the civilized world and the intensification|
of intercourse throughout it, men of the Iron Age needed
more than ever to know about the planet on which they
lived.   Conquerors,   generals,   merchants,   and   mariners
wanted to know not only what sort of people and lands
they might conquer or trade with, but also how to teach|
them and how far off they were. Assyrian and Pera
officials drew up itineraries giving roads and distances. |
The pharaohs of a temporarily revived Egypt sent out|
exploring expeditions: one crew rounded the Cape of Good
Hope and were astonished to find the sun on the right as|
they sailed westward ~ a report that the credulous Herodo-
tus refused to believe !
   Much of this information thus gathered remained locked
:            GOVERNMENT,      RELIGION    AND   SCIENCE       221
     up in the confidential archives of Oriental monarchies or
   as the trade secrets of private merchants or individual cities.
 _ But the new class of travelling Greek philosophers picked up
   scraps here and there and added to them their own obser-
   vations. They could sell such knowledge to a wide circle
   anxious to take advantage of the new facilities for travel,
   business, or even pleasure. Anaximander is reported to have
_made the first Greek map. Some even wrote down their
_ information for the benefit of the new reading public. The
 _ results were both descriptive works and also scientific trea-
_ tises in which the foundations of a mathematical geography
_ were laid with the aid of astronomy and spherical geometry.
_ The Iron Age improvements in the applied sciences due
_ to the cheaper metal tools and the need of new classes are
_ too numerous even to mention. They did not as yet involve
_new methods of transmission. Despite the alphabet, craft-
_ lore in general was not committed to writing and so did
   not become fully scientific. Athenian potters’ traditions, for
   example, still taught them to fear the demon who cracked
_ pots in the kiln and to mount on it a Gorgon mask to scare
   him away! The illiteracy of craftsmanship (craftsmen could
   sign their names all right) is presumably due to old-fashioned
   contempt for the mechanic arts. The exceptions prove this.
      The craft-lore of the medicine-man, like that of the
   magician, had been committed to writing even in the
   Bronze Age and continued to be transmitted in the Iron
   Age. In the Oriental schools this scholastic tradition all too
   faithfully preserved the magical theory of disease as due to
   possession by evil spirits. The Assyrians added only a few
   new spells and drugs for their expulsion’    to the Sumerian
   and Babylonian recipes. In Greece, too, there were healing
   gods, like Aesculapius, who wrought miraculous cures in
   their temples. But outside the temples there grew up a
 school of private physicians who discarded the magical
  ‘paraphernalia of the medicine man, but not his drugs, and
 _relied on manipulative and chemical remedies.
     Judged by the extant writings beginning with Hippocrates
     (of Chios, ? 460-350 B.c.), the Greek medical tradition was

if



fis
222          WHAT     HAPPENED      IN   HISTORY

characterized by freedom from demonology and by an i
accuracy and objectivity in the observation and recording
of symptoms quite foreign to Assyria and Egypt. Even 7
before 500 B.c. Greek medicine had gained such a reputa-_
tion that Darius summoned to his court a Greek physiclagy
who cured his queen.
   Agriculture again was a reputable pursuit in the Iron
Age, and treatises on scientific farming were written both
in Greek and in Phoenician. Even before 700 B.c. Hesiod
was putting into verse a farmer’s almanac replete with
maxims for the application of practical botany, geology, and _
zoology. Thereafter migration overseas and the switch over
to specialized farming broke down the routines of agri-
culture and made experimentation compulsory. A Phoe-
nician or a Greek, transplanted to Italy or North Africa,
could hardly help noticing the effect of the new soils and
climates upon the seeds, cuttings and young animals he
took with him. Experience showed that a vine-stock from
Lebanon produced different grapes on the slopes of Vesu- —
vius or the plain of the Rhone valley. Comparison and selec- _
tion of soils and stock were inevitable. Moreover, new plants”
and animals were introduced, as well as new methods, as part |
of the general diffusion already described on page 197; thus.
the Persians introduced lucerne into the Mediterranean
when they invaded Greece in 490. Conversely they them-
selves learned to cultivate rice after their conquest of India.
   The collation of such experimental results and the forma-
tion ofa written, and therefore abstract and fluid, tradition of
agricultural science may have been prompted by a demand
for manuals on the part of large landowners; handbooks for
“gentlemen farmers’ existed among the Carthaginians.
   But with the data collected for practical purposes by
farmers and physicians the new leisured class of natural
philosophers in Greece were enabled to lay the foundations
for modern descriptive botany, geology, and zoology. Their
work differs from the Sumerian lists firstly in containing
accurate descriptions instead of bare names, and secondly
in drawing upon the observations of a much wider circle



                                                                   E
                                                                   se
          GOVERNMENT,        RELIGION    AND   SCIENCE        223
_ of educated persons. Their classifications too are more
  ‘scientific’ in that they are no longer based upon similarities
  of conventional names or written signs but upon real and
  often significant similarities in the actual plants, minerals,
      or animals classified. The results can best be judged from
      the lectures of Aristotle who died in 321 B.c.
         In Aristotle culminate in a sense all the philosophical
     -and scientific tendencies of the Classical period. A man of
      comprehensive interests and encyclopaedic erudition, he
  _ lectured on the theory of knowledge, logic, ethics, politics,
      psychology, mathematics, astronomy, geography, botany,
 _ zoology, anatomy, chemistry, physics, and meteorology.
      The vast Aristotelian corpus consists of notes of these
      lectures, edited by the author or his pupils, and treatises
      of disputed authenticity. As a pioneer in formal logic,
   _ positive psychology, comparative anatomy, and systematic
      biology his contributions to later science are invaluable.
         Inevitably Aristotle went wrong — sometimes stupidly
      wrong — for instance, in claiming that the heavenly bodies
      are incorruptible and that the sun goes round the earth,
     in denying the sexuality of plants, accepting spontaneous
     generation and locating the intelligence in the heart. It is
     his misfortune and ours that his authority grew so great
_ among his Hellenistic successors that his theories were
_ sometimes preferred to observed facts. By the Middle Ages
     Aristotle’s system with all its blemishes was virtually in-
     corporated in the sacred canon of the Catholic Church.
= The       schoolmen appealed to Aristotle rather than to ex-
     perience; the Church condemned the heliocentric system
_ of Copernicus as contrary to Aristotle’s teaching that the
_Church had accepted. A champion of oligarchy and a
   defender of slavery, Aristotle appears as the mouthpiece
 _ of the class from which his patrons and pupils were recruited
   and as the victim of the contradictions in the economy of the
 _ City-state which were all too apparent by his day.
      Compared with the stagnation of science in the Bronze
   Age, in spite of the endowment of research institutes in
_ temples, the progress achieved in Greece between 600 and

’
 224          WHAT    HAPPENED      IN   HISTORY                  ¥
                                                                  e)
                                                                  i
450 B.G. is amazing. It was moreover due not to clerks and
priests assured of leisure by rich States or Churches, but
to private individuals living either by their own industry
or on the generosity of patrons and disciples.
   Nevertheless, at least after 500, this superb effort of pure
science did not, as the comparable efflorescence of modern
theory did after a.p. 1600, find expression in technical
inventions that not only enriched human life and guaran-
teed the workable truth of the theories but also provided
instruments for fresh discoveries. On the contrary, except in
the domains of agriculture and military engineering,
natural philosophy became increasingly divorced from
practical life as the Greek cities grew richer, wealth more
 concentrated and slaves more numerous.
     The wealthy slave-owners and landlords wis welcomed
 to their banquets the natural philosophers and on whose
 patronage the latter had to rely, did not want labour-saving
 devices and despised craftsmanship as degrading (banausic)
 and servile. The pursuit of abstract knowledge for its own
 sake or as the ‘greatest purification’ became a consolation |
 to the rich slave-owner who was relieved by his slaves of |
 any need to exert himself productively and was yet jostled
out of his employment in running the State by the vulgar
 mechanics in the Athenian assembly or by the equally |
 vulgar tyrants of other cities.
     Then the private merchant, loyal citizen of one of several
 competing States, would hesitate to disclose the geographi-
 cal and astronomical observations he had made to any
 cosmopolitan scientist who might betray his secrets to
 enemies and rivals. Moreover, slavery made a real science
 of man and so scientific history impossible. To justify the
 institution Aristotle propounded the doctrine of the ‘natural
 slave’. It means in effect that a man of any race except the
 Greek found the highest expression of which he was capable
 in serving the kindly Greek as an intelligent instrument.
 The Semites and Egyptians who had created civilization,
 the Celts, the Teutons, and the Jews who were to recreate
 it, were thus summarily labelled and dismissed.
                                       ae   een   ean   eee




          GOVERNMENT,         RELIGION      AND   SCIENCE       225

         Finally Farrington has argued that the freedom of
 _ thought and teaching was deliberately restricted in the
 _ interests of the propertied classes and by their influence in
      the State. Certainly the criticisms of the natural philo-
      sophers assailed the religious and superstitious pillars of the
  _ established order. That could be tolerated while the eco-
      nomic system was expanding so that an absolute increase
 _ in wealth hid the inequalities in its distribution. But after
  _ 450 the market was no longer expanding at the old rate;
_ the profits of usury and slave-holding on the one hand, the
     _ruination of small farmers through war and the congestion
   _ of the labour market on the other, were revealing nakedly
      the contrast between rich and poor. Disturbances occurred
      already in several cities. In the fourth century demands for
      the abolition of debts and a redivision of the land became
      widespread and chronic.
         In these circumstances philosophers of the right recog-
      nized the value of superstitious supports for the existing
 : order. Plato frankly recommends teaching the citizens ‘a
   noble lie’. Later Polybius commends the Roman aristocracy
 _ for having done so successfully. ‘The foundation of Roman
      greatness is,’ he asserts, ‘superstition. This has been intro-
      duced into every aspect of their private and public life with
      every artifice to awe the imagination. For the masses in
      every State are unstable, full of lawless desires, irrational
 _ anger, and violent passion. All that can be done is to hold
_ them in check by fears of the unseen and similar shams.
      It was not for nothing but of deliberate design that the
      men of yore introduced to the masses notions about God
      and views on the after-life.’ And Farrington can in fact point
      to the condemnation of Anaxagoras for ‘impiety’ and later of
      Socrates for ‘corrupting the youth’ as concrete examples of
      intolerance of criticism of precisely those notions and views.
   _     In any case the development of Classical Greek science
      was in fact limited by the peculiar social and economic
- conditions of the classical polis. The same limitations may
     have affected Classical art.
         Throughout the Bronze Age the conventions established
 226          WHAT    HAPPENED     IN HISTORY

 as canons in che Third Millennium (p. 139) had remained
 fixed; only new technical processes had been introduced
 and styles had been modified. Even in the Iron Age Orient ;
 the venerable and sanctified traditions of the past dominated—
 the taste of customers drawn from essentially the same social —
 classes, albeit of different ‘races’, as before, though new —
 media — glazed bricks and tiles, for instance — might now —
 be effectively employed.                                     {
   The Greeks, abandoning the stiff barbaric styles of thed ;
Geometric age about 700 B.c., began to copy the approved i
models of Oriental art as Ee           as the Phoenicians 4
had done in the Second Millennium, but always preserving ©
something of that balance and restraint that distinguished—
the Geometric style. And then they broke away from the
 old conventions, as the Classical economy expanded, and |
 with its expansion the market constituted by appreciative |
 buyers deepened.
    The sculptor and the painter were no longer dependent”
 on the patronage of priestly corporations and despots’—
 courts. Their most profitable and most honourable duty—
 was therefore no longer to turn out idols of a pattern
 approved by sacerdotal tradition as divinely sanctioned and—
magically effective. Portraits of divine kings, stillfulfilling
 a magic function (p. 138) no longer set a standard for the |
 delineation of the human form. Sculptors were commis- —
sioned by cities or private individuals to execute statues of—
athletes and warriors or of deceased relatives none of
whom made any pretence at divinity any more than the —
statues themselves worked magic. They were thus free to
abandon sacred conventions and depict what they saw.
And incidentally the frequent gymnastic contests gave them
opportunities of seeing the human form naked which were|
less common in the Orient.
   ‘Thus Greek artists were the first, since the nameless
masters who had worked in prehistoric India (p. 128),
to present the human figure in a naturalistic manner; they
were allowed to treat even the gods in the same spirit. So
by the fifth century the Greeks had established canons of
            GOVERNMENT,       RELIGION AND SCIENCE =. 227
    beauty in portraiture at least that are still generally
    accepted.
       Architects too in translating into the lovely marbles of
    their homeland the wooden structures of their barbaric
    ancestors were very likely inspired by Egyptian and Asiatic
    models. But they created architectural forms that, however
    depressing they may seem when copied in dirty stone under
    a grey northern sky, in Mediterranean sunlight - are still
    things of ineffable beauty even when in ruins.
       Similarly in literature epics dealing with the warlike
    deeds of gods and kings had been recited in Asiatic .and
    Egyptian courts; magic dramas were performed in Bronze
    Age temples; the barbarian ancestors of the Indo-Europeans
    composed chants in metric verse. But out of the epic lays
    sung by minstrels at Mycenaean heroes’ courts some Iron
    Age ‘Homer’ created epics that not only describe incidents
    and scenes, but also reveal the personalities of human
    characters   for the delectation   of Ionian   aristocrats   and
 plutocrats. The choral ode accompanied by music and
 dance was created for the country gentry and the com-
 mercial tyrants of the sixth century. Finally, for the demo-
cratic citizens choral ode and epic recitation were combined
 for public performance as dramas that were no longer
 magical. The literary conventions thus perfected have been
 models not only to later Europeans, but to the Persians
 and Arabs and perhaps Indians too.
    But the most original creative period of Greek art was over
 before 400 B.c. Decadence sets in precisely at the point when
 economic expansion had slowed down, the general level of
  prosperity was declining, and real wages were falling, though
 individual fortunes were bigger than ever and the number
 of slaves relative to the total population had increased.
    Now to us classical Greek sculpture is represented not by
 statues of gods carved by the most celebrated masters
 (these are lost), but by tombstones and similar works turned
out by humbler artists for patrons of more modest means.
Greek painting is not known by renowned artists’ pictures
 in temples and public buildings — for these have perished —


{
—
228           WHAT    HAPPENED     IN   HISTORY           at

but by the designs on vases manufactured in mass in fac-
tories for popular consumption and executed by craftsmen
who were seldom citizens and sometimes slaves (p. 199).
After 500, as the number of slaves increased, the social and
economic status of such executants had declined, as had
 that of other craftsmen. Aristotle in the fourth century
 mentions the profession of a musician (flute-player) as-
 typically degrading (banausic).
    The fatal outcome of contradictions in the political and
 economic structure of the world of Greek poleis was fully
 exposed after 400 B.c. ‘The social and economic life of the |
 fourth century,’ according to Rostovtzeff, ‘was marked. by
 two dominant features — the lapse of the mass of the
population into proletarianism, and closely connected
therewith the growth of unemployment, and secondly a
shortage of foodstuffs.’
    Many small peasants were being driven off the land by
prolonged military service in continual wars, by the actual
devastation of their farms by hostile armies and by the debts’
these circumstances forced them to incur and prevented
them from repaying. Industry offered no outlet to such as
these. For the small craftsman could not compete with the
slave-manned factory (p. 199). The internal market for
industrial goods contracted; for usury and slave-owning
concentrated wealth into fewer and fewer hands. The
external market contracted too; for in true Bronze Age
fashion industry exported itself instead of its products. For
example, not only in Italy but also in the colonies on the
Black Sea local potteries, presumably staffed in the first
instance with emigrant craftsmen, were successfully imita-
ting for the local market vases that had formerly been
imported from Athens. The emigration of the ceramic
industry is just an index of what was happening in other
domains. By reducing the export market it of course made
it increasingly difficult to cover the cost of imported food-
stuffs, like the wheat from the Black Sea.
   So in the fourth century there was no outlet for the over-
flowing and dispossessed rural population save to sell their
                   a



           GOVERNMENT,       RELIGION     AND     SCIENCE      229

  _ bodies as mercenaries to the King of Persia or other
_ ‘barbarians’ or to take to piracy and brigandage; one
_ pretender to the Persian throne alone hired without diffi-
_ culty   10,000   Greek   mercenaries,   while   pirates   became
  _ bolder and more numerous, aggravating (by increasing the
    slave-supply) the foregoing evils. No wonder that violent
    social struggles became endemic in most cities. Such were
    the consequences on the one hand of the economic con-
 _ tradictions exposed on page 200, on the other of the paro-
    chialism of the City-States that split Greece into tiny units,
    each clinging to local autonomy with suicidal fanaticism.
       All Greeks were indeed conscious of a common Hellenism.
    They spoke dialects of a common language hardly suffi-
    ciently divergent/ to prevent mutual understanding alto-
    gether. All acknowledged a common pantheon of Olympic
_ gods, despite local differences in cult. They even partici-
 _ pated in pan-Hellenic festivals like the Olympic games.
    In fact most Hellenic cities had joined forces to oppose
    aggression by non-Hellenic powers like the Persians and
    Carthaginians, though even in old Greece there were cities
    that supported Darius and Xerxes. But otherwise each city
    fought with its neighbours almost continuously — first to be
    able to maintain the ideal of self-sufficiency by stealing
    other people’s land, later to win a political or commercial
    hegemony.
       No doubt passionate devotion to the polis provided a
 _ conscious motive for self-sacrificing moral action such as a
    barbarian tribe did not need and an Oriental State could
    not evoke. It inspired its citizens to deliberate valour,
    triumphant art, and noble generosity. But in practice it
    squandered the man-power of Greece, dissipated its wealth,
    brought Greeks to the slave-market to reduce the status of
  free craftsmen and in the end forfeited the autonomy of
  the poleis themselves. Such local patriotism in fact sums up
  the ethical ideal of the Classical moral philosophers like
  Plato and Aristotle. It could not provide an ideology
  compatible with an economic system based inexorably on
  international trade on at least a Mediterranean scale.
                             XI                               e



THE    CLIMAX       OF ANCIENT          CIVILIZATION          a


                                                              ¥


In the three centuries beginning in 330 B.c., the frontiers of ©
civilization were further enlarged until a continuous zone —
of literate States extended from the Atlantic to the Pacific. —
The new economy, hitherto realized only in the eastern —
Mediterranean, came to dominate Atlantic Europe and —
Hither Asia, and at last found political expression for the —
unity it created in the Roman Empire. This result was
achieved in two main stages.
   In the first the Greeks themselves, under the leadership off
Alexander of Macedon, took over the whole Persian Empire
as a going concern, extending the polis economy right to the ©
Indus and the Jaxartes. At the same time the Syracusans ~
established a ‘smaller Greek Empire in the west (under —
Hiero) while the Romans were uniting Italy on Greek
rather than Oriental lines and enlarging the sphere of the
new economy at the expense of the Phoenicians of Carthage. —
In the second stage the Romans, having conquered the ~
Greeks in Italy and Sicily, annexed the Carthaginian i
Empire and slowly swallowed Old Greece and its new
appanages in the East, brought barbarian Europe by force—
of arms into the Mediterranean economic system. In the —
meantime a large part of India had been united, albeit for —
only a century, in the Maurya Empire, while the Chinese
Empire advanced its frontiers to the Tarim basin. ~
   The conquests of Alexander opened up Asia to Greek —
trade and Greek colonization, thus temporarily relieving
the economic crisis sketched on page 229. They made Egypt -
and Hither Asia a province of the cultural and economic —
system of Hellas. Throughout this new province asingle
dialect of the Greek language was everywhere understood,
so that ideas could and did circulate freely. Unity of
currency, new roads, improved harbours and lighthouses,
          THE CLIMAX OF ANCIENT CIVILIZATION                   231
   and larger ships facilitated intercourse and trade. The
Bee stical and monetary unity created by Alexander did not
_ indeed survive him. After his death in 321 his overseas
 empire became the prize in a prolonged contest between
  rival generals and was eventually decomposed into from
_ three to five major monarchies.
      Egypt fell to the Ptolemies who at first held also the coasts
  of Palestine, southern Syria, and Cyprus. Asia became the
  kingdom of the Seleucids; they rapidly lost their eastern
   provinces to the Indian Mauryas, independent Hellenistic
Nikings, and eventually     the Iranian Parthians, but after 200
wvacquired Palestine and Syria in compensation. Minor Greek
_ kingdoms arose in Bactria (eastern Iran), and eventually
   recovered parts of India too for Hellenism, while native
  -dynasts in Asia Minor, notably the Attalids of Pergamon,
_ successfully imitated these Greek models. Finally the cities
of peninsular and insular Greece         mostly recovered     their
 cherished autonomy, which meant for them the privilege of
_fighting with and enslaving their neighbours and rivals. This
_ political disintegration did not, however, obliterate the
cultural unity created by Alexander.
_ The annexation of the Persian Empire had meant not just
_ achange of monarchs, but the opening up of a new world to
 Greek colonization. Alexander himself began founding in
  his new domain military colonies for his veterans and cities
_ of Greek type. His successors founded many more. The new
_ poleis all enjoyed at least municipal self-government and
   civic institutions of classical type. The Hellenistic cities of
:the East, like contemporary foundations in Old Greece and
 the West, were endowed with the amenities indispensable
  to the classical polis - market-place, theatre, official build-
 ings, schools, fountains. Most new foundations were scienti-
"fically laid out on the grid system. All were adorned with
  oe and works of art. Few were larger than their
  classical models. Priene covered only 52 acres, Pergamon,
  though the capital of a kingdom, not more than 222. At
_Heraklea on Latmos the fortified area covered 245 acres in
 295 B.c., and was reduced to 148 ten years later, while the
pe a SST    ER eee    Te iesve



    232              WHAT HAPPENED         IN HISTORY
    walls of Demetrias in Thessaly enclosed 645 acres. But by
    100 B.c., Alexandria, the capital of Egypt, occupied 2,200 |
    acres, while the population of Seleucia on the Tigris is said’
    to have numbered 600,000. The component houses, how-
    ever, were commodious. Even at Priene, a small and pre-
    dominantly agricultural city, the built-up area was divided
    into blocks of 155 by 116 feet, each normally containing
    four to eight two-storeyed houses; only a few richer dwell- |
    ings measured as much as 65 by 60 or even 100 by 52 feet,
    and boasted on the ground floor eight to ten rooms round|
    a pillared court or peristyle.
       These poleis in the Orient were inhabited by Greek or
    Hellenized   officials,   bankers,   merchants,   craftsmen,   and|
    farmers plying arts and crafts in the Greek fashion and
    worshipping Greek gods. On the other hand, the old
    Oriental cities with the native commerce and industry,
    religion and science, laws and institutions that animated
    them were not suppressed. Alexander himself had planned
    to rebuild the great temple of Marduk at Babylon, and his!
    successors actually endowed similar buildings in Erech and|
    other cities. So the old Sumerian cults were still celebrated|
    in the Babylonian temples, which continued to function also|
    as observatories and research institutes. In Egypt the}
    Ptolemies showed themselves no less solicitous for the}
    temples and their priesthoods.                                        |
      Naturally the Hellenistic kings stepped into the niches in|
    the Oriental pantheon previously occupied by the king o |
    Babylon and the pharaoh of Egypt. At their death or even|
    during their lives they were deified. By the titles they
    assume, Benefactor (Euergetés), Saviour (S6tér), they lay
    claim to the same ideological role as their Bronze Age
    precursors who, as ‘the Good God’, ‘The Waterer of}
    Babylon’, advertised their real services in promoting repro-}
    ductive public works and protecting the weak from}
    oppression by the strong. ‘Monarchy,’ as Glotz says,|
    ‘appeared a necessity to hold together the opposing classes, |
    to govern the relation between different races and to define
    the rights and place of each.’
                                         ee.   ee, PPeer    ee

                                   *}                      Wa

         THE   CLIMAX    OF   ANCIENT   CIVILIZATION             233

  _ The Hellenistic monarchs carried on the traditions of
     eir remote precursors in developing the resources of their
   ingdoms, but now with the experience of Iron Age Greece
  behind them. In Egypt the Ptolemies revived the ancient
  doctrine of Pharaoh’s eminent domain over the Nile valley
   und its resources. Egypt was once more the ‘king’s house-
    old’ (ozkos), its territory his ‘estate’ (chora), the prime
minister his ‘steward’ (dioikétés). Its whole economic life
    as scientifically planned on strictly totalitarian lines to
     ake the country self-sufficing.
     The land, apart from estates belonging to temples or
    ranted to royal favourites and to soldiers, was cultivated
    r the king and under strict supervision by ‘king’s peasants’.
 These were ‘free’ tenants, but bound by minutely-defined
     ntracts as to what they should plant, and obliged to use
    ed provided by the State and to deliver to royal store-
houses a high proportion, probably at least a half, of the
   eld, as well as to maintain canals and dykes and perform
   her specified services. The productivity of the land was
    hanced by the introduction of superior varieties of plants
 and animals (seed corn from Syria and Greece, fig-trees
 from Asia Minor, vines from the Greek Islands, sheep from
    ia Minor and Arabia, pigs from Sicily), by the supply of
efficient iron agricultural implements to replace the wooden
equipment that had survived scarcely changed from the days
 of Menes, and by the installation of irrigation machines like
 the Archimedean screw. |
    Mines and quarries were exploited by criminals and
‘slaves for the profit of the State. Secondary industry was
 conducted by private firms under licence, by monopolies, or
 most often in State factories manned once more by ‘king’s
 peasants’ working as free wage-earners under contract, but
 bound to remain at work during the stipulated period.
‘Here too Greek techniques and methods of organization
 were grafted on to native traditions, and the output of each
 branch was regulated in accordance with the Plan.
 _ The ambitious edifice was supervised by a hierarchy of
‘officials and inspectors and controllers. The higher ranks in
234          WHAT     HAPPENED
                             IN HISTORY             |
this bureaucracy were staffed, at first exclusively, always
mainly, by Greeks; the minor officials must have been.
recruited from the old clerical class, but would of course have


                                                                  |
to learn Greek. As an additional check the Ptolemies farmed
out the various taxes to underwriters who paid down a lump
sum in advance, recouping themselves from the collection, _
but not Danone doing the collecting— for that there ee
permanent officials.
   No such grandiose experiments in planned economy were
attempted elsewhere, and more play was left to the initiativewiY
                                                             S
                                                             er
of landowners, industrialists, and merchants, though the
Hellenistic monarchs    claimed   a substantial   share in the
proceeds and the autonomous cities a more modest slice.        _
  Specialized farms producing for the market were spread
by the Greek colonists right to Russian Turkestan and India.
In Sicily and the Carthaginian domains large estates worked
by slaves or serfs were run on scientific capitalist lines, pro-
fitably if brutally. The same methods were adopted by
Roman landlords in Italy. They tended to correct the
balance between crops and livestock that is so hard to main-
tain on small peasant holdings but is yet necessary to
preserve the soil. Under these conditions the experiments in
acclimatization that had begun empirically in the preceding:
epoch were tried out on a larger scale and more deliberately.
Cotton, apricots and citron, geese and buffaloes were intro-
duced into European Greece, sesame and improved stocks
of horses, asses and swine from Europe into Asia as far as’
India, lucerne, oriental fruit trees, melons and beets and
barnyard fowls from Greece into Italy.                         ‘i
   At least, in so far as sea or river transport was available,
each natural region could concentrate on raising what was
best suited to the local soil and climate, exporting the sur-
plus, and receiving in exchange       a variety of foods and
materials that could hardly be produced at home. In the
third century all the Greek cities were frankly dependent on
imported corn, and even Rome had sometimes to supple-
ment Italian supplies from Egypt. Egypt now imported
olive oil, salt fish, pickled pork, honey, cheese, dried figs,
           THE    CLIMAX   OF ANCIENT     CIVILIZATION        235
     nuts, and melons. The distribution of Rhodian jars (which
     archaeologists happen to have studied) as far afield as Susa
     in Elam, Erech and Seleucia in Mesopotamia, north Syria,
   the north coasts of the Black Sea and the Lower Danube,
_4,Carthage, Italy, and Sicily is one archaeological index of the
  Brport of oil and wine from Greece.
      Secondary industries developed along the Classical lines.
"Specialization was further advanced — in Delos, for instance,
 _thejoiner who fits a door does not set up the doorposts, and
_stonemasons do not sharpen their own tools. As a productive
_unit the small factory or workshop employing ten or twenty
   hands as described on page 199 was more typical than in the
   previous period. Such factories might be attached to the
_ larger landed estates as they had been in the Bronze Age, to
   temples or to palaces. The kings of Pergamon in particular
_ owned large factories for parchment and textiles, manned
_by masses of slaves. Workers were not normally collected
_into factories to make use of machinery, or even to facilitate
_the co-operation between specialist craftsmen performing
different operations, but simply for convenience in
supervision.
f To this there is at least one exception. The development
_ of the milling industry in Hellenistic times was revolution-
  ary in two ways. Since the neolithic revolution each house-
  hold had had to convert its grain into flour for itself, even
though it had long abandoned its neolithic self-sufficiency.
_After 330 monuments and literature disclose special milling
Vfestablishments, often attached to bakeries. And in them the
  grains were no longer ground by hand by pushing the
“rubber up and down a saddle quern (p. 58), but in rotary
mills driven by donkeys or, after 100 B.c., sometimes by
_water-power. This new industry not only began to alleviate
domestic drudgery, but also initiated the first extension in
the employment of non-human motive-power since the
_Copper Age and the first fresh application of rotary motion
“since the potter’s wheel. At the same time baking and milling
"are just instances of a number of new branches of industry
 that were now specialized to cater for the needs of the masses.

Ms,
i.
236          WHAT    HAPPENED      IN   HISTORY

    Trade was simplified by the political unification of large
 areas, monetary reforms, improvements in shipping, the
 construction of lighthouses and harbours and road-building.
 Alexander established for his whole empire a unitary cur-
 rency based on the Attic standard on which the Roman
 denarius was also based. His policy was followed by his
 successors, except for the Ptolemies, who adopted the
 Phoenician standard for the Egyptian coinage. Meanwhile
 the Roman denarius spread in the west at the expense of
 Carthaginian and other currencies and competed success-
 fully with the Greek coinage of the east. Moreover, the
 money economy finally ousted a natural economy from
 many strongholds where barter had persisted throughout |
 the first Iron Age, spreading, for example, even among the
 Celts north of the Alps.                                     b
    Ships were larger and faster. We even read ofa ship of |
 4,200 tons burden, built for Hiero of Syracuse. Though she |
 was not a success, she gives a hint of what Hellenistic ship-
 builders could do. Rigging and steering gear were also’
improved, and captains now ventured to sail direct instead |
of hugging the coast more frequently than in earlier cen-
turies. A veritable new era in navigation was initiated by |
the construction of lighthouses, inaugurated under Alex- |
ander by the Pharos of Alexandria, where a tower over 480
feet high was erected, in the lantern of which burned afire |
of resinous wood. Improvements in ports were scarcely less|
important. Here again Alexandria led the way, but later
contributions by the Romans — hydraulic cement, the coffer
dam, pile-driving in deep water — were momentous.
   Despite these improvements, the journey from Rhodes to
Alexandria still took four days, as in Classical times. You
might get from Alexandria to Sicily in six or seven days, but |
the voyage thither from the port of Rome (Pozzuoli or |
Ostia) normally occupied twenty to twenty-seven days. In
fact it took longer to cross the Mediterranean than it now
does to cross the Atlantic, and the chance of reaching your
destination was immeasurably less; for the risks from ship-
wreck and still more pirates were really grave. Outside the
        THE   CLIMAX    OF   ANCIENT   CIVILIZATION       237

  Mediterranean traffic was still slower. A journey by sea
   and river from the Indus to Seleucia on the Tigris could be
specomplished in forty days. Till the trick of using the mon-
  -soons was discovered, four to six months might be consumed
 on the long sail of 2,760 miles from Berenice, on the
  _Egyptian coast of the Red Sea, to peninsular India.
      Land transport was also expedited. The caravan routes
   in Asia were more or less policed and equipped with khans
 and post stations by the Hellenistic monarchs, the Arabian
States, or the merchant companies themselves. The Persian
road system was extended and improved by the Seleucids.
  Profiting from their example, the Romans, as they united
Italy under their leadership, began to bind their domains
;
itogether with military roads. As pioneers of communications
 in a temperate zone, they were forced to face problems that
do not arise in the arid lands east of the Mediterranean.
Dust may be unpleasant, but it does not paralyse traffic;
 “mud does. In Hither Asia rain falls in sufficient quantities
“to bog the roads for only brief seasons every year. In
northern Italy rain and therefore mud may impede transit
_at almost any time and for long spells. The Roman engineers
 solved the problem thus created magnificently. Their roads
are feats that have not been surpassed till the nineteenth
century. According to Ptolemy, for instance, the roads
radiating from Rome had been so graded that ‘a wagon
could take the load ofa barge’.
 _ Nonetheless, land traffic was slow and costly. It took
fifteen days for a messenger to get from Seleucia on the
 Tigris to the coast of Syria, and at the beginning of our era
 twenty-seven to thirty-four days from Rome to Britain. The
 journey from Rome to Naples might occupy three to five
 days — a train does it in as many hours. For bulky or heavy
goods land transport was almost prohibitively costly. In the
“second century Cato, a celebrated Roman statesman and
 ‘writer on scientific agriculture, bought an oil press at
Pompeii for 384 sesterces. To transport it from the town to
his farm, a distance of about seventy miles, cost him 280
sesterces!



.
a
238          WHAT HAPPENED IN HISTORY                        1
   Under such circumstances it is not surprising that in-|
dustry often migrated to its market instead of sending its’
products thither. Pottery again illustrates the tendency.
After 330 B.c. the ceramic industries of Athens and the)
Greek islands found new export markets in Alexander’s|
empire and recovered old markets by offering new wares.
Before and shortly after 300 vases in the new style decorated
with patterns in relief made in a mould were imported in
large quantities into Alexandria, Europus in north Syria
and all the ports of Syria, Palestine, and Asia Minor, as well!|
as to South Russia and Italy. Soon after 300, however, local|
potteries, often at least manned by immigrant craftsmen,|
began making imitations which soon closed the Egyptian.|
Asiatic, and Russian markets      to Old Greece. After 200)
potters trained in the new tradition settled round Calles in}
Italy to supply the Roman market. In the same way glass- |
workers migrated from the ancient centres of that industry!
in Syria and set up glass-houses in Italy after 100 B.c.
  Nevertheless, the volume of trade was greater than ever,|
both within the Mediterranean world with its Hellenistic!
extensions into Africa and Asia and beyond its borders. Of
course commerce handled largely ‘luxuries’. Still, the large-|
scale importation of foodstuffs, alluded to on page 234, and|
the exportation of pottery just mentioned will suffice to}
suggest how extensively a variety of popular consumption
goods were transported over considerable distances— from)
the Crimea to Athens and from Egypt to Rome, for instance. |
Again, raw materials, such as tin, can hardly be called q
luxuries, yet after 300 B.c. Cornish tin was being regularly)
shipped across France to Marseilles on the Mediterranean. |
Moreover, many exotic luxuries were becoming necessities.)
Arabian frankincense was regarded as an essential for)
public worship and actually cost five shillings a pound in|
Old Greece.                                                 a
  So caravans and flotillas brought to the Mediterranean|
world perfumes, spices, drugs, ivory, and jewels from Central
Africa, Arabia, and India; gold, furs, or forest products from
Siberia and Central Russia; amber from the Baltic; metals
             THE   CLIMAX   OF   ANCIENT    CIVILIZATION        239

_ from the British Isles and Spain. After 114 B.c. a dozen
- caravans     a year loaded     with silks crossed   the deserts of
- Central Asia from China to Russian Turkestan, whence the
  fashionable stuff was sent to Seleucia, Antioch, Alexandria,
_    and Rome. A citizen of Rhodes, Alexandria, or Syracuse
     could be familiar with elephants, monkeys, parrots, cotton,
     silk, tortoiseshell, furs, myrrh, pepper, ebony, coral, amber,
      and lapis lazuli.
        Thus materials and manufactures were diffused. Persons
    _ were diffused, too. Slavery in its Hellenistic-Roman devel-
     opment brought to the great international mart on Delos
     victims from Britain and Ethiopia, South Russia and
     Morocco, Iran and Spain, Greeks, Jews, Armenians,
    Germans, Negroes, Arabs, to be redistributed to Seleucia,
     Antioch, Alexandria, Carthage, Rome, Athens, or Pergamon
     — human cattle indeed, but comprising highly educated
     doctors, scientists, artists, clerks, and craftsmen as well as
      prostitutes and labourers. As in the Bronze Age Orient,
      merchants not only travelled about, but needed permanent
      offices and agencies in foreign cities. In every port and
      capital alien colonies were established, Jews being ubiquit-
      ous. We read of an Indian merchant resident in Egypt and
      actually holding a priesthood there. A guild of Syrian
      merchants maintained a regular hostel on Delos, providing
      lodgings, stock-rooms, a council chamber and a chapel. A
      contract survives between a Massiliote and a Spartan who
      were partners on a trading voyage to Ethiopia. Free labour,
      too, was as mobile as ever. An Italiote bronze-worker trans-
      ferred his business from Luciania to Rhodes, while a silk
      manufacturer from Antioch died in Naples.
         The migrants, slave and free, brought with them to their
      new homes the fashions, techniques and cults of their native
      countries, and established shrines where the deities of their
      nation or city were worshipped with appropriate rites on
      foreign soil. Their spontaneous efforts were supplemented
      by the proselytizing of Asoka, the recently-converted
      emperor of India, who sent missionaries to the courts of
      Egypt, Syria, and Macedonia. Finally the standing armies
240          WHAT    HAPPENED     IN   HISTORY

maintained by the Hellenistic kingdoms, Syracuse, Carth- _
age, and Rome were not only consumers of industrial and —ta
rural produce, but also agents for training barbarian mer- |
cenaries in civilized ways and familiarizing farmers’ sons —
with foreign lands.                                         a
   So Oriental and Mediterranean civilizations, having _
fused, were joined by commerce and diplomacy to other |
civilizations in the east and to the old barbarisms of the
north and south.                                           i
     In the Far East the feudal anarchy into which the Chou
empire had relapsed was at length suppressed by Shih
Huang Ti (246-210 B.c.), a prince of the Ch‘in state. This
conqueror is credited with establishing the centralized rule
by the Son of Heaven and a bureaucracy recruited not by
birth, but by examination;     the subjects of examination
were theology and polite literature, without those, con-
cessions to science and modern languages that have been
extorted from the Oxford mandarins in Britain. The
frontiers of Chinese civilization were advanced into the
tropical forests of the south and against the nomads of the -
arid north. Built as a defence against the latter, the Great |
Wall, 1,500 miles long and fifteen to thirty feet high, dwarfs |
the Great Pyramid,    Hadrian’s Wall, and Radio City as |
the largest alteration in the world’s surface effected by |
man.
  Then in 115 B.c., under the Han Dynasty, the Chinese
army occupied, albeit only temporarily, the Tarim basin.
At length the civilizations of the Far East and the Near East
were in contact directly, no longer through intermediaries.
Glass beads of the type fashionable in the Mediterranean
during the fourth and third centuries had already found
their way to China and had been imitated in home-made
glass containing barium; Chinese silk had reached India
before Alexander. After 115 the silk caravans, equipped by
the Empire, travelled on roads protected by blockhouses and
police. From their Chinese neighbours the Greeks of Bactria
learned of a new element — nickel; like the Chinese, they
used an alloy of it with copper for their coinage. The
                   al             i
       ;      Spa            OF ANCIENT CIVILIZATION            241
     nese for their part acquired vines, lucerne, anda          eee
     eed of horses that ‘sweated blood’.
_ In barbarian Europe preparations were made for the
 ¢civilization that was to be imposed by Rome. The Scythians
 in south Russia had already come under the influence of
 colonial Greek civilization, which was now reinforced by
  that of Hellenistic Bactria on their kinsmen further east.
 The Celts in Central and western Europe were reached by
Etruscan traders and Greeks from Marseilles (p. 203), and
 bartered slaves, metals, and forest products for wine and
 manufactured luxuries.
    Their rural economy, growing wheat and barley on small
 square fields tilled with a light plough, and breeding cattle,
yielded a small surplus which was concentrated to some
extent by numerous petty chiefs and nobles. These kept up
the life of a Bronze Age chivalry, still fighting from chariots
 ike Homer’s heroes. Their clients, scattered in lone stead-
  ings and small villages, used iron tools, but could otherwise be
 -self-sufficing; their surplus younger sons sought fresh land for
_ farms at the expense of their neighbours in neolithic fashion.
 _ As internecine       warfare was   therefore endemic,    the La
Tene       Celts fortified   hill-tops even   more   strongly   and


their cattle during a war. Others were permanently in-
hhabited, but even these were economically just villages
occupied by farmers living in squalid one-roomed round
  quts without any appreciable admixture of artisans, shop-
keepers, and merchants. As late as the first century A.D., for
  nstance, iron equipment was not brought from such fenced
     ee: but the metal was smelted and forged on a tiny
scale in farms and hamlets, even though these might be in
  ight of a permanently-inhabited hill fort.
    Only chiefs disposed of sufficient real wealth to be able to
 support specialist craftsmen such as wainwrights and artists
in metal or potters using the wheel. These experts probably
242         WHAT     HAPPENED      IN HISTORY      |           1
naturalistic Greek patterns and converting them into com-
plicated geometric designs.
   With such an economy and a growing population the
Celts inevitably overflowed. Ambitious war lords led the
younger sons of their tenantry in quest of land and booty. —
In the fourth century Celts had flooded across the Alpine
passes, occupied the Po Valley, and sacked Rome herself in
390 B.c. So in the third other waves spread down the
Danube valley to the Balkans, devastated Macedonia and
northern Greece, and established a barbarian kingdom in
Asia Minor — Galatia. Other Celtic bands turned westward.
They laid hands on the metalliferous regions of north-
western Spain, Brittany, and the tin-lodes of Cornwall, thus
securing materials both for their own needs and to barter
for wine with the Greeks. And part of the tribe called Parisii —
moved from the chalk-lands of the Marne across the sea to
the Yorkshire Wolds, while the rest settled on the Seine to
leave their name in Paris.
   Farther north the Germans, though they too had acquired ©
from the Celts the secret of iron working, remained in bar-_
barism. But they did apparently invent a system of tillage
appropriate to the heavy clay lands of the north European
forests — deep cultivation with a heavy plough drawn by
eight oxen and equipped with mould-board and coulter to
turn over the sod instead of just scratching the soil as the
Mediterranean and Celtic ploughs did. This new technique
and equipment unlocked fresh sources of food, which in
their turn stimulated a growth of population. Among bar-
barians that meant territorial expansion. A great horde of
migrants with wives and household belongings — the Cimbri
(from Denmark, the Cimbrian Peninsula) and the Teu-.
tones — invaded Celtic France, only to be annihilated by the
Romans in Italy in 101 B.c. Filtering across the Rhine,
Germanic colonists introduced the new rural economy to
the Celts of Belgium and north-eastern France and formed
a mixed nation, the Belgae— Celtic in speech, but Germanic
in appearance (according to Caesar) and in burial rites
(according to archaeologists). Some of these occupied south-
                                                   “Hee            =




  A: THE    CLIMAX    OF   ANCIENT     CIVILIZATION         243

       England about 75 B.c., and for the first time
  ened to the plough the richest soil in Britain. By 50
    and was even exporting corn to France.
      ) the economy of barbarian Europe throughout the La
  ne phase of the Iron Age was still dominated by sub-
    ence farming, supplemented by a minimal development

    uxuries, not different in kind from that which had been
    ucted ever since the beginning of the Bronze Age. This
     economy, as far as it went, was in fact well adapted to
   onditions of the temperate zone of woodland. Emphasis
   rightly laid on pastoralism, especially on cattle-breed-
   and that to such,an extent that Classical writers some-


        ack of winter made it necessary to eat too many of
       calves. Lacking industry and a diversity of crops, this
        arian economy could not support a really sedentary,
il less an expanding, population. Endemic warfare kept
   wn     numbers all too effectively till the Roman legions
        duced urban life and peace.
         e channels of intercourse just surveyed thus diverted
       the Hellenistic cities traditions and discoveries accumu-
         by diverse societies in varied environments. From this
      at pool of human experience the natural philosophy of
  ssical Greece united with Babylonian and Egyptian
   iplines could distil a truly international science which
      not remain pure-theory. The Hellenistic scientists —
    y were Greeks only in name and culture — were no
     r dependent on the patronage of the parochial
    ‘geoisie of a polis nor confined ina theological seminary.
    arch was encouraged and endowed by the heads of
     rful States, eager to develop the resources of new
       ns.
    lexander himself was a pupil of Aristotle. His army was
   mpanied by surveyors and observers to map out the
    try and note its resources. His fleet was expressly sent
9 explore the Arabian Sea. These traditions were worthily
mia ined by his successors in pee and Asia w              {
Phoenicians of Carthage performed similar work in
Atlantic. Ptolemy I of Egypt in particular fostered ieatnion|
The Museum that he founded at Alexandria functioned as
University with the accent on research. All the Hellenistic
kings and their officers indeed saw chances of political and
commercial profit from applications of systematized know-
ledge more clearly than had the small factory owners and
petty traders of any city state.
   If private merchants were chary of disclosing trade
secrets, the captains of royal fleets felt no such scruples.
Ministers of State and capitalist farmers were developing
kingdoms and estates as practical experiments in botany
and zoology, genetics and geology. Continuous warfare,
conducted now by standing armies, permitted changes iin
tactics and strategy. In particular sustained sieges became
feasible and demanded new weapons of attack and defence.
   At the same time the cosmopolitan populations of the
great Hellenistic metropoles were likely to be more tolerant,
if no less superstitious, than the Athenian people that had
expelled Anaxagoras (p. 225). As pointed out already, the
foreigners in each city brought with them and celebrated
there their own native cults. With these religions and their
officiants spread new brands of magic and philosophy — a
motley horde of quacks, astrologers, alchemists, and oracle-
mongers — competing with traditional beliefs and legitimate
sciences. Polytheism could easily find room both for new
gods and new rites. All were tolerated with equanimity both
by the States and by the less tolerant masses. Even Asoka,
who with the zeal of a new convert was establishing
Buddhism in India, professed and enjoined toleration to
other creeds. Only Judaism remained exclusive; only
Yahveh would accept no partner. The State of the Macca-
bees gave the first practical demonstration of religious
intolerance and spiritual totalitarianism.
   The proliferation of often ridiculous cults, the motley
pantheons of polyglot deities, the dissemination of magic
rituals and pseudo-sciences do not necessarily imply an

                                                        i
                                                       aa
       THE CLIMAX        OF ANCIENT       CIVILIZATION         245
   olute increase in superstition; they were but indications
   f the free interchange of ideas. They broke the absolute
     thority of old-established priesthoods and left sensible
      n free to discuss practical science without interference
    ther from sacerdotal interests or mob fanaticism.
  _ At the same time the ancient temple research institutes in
    abylonia were still functioning. Mathematical texts and
     ronomical observations were written down in cuneiform
as late as 20 B.c. Greeks from the west frequented these
  cient seats of learning and would then take the title
     ihaldaean’ as an equivalent to our Ph.D. Alexander’s con-
       st, in fact, inaugurated two centuries of fruitful collabor-
  ition between Babylonian and Greek scientists, by which
the substantial achievements of the Bronze Age Orient were
 conserved for transmission to the modern world.         So close,
  deed, was this collaboration that we cannot now always
  cide which party was in the lead; it is an open question
   ether the Babylonian Kidannu or the Greek Hipparchus
  st recognized the phenomenon termed the precession of the
 quinoxes.
 _ To Alexandrian science the Orient contributed Babylon-
 an mathematical processes, examples and all, and astro-
   mical data. With the latter the Babylonian system of
 exagesimal fractions (p. 178) was transmitted to the West,
 nd that in an improved form; for the Babylonian mathe-
 naticians by the third century had at last agreed upon a
 ign for zero. The Alexandrians at first used the sexagesimal
 lotation for tables of angular measurements, presumably
 hemselves borrowed from Babylonia; but by the second
  ntury A.D. the device was used in preference to the clumsy
   quot parts of Egypt and Classical Greece for other
 uotients, approximations to square roots and to 7. ‘The_
idea of a zero sign in the form of an o (for ouden, nothing) -
was adopted too, but only in connexion with sexagesimal
 actions.
 So through its adoption by the Hellenistic mathema-
 icians the most ingenious contribution of the Bronze Age
tothe mastery of numbers was preserved, transmitted to the
246          WHAT    HAPPENED     IN   HISTORY

Arabs, and then brought back to Europe to come to fruition
in our decimal notation in A.D. 1585. But of course the
Greeks, in adapting sexagesimal fractions to their alphabetic
notation, sacrificed their greatest charm - place value.
WeTtysscwccID became py. ve’ Ky” (103° 55° 23”). By the
Roman period Greek mathematicians were using distinct-
ively Babylonian methods for the solution of quadratic
equations (e.g. multiplying both sides by a instead of divi-
ding as we generally do). They must even have adopted
Babylonian examples. At least one example in an early
medieval arithmetic book, the Liber Abaci of Leonard of
Pisa, based upon Arabic, and so eventually Hellenistic,
material, copies almost verbatim a problem set out in two
cuneiform tablets, one early Babylonian and the other
Hellenistic in age.
   Still the greatest achievements in pure mathematics
during the Hellenistic age were developments of the classical
Greek geometric methods. Euclid (? 323-285 B.c.) not only
systematized theoretical geometry and expanded previous
work on curvilinear spaces, but also made practical use of
it in the theory of optics. About the same time Aristarchus
of Samos began to use what we term trigonometrical ratios.
A generation later Apollonius at Alexandria developed that
branch of higher mathematics known as conic sections. The
name itself reveals how these figures of ‘pure geometry’ are
derived from actual man-made objects; the curves it studies
‘theoretically’ include the parabola that the projectiles of
the Hellenistic artillery followed and the hyperbolas traced
by the shadow on contemporary sundials.
   At Syracuse Archimedes (287-212) laid the mathe-
matical foundations of mechanics, on the basis of empirical
  rinciples already verified in practice. Such achievements
take us into a realm beyond the comprehension of the
ordinary man, but they had practical results in yielding good
approximations to ratios, ~ and other ‘irrationals’. In
an age which was using water-wheels, mapping the earth
and measuring the sun an accurate evaluation of
7 was more essential than in the Bronze Age, when
        THE   CLIMAX     OF   ANCIENT   CIVILIZATION        247

 the issue had been the circumference of a well or a cart-
   heel; in constructing a water-wheel 10 ft. 6 in. in diameter
    ke that found at Athens, the Babylonian value of 3 might
   ell cause trouble.
     Even more fruitful were the collaboration between Greek
   od Babylonian astronomers and the co-operation of ob-
“servers in different countries. After the more speculative
adventures of the Ionians the Hellenistic astronomers boldly
 set out to measure the earth by strictly scientific methods.
From    observations   on the sun’s altitude   at the summer
 solstice made respectively at Syene on the Tropic of Cancer
 and at Alexandria, Eratosthenes (Director of the Museum
 from 240 to 200) calculated the globe’s circumference as
  52,000 stades, probably 24,662 miles, and if so, only 4 per
 cent out! Later Poseidonius, apparently from observations

    Rhodes respectively, reached the figure of 180,000 stades.
     nluckily the later pundits of Alexandria accepted this
       aller figure and handed it on to their Arab successors.
      Still bolder, the astronomers proceeded to measure the
     vine Sun and Moon by perfectly rational methods. Aris-
_tarchus devised two ingenious and perfectly correct methods,
   which, however, were not practicable with the instruments
 at his disposal. Owing to unavoidable errors of observation,
he made the sun’s diameter only between six and seven
 times that of the earth and its distance twenty times that of
  the moon. More than a century later Hipparchus of Alex-
      dria, using other methods, deduced that the moon’s
   listance was between sixty-seven and seventy-eight times
     e earth’s radius and its diameter about one-third of the
   arth’s. He put the sun some 13,000 radii away from the
   sarth. Though not much more than half the true distance,
‘such figures were a shattering blow to common sense and
 thheology alike. So equipped with instruments of its own
   levising, man’s mind burst the bounds of terrestrial space
   nd launched out on a voyage into the limitless inane
   ot on the wings of fanciful speculation, but guided by
   mectly practical geometry. The fruits were not delusive
 248             WHAT     HAPPENED       IN
 superstitions, but maps that generals and merchants  ee
use.                                                     .
    An even more subversive theory was in sight. The eo) |
of concentric spheres, revolving round the earth, pro-—
pounded to explain the movements of the heavenly bodies
as plotted by the Babylonians and classical Greeks, was —
proving increasingly difficult to reconcile with accumulating _
observations. To escape the impasse Aristarchus advanced
the revolutionary theory that looks so patently absurd that
the earth itself and the planets really revolve around the
sun. Seleucus, the Babylonian, shortly after 200 B.c.,
espoused the same heliocentric hypothesis.                  °
   Unfortunately, it was not only contrary to common sense, _
but ran up against perfectly genuine theoretical and obser-
vational difficulties. Hipparchus rejected the hypothesis on —
the quite reasonable scientific ground that he could not
observe the parallax of a fixed star from the opposite poles —
of the earth’s orbit round the sun — a phenomenon that only ©
a high-power telescope can in fact disclose. So he returned—
to the geocentric view, embellishing it with a theory of
epicycles. It became then the ‘party line’ on which all sub-
sequent Hellenistic astronomers and their Arab successors’
worked and which was embodied in the sacred dogma of
the medieval Church. But Aristarchus was never quite for-
gotten, and Copernicus, with very little fresh observational :
data, reverted to him— and was condemned for heresy!
   Such epoch-making astronomical achievements were
possible in the Hellenistic age not because ‘a spirit of|
inquiry’ was abroad, nor because men had leisure to pursue~
the contemplative life as the greatest purification, but |
because, in spite of all conflicts of political loyalty, men
using a common language were co-operating all over the
enlarged world; for they pre-supposed observations on
 star-transits   and    declinations   in different   cities and   the|
 communication of the results. They were not inspired by
 mere curiosity, however divine, nor only by the vain hope
 of foretelling the destinies ofmortals, but by the urgent need
 of finding one’s way about an expanding world. Their

                                                                      i
              CLIMAX OF ANCIENT CIVILIZATION                  249
    v    }
    ilts,were not only to liberate humanity from the bonds
    pace and the terrors of solar myths, but also to define the
      of the inhabited globe and to guide armies, merchant
  ips and caravans on unprecedented journeys.
   ‘or astronomy was applied to geography. Once Eratos-
     es had fixed the value of a degree, angular measure-
     ts on the elevation of the Pole Star and on meridian
    sits gave a much more accurate idea of distances north °
  idsouth than any calculations from marching or sailing
  nes. By correlating such observations the positions of
  aces could be plotted onaterrestrial sphere divided up,
     the sky, into parallels of latitude, numbered 0 to go to
    cate the angular distance from the Equator. Latitude
    ‘means ‘width’, and so the word reveals how the system
       ted with sailors’ observations in crossing the long
     editerranean.
      fo find astronomically how far one had progressed west-
      d, sailing along the Mediterranean, one’s longitude in fact,
     isnot so easy. Longitude expresses the difference between
     al sundial times. With a modern accurate chronometer
   is easy enough to compare your local noon, the moment
   en the sun crosses the meridian above you, and ‘Green-
      h time’, and so fix your position, an hour being equal to
         The ancients had only sundials and water-clocks.
        ce only a celestial event, independent of the earth’s
     inal rotation on its axis, an eclipse or an occultation,
    rmitted the comparison of local times. As early as 331
      . the times of an eclipse seen at Arbela in Syria and at
       thage had been recorded and compared. Hipparchus
     d the idea of fixing the longitudes of various places by
    -operative observations on the relevant phenomena. By
       second century A.D. his idea had borne such fruit that
Ptolemy was able to construct a skeleton map of the globe
      a frame of astronomically fixed latitudes and longitudes,
such as has been used ever since.
     Unfortunately cardinal errors were accepted and re-
peated again and again till they acquired the authority of
 facts’. For instance, Eratosthenes had taken as his meridian
 250           WHAT    HAPPENED      IN   HISTORY           oma   |

 a line. through Alexandria, Rhodes, Troy, Byzantium, andi
 the mouth of the Dnieper, a line that is anything bu
 straight. Yet it remained the basis of all subsequent ancien A
 maps.                                                            |
     Theoretical   advances   in  biological  science  were  less}
  dramatic. The substantial achievements of Hellenistic
  botany and zoology are to be found in the agricultural
  experiments of the Ptolemies and of the Romans. Bun
  Crateuas, physician to the king of Pontus (120-63 B.c.)|
  introduced a fruitful innovation in method when he illus
  trated his herbal with realistic pictures of the plants he waa
- describing and classifying. In physiology and anatomy
 Herophilus and Erasistratos of Alexandria made important
 discoveries between 300 and 275 by dissecting humay
 bodies. In a later age when men were devoting all theig
 ingenuity to torturing their slaves and theological oppo}
 nents, these Alexandrian physicians were accused, part
 ticularly by the Christian fathers Tertullian and Augustine}
 of practising vivisection on condemned criminals. There if
 some evidence for the existence of a public medical servicd
 in Egypt, rather less in the Seleucid kingdom and Pergamon
 but its benefits were probably confined to the Greek citizens
 and the army; the natives were left to their fate. Of effective
 measures against epidemics, such as campaigns against fleas|
 lice, and mosquitoes, we hear nothing, while human excre
 ment was still regarded as the best manure.                     )
    Hellenistic science was not divorced from the practical
 life of the producer, as Bronze Age learning and Natura
 Philosophy after 450 had been. The two centuries beginning
 in 330 B.c. brought forth a crop of mechanical invention:
 that cannot be paralleled in any comparable period till |
 A.D. 1600.                                    i             mf
    Besides laying and experimentally testing the mathelf
 matical bases of pure mechanics, Archimedes of Syracus¢)
 showed how the principle of specific gravity could bq
 utilized in daily life; in fact he stumbled upon the principl¢}
 itself in trying to unmask a fraud practised upon his patron}
 by a goldsmith who had adulterated the metal entrusted te
                 Rete ARN pee
                           CMPT et neRr nt UR Fr
                  wy   }   at




     }    THE   CLIMAX          OF   ANCIENT   CIVILIZATION    251

     him. For an earlier tyrant of Syracuse his forerunners
     designed engines of destruction far more potent than the
     slings, bows, wheeled towers, and battering rams that
     formed the strongest items in the Assyrians’ equipment,
     despite that nation’s preoccupation with wars and sieges.
     The propulsive force in the new artillery was provided by
     torsion and levers, and they could hurl missiles weighing
     sixty pounds for 200 yards.
         Archimedes not only studied the geometrical properties
     of the screw, but also applied the results to the construction
   _ ofa machine for raising water. This was made of wood, gave
    a lift of from six to twelve feet, and was generally driven by
     human motive-power — a man working a treadmill. Greater
     lifts were subsequently effected by buckets attached to an
     endless chain on a rotating drum. Irrigating machines of
     the latter type seem to be referred to in Egyptian papyri of
     the second century B.c.
         Finally Ktesibios, who probably lived at Alexandria in
     the third century, invented a perfectly good pump equipped
     with valves and cylinders and pistons and embodying the
     same pneumatic principle as old-fashioned hand-pumps.
     Funnily enough there is no evidence for its use during our
     period for raising water — perhaps owing to the unsuitability
_ of lead pipes, the cost of bronze ones, and ignorance of cast-
_ iron. A similar fate befell a number of ingenious pneumatic
     and hydraulic devices described by Hero of Alexandria, a
     writer whose date cannot be fixed within four centuries.
 _      The significance of the use of rotary motion in corn-mills
  and of the application thereto of water-power was em-
__phasized on page 235. Now it must be insisted that these
_ water-mills were complicated machines involving the inser-
  tion of gears, both to convert horizontal into rotary motion
  and to increase power by reducing speed. They were, of
_ course, made of wood, as was mill machinery as late as the
_ eighteenth century A.p. Gear-wheels, this time of metal,
_ were also employed in a water-clock described by Hero
_ which forms the starting point for all subsequent develop-
_ ments in clockwork mechanisms and chronometers.
(p. Be     was probably invented in oe during tk
century B.c., and had momentous consequences. It s
likely, too, that distillation was practised in Alexar
before the beginning of our era. Retorts are described i
treatises on alchemy that can hardly be later than a.p.
But just when alcohol opened a new chapter in the hist
of pee is still unknown, The use of lime mortar v


    he indestructible cement made by mixing lime wi
volcanic ash (first found near Puteoli and hence still called
“pozzolana’) which would set even under water.
   Hydrostatics were effectively applied to the supply
water to cities, notably at Pergamon, in the second cent
and also at Rome. There an aqueduct constructed in
B.C. flowed underground for no less than ten miles through
tunnels the construction of which was a remarkable feat
surveying and levelling. But though the syphon was p
fectly familiar to the Alexandrians, as Hero’s book sho
the Roman engineers never applied it to large-scale u
takings (of course their lead pipes could not stand
pressure). They preferred to build those superb viaduc
that still survive to testify to their mastery of the arch a
other architectural devices inherited from the Bronze A
Orient.
   Strangely enough, as it seems to us, mechanicaliinventi 1
found little application in practice — save in warfare.
during the Hellenistic age. In that period water-power was        —
not apparently applied in any industry save corn-milli
Even water-mills for corn were still so rare at the beginning
of our era that geographers mention them specially as‘
curiosities. Antipater of Salonica bitter), sang in the first
century B.C.:                                                   Re




  ‘Mill girls touch the quern no more; for Demeter hath bidden the
     Nymphs perform your work.                                   fa
   They rush on to the top of a wheel and make its axle turn.’
             PERRY
        ae   THE CLIMAX | OF ANCI
                              |
                                  ENT CIVILIZATION               253
   BRp, utlandlords and capitalists preferred to invest their profits
  in living instruments rather than costly machines of wood;
_ slaves were cheap.
    _ Similarly the pneumatic and hydraulic devices of
 rKtesibios and his successors were not demonstrably applied
     © draining mines or watering gardens. What Hero des-
        ribes are eo    ee      automata,   parlour toys to divert
  penests at a rich man’s banquet and temple furniture to
   mystify the credulous.
y a The failure to exploit productively the inventions offered
   by science was a consequence of the structure of Hellenistic
     ociety and of contradictions in its economy. These reacted
    on theory too. The most original and creative activity, the
    epoch-making discoveries and the great constructive hypo-
       eses all fall within the later fourth and third centuries —
       ecisely the period when the economic system was expand-
 ing triumphantly. Though the lines of research then laid
 adown were fruitfully pursued subsequently, the output of
  Egenuinely novel ideas virtually ceased after 200 B.c.; the
  compilation of data from records began to take the place
  of fresh observation and experimentation (Strabo and sub-
i "sequent geographers, for instance, are constantly repeating
     he reports of Alexander’s observers and third-century
   ambassadors, adding relatively little later information). But
 _ by 200 economic contradictions were becoming manifest in
_ an arrest of the market’s expansion externally, and a slowly
    rowing impoverishment internally.
     ‘The system described in this chapter undoubtedly yielded
 _a genuine increase of real wealth. But an excessive propor-
  tion of the yield was concentrated in the treasuries of a few
  kings; most of the balance was annexed by Greek and other
  ruling castes; very little was left to the ‘natives’ who tilled
_ the     soil and less to the slaves who manned the factories and
 _ mines.
      The planned economy established in Egypt by the
  -Ptolemies was planned to produce revenue for the king just
 _as much as the pharaoh’s systems under the Old and New
  Kingdoms had been. Inasmuch as it was more scientific, it
254          WHAT    HAPPENED      IN   HISTORY   |    :      ei

increased Egypt’s prosperity; even the natives benefited in
securing better tools, perhaps a more varied diet, on paper >
a freer legal status. But it added to the old antinomy i
between nobles and peasants a new contrast between Greek _
rulers and native subjects. Perhaps the natives preferred the
old rulers ‘who had been their compatriots, who spoke their _
own language and had the same religion and mode of life’ j

                                                              |:
to the ‘bureaucratic machine in which foreigners played—
the most important part, foreigners who regarded them-
selves as far superior to the natives, who did not speak their
language and had no intention of learning it’. This sugges-   |
tion of Rostovtzeff’s is borne out by the letter of a literate
Egyptian who writes bitterly about being ‘despised because -
I am a barbarian’, and the readiness of the peasantry to
support the native priests in revolt against the conquerors.
   The machine produced revenue all right. Ptolemy II
enjoyed an income of 14,800 talents, and even his father’s
prime minister had secured a rake-off of 6,000. But, how-
ever excellent the intentions of the rulers may have been, —
the machine soon became oppressive. The Rosetta Stone,
inscribed in 196 B.c. with a decree in Greek and Egyptian |
which first gave the clue to the decipherment of hierogly-
phics, implies ‘pressure of taxes, rapid accumulations of
arrears and concomitant confiscations, prisons full of—
criminals and debtors, public and private, many fugitives
scattered all over the country and living by robbery, com-—
pulsion applied in every sphere of life’. The decree in
question was designed to remedy this situation, but like —
equally humane decrees by later Ptolemies was frustrated
by the administrative officials. For complaints in Hellenistic
papyri prove that corruption and extortion were as rampant
in the civil service then as they had been under the New
Kingdom (p. 159).                                              ,
   The natives had one recognized remedy — the strike; they
left their work and retreated en masse to the asylum of a
temple till intolerable grievances were remedied. They
resorted to it so frequently that many later contracts include
a clause binding the tenant not to strike. The natural results
  One complainant writes that his village had shrunk from
   140 to 40 souls. Such were the results of a planned economy
   run in the interests of a governing class — even from the
__ biological standpoint the reverse of progressive.
     In the Greek cities the principal beneficiaries from the
  new opportunities afforded by Alexander’s conquests were
  the bourgeoisie. Its composition may be defined with
 -Rostovtzeff as: landowners whose land was tilled by tenants,
_hired hands or slaves; tenant farmers employing the labour
_ of the latter classes; owners of workshops, directing their
_ employees, slaves or freemen; owners or tenants of shops or
_ ships and warehouses; money-lenders and slave-hirers. To
4 such belong the nice houses we have admired at Priene
  _ (p. 232) for instance.
_      All over Greece, as also in Italy, the number of peasants
_ who worked their own land was declining to make room for
_ capitalist farms. After 300 B.c. contracts for temple building
 (at Delos) were not taken by independent craftsmen who
_ performed small jobs themselves as in the fifth century, but
_ were let to contractors in the modern sense who supplied
    labour, free or servile.
       The profits of the bourgeoisie were — at first — large. The
 _ Alexandrian Zeno left a fortune of 2,000 talents, while the
  _ richest man in Athens before Alexander’s day had possessed
 ~ only 160. On the other hand as compared with fifth-century
_ Athens, real wages fell. On Delos a skilled artisan made at
 _ best four obols per day per annum and an unskilled worker
_ only two obols, though the price of wheat had doubled, wine
    had gone up two and a half times, and rents nearly five
    times. Rich citizens were certainly generous in helping their .
_ cities with gifts or loans — loans from private citizens to the
_ State are a common     feature in Hellenistic finance — and
contributed handsomely to the adornment of the city and
_ the upkeep of schools and other public institutions. Yet the
concentration of purchasing power restricted the internal
 market for popular goods.
middle class. But soon the migration of industry (p
narrowed the export market once more. The ravages of w.
debt, and the competition of slave-manned factories |

proletariat. Demands for the cancellation of debts auen
redistribution of land broke out in open civil war in Spa
and other States of Old Greece. But everywhere th
bourgeoisie stubbornly and successfully resisted reform
sometimes with the aid of Rome.                                        :

as the outcome of tendencies outlined on page 208. But th              2
loot from imperialist wars and an expanding market int                 |
barbarian west staved off the crisis. Two efforts at a resett          :
ment of peasants on the lands of great estates initiated by            |
the Gracchi in 131 and 121 B.c. were defeated by the
Senatorial oligarchy, at the cost of concessions to the new            |
middle class of contractors, tax-farmers and usurers an                |
doles of free corn to the urban proletariat.                     |
    Finally Alexander’s expeditions, the wars between|
successors and between the still autonomous city states,
intensified activity of pirates, inroads by barbarian Celts,:
Roman imperialism enormously augmented the slave supply
till industry and agriculture i in Hellenistic times were really
run by slave labour except in Egypt. Of course only inmines
and quarries were slaves systematically and rapidly worked
to death. Most were allowed opportunities of earning mon:
for themselves; many might hope to buy their freed
(when they were too old to work!). Materially even »
slaves on a capitalist farm lived better than most barbar nm
peasants; Cato provided the slaves on his estate with sheets,
blankets, mattresses, and pillows, and the slave-quarters on
excavated farms compare favourably with the Celts’ round
huts. Many professional men — clerks, doctors, tutors,
factory managers, and farm bailiffs — the equivalent of our



                                                              ‘ood %
                                                                 CEs tet

                                                          257
        c-coated Swe           — .were actually oe like
     ourers and artisans, particularly but not exclusively in
  the Roman Empire. As slaves of kings and ministers, these
    might rise to positions of responsibility and amass large
       rtunes, holding slaves themselves.
     _ Hence slavery hardly created a class conscious of a solid-
      rity of interests against its exploiters. Rather did it cut
    across the division of the free population into bourgeoisie
   and proletariat. Yet slave revolts did actually occur and
_ assume serious proportions for the first time in history after
  134 B.c. in Attica, Macedonia, Delos, Sicily, Italy, and
 _ Pergamon. The rebels were often joined by small peasants
    and tenants and even by ‘free’ proletarians. But all these
 __ efforts were brutally suppressed in the end by the armies of
 _ Rome and other States.
       _ Incidentally the institution of slavery impeded the pro-
     - clamation of an ideology appropriate to the international
        economy that was already de facto in existence. Nevertheless,
  - some Hellenistic philosophies did begin to transcend the
        narrow bounds of the polzs and even the time-honoured con-
_ trast between Greek and Barbarian, and present the concep-
  _ tion of the unity of the human race adumbrated by Alexan-
_ der himselfafter his victory over his country’s traditional foes.
     _ Zeno, a Phoenician from Cyprus who lectured in Athens
        in the Stoa — hence the name Stoics applied to his school —
f dreamed of one great Polis where all were citizens and
__ members one of another, bound together by their own will-
_ ing consent or, as he put it, love. Zeno accordingly de-
      “nounced slavery as unnatural, but he regarded it, like sick-
        ness and other material ills, as an rreievatib external
        accident over which the wise man could triumph in his
 _ spiritual power; the wise man, though he serve in slavery, is
        yet a king, though he be a pauper, possesses all things. Such
        a doctrine was too sophisticated to be a rallying cry for the
  _ oppressed masses but might soothe the consciences of the
 _ bourgeoisie. The later Stoics in fact, doubtless as a con-
 _ cession to rich patrons, revived Aristotle’s doctrine of the
   a
        ‘natural slave’ (p. 224).
258          WHAT     HAPPENED IN HISTORY
   Religion too, though not of course the official cults of the-
States, began to reflect, ina striving after one god, the world|
unity realized in the economic sphere. Astrology, themost |
widespread cult of the age, was on its theological side a_
catholic version of the old Sumerian doctrine of Fate as a |
power superior to all tribal, civic, and national deities. But
it was amoral and in practice purely magical. Other |
religions, celebrated by unofficial congregations, did incul-
cate a morality that recognized no distinctions of race or
civil status. One quotation must suffice.
   The ordinances of a private shrine to Agdistis at Phila-
delphia in Asia Minor read: ‘ Let men and women, slave and
free, coming into this shrine swear by all the gods that they
will not deliberately plan any evil guile or baleful poison |
against any man or woman; that they will neither turn to
nor recommend to others nor have a hand .in love-charms,
abortives or contraceptives or doing robbery or murder;
that they will steal nothing but be well-disposed towards
this house.’ Of course such cults were not concerned with |
reforming abuses in earthly society, but with securing ad-
mission to an imaginary society where such abuses did not
exist. Still, admission thereto is obtainable by moral action
and open equally to slave and free.                           |
   But if philosophy and religion could avoid the inipeda “
ments of slavery, the institution continued to obstruct the
progress of science (p. 253) by making labour-saving
machinery unprofitable, and contributed to the impoverish-
ment of all producers by keeping down the purchasing
power of the internal market. For by 200 the failure of the
classical economy even in its amended version was in fact
becoming apparent. At least in Old Greece the results of
this failure could already be measured by purely biological -
standards. The population was actually declining. Citizens,
rich and poor alike, were deliberately restricting their
families by abortion and infanticide. And slaves had no
chance to rear large families.
   But the purely economic factors in’ this catastrophe
were reinforced, and in the literary record are quite
      economic system itself. The Hellenistic world, through-
   t which language and culture were so nearly uniform, was
  lit up into three or more major kingdoms and a varying
       ber of city-states and confederacies. All these units
    ight one another continually with senseless ferocity. ‘ Bar-
     ian’ States — Parthia, Armenia, Arabia, Rome, Carthage
— joined eagerly in the mélée. Engrossed in self-destructive
        the States allowed or even encouraged pirates and
   ober bands to nest in the disputed frontier zones. The
      tiplication of these parasites was only a symbol of social
      rders which denied an adequate livelihood to peaceable
      ants and artisans and extolled violence and slaughter
  the name of patriotism as the highest expressions of manly


  'The conflict between these economically futile political
entities was at length terminated in the most brutal manner >
    Rome. Having made herself head of an Italic alliance
   90-264 8B.c.), and annexed first the foreign domains of
     thage (Sicily, 241, Spain, 201) and then the city and her
     can domains (146), Rome proceeded to absorb Mace-
   nia, the Greek city-states, and the Hellenistic kingdoms
in Asia Minor, Syria, and finally Egypt.
                            Tre i ec
   THE     DECLINE         AND     FALL      OF    TH
                   ANCIENT       WORLD

Conquest by Rome brought to the war-scarred Mi i
ranean world peace, but not at first prosperity. Qui et
reverse. The original kernel of the Roman domains,|
peoples and cities of Italy, had been organized as a n,
of allies; eventually after 88 B.c, all Italians were ad
to Roman citizenship. The annexed territories overs
the contrary were treated as estates to be exploit
tribute like the conquests of an Oriental monarcl
Babylonian, Assyrian, and Persian kings seldom quite for
that their revenues depended in the last resort upon
prosperity of their subjects. They generally saw to
their governors acted accordingly. The elected magis
sent out for a year as governors by Republican Rome, 1
 not thus cramped.
    The Senate, composed of time-expired governors, did| No
aspire to be hailed as ‘Saviour’ or ‘Benefactor’ by i sub
jects. Laws against extortion were indeed enacted. But   aft
 121 a governor, if impeached, would be tried beforea

rank to the exploitation of the Provinces by tax-fa:
usury, and concessions. At the same time election co
secured only by bribes to ‘ the Roman People’. The gove
had to make three fortunes out of his Province — one to




in an unparalleled exploitation that completed the
poverishment of the Hellenistic world.
    In the last century of the Republic Senators and capital}
ists amassed vast fortunes: Pompey was worth 11,000
talents, Crassus   7,500, the Stoic Brutus who murdered|
                          oar       oer   RM    ee
                                           a “aaa     a      r   ah
                            BES r ites    it
                                >

  a joo
      LINot AND FALL        OF THE ANCIENT           WORLD            261



     it mean thatthe Hobie Romans            ea lead of the
     ut (as Heichelheim points out) that there was less loot
     ket; depredations and mismanagement had destroyed
    uch of the accumulated wealth. In any case these
        es had been acquired, not as the rewards for organ-
    x industry and commerce, but as the plunder of war
 d the proceeds of extortion, usury, and financial manipu-
     n.
      Rome itself empire enriched only a relatively small
 8. Debts and conscription had driven from the land a
 ‘ge proportion of the peasantry; their small holdings were
 placed by capitalist farms worked by slaves. (These were
   always very large; Cato’s ideal in the second century
   ; a farm of some 60 to 150 acres, worked by 13 to 16
  ves.) The dispossessed peasantry could find no rebabilita-
        1 industrial employment; for the urban working class
    were being impoverished and socially degraded by the
     petition of slaves who were poured upon the market by
 ch imperialist war. The imperial city contained within
  + the material for civil war, just as inflammable as what
  ught alight in some Hellenistic cities.
     his situation helped Julius Caesar, after he had added to
     Empire the Celtic lands to the Rhine and the Channel,
  seize supreme power like a Greek tyrant. Two years later
    was murdered in the name of liberty. But after twelve
   ore years of civil war, his grand-nephew, Augustus Caesar,
    ame in fact emperor, though called only princeps (first
   izen). Julius was duly deified, and in the east Augustus
      pted divine honours in his own lifetime, thus proclaim-
      himself the spiritual successor of the Ptolemies and
   leucids and their Babylonian, Sumerian, and Pharaonic
forerunners. But he was now monarch of a single State
 sxtending from the Euphrates, the Black Sea, the Danube,
   d the Rhine to the Atlantic, and from the North Sea to
the Sahara and the Arabian desert. As thus completed the
Roman Empire is the best instance of a geographical area
                                                                ws2.
                                                                a
                                                                  i
262           WHAT    HAPPENED     IN   HISTORY                 *



large enough to be completely self-sufficing that enjoyed
a common culture as well as political unity.                q|
   Julius and Augustus put an end to the worst excesses of
Senatorial governors. They gave the Empire a reasonably
efficient and honest administration. Above all they gave it
peace. For nearly two hundred and fifty years the great unit|
enjoyed internal peace to a degree never hitherto enjoyed |
by so large an area. After the victory of Augustus the Roman
Peace was seriously disturbed internally only in the terrible:
year A.D. 68, when ‘a secret of empire was divulged that|
emperors could be made elsewhere than at Rome’, and|
three provincial armies warred in Italy to win for their|
generals the imperial dignity. Even external peace was not|
long nor deeply troubled by remote local wars that added |
to the Empire Britain (A.D. 50-80), Transylvania and
Rumania (as it was in 1938), Armenia, and parts ofMeso-
potamia.                                                    a
  The immediate result was a revival of prosperity and, a
least in the new western provinces, an increase of popula. |
tion. All over the new provinces in Gaul (France and
Belgium), Germany (the Rhine valley), and Britannia \
(England), as well as in Spain and North Africa cities of the |
Graeco-Roman pattern were established. In size Roman |
cities were quite like Greek poleis. As laid out in A.D. 100, |
Timgad in North Africa covered only some 3o acres; Caer- |
went in South Wales measured 44 acres, and Herculaneum,
near Naples, had not outgrown 26. Pompeii and many |
similar towns occupied 150 to 160 acres. Even at Naples
itself the walled area did not exceed 250, and Cirencester,
in England, was about the same size. But Roman London |
was already 300 acres, Capua 440, and Autun, in France, |
490, while New Carthage reached 1,200 acres, Alexandria
2,275, and Rome by the third century 3,060.                    )
   In themselves these figures do not imply any substantial |
increase of population. To-day the sixty-four closely built-up |
acres of St Malo house only 7,262 souls, and the ancient
cities were hardly more densely populated. The significant |
fact is the addition of a number of such cities in formerly |
         DECLINE   AND   FALL       OF   THE   ANCIENT   WORLD   263

   barbarian lands to those of Italy and the Hellenistic east.
 _ All but the smallest exceed in area the hill-top forts and
    villages in which Celts had lived in La Téne Britain, and all
   were far more closely built over. As the capital of a Belgic
_kingdom Colchester is disclosed by excavation as a dis-
_ orderly huddle of squalid huts. As a provincial city its
_ successor appears as a well planned array of commodious
   dwellings.
_. For all Roman cities, like the Hellenistic poleis, enjoyed
_ the amenities of a public water supply, now often laid on to
 _ every block, handsome public buildings, baths, theatres,
 - colonnades, market halls, and assembly places adorned with
_ statues and fountains. The private dwellings were tasteful
 - and commodious. In a provincial watering place like
 _ Pompeii with at most 30,000 inhabitants archaeologists have
- uncovered street upon street of mansions with mosaic pave-
 - ments, frescoed walls, colonnaded courts, glazed windows,
_ running water, bathrooms and latrines.
_ A good middle-class house with a terrace garden might
  occupy a block 108 ft square, the main reception room being
_ 48 ft long. More sumptuous houses with a colonnaded
   central court are of the order of 200 ft by 40 ft. These,
_ though very numerous, are doubtless the dwellings of the
_ bourgeoisie as defined on page 255, and occupied a space
_ disproportionate to the numerical strength of that class.
_ The larger body of small retailers, artisans, and labourers
_ would live in flimsier houses of one or two rooms or, in the
   larger cities, in tenements that might run up to 60 ft in
_ height. Still a baker’s house (two-storeyed) at Pompeii with
 _ the ovens and four donkey-mills on the ground floor forms
   a block go ft long and nearly 60 ft wide. At Caistor by
 - Norwich in distant Britain, houses adjacent to potters’ kilns,
  and so presumably occupied by master potters, are resplen-
 _ dent with tessellated pavements.
 _    Moreover, Roman cities like the Hellenistic polezs enjoyed
 _ municipal self-government. Election posters discovered at
   Pompeii show how keen the competition for magistracies was
   before the eruption of Vesuvius overwhelmed the city. Rich
                                \
 264          WHAT HAPPENED
- citizens were as public-spirited as inC
  istic world, and delighted to adorn their c
  buildings and to finance gladiatorial shows and c
 tainments for the benefit of their fellow-citizens.
    Rostovtzeff once called the new cities ‘hives of dr
 but they were also hives of industry and trade. The han
 crafts pursued in them supplied not only the citizens ;
 rural population of the vicinity with manufactured g
 but also barbarians far beyond the frontiers of the Emr
 Bronze casseroles made in Capua for instance have turr
 up in Scotland, Denmark, Sweden, Hungary, and R:
 Artisans and industrialists from Italy and the Helle
 east migrated westward and established factories in the
 provinces. Fine red-glazed moulded ware in the Helleni
 tradition was produced now by potteries established —
 France, ‘Germany’, and even at Colchester in En
 Syrians established glass-houses in the Rhine Valley
 northern France; an ‘artist in glass of African natior
 and a citizen of Carthage’ has left a tombstone at Lyon
   oe
     Trade circulated
                :
                       freely throughout the Empire. ene
 cities were united by a network of superb roads. Harbou
 were everywhere improved or constructed, and the sea’
 were now free from pirates. Pottery manufactured in
 has been found in Asia Minor, Palestine, Cyprus,
 North Africa, Spain, and Southern Russia; the prod
 the factories in France reached North Africa and Egy
 well as Spain, Italy, and Sicily.
    But the Empire, though self-sufficing, was not a
 economic system. The barbarians of the north sup
 slaves, amber, furs, and other materials.      In return
 acquired wines, pottery (mostly from French and Rher
 kilns), metal-ware, glass vessels, and coins, which are d
 all over Germany to East Prussia, Sweden, Denmark
 Norway, as well as in the distant isles north of Scot
 Trade routes radiating from the Black Sea ports distril
 similar commodities across the south Russian steppes to the
 forest belt beyond.                                       ey,
    Regular caravans of camels brought spices, aromatics,
                                                                       er

              Sree Pisce
           |DECLINE       en
                    AND FALL
            mts and jewels across the deserts from southern Arabia
            Mesopotamia. Their western termini, Petra, Jerash,
         bek, Palmyra, and Dura-Europos, became rich and
     rosperous entirely as a result of this traffic. Under Roman
     uspices direct sea trade between Egypt and India was
       ensified, partly cutting out the Arabs who controlled the
 caravan traffic.
 _ From Egyptian ports like Arsinoe and Berenice the India-
        *n sailed down the Red Sea, and then at first coasted
           g southern Arabia, across the mouth of the Persian
 Gulf and so coastwise to the Indus delta. But at least after
    . D. 50 they began to exploit the discovery of a Greek sea
           ain, Hippalos, that the monsoons provided a reliable
         ans of transit direct across the ocean to peninsular India,
        ormously economizing time. The south-west monsoon in
         gust provided both the motive power for the crossing and
         uide as reliable as a compass, which was still unknown.
        1enorth-east monsoon in January ensured the return
          age.
  rt
          yy using the monsoons the 2,760 miles from Berenice
  mL ht be covered in less than six months, the return voyage
 P    oy




           d be accomplished within ninety days. In fact, by leav-
‘ing Italy with the corn-ships in May, and taking Nile boat
and caravan from Alexandria to the Red Sea, you might be
back in Rome again in just over a year. A regular fleet was
engaged in the traffic, and we read of a boat 180 ft long,
45 ft wide and 44 ft deep.
      The fleet brought to the Roman market not only Indian
goods but also Chinese products carried so far overland or
by sea in Indian and Chinese bottoms. The imports were
mostly ‘luxuries’ - dancing girls, parrots, ebony, ivory,
pearls and precious stones, spices and perfumes from India,
 silks and drugs from China — but some,.such as pepper,
were becoming necessities to quite large circles.
      Owing to the limitations of transport and to the structure
  of Middle and Far Eastern societies these imports could not
 be paid for in the products of mass manufactures or agricul-
‘ture. High-class textiles, glass and metal ware, parchment
266           WHAT    HAPPENED       IN HISTORY

and papyrus and such substances as eorall were in ie;
exported eastwards from the Empire. But the balance
trade between Rome and India was adverse, and the defic
was made up by exporting coin— and good gold coin at tha
Roman aurei still turn up in numbers all over India and have
been found as far away as Ceylon and China. From the
falling ratio of silver to copper and to gold it has been calcu-
lated that two-thirds of the stocks of gold and half the silver
in the Empire had crossed its frontiers, mostly eastwards, by
the fourth century A.D. (Under Augustus the ratio of copper
to silver was as 1 to 60, of silver to gold 1 to 12; after 300 the
respective ratios are I to 125 and 1 to 14 or 18. )             2;
   Finally, Graeco-Roman agricultural science was fruitfully
applied to the undeveloped soil of the western provinces, as
of North Africa. All over France, the Rhine valley, and
Southern England Romans and provincials established
capitalist farms. On them Mediterranean techniques were
applied, vines and other new plants cultivated and acclima-
tized. The farm buildings, the so-called villas, afford a
pleasing contrast to the squalid and untidy steadings ofthe
La Tene Celts, such as we know on the English Downs. Even
the slaves’ quarters are more hygienic than the hovels of|
contemporary native villagers. ‘The owners’ apartments are
adorned with mosaic pavements. To meet the unaccus-
tomed rigours of a northern winter, Italian proprietors even
installed an ingenious system of central heating.            ms, |
   The Roman Empire formed a unique reservoir for the
pooling of human experience. The intensity of commercial |
intercourse between all its scattered parts and with civilized
and barbarian worlds beyond its frontiers has already been
indicated. Besides traders, craftsmen, and slaves, civil ser-
vants and military officers were continually travelling to the
remotest outposts of the Empire. The huge standing army
needed to guard the long frontiers against barbarism with-
out was a great educative force. Soldiers were recruited in
every part of the Empire, but the normal practice was to
send them to serve away from their home country. Finally
ambassadors and missionaries came from the East to Rome, |
                                             Sie seer    ey



         ere
          t    Py

      _ DECLINE AND FALL OF THE ANCIENT WORLD                   267
      d conversely Marcus Aurelius is said to have sent an
    mbassy to China.
 ___ In the scientific arrangement of the vast mass of informa-
   tion thus made available hardly any progress was made. No
  original creative hypothesis for reducing to order a number
      scattered facts was advanced. Not a single major inven-
_ tion was suggested by all the data accumulated. Despite the
_existence of a large leisured class of cultivated and even
_ learned men, Imperial Rome made no significant contribu-
 _ tion to pure science. Rich amateurs like Seneca and Pliny,
_ with the aid of an army of Greek clerks, compiled volumin-
   ous encyclopaedias of natural knowledge. Though a number
  _of true and novel observations were therein recorded, their
 _ arrangement is astonishingly unsystematic, and the critical
_ judgement of Aristotle is conspicuously absent. While Pliny
_ rejects magic verbally, his credulity is deplorable. Only in
 _ Alexandria was the tradition of Hellenistic science still
- active, but subject to the limitations mentioned on page 253.
_      In applied science, too, the advances made under the
_ Empire are disappointing in comparison with the resources
_ available. Roman architects and engineers applied and am-
_plified processes and techniques inherited from the Hellen-
 _ istic world and Republican Italy without any revolutionary
  ‘innovations. Medical studies were encouraged and sup-
 _ ported by the Emperors, and military hospitals were admir-
_ ably organized, but the results were hardly novel. Even in
 the highly respectable domain of agriculture the writers of
   the Empire have little to add to Cato. It may be questioned
   whether the Romans and their provincial disciples appre-
    ciated the difficulties of applying a system of farming evolved
 in the Mediterranean to the very different soils and climates
of temperate France and Atlantic England, whether in fact
 the villas were so scientific after all.
    If the sciences did not profit much from the facilities for
intercourse offered by the Empire, religions did. Slaves,
. emigrant artisans, merchants, and soldiers carried with them
  every variety of Oriental cult, not only to the capital but
    to the     uttermost   bounds   of the Roman     world.   Altars
  Germany. Of the many sects and rites thus diffi
 and Christianity were alone destined to have a p     x
 world significance. Judaism was too nationalistic to
-M™many converts outside those accruing to it by kt
 Christianity, on the other hand, provided the truly|
national ideology that a world economy had long demar
   Christianity began as a small Jewish sect whose mem
saw in Jesus the Messiah of the Scriptures and expected h
immediate return to set up the Kingdom on earth. B
Jesus’ doctrine of love and His life, at once an example o
 and object for, such love, combined with the promi
 salvation and resurrection, gave the faith an in
 broader appeal. After the journeys of Paul the religio
 spread rapidly, if at first principally among slaves        ;
 proletarians. As their one God, like Yahveh, would tolerate
 no other deity, least of all the divine Emperor, to sh:        Le
worship due to Him, the Christians, like the Jews,
persecuted by a State that would still tolerate any
provided only that loyalty to its deified head were p
proclaimed by conformity to the prescribed ritu
love for the Master inspired them to suffer and to di
an ideal with an unprecedented fortitude. In the end th
won not only toleration but also endowment from t
State — but only when that State needed an ideological
support to reinforce its failing powers.               ee
   In the meantime Christianity had acquired a priesth
a sacred book, and several theologies. The first disciples
their immediate followers had no need of an organizatior
an elaborate ritual or a philosophical formulation of the
faith; they expected the Messiah hourly. But when
second coming was found to be delayed, adjustments
became inevitable. Leaders were forthcoming to orga
the brethren’s meetings, to conduct their devotions and
proselytize the heathen. The very growth of the Chur
and above all the pressure of persecution made organiz
tion imperative. The Church evolved a hierarchy, modell 2 |
                                                        el

                                                            t
     lif and sayings a,eeemust            6 Rave been recorded.
   lected and edited and combined with writings attributed
 tOthe apostles, these came to form a canon to which the
 b ilk of the Hebrew Scriptures was prefixed. Missionaries
       thus equipped with a sacred book to compete with
    hose of the Jews, the Zoroastrians, and the Orphics.
       To defend and explain their faith before imperial officials
    nd the middle classes, the leaders were obliged to formu-
   ate in terms of analytic reasoning the emotional content of
        igious experience. They inevitably used the terminology
        Greek philosophy and Aristotelian logic, helped out by
           ences to approved or tolerated and familiar Classical
      id Oriental doctrines. The inherent difficulties of the task
         vitably provoked controversies which would split the
        urch into sects, each branding as heretics all its oppo-
 nents, as soon as the pressure of persecution relaxed. At
   che same time a tincture of dogmas derived from Judaism,
      eo-Platonism, and other heterogeneous sources was in-
      sed into the simple teachings of Jesus. In fact, the scientific
    iythology of the Jewish book of Genesis, Greek science as
 expounded by Aristotle, and even the geocentric astronomy
           ipparchus became incorporated in the tenets of the
            successful sect.
           the same way ritual was enriched by borrowings from
           ceremonial of mystery cults and the vestments of
    riest-kings, while converts were conciliated by the adop-
   tion as saints, martyrs or virgins of local heroes and mother-
f ddesses of neolithic antecedents. Increasing emphasis
 came to be laid on the negative sanctions for piety and
 morality, implicit in the teachings of Jesus as in any other
doctrine of salvation. If Christianity as a religion of love
.surpassed all others in stimulating positive virtue, it came
Beto match the Egyptian, Zoroastrian, Orphic, and Buddhist
faiths in deterring from evil by terrifying descriptions of
 hell.
    Finally, with their hopes and fears focused upon the
 coming Kingdom and the life beyond the grave, the early
             WHAT    HAPPENED      IN   HISTORY

Christians accepted the social order as they found it h
except in so far as it conflicted with their ritual duties.    In
the Kingdom there would be no distinction between slave
and free, but here slavery was an established institution, ,
and theslave must submit himself to his master.
   Nevertheless the Christian conception of the Brotherhoo
of Man and its command, ‘Love thy neighbour as thyself ,
provided a motive for moral action more universal             |
loyalty to tribe or polis, and yet more potent than Stoic
philosophy or Roman law. But for the moment the new
religion, like older cults, made life significant and livable
for the masses to whom the resources of the Empire an.
the fruits of natural science offered no prospects in thislifer
It spread through the middle and upper classes precisely
in the measure that these too were forcibly convinced of       ‘



the vanity of earthly hopes by the growing impoverishment _
of the economic system. And this disillusionment was ne
long delayed.
   The multiplication and beautification of cities and aed
lively bustle of commerce that we have described give an |
impression of limitless prosperity. Yet the Empire had =
removed the contradictions of Hellenistic economy. Rome
had not released any new productive forces and did not
materially extend the use of those already available in the
Hellenistic age. Not even the structure of industry ie
radically reformed. ‘The step from the “manufactory” to
the factory and the machine as the fundamental means of
production was not made.’
   No doubt the size of the productive unit was increaenl
For example, the ceramic industry of Arretium (Arezzo in >
Tuscany) was organized on a larger scale than the same
industry in Athens five centuries earlier, Out of twenty-five —
potteries operating there between 25 B.c. and A.D. 25, two
employed more than 30 artists who ‘signed’ their products, ©
ten had from Io to 14 artists and only six so few as 7 to 10.
The largest firm that in the fifty years sold vases signed by
58 artists must have had at least a hundred slaves engaged
at any one time in the less skilled operations. So in the
    le Pe we read even at Pompeii of a workshop
    loying 25 weavers.
       multiplication of employees under unitary manage-
    nt does not, however, imply any greater specialization
    Jabour than we have already encountered in classical
 Athens and Corinth. Still less was it dictated by any sort
of mechanization. Water-mills, for instance, were hardly
commoner in the first century after our era than in the
last century before it. The ‘aristocratic’ tradition, inherited
from the Republic, discoutaged the investment of capital
in industry. A Senator was forbidden by law to engage in
trade. Even more than in classical Greece ‘agriculture and
to a lesser extent commerce were the only “respectable”
  ccupations; thesphere of industry was left to freedmen and
others of humble birth’ and slender means. The new rich
accordingly hastened to invest in land like the freedman,
‘Trimalchio, in the famous satire of Petronius. Having made
   fortune in shipping and money-lending in the days of
   ero, he proceeds to buy up estates and farms. At best sucha
   pitalist might buy slaves to man a workshop, but he would
 not even fulfil what economists call the entrepreneur function
‘since the works would be managed by a freedman oralessee.
 _ Hence we find at Pompeii forty little bakeries with mills,
 like the one described on page 263, and about twenty fullers’
 shops to cater for the needs of the 30,000 inhabitants of this
 little town. Soin the ceramic industry at Lezoux in Southern
 France, which after a.p. 70 took the place of Arretium in
s1 pplying the western market, eight distinct firms are
 known by their trade marks.
   The real increase of wealth attested in the early days of
 the Empire was the result of the superficial expansion of
civilization and the suspension of attritional warfare. But
‘the expansion of urban civilization was a system of
  exploitation which organized the resources of the newly
conquered lands and concentrated them i= the hands of a
minority of capitalists and business men.’ In other words,
the market for goods was made wider, but not deeper. “The
 purchasing power of the very large lower class was still
i dedved from the middle ne upper
  Army,’ as in Hellenistic times.
    On the land the position of the peasantry
  proved and probably deteriorated in the old e

 Me gosleling the ieaundity of refuges:in Lecnoies (
 In Celtic lands like Britain the natives lived in t
 squalor and cultivated. their lands by the same in
 means as before their annexation to the Empire.

 workers was kept down by the competition of dace
 Admittedly slaves did not oust free workers from
 ment. Of the artisans mentioned in inscriptions of |
 and second centuries, 27 per cent were free-born.
 cent freedmen Ca             slaves), and only ve



 with tombstones or offices in religious clubs — pea
 those that our inscriptions mainly refer — so tha
 figures do not give actual proportions of the e
 population. Nevertheless even in a brickworks th


 of Arretium before A.D. 25, out of 132 known work
 were slaves. But in the ceramic industry of France a
 Rhine valley the employment of slaves is not thus
 In inscriptions from Dijon woodworkers, smiths, ando t
 craftsmen are called ‘dependents’ (clzentes), not slaves.   —
   It must again be recalled that slaves Were ie


men were Shen aires and Caesar’s slaves wtene
fulfil the functions of ministers of State. Some auth
assert that wages actually rose till a.p. 200. Be that a:
 may, the share of the industrial worker in the produce «
 his labour was very small.
             ed, very low. “The men of antiquity, if they did
        e in opulence, had few needs. They lived mainly on
       en bread, olives, and figs, consuming relatively little
      and wine, in miserably furnished rooms, heated only
        ee -and lit with oil lamps.’ Most men apparently

      d at raising it.
        ce the internal market was as restricted as it had been
       Hellenistic and Classical worlds. But now the external




     itical disturbances feannieded to mask the results of
    elyeconomicforces, Undisturbed we can observe the

 cy, since 450 B.C,
a   appear first as cai shadows on the bright surface



    an expansion of the manufacturers of Italy and Greece,
   itby migration of craftsmen to France, Germany, and
     ain. Down to A.D. 25 the better-class pottery used in the
     t had been exported from Arretium. Thereafter crafts-
      , expert in its manufacture,       migrate first to South
      ance, then to the north and Germany, finally even to
    ritain to set up potteries there to supply the local markets.
       e case of the glass industry, already cited, illustrates the
same process.
y.. The result was a reduction of inter-provincial trade, par-
 ticularly in cheap consumption goods. Each province tended
    o become an economic unit that supplied its own needs as
   far as its natural resources would allow. That was not the
      msequence of any chauvinistic demands for self-sufficiency
      ch as have inspired the tariff policies of Australia and
  Canada. It resulted rather from the deficiencies of the
  transport system already explained. Not even the splendid
274           WHAT    HAPPENED       IN HISTORY   |
Roman roads had made the carriage of bulky good
land really cheap. So ‘Rome, which imported every
from the provinces, never reimbursed them except
money from their taxes.’                              \
   Still graver was the tendency of capitalist farms to g
into self-sufficing ‘households’ of the old Oriental patt
In the days of Cato only minor repairs were done at tL
farm; for major operations the local smith would be called
in. Glothes for the slaves, burned bricks, and metal war
were bought in town. Under Augustus only very large an
remote estates maintained specialist craftsmen. But a
A.D. 50 Pliny assumes that on every estate there are weave
fullers, smiths, carpenters, and so on.
   Then the capitalist farms, scientifically run, albeit wi
slave labour, and producing for the market, began to
replaced by, or combined with, estates exploited by de
dent tenants or share-farmers practising subsistence a
culture. The villa began to turn into the manor as fai
in medieval Europe. This meant the replacement of sla
cultivators and herdsmen not by free peasants such as_
formed the backbone of classical Greece and early It
but by tenants dependent on the landlord for seed
equipment and paying rent often in kind and servi
well — an old Oriental system already encountered r
than once. The system offered the new bourgeoisie
opportunity to ‘make fortunes out of unspecialized a
culture by absentee landlords’. It was definitely a step b
towards the Oriental economy of the Bronze Age, indet
towards neolithic self-sufficiency.
   The specialized farmer, large or small, relied on urban
industry to supply the needs of himself, his family, or his |
slaves. The new type of tenant could cover a larger pro-
portion of his needs by household industries. The Jandlords
maintained on their estates small-scale smithies, potteries,
tile-works, and brick-kilns worked by their slaves or the
compulsory labour of their tenants. Only luxury products
like glassware and exotic materials had to be bought in town.
   The inevitable rue was the decline of urban industries
        cess can be measured by the actual contraction of urban
      eas. After A.D. 275 Autun had shrunk from nearly five

    cities in France after A.D. 300 exceed sixty acres. Bordeaux
      down to fifty-six, Nantes, Rouen, and Troyes to thirty-
    nine. In Britain, too, the decline of city life is no less clear
    in the last quarter of the third century. At Verulamium
    (St Albans) the town walls were partly in ruins and the
 theatre fell into disuse. At Wroxeter the town centre was
   burned and not rebuilt. These facts symbolize the ruin of
    1e smaller bourgeoisie at least as a corollary of the ‘ex-
     citation of the primary producer.
      Now, as Rostovtzeff says, ‘the advance made in the Greek
      d Hellenistic periods i in the sphere of industry was due to
      constant increase in the demand for goods. After 125
     e market for industry was limited to the cities and country
     stricts of the empire. The future of industry depended on
    eir purchasing power. And while the buying capacity of
_ the city bourgeoisie was large their numbers were limited,
Eeand the city proletariat grew steadily poorer. The material
   velfare of the country population improved very slowly if
       all.” ‘When the limits of the ovkowmene were reached,
 industry should have exploited the internal market more
  actively and should have extended its scope to include the
 _lower classes. This would, however, have required a modi-
  fiction of the social structure of the Empire’ (Cambridge
_ Ancient History, xiii, 252).
_     Having    failed   to stimulate   proletarian   and   peasant
demand by advertising and to make it effective by a
 redistribution of purchasing power, the middle class of
 factory owners, merchants, and shopkeepers, who had reaped
such benefits from the Roman peace, now found themselves
doomed         to proletarianism, too. No wonder they began
restricting their families like their forerunners in Hellenistic
 Greece. Only the great landlords escaped, and that by a
‘reversion to neolithic self-sufficiency.
   By A.D. 250 all semblance of prosperity had vanished.
276           WHAT HAP
 The bankruptcy of the Romas
 exposed. It was proclaimed to the
 in fertility that is notorious in all classes 0:
 of the later Empire. Economically, as well as sci
 classical civilization was dead a hundred and fifty
 before barbarian invaders from Germany finally disr
 the political unity of the Empire and formally initiat
 Dark Age in Europe.                                    :



 a heroic if vain attempt to rescue the machinery of ci
 tion by reviving a regime of Oriental centralization,
miscalled State Socialism. A more arene term




 population naturally reacted on the State itself. A
 standing army was essential to defend the vast empir
 the prolific starvelings of the Germanic north an
 envious nomads of the eastern and southern stepp
 army had to be equipped and paid, and its cost incr
 as the emperors were forced to hire barbarian merc

 Administration and the collection of revenue req
 large and costly civil service. ‘The emperors spent va:
 on public works that were either really reproducti

 quite wasteful luxuries. While the economic systen
 expanding it could easily stand the strain, but as
 proached the limits set forth above, a discrepancy betw
 revenue and expenditure became noticeable.
    Nero already began to cover his deficit by debasing
 currency. The drainage of bullion to the east to pay for
 luxuries imported for the plutocracy (p. 265) further er
 barrassed the Treasury. In the third century the deficit w
 swelled by civil wars in which the armies were turned fro
                                                      Dot eee    ee
                                                  ’         et   i   .   ot   x




       g ‘to. the expenses they traditionally entailed and
      ause magistrates were made responsible for the pay-
     mnt of their city’s taxes. So magistracies were made
     npulsory on all who, in the eyes of the State, could
     ord them.
   Then compulsion was applied to industry and commerce
       The guilds of craftsmen and merchants, originally free
   ss ciations for religious and social ends, became organs of
    e State for ensuring a supply of artisans or ships. To
    sure the maintenance of public services the employees of
      mint,   the State arsenals,   the State   textile factories
   here were seventeen in the west alone), the public post,
        water supplies, and similar utilities were bound to their
          yment, often branded, and allowed to marry only
    to the families of fellow-workers. One was no longer free
       dopt or ply a craft, but compelled by law to follow it.
     afts in fact became castes. All were brought under
       itary discipline, which applied also to corporations of
       owners, teamsters, and others            ete      services
    fected with a public interest’.

_    more> favoured provincial towns were thus maintained. At
"Rome there were 956 public baths and free shows were
 given on 175 days a year! The citizens now received the
   ee corn, distributed to them since the days of the Gracchi,
   lready ground to flour for them; water-mills became
- common in Rome after 300. Prices were fixed throughout
the Empire by edict as by Babylonian kings, but wages
_ were fixed too, and that not minimum but maximum wages
 as in the Bronze Age — for there was a real shortage of
_labour.
_ Finally the primary producers were reduced to the status
peasants’ in Egypt oe           Nien Tiberiusten
right to strike, leaving banditry or beggary the sole       reso
of an oppressed tenant; in the third century the typi
questions put to an oracle were: ‘Am I to become a beggar ?
‘Shall I fly?’ ‘Will my flight be stopped?’ After 300 the:
system was applied to Europe, primarily as a fiscal meas
to make sure that the cultivator did not escape his poll tz
In 332 Constantine, the first Christian emperor, made »
attachment of the share-farmer (colonus) to the manor.
forceable at law. In 371 the Emperor Valerian wrote: “
do not deem that coloni are free to leave the land to w
their condition and birth attach them. If they do, let th
be brought back, put in chains and punished.’ The ten
has become aserf.                                          ‘
   But by favouritism and corruption the landlords o
great estates escaped the pressure of the machine. Thi
they might be compelled to provide contingents for t
army from their tenantry, they were often able to prot
these against the exactions of tax-gatherers and the rest          of
the swarm of officials. So ruined freeholders and urban
workers sought refuge under the patronage of great         lar
owners. These feudal lords were already on the wa
vindicating for themselves a political independence c
sponding to their economic self-sufficiency and so preparitn
the disruption that was consummated by barbarian w
bands in the fifth century.
  Finally, asthe ideological expression of the totalitari

‘Master and God’ (dominus ac deus). Only Christiani
an exclusive monotheism effectively organized in a
versal and independent church, offered for a time a spir
refuge against absorption in the Nazional-Sozialist State.
The conversion of Constantine is generally hailed as the
final victory of the new faith. It may equally be “oe
as the triumph of totalitarianism.
   The Church no doubt won not only tolerance and relief
from persecution, but also wealth and the right to eae:
                                                                    ae




                                                              j
                      ‘ee       rit            tN   Tar
             mA   Bre       a              a                  as
         :    J   Lee aTeay,          ey                  ¥


        DECLINE AND FALL OF THE ANCIENT WORLD                                              279


bu the i) become the ‘Orthodox and Apostolic Emperor’,
His rule was an earthly counterpart and representative of
  he Sovereignty of the Divine Word. In the ‘Sacred Palace’
     ; Istanbul     the ‘Divine                                Household’   abode   and issued
     Celestial Commands’;                             even         the annual   tax assessment
   wasknown as the ‘Divine Delegation’.
er Tt seems as if humanity has reverted from the Greek Iron
Age back to the Oriental Bronze Age. The atmosphere of
Byzantium is’ more like that of Babylon or Ur than of
 Athens or Alexandria. Nor could the relapse to Oriental
centralization and despotism save even the physical unity
of the Empire. /Germanic hordes overran the western
7 rovinces and “sacked even Rome itself. (The capital had
_been removed to Byzantium (Istanbul) under Constantine.)
AD pepod of barbarism submerged all the new acquisitions
rt




     re nuinerous, they are still citizens of a world infinitely
  rider than any Sumerian dreamed of, however much its
frontiers may have contracted since Augustus. Water-power
_now drives the mills that slaves had once pushed. There is
   ore than a verbal difference between an ‘Orthodox and
    ostolic Emperor’ and ‘the divine Naram-Sin, the mighty,
god of Agadé’. The former acknowledges himself servant of
a God who is Father of all men, not only of Akkadians. His
 universal dominion needs no extension by military victories.
      In reality the cultural capital accumulated in the long
_ ages here surveyed was no more annihilated in the collapse
 _ of the Roman Empire than smalier accumulations had been
  in the lesser catastrophes that interrupted and terminated
  the Bronze Age (pp. 150, 153, 185, 186). Of course,.as then,
“many refinements, noble and beautiful, were swept away.
But for the most part these had been designed for and
 ments that had       el thease         10
 gressive and that had become firmly«
 genuinely popular footing by the aia
 classes were conserved, even if temporarily fossilized.
    So in the Eastern Mediterranean city life, with
 implications, still continued.   Most crafts were st
  with all the technical skill and equipment evolved
- Classical and Hellenistic times. Farms were still w
  scientifically to produce for the market. Barter d
  entirely oust the money economy, nor did self-suffici
  paralyse trade completely. Writing was not forg

 texts were studiously copied and preserved. Greek m:
 was practised in public hospitals with the en
 Church.

 comparably graver. But ies a reaction towa
 aT      GL barbarized Europe did not’ ae




 alluvial valley, but of a vast round oe Howeunli
 they were by the deterioration of the roads and the ¢
 that infested them, pilgrims, missionaries, and me chi
 could and did travel about a continent. The new al
 crafts introduced under the Empire were not exting


 all through the Dark Ages. Water-wheels were       u
 feudal estates and by 700 were at work even in En;


 in Egypt and Mesopotamia to their confluence in
 Hellenistic Mediterranean. With the collapse of the Ro
         - stream seems to be obstructed and lost. But
        y of writing this book itself refutes that supposi-
    ould be fora sequel to show how the current flowed



  fhe one hand, the body of Classical theory and
   istic technology was preserved in a staté of suspended
  tion at Byzantium and Alexandria in the sterilizing
 sphere of a theocratic State. It began to revive in the
  tolerant atmosphere of Sassanian Iran (in the Uni-
   of Jundishapair, 530-580) and then under the
ifsof Baghdad (750-900), when the temporal conquests
     i realizing /again the unity of a large area of the
 ited world, recreated an era of peace and prosperity.
  : the old internal contradictions had destroyed the
     ty and disrupted the polity of the Arabic world,
     the establishment of the Orthodox Faith about




a respect for precise conventional divisions of time and
    es for their determination (clocks), a demand for



   al medicine and scientific agriculture. Many crafts-
  survived as indicated; old Mediterranean towns were
laced by new cathedral cities.
  e rural economy of Europe did not revert to that of
 re-Roman Celts. No doubt even more than in the late
282

Admittedly feral famines were re               1
relieved by the distribution of a world surplu
the feudal estates did permit of the estab
of farming really suited to the temperate |
Serfdom for the first time converted its half-r
 cultivators into really sedentary farmers. And the lo
 water-mills provided examples of the rational exploi
 of resources with which our Continent is excep
blessed.                     }
    These hints must suffice. Progress is real if discont
 The upward curve resolves itself into a series of trough
crests. But in those domains that Coe as el


 precursor.

                          THE   END



