                            VII

   THE    EXPANSION           OF CIVILIZATION

By 3000 B.c. economic revolutions had integrated the dis-
coveries of the preceding thousand years into civilizations in
three tiny patches of the earth’s surface. The new social
 organisms, contemporary and interrelated, were all distinct,
 and differ from one another in the details of their compo-
 sition and structure. Yet all exhibit certain features in
 common, notably dependence for industrial equipment on
 relatively uncommon and socially expensive metals or alloys
 of metals. The label Bronze Age may sum up their distinct-
 ive peculiarities, but it needs expansion.
    In the great alluvial valleys of the Nile, the Tigris-
Euphrates, and the Indus system collective effort had created
artificial environments. Societies dwelling therein had
emancipated themselves from immediate dependence on the
caprices of raw nature and had discovered uniformities
that permitted rational planning. The organized exploita-
tion of lands reclaimed from swamp and desert was yielding
unprecedented supplies of corn, fish, and other food-
stuffs. A local failure of crops need no longer mean starva-
tion; for thanks to improved and artificial waterways food
supplies could be collected for storage in the city granaries
and distributed all over the valleys. State organizations,
based on residence instead of kinship, abolished blood-feuds
between clans, mitigated the violence of other internal
conflicts, and probably reduced the frequency of wars.
   The biological consequence had been an immense numer-
ical increase in the species Homo sapiens within the valleys.
The vast areas of the new cities as compared with any
barbarian village, the immense cemeteries attached to them,
and the stupendous works executed by the citizens, place
this conclusion beyond question. The standard of life had
risen, too. The rulers and the new middle classes certainly
           THE   EXPANSION      OF   CIVILIZATION             131

enjoyed a variety of food and drink, and comfort in
accommodation and clothing that no barbarian chieftain
could imagine. Even the masses secured a more varied diet
and more salubrious housing. The sea-fish, for instance,
brought to Lagash from the Persian Gulf and to Mohenjo-
daro from the Arabian Sea were probably articles of popular
consumption that a Stone Age peasant could never enjoy.
The workmen’s quarters at Harappa are more commodious
than neolithic huts.
  The new economy, furthermore, permitted the effective
utilization of the discoveries described in Chapter IV for the
improvement of man’s equipment for living, the reduction
of drudgery, and the enrichment of enjoyment. It secured in
particular adequate supplies of metal, and guaranteed a
livelihood to the specialists who could alone work it. It
engendered exact and predictive sciences that could really
lift at least a tiny corner of the veil that shrouded the
menacing future. At the same time the new order encour-
aged and consolidated old but, as we think, delusive hopes
of predicting the unpredictable and controlling the future.
Finally it opened new possibilities to architects, sculptors,
 painters, and musicians, and new values in art.
    On the other hand, the enjoyment of these benefits was
 restricted at once by the scarcity of the industrial metal and
 by the form the revolution had assumed. In the first place
 copper or bronze remained too costly to replace stone in
 industrial equipment. For deposits of copper ore, large
 enough to be worked economically, are far from common
 and always remote from alluvial valleys; tin is absolutely
                                                            and
 rare. With the technical equipment at first available
 under the conditions of transport outside the river valleys
                                                  distribution
 and coastal tracts, the extraction, working, and
                                                                 is
 of metal must have absorbed a lot of social labour — that
                                                               ted
 to say, consumed the time of agents who had to be suppor
 out of the surplus of food-stuffs availab le to society .
                                                               had
    Secondly, this surplus — at first absolutely small —
                                                           es, and
 been concentrated in the hands of a few kings, templ
                                                               red
 nobles. So the peasant masses from whom it was gathe
              WHAT HAPPENED IN HISTORY                          a
could hardly afford the new equipment. In practice the
cultivators. and quarrymen of Egypt had to be content with
neolithic tools through the Third Millennium. Wool in.
Sumer was still plucked, not shorn. Even in the Indus cities
chert knives are common enough to suggest a shortage of
metal tools. In general it was only the divine and royal
households as such, the Army: and Navy, craftsmen         em-
ployed by the State, by temples and, in Egypt, by the noble
and mortuary estates, the tenants and serfs of gods and
territorial magnates that were regularly equipped with
metal tools or weapons.
   Both the cost of metal equipment and its superiority
reacted to consolidate the authority of those who could
alone command its use. An actual or virtual monopoly of
metal armament placed the pharaoh, the king, and the city-
governor — the personifications of the Egyptian and
Sumerian States ~ in an almost impregnable position. On
the other hand, the craftsmen, for their part, had lost the
independence they enjoyed under barbarism. They were
dependent on the city-governor or pharaoh for their raw
materials, and could in practice hardly dispose of their
products or their skill save to great households.
   The merchant class was similarly, if less severely, handi-
capped. Under the totalitarian regime of Old Kingdom
Egypt merchants    had little scope.   In. Mesopotamia    the >
market for the rare goods of small bulk that could alone be
profitably transported over long distances, at least by land,
must have been to a large extent restricted to the city-
governors’ courts and the gods’ temples. In India alone the
archaeological record suggests a wider market and larger |
profits, but it is unsupported by written documents. A
corollary was the slow and incomplete replacement of a |
‘natural’ by a ‘money’ economy.
  The distinctive achievements of civilizations that differ-
                                                                    |
entiate them from barbarism are the invention of writi
                                                         ng |
and the elaboration of exact sciences. In Sumer, Egypt, and
India the new economy had required and elicited conven-
tional systems of writing and numeral notation, of weight
                                                          s
 aad measures aha of time-keeping. It had thus revolution-
  ized the methods of accumulating knowledge and trans-
|mitting experience, and produced sciences of a new kind.
     By the written word a man can accurately transmit his
   experiences to correspondents in another city and to genera-
;tions yet unborn — provided, of course, they use the same
4
   conventional symbolism. Written tradition is more imper-
:sonal and more abstract than oral. An artisan shows an
;mepprentice concretely how to make a given article or to
 _perform a specific operation. Craftsmanship is therefore
 _imitative and so conservative, as explained on page 79. A
"prescription on the contrary, just because it is expressed iin
    words, deals with general classes of objects and actions.
_ More scope is given to originality when a verbal rulé or
  abstract formula is translated into action and applied to
    individual cases. ,
   ; But the cuneiform and hieroglyphic scripts and doubtless
   the similarly constructed Indus script too were so cumber-
     some and complicated that their mastery demanded a long
    and specialized apprenticeship or education. On purely
    practical grounds a peasant or an artisan had no chance of
     learning to read and write. Literacy was confined to a
     special class of initiates, comparable to the Mandarins in
    China. Like the latter, the adepts enjoyed a privileged
- status in Egypt and Mesopotamia. A late Egyptian papyrus
   in the form of a father’s advice to his son contrasts the
 fprospects of a clerk who may ‘become an official of high
   rank’ and will be ‘exempt from all manual tasks’ with the
     position of a metal-worker ‘with fingers like a crocodile’s’
 ‘ fa mason and of other craftsmen.
    _ Consequently, craft traditions were not committed to
  f writing, craftsmanship and literacy were divorced. To the
    practical sciences, successfully applied in the workshops,
   _ were opposed a body of ‘higher learning’ and literary or
    learned sciences— mathematics, astronomy, and medicine —
  ‘ ‘andpseudo /sciences — theology, astrology, hepatoscopy, and
 other vain methods of foretelling the future.
 _ Owing to its specialization and remoteness          from the
134          WHAT    HAPPENED      IN   HISTORY

successful activities of the workshop, the written tradition
tended to be as conservative as craftsmanship. What was
painfully expressed with the symbols of the abstruse Bronze
Age scripts acquired a sanctity and magic prestige. As a
class, the clerks tended to attach more value to the products
of their craft than to the experiences of daily life. A scho-
lastic attitude is engendered in the cloisters. The develop-
ment of theoretical science was in fact entrusted to a leisured
class, relieved by society of the active labour whereby the
opposition between mind and matter is overcome, and thus
cut off from the sources of empirical knowledge. On the Nile,
in the Second Millennium, clerks were busily copying down
medical prescriptions and arithmetical problems that, they
claim, had been composed in the Third. A medical text is
advertised as having been ‘found in ancient writing at the
feet of Anubis (a god) in the days of King Usaphais’ (of the
First Dynasty). A certain Ahmes boasts, in the fifteenth
century, that his arithmetic book is ‘in the likeness of a
writing of antiquity made in the time of King Nemare’
(1880-50 B.c.). In Babylonia and Assyria clerks still dili-
gently collected and copied texts in the long extinct
Sumerian tongue as late as the First Millennium.
   Moreover, judged by the extant texts, teaching in the
schools may have been almost as concrete and imitative as
in an artisan’s workshop. The so-called mathematical
tablets and papyri are just collections of concrete examples
worked out — in fact, specially constructed so that they
will work out with the means available to their composers.
No general rule is ever stated, nor written explanation of
the reasons for any step added. Egyptian and Babylonian
medical texts describe symptoms of particular maladies and
prescribe remedies — drugs and spells — again without a
word of explanation.
 _ The compilation of sign-lists or dictionaries, the arrange-
ment of accounts or tax-assessments required more rigor-.
ously systematic classifications than did the craft or ritual
lore of barbarians. The rules applied, if never formulated, by
the temple-administrators of Sumer and the architects of
              THE   EXPANSION      OF   CIVILIZATION       ie   135
:
_ Egypt to obtain the areas of fields and the volumes of
_ pyramids served the same purpose as the mathematical
  laws of physics and mechanics; they did enable the officials
  to foretell the quantities of grain needed for sowing the fields
  and of stone required for the monuments. The Egyptian
  calendar and its correction by Sirius were truly applications
  of quantitative astronomical laws.
     Nevertheless, the scope of science was circumscribed by
  the nature of the Bronze Age civilization. The limitations of
  Mesopotamian and Egyptian sciences were not, of course,
    due to any hereditary deficiencies in the Sumerian, Semitic,
    or Hamitic races, but to the social background from which
  the sciences sprang. The charge is commonly levelled
  against ancient Oriental science that it was inspired by
_ purely practical aims and not by a ‘divine curiosity’ as to
  the ‘essence’ of things. But the aim of science is surely to
    amass and systematize knowledge that society can use to
   control events in the external world, in fact to operate more
   efficiently on nature; the best test of the ‘truth’ of scientific
   laws would seem to be their success in so doing.
      Now Egyptian and Sumerian societies — and apparently
   that of the Indus valleys too — were firmly convinced, as are
   barbarian societies to-day, that the most reliable way of
   operating on nature was by means of sympathetic magic or
   by religious ceremonies that were themselves largely
   magical. Their clerks and officials naturally accepted this as-
   sumption without question. Their whole view of the world
__ was inevitably based on the philosophy — or lack of philoso-
   phy — behind it. They had perforce to use its language
   for the new scientific terminology they were creating.
      It is an accepted principle of magic among modern
   barbarians as among the literate peoples of antiquity that
   the name of a thing is mystically equivalent to the thing
   itself; in Sumerian mythology the gods ‘create’ a thing when
   they pronounce its name. Hence to the magician to know a
   thing’s name is to have power over it, is — in other words —
   ‘to know its nature’. (The silly questions with which a
   scientist-is plagued: ‘What do you call that?’ ‘Who built
this?’ show a popular anal of this attitude to-day.) The
Sumerian lists of names may then have not only served a
useful and necessary function as dictionaries, but also have ©
been regarded as constituting in themselves instruments for _
mastering their contents. The fuller a list was, the more of —
nature could be mastered by its knowledge and use. This —
may explain the extraordinary fullness of the lists, and the —
care with which they were preserved and copied.               ,
   A Nazi has indeed argued that the aims of Sumerian —
science were confined to the compilation of exhaustive lists _
of such magical names and their arrangement in an order
which should correspond to the order of the real world. The —
latter would naturally be conceived in terms of the hier-
archical order of Sumerian society. As that society was still
dominated in the last resort by tribal custom to which even
city-governors were subject, so the world order would be
ruled by an impersonal Fate, older than gods and superior
to them. Of course, this concept was never very sharply -
formulated, and later had to contend with that of a high
god whose personal legislation constituted Fate when a con-
quering king, like Sargon, attained such power that he
could override Custom and create Law by his fiat.
   Again, architectural forms — like the Sumerian ziggurat
and the Egyptian pyramid — came to be regarded as symbols
of the divine order of nature, and the contrast between |
symbol and meaning was not yet sharply defined. But
Babylonian and Egyptian geometry had been partly
devoloped by — and for - the construction of these symbolic
monuments (hence the accurate knowledge of pyramids
displayed in Egyptian arithmetic books). As successful _
instruments for the construction of symbols of the natural
order, geometrical propositions were liable to be regarded
also as instruments for the knowledge of that order, for
controlling the external world.
   Finally, the terminology for the new sciences might be
borrowed from the language of liturgy and magic; the
Akkadian word for ‘working out a sum’ is the same as that
for ‘performing a ritual act’.
              ;   ”   y                                   *

              THE         EXPANSION   OF   CIVILIZATION       137

    Accordingly, it was not the business of Egyptian and
 Sumerian clerks to test experimentally or criticize the
 magico-theological view of the world held unquestioningly
 by their societies; were they not themselves servants of gods
 and divine kings, owing their existence and prestige to
 superstitions? Their task was rather to systematize the
 incoherent beliefs of barbarism that they had inherited. So
 they created not what we call philosophy, but a theology or
 mythology. Thereby they gave to the nebulous and fluid
 superstitions of the barbarism from which Sumer and
 Egypt were just emerging the more rigid forms of theo-
 logical dogmas, backed up by organized ‘churches’ and
 supporting the vested interests of priesthoods, their royal
 patrons and divine4 kings.
      As the converse of this inevitable confusion between theo-
 logy and science, the aims of Oriental religion seem to us
materialistic. The cult of the gods was, in fact, designed to
secure not what we call holiness, purity, and the peace of
 God, but good harvests, rain in due season, victory in war,
 success in love and business, children, wealth, health, and
 an indefinitely long life. Immortality was conceived by the
   Egyptians (the Sumerians and Akkadians had only the
   vaguest notions of anything of the sort) as essentially a
   prolongation of earthly life. That is why the noble dead
   have to be provided continually with food, drink, and other
   offerings, supplies of which were to be secured by the per-
_ petual dedication of mortuary estates and chantry priests.
   The recognized passports to their “heaven’ were magic
   rituals — particularly embalmment.
      It is true that even in the Pyramid Age a judgement of
- souls had been conceived. In securing a favourable verdict
 _ the appropriate spells and ritual purity were supposedly the
  essential factors, but what modern, like barbarian, societies
 consider moral virtues were admittedly helpful. So nobles
  plead in their sepulchral inscriptions: ‘Never have I taken
_a thing belonging to any person . . . Never have I done aught
  of violence towards any person.’ And a county governor:
  ‘T gave bread to the hungry (of my district); I clothed him



ss,
138    :      WHAT    HAPPENED      IN   HISTORY   ~—

who was naked therein ... I never oppressed anyone in
possession of his property.’ Even so the attainment of im-
mortality was not presented as a motive for moral virtue.
Still less did an Egyptian or a Sumerian pray to his god,
as Christians do, to help him to be honest, just, or charitable.
   In the same way, the Bronze Age artist did not aim at
expressing an abstract ideal of beauty, or.even primarily at
delighting his fellow men. The Sumerian architect must
design a temple worthy of the gods, symbolical of the divine
order, and yet modelled substantially on the barbarian
shrine of reeds in which gods had been worshipped from
time immemorial. The result, judged by contemporary
representations and modern reconstructions (the actual
buildings of mud-brick and timber have lost all pretence at
beauty), must have possessed the severe beauty of an
American sky-scraper. The Egyptian architect had to trans-
late into imperishable stone and so immortalize a palace of
reeds, planks, and mats. Incidentally he created the colon-
nade of fluted columns (copying the papyrus bundles that
had been the first pillars). But it was an illiterate barbarian
who discovered how to compensate for the perspective
foreshortening that would spoil the effect of the Stonehenge
lintels when viewed from the ground.
   The Egyptian sculptor had to carve in the hardest and
most durable stone a portrait statue of the deceased that
contributed magically to his immortality. The statue was
not intended for display to mortal eyes, but was walled up
in the funerary chapel. None the less, the statues of Myceri-_
nus in Boston, for example, are to-day hailed as masterpieces
of the sculptor’s art. His Sumerian colleague was charged
with expressing the divine presence as an idol in human
form, and with carving statues of city-governors and high
priests that, by standing perpetually before the idol, should
magically keep the originals ever before the deity’s eyes.
His efforts fail to arouse enthusiasm among art critics
to-day. They, at least, illustrate a connexion between the
urban revolution and an art that seeks to portray the human
form realistically. That, at least, can be said of a couple
                                              Peete te ee
                                                $4
                t




‘              THE    EXPANSION     OF   CIVILIZATION            139

    of statuettes    from   Mohenjo-daro    in the   Indus    valley
    too,
       In Egypt, lively representations of life on the mortuary
    estate — seed-time and harvest, boat-building, pot-making,
    even the sports of the peasantry — painted on the tomb walls
    would ensure to its dead owner the enjoyment of its pro-
    duce. To depict them the painter had consciously to face
    the problem of representing the three-dimensional in two
    dimensions, solids on a flat surface. A selection from his
    solutions has passed at length into the aesthetic tradition of
    Atlantic civilization.
       The music of drums, pipes, or stringed instruments
    excites exaltation even in savages. It is no less efficacious on
    civilized worshippers, and therefore on their gods. With the
    technical aids of civilization the Sumerians could gather in
    the temple a regular orchestra       of drums,   rattles, flutes,
    horns, trumpets, and harps. They doubtless gave form to
    barbaric melodies. They certainly used, if they did not
    invent, the heptatonic scale that has been characteristic of
    civilized music ever since.
       In architecture, sculpture, painting, and music Oriental
    societies established canons of art, not ‘for art’s sake’, but
    for supposedly practical ends. Once the requirements of
    society had been met, the canons became rigid conventions.
    The artist inevitably turned copyist, so that his products lost
    the individuality that had made the models truly artistic.
    But in the sequel the dead conventions, adopted, adapted,
    and blended by fresh societies with new requirements,
    could — and did — provide the materials and scaffolding for
    a living art.
                                   *

    If the economy of the Early Bronze Age cities could not
    expand internally owing to the over-concentration of pur-
    chasing power, if its ideological expression were doomed to
    fossilization, the fossils were at least preserved to serve as
    models and building materials for the future, the urban
    economy must — and did - expand externally, as explained
    in Man Makes Himself.
   PR   Toes Aha
              Oeve%ae
                  +




  140           WHAT HAPPENED         IN HISTORY                i
     The alluvial cradles of civilization were dependent on
  imports for many of the raw materials required by the urban
  industries, and for luxuries that became necessities. It is not
  surprising that products of urban workshops are found in
  barbarian lands from — or through — which the requisite
  imports must come. In the ruins of villages in Baluchistan
  Stein found metal-ware and even pottery exported from the
  cities of the Indus valley. Seals such as were fashionable in
  Mesopotamia in the Jemdet Nasr phase just before 3000
  B.C. have turned up as far afield as central Asia Minor and
  the Isles of Greece. Egyptian manufactures were carried to
  the North Syrian coasts and to Crete, and imitated there.
     In fact not only the products of urban industry, but the
  new economy that produced them spread and were bound
  to spread. To persuade their possessors to exchange
  the needed raw materials for manufactures,       they must be
  induced not only to demand the latter, but also to adjust
  their economy to absorb them. In practice the manufac-
  tures that could be exported over long distances under the
  conditions of Bronze Age land transport were mainly luxury
  goods of modest bulk that would appeal to a small class
  enjoying a concentrated surplus of wealth. To market them
  the chiefs or gods of barbarian tribes must be induced to
  extort from their followers and worshippers a surplus of
  foodstuffs to support woodsmen and miners as well as courts
  and temples. And this is apparently what happened.            48
     Byblos, the best port for the Lebanon lumber trade, had
  even before the unification of Egypt been occupied by a
_ Copper Age community of fishers and farmers who culti-
  vated olive trees as well as barley and bred chiefly goats and
  sheep. After the revolution in Egypt a stone temple to the
  local deity, Ba’alat Gebal, was built in the village, covering
  about eighty by fifty feet. It was soon replaced by a quite
  monumental temple measuring over ninety by sixty-three
  feet of handsome and richly adorned masonry.
    The pharaohs sent to the shrine stone vases inscribed with
 their names and other offerings. Egyptian ambassadors,
 officials, clerks, and merchants frequented the temple and
            HE   EXPANSION    OF   CIVILIZATION          I4I

the local chieftain’s court, and even settled at the port.
Native Giblite clerks were apparently trained in Egyptian
hieroglyphic writing. In exchange for the cedars of Lebanon
and perhaps olives and dyes, the Giblites received and
adopted elements of Egyptian civilization, including writing
and all that that implied, as well as manufactured articles
and corn. They remained a friendly but independent
civilized community.
   The same sort of thing must have been going on round
Mesopotamia. Just after 2000 B.c. we find a regular colony
of Semitic (Assyrian) merchants established round the court
of the local prince of Kanes in the Halys basin in Central
Asia Minor. They were engaged in trading metals in ex-
change for Mesopotamian textiles and other manufactures.
Their business letters which happen to have survived give a
lively picture of caravans of pack-asses regularly crossing
the Syrian steppes and the Taurus Mountains on the way to
and from Mesopotamia. Legends imply that such colonies
were already established in the Halys basin in the days of
Sargon about 2400 B.c. The seal, mentioned on page 140,
and contemporary copies of Sumerian devices may mean
that such commerce went back to 3000 B.c.
   An alternative way of securing the necessary raw mater-
ials was to turn the new metal weapons against the societies
controlling the supplies and to extort the requisites as
tribute. The Egyptians, who traded amicably with the
Giblites as with Arabians and Ethiopians, ‘smote the
wretched nomads’ who dwelt round the copper mines of
Sinai. The pharaohs sent armed expeditions to extract the
ores and left warlike inscriptions on the mountain’s rocks.
They conquered the gold-bearing region of Nubia and
compelled the natives to send them gold as tribute. But
beyond this the Egyptians avoided imperialist ventures
outside the Nile valley till about 1600 B.c.
   It was otherwise with the Semitic kings of Mesopotamia.
The Sumerians too may have tried conquests outside the
delta as well as over one another. The alluvial plain of
Sumer and Akkad was no more a self-sufficing unit than
  142         WHAT        HAPPENED   IN   HISTORY

  was the individual city state within it. As imperial hegemony
  was the accepted recipe for overcoming conflicts between
  the cities, so military and political domination over the
  sources of indispensable raw materials — metals, stone,
  timber — would be the dream of an ambitious city-governor.
  The expeditions these sent to get stone and timber may have
  been ventures in economic imperialism. The earliest temple
  of Ishtar at Assur (the capital of Assyria) looks like the
  foundation of a Sumerian conqueror. The annexation of
  Sialk by ‘Elamites’ (p. 72) was apparently a military con- —
  quest designed to secure routes to the north. But on the
  whole the stalwart inhabitants of stony, well-wooded and
  metalliferous mountains were able to defend their indepen-
  dence till the rise of the Dynasty of Akkad about 2350 B.c.
     Sargon, his sons, Rimush and Manishtusu, and his grand-
  son, Naram-Sin, extended their conquests ‘from the Lower
  Sea (the Persian Gulf) to the Upper Sea (the Mediterran-
  ean)’. Sargon not only imposed his sway upon the rival —
  cities of Mesopotamia. He was the first to create a vast
_ military empire, the prototype of all the conquerors who
  have captured popular imagination from Alexander to
  Napoleon. Like Alexander, Sargon became a hero of
  romance. Nearly a thousand years after his empire had
  crumbled, his deeds were being celebrated in epics, frag-
  ments of which have turned up in the Egyptian archives at
  Tell-el-Amarna and in the Hittite library at Boghaz Keui
 in central Asia Minor.
    Both the poetic tradition and the actual inscriptions of
 Sargon and his successors reveal economic objectives in
 their conquests. An epic fragment depicts Mesopotamian
 merchants in the Halys basin inviting his aid against local
 princes and not asking in vain. Sargon himself explicitly
 boasts of reaching ‘the Cedar Forest’ (Lebanon?) and the -
 “Mountain of Silver’ (Taurus). He ‘caused the ships of
 Melukha (Arabia ?), the ships of Magan (Oman, source of
 copper) and the ships of Dilmun (the Bahrein Islands?) to
 anchor at the quay in front of Agadé’. His son, Manishtusu,
 again ‘took possession as far as the Silver Mines, and
                               wee ee     eS   ee




             THE   EXPANSION     OF   CIVILIZATION          143

  from the Mountains of the Lower Sea he carried off their
  stones’.
     The kings of Akkad brought back vast booty. Therewith
  they endowed and adorned temples, not only in the capital,
  but also in the subjugated Mesopotamian cities. Their
  victorious soldiers shared in the spoils. Thus the forcible
  distribution of the wealth, hoarded in conquered treasuries,
   spread purchasing power in Mesopotamia. Production was
    thereby stimulated. At the same time war captives swelled
    the supply of service producers. In disposing of loot and
    tribute merchants could make profits. So the middle-class,
   now comprising victorious veterans as well as merchants, and
 _ independent of the old ‘divine households’, profited from
   imperialism. Money economy spread till land was now
   bought and sold like any other commodity.
       Nevertheless, trade in metals was made an imperial
   monopoly. To consolidate his position Naram-Sin took a
   leaf out of the pharaoh’s book and became a god of empire;
   he styles himself no longer ‘tenant-farmer’ nor even ‘king’,
   but ‘the divine Naram-Sin, the mighty, god of Agadé’.
   Thereby he set a precedent that later imitators of his im-
   perialism, the kings of Ur, of Babylon and of Hatti, and at
   last the Roman emperors, did not fail to follow. Neverthe-
   less, the Empire of Akkad was ephemeral and collapsed in
   chaos after a century.
      But it had more permanent results than the forcible ex-
   traction of raw materials for Mesopotamian industry. At
   Nineveh (opposite Mosul in Assyria), previously at best a
   country town, Rimush, Sargon’s son, built a monumental
   temple to Ishtar. Still further west, Naram-Sin founded an
   imposing palace at Tell Brak on the Khabur. As in Sumer,
   such monumental buildings are outward symbols of the
   establishment of the new urban economy with all its con-
   sequences; written documents have actually been found in
   both buildings. Literate city life persisted here even after
   the disruption of the empire and the recovery of indepen-
_ dence by the new cities.
      Even where full city life was not thus established by the
144          WHAT HAPPENED IN HISTORY
conquest, successful resistance or revolt involved an adop- —
tion of part at least of the urban economy. The success of the
Akkadian, as of the Egyptian, armies was due to their
superior copper weapons and armour against which sling
pellets, flint daggers, and stone axes were of little avail. To _
resist them similar armaments must be manufactured; —
smiths must be trained and supplied with raw materials; —
copper and tin must be collected; trade must be organized; _
a sufficient surplus must be available to support the artisans. —
Even resistance to imperialism generates a ‘Bronze Age —
economy’, dependent on trade at least for armaments to —
supersede neolithic self-sufficiency.                             .
   So, like peaceful trade, economic imperialism did extend —
the area of civilization. As a result of one activity or another —
on the part of the original nuclei, new cities, new centres of |
civilization arose around the original foci and beyond them
barbarians abandoned neolithic self-sufficiency at least far
enough to secure the new metal armament. And of course —
each Bronze Age city or township became itself a new centre
of demand, irradiating, if only by reflected light, an ever-
widening hinterland.
   Now the new centres were not just copies of the old.
Urban arts and crafts were superimposed upon neolithic —
cultures, but did not obliterate them. These cultures were
adaptations to varied environments, different from those
of the great alluvial valleys. They offered opportunities for
novel developments in industry and organization. The sea,
for instance, now offered new means of livelihood to the          |
peoples of the Mediterranean, and doubtless of the Persian }
Gulf too.                                                      |
   On the Syrian coast we have seen how Byblos quickly
rose to urban status as a result of maritime commerce with
Egypt. In Cyprus villages with burials under house floors
disclose a vigorous neolithic population. No cities of the
early Bronze Age have yet been identified, but large ceme-
teries of collective tombs bear witness to larger aggregations
that must be nearly urban. In one cemetery at Vounous no
fewer than forty-eight family vaults, each used over many
            THE   EXPANSION      OF   CIVILIZATION           145

  generations, have been explored. The island’s exceptional
  wealth in copper — the metal takes its name from Cyprus —
  must have contributed to the support of the increased
  population.
     A wealth of metal tools in the tombs shows that the local
  ores were exploited, that specialist miners and smiths were
  working on the island. But neither pottery nor any other
  craft had demonstrably been industrialized. Nor do foreign
  imports in the tombs show where the surplus metal was
  marketed. Indeed, though the Cypriotes cast for their own
  use a very distinctive kit of metal tools and weapons, the
  Cypriote forms are hardly ever found outside the island, even
  when the exportation of Cypriote copper onalarge scale is
_ proved by written documents. As then, so even in the early
  Bronze Age, the metal must have been exported in the form
 of crude ingots or ore and not worked on the island.
      The neolithic farmers and fishers of Crete were joined
   about 3000 B.c. by refugees from the Nile Delta and fresh
  colonists from Syria, bringing with them some of the tech-
  nical and artistic traditions of Egypt and Asia. The cultiva-
   tion of vines and olives, and the exploitation of the island’s
   natural resources in timber, copper and murex shell (used
   for dyes), could now profitably yield an exportable surplus.
   Above all, the island’s geographical position between
 Egypt, Asia, and Mainland       Greece, its endowment      with
 timber for ship-building and a happy conjuncture of winds
 and currents offered prospects of wealth in the carrying
 trade.
    Little townships arose, even on tiny islets utterly destitute
 of arable land wherever there was a good harbour. A surplus
 was available to support smiths, carpenters, goldsmiths,
 jewellers, and seal-cutters. Craftsmen, traders, and sea cap-
 tains became rich enough to need seals on which are carved
 the tools of their craft or their high-prowed rowing-boats.
_ Otherwise there is no evidence for concentration of wealth.
  Large collective tombs, often constructed with considerable
  labour, perhaps in imitation of the houses of the living,
  crowded with skeletons and quite richly furnished, may well
                            ER      eee   Oe aa



146           WHAT    HAPPENED      IN    HISTORY

be the communal burying-places of clans and not just of
chieftains’ families. Stone axes and obsidian knives were
still used side by side with metal tools and weapons. But self-
sufficiency had been left behind. Gold, silver, lead, obsidian,
and marble were imported; even Egyptian and Asiatic
manufactures in the shape of stone vases and faience beads
reached the island.
   Farther north the little islands scattered in a belt across
the Aegean (the Cyclades) had no attractions for self-
sufficient farmers. But they possessed marketable resources —
copper, emery,   obsidian, marble — which, if not edible,
could be exchanged for foodstuffs. So in the Third Millen-
nium they were thickly populated by people who worked
metals, quarried obsidian and carved marble vases and
traded the products to Egypt, Crete, the coasts of the
Dardanelles, and Mainland Greece. Their graves are
aggressively furnished with metal weapons. So it may be
suspected that these insular communities combined piracy
with peaceful trade, adding loot to profits, a practice normal
in the Mediterranean at many subsequent periods. They
would then have discovered the secret of making a living
off the urban surplus by simply stealing it!
   The plateau of Asia Minor is dotted with settlement tells,
so small that they look like villages rather than townships.
Their inhabitants were able to secure perhaps from travel-
ling merchant artificers and migratory smiths some copper
weapons and trinkets, but on the whole retained a barbaric .
self-sufficiency. For their agriculture (probably based on
irrigation) they still relied entirely on a neolithic equipment.
But on the western coast piratical commerce under the
leadership of militarist chiefs led to the accumulation of
wealth. The ‘city’ of Troy, made famous by the epics |
ascribed to Homer, began as a fortified hamlet or citadel, |
not much more than one and a half acres in area, dominated
by the chief’s palace. In time it expanded till as ‘Troy II’ it
covered nearly two acres. Accumulated loot and profits now
attracted to the chieftain’s court goldsmiths trained in
Asiatic schools and skilled in filigree work, and at length
                                                   “——)   2s   ft




           THE   EXPANSION     OF    CIVILIZATION                   147

even professional potters using the wheel. Trade and plun-
der secured supplies of copper, tin, lead, silver, gold, and
obsidian and manufactured luxuries like vases of ‘island
marble.
   This wealth was concentrated in the personal treasury of
a petty war-chief. For its administration neither writing nor
even seals were needed. Nor did it support any substantial
industrial population. The chief’s subjects or followers con-
tinued to use stone axes and hoes, picks and mattocks of
stags’ antlers and sickles armed with flint or obsidian blades.
There were apparently enough demand and reserves to
justify a quest for further supplies for the armament
industry in Europe;     ornaments,   fashionable     in Troy II,
were scattered about in the Lower and Middle Danube
basins as a result.
    Industry on the scale attested at Troy and at other less
warlike villages could not absorb an expanding population,
which must accordingly seek fresh land. With barren
mountains and an already populous plateau behind it, the
surplus could only overflow westward in overseas coloniza-
tion. And so in Macedonia and Mainland Greece com-
munities of neolithic peasants, already established in the
narrow valleys and coastal plains, were joined by Asiatics
 and islanders, already accustomed to metal tools and weap-
ons and practising the culture of vines and fruit trees in
 addition to mixed farming and fishing. The resultant Early
 Helladic settlements show already an urban character; for
 the culture of vines and olives, metallurgy and a few other
 specialized crafts, small-scale but fairly regular trade in
metal and luxury articles and perhaps some piracy were
superadded to the subsistance farming of the neolithic
 population. There is no more evidence for a concentration
 of wealth than in Crete. Though jars or bales of merchan-
dise duly sealed in Crete reached Helladic ports, no need
was felt locally for seals, and writing was of course unknown.
    So all round the eastern Mediterranean maritime cul-
 tures arose in which the subsistence economy of barbarism
was tinctured with civilized industrial specialization and
 an,
148           WHAT    HAPPENED     IN HISTORY
commerce. They built up new traditions of seamanship
and geographical lore and transmitted to the Oriental pool _
knowledge of new lands, materials, and techniques.        ‘
   These partially urbanized communities then served in
their turn as new centres from which civilized ideas were i
diffused westward and northward. East Mediterranean :
manufactures were transported as far west as Sicily and
Malta. In Sicily they are found in collective tombs or|
family vaults, each containing fifty to two hundred skele- ‘
tons. These are grouped in cemeteries of from ten to thirty —
which must belong to small villages whose inhabitants,
while relying mainly on home-made tools, did import a
few ornaments or amulets from further east. It is thought
by many that they imported spiritual goods too; for the
tombs and the ritual observed in them are suspiciously like
those of Crete, Cyprus, and Syria.                             i
   Now all civilized peoples are troubled to know how to.
appeal to barbarian tastes and how to induce ‘natives’ to
work for them. The most acceptable inducements to-day
are arms, showy trinkets, and spirits. Perhaps in antiquity
spirituous inducements to labour were replaced by spiritual
incitements — hopes of immortality. That might be one
explanation for the Copper Age of Sicily.                     :
   In that case the same enticements must have been held
out to induce the natives of Sardinia, south-eastern Spain
(Almeria), and southern Portugal (Algarve) to mine and
smelt the local ores of copper, silver, and lead. They cer-
tainly did extract these metals and did build tombs more
or less on the same general plan as those used farther east.
But they supplied the dead at least with a predominantly
neolithic equipment, very few copper tools and daggers
and no east Mediterranean manufactures.
   Still farther afield the great family vaults built of huge
undressed stones and termed megalithic tombs (in Britain
long barrows or chambered cairns) that are scattered along |
the Atlantic coasts of Portugal, France, and the British Isles
and across the North Sea to Denmark and southern
Sweden are regarded by one school as clumsy and barbaric
               THE   EXPANSION         OF   CIVILIZATION             149

attempts to copy Spanish, Sicilian, and Cretan funerary
 architecture and as inspired by the same beliefs. If the
 megalith-builders were thereby induced to produce a
 surplus above domestic needs, they certainly did not
 expend it on obtaining metal tools, still less Oriental
 manufactures. The megalith-builders of Britain and Den-
 mark   are,    in fact,   classical    examples     of neolithic   self-
sufficiency.
    In Central and north-western Europe the competition
 for land, described on page 67, had prepared societies to
 desire superior weapons and in places had produced ruling
 Classes, extracting from a vanquished peasantry a surplus
 which they were prepared to expend in gratifying that
 desire. The necessary technical knowledge reached Central
 Europe from Syria, Britain, probably from Spain. Hungary
 and Bohemia, Ireland and Cornwall could provide the
 requisite copper and tin. So soon after 2000 B.c. a Bronze
_Age could and did begin in Central Europe and Britain — a
 few centuries later also in Denmark,              northern Germany,
 and southern Sweden.
    A regular trade in metal linked up the whole of Central
Europe from Upper Italy to the Harz Mountains and from
 the Vistula to the Rhine into one economic system which
joined on to a second in the British Isles and was subse-
 quently extended to embrace Denmark where metal was
 bartered for amber. It was conducted by itinerant artificers
 who manufactured or at least ‘finished’ metal goods to
 order and may, like the pedlar in Derbyshire during the
 eighteenth century, have practised petty brigandage as a
 side-line. But metal remained rare and very costly «for
 centuries and was used almost exclusively for weapons .and
 ornaments. The only specialized metal tools current were
 those of the metal-workers themselves. For tree-felling,
 reaping, and other rural pursuits, the peasantry had still
 to rely on stone axes, flint sickles, and a general Stone Age
 equipment. Bronze did not open forest lands to the hoe
 or the plough as iron later would.
    So. the new bronze industry neither absorbed any




xs
150          WHAT   HAPPENED      IN   HISTORY

appreciable proportion of the surplus rural population nor
equipped it to conquer virgin lands. Pressure on the land
was thus unrelieved. Moreover, at least in Denmark and
southern England, the costly bronze armament merely
consolidated the authority of ruling groups as did the
knight’s armour in the Middle Ages. Here Bronze Age
burials reveal ‘an aristocratic world with richly developed,
upper class life based on organized luxury trade and the
labour of the lower classes’.
   But the petty chieftains were now equipped with weapons _
not only to enforce obedience on their followers, but also to
lead them to conquer the new lands that their still neolithic
rural economy demanded — even to plunder the rich civili-
zations that had unwittingly armed them. In the sequel
civilization is repeatedly threatened by onslaughts from
barbarian war-bands impelled as much by the failure of
their own economy to support a growing population as by
envy of civilization’s wealth. The war-bands from Europe,
whose arming archaeology allows us to observe so clearly,
had not perhaps yet reached the frontiers of the tiny
civilized world. But the process revealed in Europe may
have been repeated in Asia. There Sargon’s ‘tottering
Empire was finally overthrown by the barbarians from
Gutium who fell upon Mesopotamia.
                              VIII

    THE        CULMINATION           OF BRONZE         AGE
                      CIVILIZATION
| Soon after 2300 B.c. the imposing State organizations just
 described and the economic systems they dominated dis-
 integrated.    In Egypt,   Mesopotamia,   and   India, eras of
| prosperity that have left a vivid impression in the archaeo-
   logical record were succeeded by Dark Ages from which
 few buildings and inscriptions survive. In India civilization
   itself seems to have been extinguished. In Egypt and Meso-
   potamia it soon re-emerges, and re-emerges liberated from
   some of the shackles of ancestral barbarism and deepened
   so as to benefit more fully new classes in society. In the
   interval in the newly urbanized areas like Assyria the germs
   of civilization have had time to develop on original lines.
      In Mesopotamia the clouds of darkness are represented
  by the barbarians from Gutium, armed, as we have seen,
  against imperialism to attack their civilized attackers. In
  the devastation they wrought, imperial monopolies were
  violently overthrown, the hoarded wealth collected in
  treasures was brutally restored to circulation, or simply
  annihilated, great households were broken up.
     But by no means all temples were sacked; invaders
  generally feared the gods of conquered lands too much to
  violate their sanctuaries. Perpetual corporations of priests
 survived to preserve their deities and their traditions. Most
  temple libraries remained intact; their schools still func-
 tioned. The conquerors may have been illiterates; still they
 would want clerks and their sciences.
     Similarly craftsmen survived, even though they had to
 work for barbarian masters and may have been hampered
 by some shortage of raw materials. Above all, trade was
 never completely paralysed, however many merchants may
have been killed or robbed. Even the barbarians would
‘Set tidal   yom ;   Upwear



             152          WHAT    HAPPENED     IN HISTORY

           want metal for armaments and some civilized luxuries, an
           these, in default of a State system of distribution, private
           traders could supply. Indeed, as the merchant class had
           made profits out of the plunder of conquered provinces|
         _ (p. 143), so it could out of the loot of palaces and estates
           at home. Moreover, as the urban economy spread, traders
           found ever wider scope.                                      ;
              Hence, when after about a century Sumerian kings of
             Ur reunited once more the rival cities of Sumer and Akkad,
             establishing internal peace and security for foreign trade,
             civilization started to expand again from the level attained
             under the Empire of Akkad. By 2100 B.c. the Sumerian
             monarchs had recovered at least so much of Sargon’sSs
             Empire as to be able to dominate Elam and Assyria and to.
             found cities as far west as Qatna between Homs and
             Damascus. They began the organization of a professional
             imperial administration and the codification of customary
             laws. But their empire too collapsed just before 2000 B.c.,
             and with it the Sumerian ruling class became extinct.        :
                In the second Dark Age that followed semi-barbarous
             Amorites, Semites from the West, filtered into Mesopo-
             tamia. About 1800 B.c. an Amorite dynasty, ruling from
             Babylon in Akkad, welded Sumer and Akkad into a king-
             dom that may henceforth be termed Babylonia. Kings
             Hammurabi consolidated the new kingdom, not only by
             becoming himself a god of empire, but by giving it a civil
             service of governors and judges appointed by the king and
             a unified code of laws to supersede independent traditional
             codes hitherto observed in each city. Improvements in the
             old Sumerian war-chariot had enhanced the military power
             of the Babylonian monarchy and accelerated communica-
             tions within its domains; for the heavy solid wheels were
             about this time replaced by spoked wheels and swift horses
             were replacing asses as tractive power.
                Still the machine thus created was not strong enough to
             prevent infiltrations by barbarian Kassites and invasions by
             Hittites and Elamites. The Amorite Dynasty of Babylon was
             replaced by a Kassite Dynasty. But the Kassite monarchs
     _ CULMINATION OF BRONZE AGE CIVILIZATION     153
 took over the administrative machinery Hammurabi had
  created and the whole apparatus of Sumerian-Babylonian
 civilization. Babylonia survived as a civilized State, albeit
 impoverished and cramped by new States in Elam, Assyria,
  and Syria.
     In Egypt it was the great landlords, county governors who
  had become hereditary counts, who were the agents in the
 destruction of the Old Kingdom (p. 121); they made them-
  selves independent of the pharaoh, or rather each tried to
 make himself a pharaoh on his own. The result was not only
 political anarchy, but also economic chaos; for it was the
  centralized State that had secured and distributed supplies
  of raw material and had accumulated the surplus needed
  for the support of artisans. Later clerks have left vivid
  glimpses of the chaos of the resultant Dark Age. One writes:
_ ‘Men take up arms for battle, because the land lives on
  disorder; they make them spears of copper to beg their
  bread with blood.’ And another: ‘All the materials for the
  crafts are lacking; no worker works any more; enemies have
 _despoiled the workshops.’
   But on the Nile, as on the Tigris and Euphrates, craftsmen
 and craftsmanship survived, even if rendered idle for lack of
‘materials. If there were no promising careers for clerks as
 State officials, they could be county officials and were as
 necessary as ever on nobles’ estates. So learned sciences too
could survive. From the very depths of the Dark Age designs
painted on coffin lids illustrate a development of astro-
nomical lore in the direction of stellar clocks, dividing the
watches of the night month by month by the appropriate
rising constellations, with the aid of which the dead man
 could tell the time. -
  _ Local temples and their gods were generously endowed
 by county magnates. The latter and their priests were as
 anxious as ever for ‘immortality’. But they no longer looked
 to the god-king to bestow it; instead priestly specialists and
 embalmers provided - for a fee — the needful spells and
 rites.
    Finally private merchants could do what the State had
           STG   Toye econTe eamma Oe ean


 154         WHAT        HAPPENED           IN HISTORY
done, in importing raw materials. The various independent
courts might compete with one another for merchandise as
well as for craftsmen’s skill. This multiplicity of competing
buyers enlarged the opportunities for a middle class of
artisans, priests, and merchants            to sell their skill, their
 magic, and their wares. So in Egypt, too, the techniques of
 civilization and many of its superstitions were preserved
 intact.
    The political framework requisite for their full revival
 was provided by what is termed the Middle Kingdom. The
 counts of Thebes by war and diplomacy reunited the whole —
 of Egypt into a feudal monarchy. Those rival counts who
 made timely submission were continued in their provinces; —
 recalcitrants were replaced by royal children and suppor-
 ters; all were made vassals owing tribute and allegiance to
 the royal house of Thebes. So about 2000 3.c. Egypt
recovered a political unity commensurate with the land’s
unity as symbolized by the Nile.
    After a couple of centuries this unity was again destroyed
by the insubordination of the vassal counts. In the ensuing
anarchy barbarians, usually known as the Hyks6s or Shep-
herd Kings, and armed with new engines of war, burst in —
from Asia and established from the Delta a temporary —
barbarian empire that drew tribute not only from the Nile
valley but also from adjacent parts of Asia. In 1580 B.c.
the barbarians were expelled by the military power of a
count of Thebes, Ahmose, founder of the New Kingdom.
He had adopted the new Asiatic war engine, the light
horse-drawn chariot. With it the wheeled vehicle appeared
for the first time on the Nile, albeit as a piece of armament.
   As military conquerors the new pharaohs made Egypt a
centralized military monarchy, as Sargon had made Sumer ©
and Akkad. Like Sargon, too, they set out on a career of
imperial expansion and won Egypt an Asiatic empire which
extended over Palestine and Syria to the Euphrates and
the Amanus Mountains and across the sea to Cyprus.
Conquest brought to the New Kingdom of Egypt as it had
to the empires of Akkad, Ur, and Babylon an immense
        CULMINATION     OF   BRONZE   AGE   CIVILIZATION     155

  access of wealth. But this new wealth arrived as loot and
  tribute concentrated in the treasuries of the new royal
  war-lords. The New Kingdom became atotalitarian State
  as the Old had been.
     The rejuvenated civilizations of Mesopotamia and Egypt
  in the Second Millennium differ from their parents of the
  Third most significantly in the greater prominence of a
  middle class of merchants, professional soldiers, clerks,
  priests, and skilled artisans, no longer embedded in ‘great
  households’ but subsisting independently alongside these.
     The partial disruption of great estates and the pillaging
_ of the country-side had emphasized the value of conven-
  tional, incorruptible metal wealth as against the real but
  perishable wealth produced by the land. In periods of
  invasion and anarchy the impoverishment or destruction
  of ‘great households’ within which a natural economy
  reigned had encouraged the spread of a money economy.
  Of course, gold or silver gained by usury, trade, plunder
  or even manual labour smells as good as that earned by
  the ownership of land or agriculture. In Mesopotamia,
  indeed, land had become a commodity, saleable and dis-
  posable by will since the days of the Empire of Akkad.
  Even in Egypt under the New Kingdom parcels of land,
  though held on lease from pharaoh and generally carrying
  obligations to military service, could be transferred by
  testament or sale.                    ;
     With the spread of the money economy production for
  the market became commoner. The speculative importa-
  tion of miscellaneous cargoes for sale in the market might
  yield greater, if less reliable, profits than the collection on
  commission of specific articles ordered by great households
  or States. Merchants could in this and other ways (p. 153)
  make money and find uses for it as purchasers. Soldiers
  brought back from the war gold, silver, or saleable com-
  modities like slaves, and must use the proceeds to buy
 in the bazaars satisfactions for their needs.
    Both in Egypt and Mesopotamia an army of literate
 officials appointed by the State, and ranging from junior
clerks to judges, now enjoyed assured incomes in money
and a secure status. They were no longer attached to
‘households’ that supplied all their needs, nor could many
possess such households of their own. So they too must
appear as buyers in the bazaar. In Egypt professional
priests had multiplied as a result of the generous temple
endowments by victorious pharaohs and the credulity of
their fellow-citizens, These and their Mesopotamian col-
leagues found needs to satisfy by ‘shopping’.   ;          i
   Hence craftsmen need no longer be attached to great
households, but had an open market for their products. —
Whether they produced for stock or only worked to order,—
craftsmen could earn enough to purchase the products of
other crafts. Even peasants found a market for produce|
outside great households, and could so obtain a larger share
in the technical benefits conferred by civilization. In Egypt
the rural population remained indeed legally ‘royal serfs’,|
liable as before to compulsory labour and_ practically
attached to the estate on which they worked, even when it
was held by a noble or small tenant. Still, even the Egyptian
fellah was sometimes left with a surplus of rural produce
for sale when dues and taxes had been paid.
   Under this regime the circulation of commodities cer-
tainly increased, industrial production expanded, and im-
ports were multiplied. New luxury manufactures -— in
Egypt, for instance, glass vessels and new imports — ap-
peared on the market and soon became necessities for the
middle-class. The use of metal at last spread effectively to
the countryside. In Egypt bronze first became known under
the Middle Kingdom, and almost plentiful under the New.
Even the peasantry were equipped with metal tools.
   The growth of the middle-class was reflected ideologically
in law and religion. Universally valid codes of law and
Judges appointed by the king replaced local and customary
laws administered by elders or nobles. Indeed the reign of
law began to limit even the absolutism of monarchs. A
king of Babylon or a pharaoh of the Middle and New
Kingdoms prided himself on being the ‘guardian of just
        ore   hae


        _     CULMINATION   OF   BRONZE   AGE   CIVILIZATION   157
rs

     laws’ rather than the unfettered creator of law by the fiat
     of his divine will.
        Now in Egypt rights for the masses meant rites for the
     masses. So after the first Dark Age immortality, originally
   the prerogative of the divine king and of nobles on whom he
   had conferred it, was made open to all — in practice to all
_ who could pay the embalmers’ fees and buy the magic
_ passports to heaven. This was equivalent to a popular
   revolution, but for the benefit only of the middle-class.
   An inevitable corollary of opening the gates of heaven was
    to enlarge the maws of hell too. Even in the Pyramid Age
    the divine king and his nobles had to submit to a judgement
    of souls (p. 137). Naturally in the case of such august
 _ personages little was said of the punishments in store for a
    transgressor. In the Second Millennium for the encourage-
    ment of a more vulgar clientele the pains of hell were
    vividly depicted; the most powerful instrument for domina-
  _ tion over men’s unruly wills was forged !
        In practice hell was not made a sanction for morality.
   The lucky Egyptian could buy a magic passport through
    the dread tribunal. Rolls containing the welcome verdict
    of acquittal were sold by the priests’ clerks. The fortunate
    purchaser’s name was inserted in blanks left for the purpose,
    thus securing by itselfa verdict before it was known whose
    name should be inserted. Charms were even purveyed to
    still the voice of conscience. Breasted describes an amulet
    inscribed, ‘O my heart, rise not up against me as a witness’.
        So the ‘popular revolution’ in Egypt did not promote a
    higher morality, but reinforced the powers of the new
    professional priesthood. In the same way the Babylonian
    business men provided credulous clients for the soothsayers
     and fortune-tellers of the old temples.
     _ Yet even under the new economic regime the use of
     civilized equipment was still relatively restricted, and the
     possibilities of industrial expansion were limited in like
     degree. In the alluvial valleys that expansion had been
     made possible in the first instance by the collection of a
     surplus from a peasantry practising subsistence agriculture
 158         WHAT    HAPPENED      IN   HISTORY

in the great households of kings or gods. The system not
 only secured the accumulation    of an adequate surplus and
 the maintenance of irrigation works, it proved very con-
venient to the tax-collectors of the new military States.
Contributions were more easily collected and converted
into money from the real wealth stored in the granaries of
great landlords than from the tiny stores of individual
farmers. Great landed estates, so organized as to be as far
as possible self-sufficing, therefore remained common eco-
nomic units, though now often in possession of the captains
and veterans of war-lords. They may have been extended
at the expense of tribal lands farmed communally, since we
read of Sumerian cities buying these up.
   Then the new money economy became itself an instru- mi
ment for concentrating wealth. Neither artisans and prim-
ary producers, not even travelling merchants and retailers,
were the principal beneficiaries of the new metal currency.
Insolvent debtors were added to war-captives in replenish-
ing the slave market and so degrading the status and
reducing the emoluments of manual labour. The free
craftsman was often dependent on the merchant both for
raw materials and for the sale of his products, and such
dependence might easily lead to indebtedness. The peasant,
too, after a bad harvest or a hostile raid might find interest —
added to the burden of taxes and rent. The small merchant
who travelled abroad often borrowed trade goods or capital -
from a temple or a private capitalist who became a sleeping
partner in the venture entitled to a share in the proceeds.
  Babylonian law as codified by Hammurabi might be said
‘to secure the creditor against the debtor and consecrate the
exploitation of the small producer by the possessor of
money’. The debtor might not only mortgage his land, but
pledge his children, his wife, or his own person. Enslavement
for debt was legalized. Trading partnerships were regulated
in the interest of the capitalist, and fraud by the working
partner was severely punished. Interest rates on loans in
barley ranged from 20 to 33 per cent, from 10 to 25 per cent
on silver. The concentration of wealth in the hands of
      CULMINATION     OF   BRONZE   AGE   CIVILIZATION    159

financiers would in the end react to restrict the market for
industrial products and so industry itself.
    At the same time producers in their capacity of con-
 sumers must have suffered from the price fluctuations that
 followed the introduction of metallic money. In Mesopo-
 tamia the price of the staple food, barley, rose steadily
 throughout the Bronze age. A gur of barley cost a shekel of
 silver under the Empires of Akkad and of Ur, two shekels
 by the time of Hammurabi, three and a third perhaps
 under the Kassites.
    Such price increases may just as well be regarded as
effects of inflation. The new wealth with which imperialism
enriched Babylonia and Egypt was really just loot, and
represented no addition to the total supply of real wealth
available to humanity; quite the contrary. The destruction
of houses or the ravaging of gardens is the reverse of wealth-
production. ‘An’ army is a body of pure consumers, nay
negative producers, producers of illth.? But money veils
any discrepancy between real wealth, the available supply
of commodities, and its consumption. Its possessors did not
suffer from any shortage and could indeed make more
money by loans to those who needed it to meet the rising
prices.
    At the same time professional soldiers are hostile to pro-
duction, in that their trade is robbery on a grand scale, and
robbery has been described as ‘the oldest labour-saving
device’. They were even liable to plunder their fellow-
citizens, as fragments of Egyptian legislation make painfully
clear.
    The new judges and officials did not scruple to enrich
themselves by extortion and bribes from rich litigants.
Hammurabi’s letters contain instructions for the suppression
of such abuses. Harmhab, a pharaoh of the fourteenth
century, found it necessary to prescribe the cutting off of
the nose and exile as a punishment to check extortion by
tax-collectors against the poor. An earlier papyrus describes
the plight of the poor man ‘who stands alone before the
court when his opponent is rich while the court oppresses
160           WHAT     HAPPENED       IN HISTORY            WEA
him (demanding) “silver and gold for the clerks, clothing ~
for the servants”’.’                                                  ‘—
   Finally the money economy spread and the middle-class
grew under the shadow of absolute theocratic monarchy.
No private accumulation of silver and gold could possibly
compete with the hoards in imperial treasuries. Even in —
Mesopotamia the kings took care to keep private capitalists _
in their proper place. The seal of an Assyrian merchant in ©
Asia Minor is perhaps symptomatic of the position of —
commerce in Mesopotamia; it is inscribed ‘N., servant of
the King of Ur’. There was no question of states borrowing —
from private capitalists as they do in Europe and did in ©
Hellenistic Greece. The metal trade remained a royal —
monopoly, or at least strictly regulated. The comparative
scarcity of copper and tin made this none too difficult.       ae Deaae
                                                                  gy


   By decree Hammurabi of Babylon and later Hittite and —
Assyrian kings fixed maximum prices and maximum - not |>
minimum — wages. The great estates of kings, temples, and |
nobles, internally independent of money, further limited —Se
production for the market. So throughout the Bronze Age —
the middle-class remained completely subordinate to the —
monarchy and the priesthood.                                    i
   To the peasant and the small man, on the contrary, the
divine king appeared as a saviour from the rapacity of —
usurers, the extortions of officials, oppression by the nobles
and abuse by the soldiery. Hammurabi published his law —
code ‘to make manifest justice in the land, to destroy the
wicked and evil-doer and to prevent the strong oppressing
the weak’. A pharaoh warns his vizier (chancellor): ‘It is
an abomination of the god to show partiality’. Egyptian
popular tales repeatedly introduce an oppressed peasant
turning confidently to pharaoh for redress.
   Mythologically the absolutism of the ruler was reflected
not only in his own deification. The whole world of gods
was increasingly conceived as an empire presided over by
a supreme god. So under the Amorite dynasty Marduk, god
of Babylon, usurped the place of the Sumerian Enlil as
creator. In Egypt, Amon, a local deity of Thebes, had



                                                                   =o
                                                           ¢

      CULMINATION      OF   BRONZE    AGE   CIVILIZATION       161

‘absorbed attributes of Ra, the sun-god, under the Middle
 Kingdom and under the New was on his way to becoming
 a veritable god of gods. Nevertheless, even the high gods
 retain their tribal character. Marduk is primarily lord of
 the Babylonians, Amon of the Egyptians. Amon can be
 lord of Cyprus or Syria only in so far as his ‘son’, Pharaoh,
 conquers the land for him. So no Egyptian or Babylonian
 would have felt the least scruple in saying:
             A thousand Frenchman sent below,
             Praise God from whom all blessings flow.
    Thus till nearly 1200 B.c. Bronze Age civilization survived
 in the alluvial valleys of the Near East, preserving. its
 essential structure throughout political vicissitudes and
 economic changes,
   Meanwhile    new centres of civilization had arisen and
 grown to maturity. In the Far East a literate civilization
 emerged in the alluvial valley of the Yellow River soon
 after the middle of the Second Millennium. The neolithic
 revolution had affected China, where cereals were culti-
 vated and pigs and cattle bred at a still uncertain date.
 Out of this vague barbaric background emerged the great
 city of Anyang, capital of the Shang dynasty, soon after
 1400 B.G. Its setting in the flood plain of a great river is
 essentially like that of Egyptian and Sumerian cities. The
 urban economy it symbolized agrees in general outlines
 with those of earliest Sumer, Egypt, and India as described
 in chapters V and VI. A surplus derived from breeding
 pigs, cattle, sheep, and goats, as further west, together with
 water buffaloes and chickens, and the cultivation of wheat
 and millet, but also of rice, was concentrated in the hands
 of a divine monarch who would be buried with extravagant
 pomp in a wooden chamber at the bottom of a pit sixty-five
 feet square and forty-three feet deep. The surplus supported
 bronze-smiths using the same alloys and techniques as their
 western colleagues, potters using the wheel and other
 civilized craftsmen, together with clerks who had aiready
 devised an ideographic script based on conventional
 pictures. Horse-drawn chariots were used in war.
                                                }
 162          WHAT    HAPPENED        IN HISTORY     '       SO
     In its concrete details Far Eastern civilization differed
 conspicuously from Near Eastern, but the differences are
 no more pronounced than those distinguishing the three
 civilizations of the early Third Millennium from one
 another. Some are obviously due to the utilization of local _
 resources — rice instead of barley, silk instead of cotton or
 flax, for instance. The general agreement can hardly be
 accidental. Only the lack of excavations in the intervening
 areas precludes the demonstration that impulses from the
Near and Middle East had been fertilizing Far Eastern
barbarism. China must have been receiving western tradi-
tions even before 2000 B.c. Conversely, after 1400 she must _
have reacted on the west as a full partner in civilization.
    In the Near East in any case the seeds, dispersed from the ©
original centres, as described in chapter VII, now sprouted
into full-blown civilizations. The Assyrians had learned well
from Sargon of Akkad and started a civilized state on the
Akkadian model. After a further lesson from the kings of
Ur, Assyrian kings tried an empire on their own. The
Assyrians had taken over from the Sumerians and Akka-—
dians the whole equipment of civilization — not only their
techniques   and   armaments,   but   also their script,   their
learning, and their ideology. So they embarked upon
imperialist ventures, conquering an empire west of the
Tigris and organizing it on the approved lines. In the
nineteenth century the city of Tilsha-annim (now Chagar
Bazar), on the Khabur in North Syria, appears as the ‘ great
household’ of Prince Iasman-adad, son of Shamsi-adad I
of Assyria. In the household accounts even clerks seem to
occupy the same dependent position as the smith or the
brewer in Baii’s household at Lagash (p. 95). But the
breeding and training of horses to draw war-chariots was
an important activity on this estate.
  But about 1450 B.c. this western province of the Assyrian
Empire fell into the hands of Aryan (p. 168) chiefs,-who
made it the centre of a new state, Mitanni. These, too,
adopted the old equipment and organization of Sumero-
Akkadian-Babylonian civilization, using not only the
      oP
      CULMINATION OF BRONZE AGE CIVILIZATION             163
cuneiform script, but for diplomatic correspondence even
the Akkadian language.
   On the plateau of Asia Minor, since water for irrigation
was derived from many different springs and torrents, and
supplies of raw material were generally near at hand, the
urban revolution could be postponed as long as the primary
producers could make shift with a neolithic equipment
(p. 146). At best local gods or divine kings may have accu-
mulated small surpluses in a number of independent
‘households’ on a tiny scale. But soon after 2000 B.c. Indo-
European Hittite chiefs (p. 168) began to unite these small
units into a feudal empire. By 1595 they were strong enough
to invade Babylonia and later still ousted the Aryan dynasts
from Mitanni, and even challenged the Egyptians in Syria.
   Naturally the mortal princes who attained such power
attained divinity’too, but only as leaders in a federation of
local gods. In his treaty with pharaoh ‘the sun-god of
Hatti’ still signs also on behalf of ‘the goddess of Arinna’,
‘the god of Kizzwadana’, and so on. But Sargon of Akkad,
who had invaded their future domain in the Third Millen-
nium, was their pattern, and the Assyrian merchants
established there even longer sold them the material and
spiritual equipment of their civilization. The Hittites
borrowed theology, law, poetry, and science as well as
writing materials and characters from Mesopotamia. Still
they modified what they borrowed to suit their own tradi-
tions and local needs.
   On the coasts of Syria many Phoenician settlements as
far north as Ugarit (Ras Shamra opposite Cyprus) now
became cities in the same way as Byblos had early in the
Third Millennium (p. 140). The Phoenicians profited from
both Egyptian and Sumero-Akkadian experience, adopted
Mesopotamian and Nilotic techniques and traditions and
copied the products of both centres. Situated on a narrow
coastal plain, better adapted for fruit trees and vines than
to corn-growing, they could only find on the sea an outlet
for their overflowing populations. Byblos offered a standing
example of the possibilities of maritime trade with the rich
                                   i
                               >

 164         _ WHAT HAPPENED IN HISTORY
 markets on the Nile. Owing to the relatively low cost of
 transport by sea — by rowing a ship could reach the Nile in
 eight days, and the return journey, with a favouring wind, —
 might be accomplished in four — even low-priced goods for
 popular consumption could be profitably sold there. Paint-
 ings in New Kingdom tombs show the Phoenicians from
 their barges bartering trinkets with the peasants of villages
 along the Nile. A much larger proportion of the Phoenician E
 population must have been engaged in industry and com-
 merce than in the predominantly agricultural States of
 Egypt, Babylonia, Assyria, and Hatti.                            :
    At the same time, if the local gods (Baals) and their royal |
 representatives accumulated wealth derived from the soil in
great households, these accumulations were so modest as
not to overshadow the wealth amassed by private trade
and industry so completely as in the other civilizations,
In Phoenician society the middle classes had a chance
to make their demands effective.                                :
   In Crete what is termed the Minoan civilization emerges —
into literacy about 2000 B.c. Even in the Third Millennium —
specialist farming, the exploitation of insular resources like |
                                                                   )
timber and the carrying trade had offered a livelihood to.          |



classes which a neolithic economy could not support (p.
                                                                    |
145). Now    the wealth thus gathered was partly concen- _
trated in the hands of merchant princes who were also
priest-kings. At Knossos, Mallia, Tylissos, Phaestos, and
Hagia Triadha in Central Crete, they built themselves
palaces that were also factories and warehouses like an
Oriental temple or court.
   Specialist craftsmen — potters from Asia using the wheel,
glaziers, and fresco painters — flocked to the palaces to share
this wealth. For its administration the Minoans invented
and simplified a pictographic script. Like the oldest written
documents from Sumer, the surviving remains of Minoan
writing are almost exclusively account tablets, also traced
on clay. Unfortunately they are still undeciphered. Like a
city-governor in Sumer, the Minoan princes financed public
works, but the most conspicuous are harbours and bridges
                                              ears a


     - CULMINATION   OF   BRONZE   AGE   CIVILIZATION   165

 to facilitate trade — the wheeled cart had been introduced
 soon after 2000 B.c.
    The Minoan palace is no doubt the symbol of a great
 household like the divine households of Sumer described on
 p. 95- But magazines and workshops are proportionately
 more conspicuous and occupy a relatively larger area at
 Knossos or Phaestos than in the temples of Erech or Lagash.
 A smaller proportion of their contents and products must
 have been absorbed in supplying the household’s needs;
 the balance must have been used for trade. In other words
 the priest-king’s economic power must to a quite high
 degree have depended on secondary industry and com-
 merce as contrasted with agricultural production.
    Nor was the royal wealth so overwhelming as to over-
 shadow altogether, that earned by private traders and
 craftsmen. Provincial towns and cemeteries, particularly in
 eastern Crete, give an impression of modest prosperity,
 even though they are not dominated by any palace. Gurnia
 in the fourteenth century covered six and a half acres and
 comprised sixty houses, each probably two-storeyed and
 occupying a block about forty by thirty feet. As merchant,
 the priest king was only one among many, although,
 thanks to his subjects’ piety, the best endowed. Even so,
 each ‘divine merchant’ had peers in adjacent palaces.
 Only during the century 1500 to 1400 B.c. does the lord of
 Knossos, the Minos of Greek legend, seem to have succeeded
‘in eliminating his competitors by the methods of Akkadian
‘imperialism; the horse-drawn war chariot appears in Crete
 at this time and figures conspicuously in the Knossian
accounts.
   These peculiarities of the urban economy in Crete reacted
in an interesting manner on Minoan industry and com-
merce. In Crete the specialist potter was not one of the
 craftsmen already differentiated before the local urban
revolution and degraded socially thereby. He arrived in the
island as the honoured exponent of a new technique while
the revolution was still in progress; he was welcomed to
island courts whose rulers were not yet rich enough to



—-
                       ThePTOPEco
                                yee saa
                                    4   ee Ra


166          WHAT    HAPPENED        IN HISTORY
adorn their tables exclusively with vessels of gold and silver.
So, while in the Orient the aesthetic quality of pottery
almost everywhere declined after the revolution, in Crete
the new specialists in the palace workshops turned vessels,
delicate and beautiful and worthy to adorn the tables of
princes. The same good fortune may have rewarded other
craftsmen. The painters who adorned the Minoan palaces
with lovely frescoes had probably been trained in Egyptian
technique and conventions. But by their originality they
may have earned such a reputation that they could find
patrons even among Mesopotamian monarchs. The frescoes
in a great palace built by a powerful king of Mari on the
middle Euphrates in the nineteenth century betray so
strong a Minoan inspiration in design and technique that
they seem to be the works of actual Cretan artists.
   The area of Minoan trade is defined by the distribution
of Minoan pottery. By the eighteenth century at least this
was already reaching Mainland Greece, the Aegean Islands,
Cyprus, the Syrian coasts, and Egypt. At first no doubt the
fine products of the palace potteries may fairly be classed
as luxury articles for the conspicuous consumption of ruling
classes. Such a vase was in fact found in the tomb of an
Egyptian noble under the Middle Kingdom. On the other
hand, pottery in general falls within the class of cheap
popular goods. Judged by the shapes and decoration, even
the products of the palace workshops were substitutes for
more costly stone and metal vessels. Potentially at least the
export of vases points to long-distance trade in cheap goods
for popular consumption.
   Moreover, the pots were hardly exported empty. Huge
oil-jars found in the palace magazines give the impression
that products of specialized farming, such as olive oil,
formed staples of Cretan commerce with the Oriental
civilizations. Popular goods, on the contrary, are not in-
cluded among the surviving imports — Egyptian stone vases,
rare Babylonian cylinder seals, ingots of Cypriote copper.
  Piracy must always have threatened the security of
Cretan commerce. Later Greek tradition credits Minos
oe:    CULMINATION      OF   BRONZE   AGE   CIVILIZATION      167

_with its suppression. But if his ‘empire’ policed the paths
_of the sea as well as eliminating rivals from the island, the
 resultant centralization seems in the end to have weakened
 Minoan economy. After 1400 8.c. Crete became a province
_ of the semi-barbarous Mycenaean culture that had arisen
_ on the Greek mainland (p. 170).
     Beyond and between the new and enlarged provinces of
_ urban civilization the penumbra of Bronze Age barbarism
  likewise expanded. Eastward migrations of peoples as well
  as peaceful trade further diffused some arts of civilization.
  From Greece and Bulgaria across the plateaux of Asia
  Minor and northern Iran certain types of seals and pins
  (with double spiral heads) are scattered along the famous
  route that, until the railway age, has been followed by the
 ‘caravans travelling across Central Asia to China and to
  India. These trade goods hint how ideas and devices from
  the west may have been transmitted even to China to
  fertilize civilization on the Yellow River (p. 162).
    In India the same sort of western objects have been un-
  earthed in slummy, illiterate settlements built on the ruins
 of some old Indus cities such as Chanhu-daro in Sind. Later,
    perhaps about 1200 B.c., ‘literary’ documents that were not
   _yet preserved in writing give vivid glimpses of the arrival in
    India of the Aryan Hindus and of their barbaric culture.
       The hymns of the Rig-Veda, the oldest Hindu sacred
 . book, describe the Aryan tribes scattered about the north-
    west from the Kabul and the Kurrum (western tributaries
    of the Indus) to the head-waters of the Ganges and the
    Jurona. They live predominantly by pastoralism, growing
    some grain, of course, but reckoning wealth in cows and
    horses. The tribes are frequently at war and are led by
    petty chiefs or rajas, fighting from chariots and delighting
| in racing, dicing, and strong drink. They worship natural
    forces personified in their own image and including deities
    worshipped also by the rulers of Mitanni (p. 162). The
    hymns thernselves are really also charms sung to enhance
    the efficacy of sacrifices that were at the same time sympa-
  _ thetic magic rites to secure rain, wealth, and victory.
    The priests who sang them and performed the rites—
enjoyed essentially the status of any highly-skilled craftsman—
under Bronze Age barbarism (p. 170); they were, that is ;
to say, entirely dependent on the generosity of royal patrons, _
but not permanently attached to royal households, since ©
rajas competed for their services. Yet they are the ancestors ‘
of the Brahmans who built up such a reputation as monopo- —
lists of magic and sole intermediaries between gods and
men that they could at length claim to form the highest
caste, superior -even to kings. The rites on which their
livelihood depended were memorized to the minutest detail _
and handed down as secrets in the priestly families. The
words of efficacious hymns were similarly committed to
memory and repeated from generation to generation long—
after their words were becoming unintelligible, and their —
language   was   more   remote   from   current   speech   than
Chaucer’s English is from ours. So as craftsmen the Hindu &
priests devised a method of transmission by sheer retentive
memory that made writing superfluous.                          :
   The language thus transmitted, (Vedic) Sanskrit, is allied te
                                                              ¥:


to Persian, Greek, Latin, the Celtic and Slavonic tongues f
and our own in much the same way as Italian is related to x
Spanish, French, and Portuguese. As these ‘Romance >
languages’ are all derived from Latin, the language of the §
Romans, so, it is inferred, Sanskrit, Greek and the other —
Indo-European languages are descended from an extinct
“parent tongue’, spoken by some people or society now
long dispersed. Because the early Hindus and Persians did —
really call themselves Aryans, this term was adopted by
some nineteenth-century philologists to designate the
speakers of the ‘parent tongue’. It is now applied scientifi- —
cally only to the Hindus, Iranian peoples, and the rulers of —
Mitanni, whose linguistic ancestors spoke closely related
dialects and even worshipped common deities. As used by —
Nazis and anti-Semites generally, the term ‘Aryan’ means
as little as the words ‘Bolshie’ and ‘Red’ in the mouths of ©
crusted Tories.                                              if
   The ‘parent people’ cannot be identified archaeologically, —
 ;,     CULMINATION OF BRONZE AGE CIVILIZATION                 169
- still less by its physical racial type. Its linguistic offspring,
   i.e. peoples who accepted, even if they modified in divergent
    ways, the conventions of the ‘parent tongue’, have already
    been met in Mitanni and Hittite Asia Minor (p. 163);
   many of the European barbarians to be mentioned next also
    must have by this time adopted Indo-European linguistic
    conventions. When their societies are stratified, their rulers’
    habits display a family likeness to those of the Vedic rajas.
       In any case European barbarism was being increasingly
    penetrated by radiations from Oriental civilization during
    the Second Millennium. To the north ‘royal barrows’ in
 _ the Kuban valley richly furnished with manufactures from
    Mesopotamia (axes, spears, cauldrons, gold-work, and
   jewellery) and materials (meerschaum) from Asia Minor
    prove intercourse across the Caucasus between Europe and
_ Hither Asia, and the fertilization thereby of an illiterate
    Pontic Bronze Age in which wealth was concentrated by
    barbarian war chiefs.
       In Mainland Greece the Early Helladic farmers and
    navigators had been replaced or subjugated about 1800 B.c.
    by more war-like farmers, probably Greek-speaking Indo-
_ Europeans. These barbarians added their own contribu-
    tions without extinguishing the agricultural, industrial, and
- commercial traditions of their predecessors. The old town-
    ships were reconstructed; metallurgy and the other crafts
    were still plied, though directed more than heretofore to
    armament manufacture. Professional potters using the
    wheel immigrated from Crete, and perhaps also from Asia
    Minor, starting a new specialized industry.
       Then from 1600 on Greece was inundated with Cretan
    products and techniques. The Helladic villages became the
    citadels of rich war-lords disposing of concentrated wealth.
    By barter or plunder these obtained first Minoan products
    — weapons, jewellery, pottery, and luxury articles. Then
  they persuaded or compelled Minoan craftsmen — smiths,
  armourers, goldsmiths, seal-engravers, fresco-painters, arc-
  hitects and, last of all, clerks — to settle at their courts and
  train native apprentices to turn out rather tasteless copies
 170          WHAT     HAPPENED      IN   HISTORY

 of the imported models in Minoan techniques. Eventually
 the Mainlanders were equipped to annex Crete, too, and —
 the Mainland Mycenaean civilization usurped the dominion '
 of the Minoan throughout the Aegean world.
    It was a semi-barbarous, barely literate, highly militarist
 civilization. The Mycenaean ‘cities’, girt with tremendous
 walls of great unhewn blocks in so-called Cyclopean —
 masonry,   and dominated,by       the war-lord’s palace, are,
 like Troy, little better than glorified castles. At the capital,       ¥


' Mycenae itself, the ramparts enclose only eleven acres: the
  “great hall’ of the palace was 38 ft long by 42 ft wide. Still,
  large cemeteries of family vaults cut in the hillside outside
  the cities’ walls denote a substantially increased population. _
    The princes owed their power and wealth to a monopoly
 of new implements of war — long rapiers of costly bronze,
 huge shields and light horse-drawn war-chariots. The social
 implications of this armament are disclosed by the Greek —
 epic poems ascribed to Homer, the Iliad and the Odyssey. —
 Battles resolve themselves into single combats between ~           4


 richly-armed champions who arrive in chariots. These —
 decide the issue; the infantry are mere spectators. In fact,
 only the few could afford the long blades of bronze, the —
 chariots — marvels of the wainwright’s skill - and the
 highly-trained steeds, so that the masses were militarily —
 worthless and accordingly politically impotent.
    But in Mycenaean Greece the costly war gear was not sup- ©
 plied, asin Egypt and the Asiatic monarchies, by a centralized —
 State to a professional soldiery, but belonged to the princes
 themselves. So the latter are sovereigns or at best owe a vague
 allegiance to the king of Mycenae as overlord whom they
 support as vassals in the ‘Trojan war’ according to the Iliad.
    The surplus wealth thus won with the sword or extorted
 from a subject tenantry was devoted to luxury display rather
 than public works or even the endowment of temples and —
 tombs. But craft products were in demand, andaskilled
 artisan enjoyed a position of freedom and prestige that is
 probably characteristic of Bronze Age barbarism. ‘A sooth-
 sayer, a doctor, a singer, and a craftsman is sure of a welcome




                                                                    Sag
       CULMINATION     OF   BRONZE   AGE   CIVILIZATION      I7I

 everywhere,’ says ‘Homer’ in his Odyssey. Trade was
 essential to supplement piracy in supplying materials for
 armaments and ornaments. So merchants might earn sub-
 stantial profits and doubtless some social standing too, since
 even a war-lord’s wealth in a poor valley could never reach
 overwhelming proportions.
    Mycenaean trade is the continuation of Minoan after
 1400 B.c., and was even more popular in character. My-
 cenaean pottery was exported in masses to Troy, the coasts
 of south-western Asia Minor, Syria, Palestine, and Egypt,
 and westward reached Sicily and southern Italy. Trade was
 followed or preceded by actual migrations of Mycenaean
 Greeks or Mycenaeanized Cretans seeking beyond the sea
 a livelihood that narrow valleys and Bronze Age citadels
 could not supply. Colonies established themselves on Cyprus
 and on the adjacent coasts of Asia. In the island the colonists
 may also have been conquerors. Just opposite on the Syrian
 coast at Ugarit the Mycenaeans appear as prosperous
 merchants, sojourning peaceably in a Phoenician city like
British merchants in Istanbul.
    But Mycenaean trade was orientated largely towards
 barbarian Europe, which thereby was enabled to make
direct contributions to the main cultural pool. Actual
 Mycenaean vases were exported as far afield as Macedonia
 and Sicily (map II). Indirectly Mycenaean trade extended
 much further. Beads of east Mediterranean faience such as
 were fashionable about 1400 B.c. reached southern Eng-
 land, and a dagger manufactured in Mycenaean Greece
_was dug up from a Bronze Age barrow in Cornwall. Un-
doubtedly Cornish tin and Irish gold were brought to
 Greece in return. Indeed actual ornaments made in England
 were worn there. Amber from Jutland (Denmark) was cer-
 tainly traded to Greece and Crete along a well-marked
 route across Central Europe, where the same sort of Medi-
 terranean faience beads were received in exchange. How-
ever indirectly, Ireland and Denmark were now contribut-
 ing positively to the collective experience of humanity,
 pooled in the Near East.
   The Bronze Age barbarisms of western and cent ul
 Europe, described on p. 149, may quite possibly have been
 generated by the trade now first attested. In any case they
 remained unchanged late enough to be quickened by it.
 The barbarian aristocracies in whose graves in southern
 England the imported faience beads were deposited, and
 who in Denmark profited most from the far-flung luxury
 trade in amber, were sociologically and economically the
 counterparts of the Mycenaean chivalry just described,
 only poorer and more provincial. It might be as true to
 say that the ‘heroic age’ of Greece resulted from the trans-
 plantation of such a northern aristocracy to the fringe of
 the rich Minoan world.
    Be that as it may, just before the Second Millennium
 ended improved methods of mining and smelting, allowing
 the exploitation of even deep ores in the Austrian Alps and —
 perhaps on other minefields, superior processes of casting
 and hammering and a reorganization of the metal trade
 to ensure the scrupulous collection and use of scrap had
 materially cheapened bronze, first within the Central
 European economic system, later also in Britain, Denmark,
 Sicily, and Sardinia. Specialized metal tools for carpentry
 and a few other crafts became at last available, as well as
 weapons and ornaments. If the revolution in the metal
 industry did not produce an urban civilization to absorb
 the farmers’ surplus sons, it supplied them with shields and
 swords for renewed onslaughts on the civilized world.
    During the Second Millennium the continuous area of
 civilized life and literacy had extended from the alluvial
 valleys over the greater part of the Near East with an
 outpost far away in China. The tendrils of commerce
‘reached out into the barbarian fringe right to the Atlantic
 and North Sea coasts and the steppes of Central Asia and
 southern Russia. Obvious results were a vast increase in the
human stock, a rising standard of living for part of it, anda
commensurate enlargement of the pool of human experience.
   In spite of wars and dark ages the cities and villages of
the alluvial valleys were at least as populous in 1500 B.¢.
                            i)            eee     Paes   CNR   Ste




      “GULMINATION     OF        BRONZE     AGE   CIVILIZATION       173

    they had been in 2500. The number of cities had been
multiplied many times. The new cities in Assyria, Syria,
 Asia Minor, and Crete, to say nothing of China, were
‘immensely larger than the villages that had preceded them.
Assur, the Assyrian capital, now covered 120 acres, Qatna
in North Syria perhaps more. Even Troy had grown from
/24 to nearly 4 acres. If Mycenaean citadels do not exceed
;11 to 74 (Asine) acres, the great cemeteries of family tombs
round them all imply that a considerable ori a            was
 housed also outside their walls.
  _ Cemeteries in the barbarian fringe illustrate a like growth.
iIn Sicily by the fifteenth century the Bronze Age cemeteries
jconsisted of from 1,000 to 3,000 family vaults as against
#10 to 30 in the Copper Age, though the Bronze Age tombs
tare less crowded with skeletons. On the Hungarian plain
jEarly Bronze Age cemeteries may comprise as many as
}180 graves as against a maximum of 50 in the Copper Age;
jin the Late Bronze Age the numbers rise to 300 or more.
} At least for the middle classes the standard of living rose
too. Of course in imitation of their royal and sacerdotal
jsuperiors much of their wealth went to purchase spiritual
     material goods and services, such as good burial, magic
jrites, slaves, perfumes and jewellery, in which no progressive
jchanges can be detected in subsequent ages. On the other
jhand, in some domains of consumption, such as housing,
jone can detect an advance over barbarism destined to be
jitself outstripped in the Iron Age. A middle-class house in
 )Ur about 1800 B.c. boasted two storeys with several rooms
jin each, grouped about a central court, 16 ft square, and
)measured over all 40 ft by 33 ft. At the Egyptian capital
Jof Tell el-Amarna in the fourteenth century an average
 shouse covered 73 ft by 68 ft.
 | The arrival of new peoples - Amorites, Hittites, Kassites,
 jAryans, Hurrians, Hyksés — in the old centres had enriched
 them with spiritual and material equipment (such as new
‘languages and the ways of thinking these make possible
i[p. 14]), that had been created to deal with other environ-
 iments. With the conversion of barbarism to civilization
174          WHAT HAPPENED         IN HISTORY
ideas and devices evolved in Crete, Mainland Greece, and
Asia Minor   flowed into the common       pool. Indirectly at
least a trickle of foreign materials filtered in from the outer
barbarism of Britain,    the Baltic coasts, Russia,    Central
Asia, and East Africa.                                           '
  Improvements in transport accelerated communications
by sea and land. Under the Middle Kingdom Egyptians
could already build ships up to 204 ft long with a beam of
68 ft and carrying 120 men. Contemporary Cretan ships
probably did not exceed 70 ft in length, but reached 100 ft
by the Mycenaean period. In the right season a voyage
from the Delta ports to Byblos need take only four days’
sail, but the return journey, propelled by oars, took a boat
eight to ten days.
   A caravan on the Syrian steppes travelled at some thirty
miles a day (the trip from Tirga on the Euphrates to Qatna
via Palmyra, some 360 km., for example, took ten days in
the nineteenth century B.C). But the light horse-drawn
chariot had vastly reduced journey-times for those who
could afford it — in practice only the soldiers and officials
of States or great war-chiefs like Homer’s heroes. For the
vehicles had to be constructed of costly imported woods by
highly skilled wainwrights; the horses that drew them, since
their harness, devised originally for broad-shouldered oxen,
half-choked the wretched beasts, needed special breeding
and long training. From the nineteenth century B.c. horse-
training was an important, even literate, profession in
north Syria and chariot-racing a practically useful sport.
The chariot, in fact, being used mainly for war, consolidated
the authority of the States and chiefs who could alone
afford it, as did the knight’s armour in the Middle Ages.
But the relative stability of the Assyrian, Egyptian, and
Hittite Empires in the Second Millennium as contrasted
with earlier empires was due not only to the sole command
of a mobile arm that could be despatched quickly, but also
to the speed it conferred on officials and overseers.
   So the pools of civilization themselves had been merged
into one broad, continuous lake from the Tigris to the Nile



                                                                  S
                                                                  aa
                                                                   a
       CULMINATION     OF   BRONZE   AGE. CIVILIZATION       175

(map II) and the Adriatic, and from the Black Sea coasts to
the Persian Gulf. Within this vast reservoir currents flowed
freely in all directions. In intervals of peace the kings of
Babylon, Assyria, Mitanni, Hatti, and Egypt interchanged
ambassadors    and wives, presents and deities, physicians
_and soothsayers. The foreign office archives of the Egyptians
 and Hittites which have been recovered present a picture
 of the Near East in the fourteenth and thirteenth centuries
 as a veritable ‘concert of powers’ or society of nations quite
 comparable to Europe in the nineteenth and early twentieth
 centuries A.D. As French was then the medium of diplomacy,
 so all the Oriental Empires and their vassal States used the
cuneiform script and Akkadian language for their diplo-
 matic correspondence.
    For since the days of Sargon experts in the cuneiform
 script had been settling in the cities and citadels of Assyria,
Syria, Asia Minor, Phoenicia, and lastly Egypt, and training
native clerks to whom the fruits of Sumerian learning were
thus thrown open. The native lore of new peoples — Hittites,
Hurrians, Aryans, and Cretans — was transcribed and trans-
lated. This large class of literate clerks was assured of a
livelihood. In the temples leisure was guaranteed to the
learned; in fact research was endowed.
   Nevertheless, compared with the brilliant achievements
of the Fourth Millennium and the organization of civiliza-
tion itself, the original discoveries in genuine science and
the technical advances made during the fifteen odd cen-
turies of the full Bronze Age are disappointingly few. Apart
from improvements in transport and armament that have
already been adequately indicated, only four are worthy of
special mention — the discovery of place value and conse-
quent advances in Babylonian mathematics under the
Amorite dynasty of Babylon, the invention of glass in New
Kingdom Egypt, the creation of an alphabetic script in
Phoenicia, and the development of an economic process for
working iron among an unidentified tribe in Armenia.
  This poverty in results is not really surprising when the
basic characters of Bronze Age society as expounded in
 176          WHAT     HAPPENED      IN HISTORY

  Chapter VII and the subsequent modifications explainet L
  on pages 153ff. are recalled. Despite the rise of a middle
  class, learning remained divorced from craftsmanship,
  though it was now more firmly wedded to commerce.
  The union of literacy and trade brought forth perhaps the
  new Babylonian mathematics and certainly the Phoenician
  alphabet. For the rest the tasks set the learned by society re-
  mained unchanged and were still fulfilled along the tradi-
  tional lines laid down from the start and defined on page 133.
     The practical scientist, the craftsman, on the contrary,
- was still handicapped by the high cost of metal tools, while.
 his social position in the older societies was further depressed_
 by the multiplication of slaves captured in imperialist wars.
 In newly civilized and barbarian communities, indeed, a
 craftsman might earn a higher status (pp. 79, 170). That
 was, however, the reward of personal skill. So the desire
 to keep secret the profitable art was added to the imitative
 method of transmission to enhance the conservatism in-
 herent in craftsmanship (p. 79).
    At the same time the kings and nobles on whom craftsmen
 were so largely dependent for orders, raw materials, and even
 equipment were now less than ever interested in devices to
 lighten drudgery and ease the burden of human labour.
 They, and for that matter the middle classes too, could
 command the labour of a growing army of slaves. From
 the time of Sargon, the war-lord, the military conqueror |
 had become the ideal of the ruling classes. To such wealth
 is booty to be taken, not produced, or rather the product
 of the ‘oldest labour-saving device’ — robbery.
    No wonder that in societies thus dominated improve-
 ments in equipment are slow. Among the Bronze Age
 barbarians of Europe, indeed, archaeology does disclose a
 relatively rapid improvement of metal equipment, inaxes|
 as well as fighting weapons. But in barbarian societies|
 to-day, as among Homer’s heroes in Bronze Age Greece,|
 even chiefs have to work with their hands. The more
 exalted kings of the Orient were entirely exempt from
 manual tasks and could even do much of their fighting
                                                              ao7   as"   a4 2   a




       CULMINATION     OF   BRONZE    AGE   CIVILIZATION      177

vicariously. Turning from Europe to Asia or Egypt any
 archaeologist is struck by the extent to which metal tools
 preserve the same form throughout the two thousand years
 of the Oriental Bronze Age. In military equipment there
 were a few more advances. But the most important, the
 light horse chariot, was developed in north Syria, first
 perhaps by the newly civilized Assyrians, later by the
  barbarian Aryan rulers of Mitanni, and was forced upon
  the Egyptians by the Hyksdés. Similarly the rapier was
  invented in Crete and exploited by the Mycenaeans. It
  looks as if the Oriental kings and generals, lacking all
  practical experience in the workshop, simply failed to
appreciate what craftsmanship could do for them.
_ A genuine science of higher mathematics, from which
modern mathematics, through Hellenistic and Arab, largely
 ‘springs, was founded in the temple schools of Mesopotamia,
apparently under the Dynasty of Hammurabi. Its rise would
thus coincide with that little triumph of the middle class
‘consecrated by Hammurabi’s laws. Moreover, many of the
  examples that illustrate it are concerned with the division of
  inheritances, partnerships, and business operations. ‘The new
 ‘mathematics may therefore respond to the social demands of
the middle class. But the fundamental discovery was a by-
  product of the simplification of the script imposed on the
  clerks much earlier by the sheer volume of sacred, govern-
  mental, and private business.
      As a result of the simplification the signs for 1 and for 60
  had come to coincide. During the same period clerks had
  ‘come to accept gin, originally a weight equivalent to one-
   sixtieth of a mina, as standing for 1 /60 in general, just as
 in Latin, uncia, an ounce, came to mean also one-twelfth.
  Moreover, in practice the clerks saved themselves trouble
  by omitting the sign for gin; one unit and eleven gin was
  written simply ¥¢1; From this point the learned went on
 ‘to conventionalize a purely abstract system in which the
  unit symbol, 1, stood for any power of 60, positive or
“negative, i.e., 1, 60, 3,600 ... 1/6, 1/3,600, while a collection
‘of ten such signs, e.g. 10, 600, 1/6, was denoted by the
other cipher <. The Babylonian arithmetician thus foun
himself in possession of a notation based on what we call
‘place value’; the value of a sign is determined solely by its. ‘
position in relation to other signs. And this system was —
applied not only to integers (whole numbers), but also to-i
fractions, precisely as in our own decimal fractions. Only the
absence of signs for zero and the decimal point introduced—
an element of ambiguity that was not very serious inactual
practice.
   So the Babylonian temple scholars had invented a system
that enabled them to operate with fractional quantities that
cannot be represented on the fingers or with counters, and
that without the tedious calculations entailed in the unit
fractions or aliquot parts that their forerunners had been,
and their Egyptian colleagues still were, forced to employ.
This purely technical improvement in the instrument used
in reckoning in fact gave man mastery over — almost — the
whole domain of real numbers.                               i
   Incidentally it eliminated all the difficulties that the
beginner even nowadays — let the reader recall his own’
troubles at school — experiences with division. For division
is nothing but multiplication by the reciprocal of the
divisor (ie. the number that, multiplied by the divisor,—
gives one). As the Sumerians had drawn up multiplication —
tables (p. 109), so now their Babylonian heirs compiled _
tables of reciprocals expressed as sexagesimal fractions. In
order to divide by 12 you looked up the reciprocal of 12;
5 in the sexagesimal notation, and multiplied by that.
   Of course the Babylonian system was imperfect. They |
lacked any - and otill late in the First Millennium. They
had not discovered anything to correspond to our recurring
decimals. Their base, 60, is divisible by a large number of
factors, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 ... so that most reciprocals can     be
 arrested as reasonably short sexagesimal fractions. But in |
the reciprocal tables the spaces for 1/7, 1/11, and so on, are
blank. With such divisors they must still have recourse to
ordinary division and use clumsy unit fractions in the
quotient.
        CULMINATION      OF   BRONZE   AGE   CIVILIZATION     179

    Similarly they had no means of representing or dealing
 with surds such as 4/2 and 4/3. In problems that should
  lead to such quantities they replace the correct method of
  working by others involving processes which give approxi-
  mations to the true result. The ‘rule of signs’ seems to have
  been beyond their comprehension altogether. The ‘negative
  root’ of a quadratic equation is simply ignored.
     Moreover, the Babylonians had discovered empirically by
  actual reckoning some properties of numbers that we should
_ express by algebraic formulae. So they were certainly aware
  of the result we express as (a + 6)" = a? + 2ab + b?, and
  used this result to solve quadratic equations by ‘completing
  the square’ very much as we do. Such properties of num-
  bers, rules of arithmetical grammar as Hogben calls them,
  appeared to the clerks not as revelations of a priori ‘laws’,
  but as results and processes actually found to work. They are
  never expressed in the extant ‘mathematical tablets’ by gen-
  eral formulae. All that survive are ‘examples’ worked out
 and in fact constructed so that they will work out by the
  - methods available; for instance the values for quadratics
     are chosen so that ac + b?/4 is a perfect square.
        Still the Babylonians lacked what we term an algebraic
     notation, using letters with indefinite numerical values in-
     stead of concrete numbers. In solving ‘equations’ they there-
 - fore had recourse to a procedure similar to the ‘false posi-
     tion’ used in medieval arithmetic.
_       Fragmentary tablets prove that the schools were experi-
' menting with geometrical figures — inscribing squares in
  - circles, and so on. What conclusions they drew the tablets
   _ do not say. But by 1800 B.c. the Babylonians had discovered,
     again presumably by actual observation and measurement,
     certain geometrical relations in addition to those rules for
     areas and volumes the application of which is attested much
     earlier. In particular they were perfectly well aware that in
     rectangles the sides of which are in the proportions of 3 to 4
     and 5 to 12, the square on the diagonal is equal to the sum
    ‘of the squares on two adjacent sides. A whole series of
  - examples on a tablet in the British Museum has been built
180          WHAT    HAPPENED     IN   HISTORY

up to illustrate this truth. In fact, learned clerks knew for
nineteen independent cases the result of what is now called oeta
                                                               wie
the ‘Theorem of Pythagoras’. Even if they ‘knew’ this 5
theorem in general, they could not apply it in cases where
the diagonal is not a rational whole number, in a square for
example. In such cases the examples in the tablets are
worked out by methods which we should use to obtain
approximations to the correct result.
   The Babylonian clerks had devised a system of mathe-
matical symbols and methods of working that enabled
them to solve with the requisite accuracy the actual
problems in accountancy, surveying, architecture, and
military engineering that their society had in practice to
face. They drew up series of examples to illustrate the
solution of precisely such problems. In so doing they had
stumbled upon several important properties of numbers
and of space. None of the tablets that survive suggests an
interest in numbers as such or any conception of abstract
empty space! (Some actual examples of Babylonian mathe-
matical texts are quoted in Man Makes Himself.)
   In the Third Millennium the Egyptian, Sumerian, and
Indus citizens had known enough of the chemistry of
glazing to be able to make faience — an opaque paste of
sand coated with a glaze. The chemical discovery involved —
is that alkaline silicates fuse easily like metals, and that
such silicates can be made by heating with silica (i.e. sand),
potash (which is just a product of burning wood), or natron
(which occurs as a mineral in the western desert of Egypt).
Under the New Kingdom Egyptian craftsmen discovered —
a process for making clear glass that could be fused and
cast like metal by heating sand and natron and devised
means for colouring the product. The glass was cast into
rods and reeds which could be moulded while hot and even
built up into vessels on a sand core. It was applied to the
production of imitation precious stones, ‘synthetic jewels’
in fact, to be converted into bangles or vases and then sold
at a modest price to the new middle class. The art was soon
adopted in Phoenicia, where potash took the place of natron.
                                       wt       eh. ee   ee   a   -—
                                            ’




       CULMINATION     OF   BRONZE   AGE    CIVILIZATION               |   181

    If glass manufacture were developed to suit the purses of
 the- small middle-class buyer, a simple alphabetic script
 seems to have been devised to expedite the business of small
 merchants. As pointed out on page 164, the Phoenicians
 trafficked very largely in low-priced popular goods. Such
 traffic involved a number of small retail transactions, all of
 which ought to be recorded. At the same time it earned the
 craftsmen, or at least the merchants, sufficient wealth to
  make them independent of ‘great households’ that would
  of course include professional clerks (p. 156); the merchant
  would have to be his own bookkeeper. This was the social
background of the Phoenician script.
     Its philological background is also noteworthy. In Semitic
 languages like the Phoenician the words are built up out of
  triconsonantal roots (that is bases that can be expressed by
 three consonants) ;vowel changes denote only grammatical
 differences — tenses and cases. Hence for practical inter-
“course where the general context is clear meanings can be
 adequately conveyed by the consonants alone and the vowel
 sounds ignored.
    By about 1500 B.c. the priests and merchants of Ugarit
 had selected twenty-nine of the cuneiform characters used
 by their Babylonian teachers and colleagues and agreed to
 assign to each of these a single phonetic value. They thus
 created a true alphabet, by means of which any word could
 be accurately spelled out without recourse to the cumber-
 some apparatus of ideograms and syllabic signs employed
by earlier scripts.
    Further south in a still nameless Phoenician city a differ-
 ent alphabet was agreed upon, suitable for writing on papy-
 rus, the use of which had been introduced at Byblos by the
Egyptians (hence the Greek word for ‘book’; our Bible is
the book). Twenty-two signs were chosen to denote simple
consonants — vowels were not written. The signs may on
one view be themselves versions of Egyptian hieroglyphs,
or on another theory be derived from non-pictorial cattle-
brands and ownership marks current among Semitic
pastoralists or Mediterranean mariners. In any case the
resultant alphabet is the parent of the Greek,           Etruscan,—
Roman, Aramaic, and South Arabian scripts and their
modern European, Hebrew, Arabic, and Indic derivatives. —
   Thanks to the reduction of the number of characters and ~
the elimination of the complexities introduced by ideograms
and determinatives, reading and writing became as simple
as they are to-day. Literacy ceased to be the mysterious
privilege of a highly-specialized class. The small shop-
keeper or pedlar could easily learn enough at least to sign’
his name and keep accounts. The new idea caught on so
fast that no one can say precisely where it started. It was
in fact an international body of merchants who sanctioned
by use the new conventions; it was their activity that
diffused and popularized the system in the Iron Age.
    It has been repeatedly shown how peculiarities of the
civilizations and barbarian cultures described in the last
four chapters were conditioned by the high cost of the sole
metal used for tools and weapons. The cost in turn was due
 to the comparative rarity of the constituent elements,
 copper and tin. Iron on the other hand is one of the
 commonest elements in the earth’s crust. It can be extracted
 from its ores by the same chemical process as copper and
 other metals — reduction by heating with charcoal. But at
 the temperatures obtainable in antiquity (without a mech-
 anical blast) iron would not melt and reduction would.
 leave only a spongy mass. This had to be purified from
 slag and compacted into a ‘bloom’ by prolonged hammer-
 ing. Even then the metal could not be cast, as copper and
 bronze had been, but must be forged or wrought, i.e., |
 shaped by hammering.
     Even in the Third Millennium a few implements of|
 wrought iron had been used occasionally both in Egypt |
  and Mesopotamia, but neither Nilotic nor Mesopotamian
 smiths   had   devised,   nor   had   any   incentive   to devise,|
 effective and economic methods for producing in bulk iron
 of good quality. A suitable process was apparently first
 invented by a barbarian tribe living among the Armenian
 mountains in what the Hittites called Kizwadana. The
       fe   Ae, BY
       CULMINATION OF BRONZE AGE CIVILIZATION               183
_ Aryan rulers of Mitanni who incorporated the iron workers
in their military monarchy appreciated the value of the
 new metal, but guarded the secret of its production and
 controlled the output in virtue of the normal Statemonopoly
 over the metal trade. The Hittites who succeeded the
 Aryans maintained the policy of secrecy. The Aryan kings
 had sent iron objects as presents to the pharaohs. But when
a pharaoh writes to ask the Hittite king for a supply of
 iron towards the end of the fourteenth century, the latter
 puts “his brother’ off with excuses and sends only a single
dagger. But iron weapons were supplied to the Hittite
army, and barbarian mercenaries serving therein eventually
 learned and divulged the secret of their manufacture.
_   Efficient and economic methods     of iron working made
‘metal cheap at last. In Babylonia under Hammurabi during
the eighteenth century B.c. a shekel of silver would buy 120
‘to 150 shekels of copper or perhaps 144 shekels of tin (in
‘Asia Minor at this date it would purchase 40 shekels of
iron). A thousand years later the silver shekel would bring
in no less than 225 shekels of iron; the price of copper had
also fallen from 150 to 180 to one of silver as a consequence
 of the saving due to the use of cheapiron tools in mining
 and the manufacture of vehicles and vessels.
_ Cheap iron democratized agriculture and industry and
warfare too. Any peasant could afford an iron axe to clear
 fresh land for himself and iron ploughshares wherewith to
break up stony ground. The common artisan could own a
kit of metal tools that made him independent of the house-
holds of kings, gods, or nobles. With iron weapons a com-
moner could meet on more equal terms the Bronze Age
 knight. With them too poor and backward barbarians could
challenge the armies of civilized States whose monopoly of
bronze armaments had made them seem invulnerable.
  _ The last result was the first to be made manifest. The
Bronze Age in the Near East ends in renewed barbarian
inroads which threatened the whole civilized world with
chaos and actually hurled the two latest outposts of civiliza-
tion ~ Greece and Asia Minor — back into illiteracy.
                             IX

             THE     EARLY        IRON     AGE

IMPERIALISM had not eliminated the contradictions of
Bronze Age economy. On the contrary, if it had at first
secured to the imperialist state the requisite supplies, it had
led in the Second Millennium B.c. to conflicts of Empires,
more destructive than the internal conflicts between Meso-
potamian cities that imperialism claims credit for abolishing.
The tribute collected by the empires did not mean the
production of fresh wealth, but quite simply the theft of
wealth from those who had produced it. Such wealth could
not therefore support an indefinitely expanding population.
    Already in the fourteenth century, when tribute was still
pouring into imperial treasuries, symptoms of decay were
becoming manifest. Both the protagonists of civilization,
the Egyptian pharaoh and the Hittite great king, hired
barbarian mercenaries for their contending armies. Pre-
 sumably they were hired to replace a not inconsiderable
 proportion of the native populations — or at least of the
 military classes — that had either been killed off or com-
 pletely debauched byplunder. By such employment barbar-
 ians received a new lesson in civilization. They were apt to
 learn at least ‘civilized’ methods of warfare, urban processes.
of armament manufacture and the secret of iron working.
Then they applied the fruits of their schooling to their
masters with disastrous results to the Hittites and Egyptians. |
   Imperialism could not even mask the contradictions so long|
in the newly-civilized provinces as it had in the older centres.
   Mycenaean society, dominated economically as well as|
politically by the war-lords’ rapiers, chariots, and great
estates, became poorer and poorer during the late four-’
teenth and thirteenth centuries. The grave-goods became
cheap and nasty. Art declined. Egyptian imports, so com-
mon in the early fourteenth century, are missing in the
                  THE EARLY IRON AGE                     185
thirteenth. Mycenaean manufactures are proportionately
rare in Egypt and Syria. Late Mycenaean pottery does
indeed turn up in south-eastern Asia Minor at this date,
but here it may have been brought by warlike colonists. It
would mean that the Mycenaeans were adopting the late
neolithic solution of their population problem (p. 68) and
were trying to dump the surplus overseas on other people’s
land. The Trojan war described in ‘Homer’s’ epics sounds
like a venture in imperialism. But the Mycenaean princelets
lacked the resources needed to imitate the kings of Akkad.
   So the Bronze Age in the Near East ended round about
1200 B.C. in a dark age, blacker and more extensive than
those that opened our last chapter. Not in a single State
alone but over a large part of the civilized world history
itself seems to be interrupted; the written sources dry up,
the archaeological documents are poor and hard to date.
Barbarians from the north wiped out the Mycenaean civili-
zation in Greece. The Hittite Empire foundered. In Baby-
lonia the Kassite dynasty came to an end; barbarian
Aramaeans and Chaldaeans filtered in; for a time Babylonia
became subject to Assyrian over-lords. The pharaohs Mer-
neptah and Rameses repelled the invaders from the Nile.
But soon Libyan mercenaries and Nubians seized the
pharaoh’s throne itself till the Assyrians annexed Egypt too
to their military empire. About the same time in China the
Shang capital was sacked, and the barbarian Chous began
a new empire, organized on more feudal lines.
   Nevertheless the continuity of civilization was not com-
pletely or universally interrupted. The Assyrian State
and its component cities were flourishing. Sumerian and
Akkadian texts were copied and collected for the Assyrian
royal libraries. Astronomical studies were fruitfully pursued
in the observatories attached to Assyrian, as to Babylonian,
temples. In Babylonia itself, as in previous dark ages,
economic and scientific life, like worship, continued in the
cities and temples, albeit impaired by foreign rule and
poverty. Neither the craft lore of artisans nor the business
acumen of merchants, nor yet the traditional learning of
                                    7       iW   aT   eT Aa   ut



              WHAT      HAPPENED        IN HISTORY

 the clerks was dissipated when their cities changed masters.            _
  The same is true of Egypt and of China. Finally the Phoe-
  nician cities weathered the storm, preserving at least the
  standard of civilization they had reached in the fourteenth
  century. They could even exploit and develop such Minoan
  traditions and techniques as had been added to their own
  by the merchant colonists at Ugarit (p. 1 71).
     Even in Greece more came through than might have
  been expected. No doubt the Mycenaean chivalry, like the
  Minoan priest-kings, had been wiped out. Any clerks they
~ had employed lost their employment. The luxury industries —
  of the nobles’ courts consequently became obsolete. Cheap —
  iron swords replaced costly bronze rapiers. What were left —
  of the Mycenaean cities relapsed into almost self-sufficmg —
  villages. But Greece did not revert quite to neolithic bar- —
  barism, nor even to the stage represented by the Helladic
  towns before 1600 B.c.
     The standardized techniques of viticulture and olive- :
  growing described by the poet Hesiod about 800. 8.c.
  cannot be fresh discoveries but must be legacies from the —
  Helladic pioneers of Greek farming. The same poet’s rustic —
  calendar   embodies    the   astronomical      observations      and
  botanical lore accumulated by an Aegean peasantry during
  the Bronze Age. Throughout the dark age pottery, usually
  called Geometric, is made on the wheel, and its technique
  is Mycenaean; only the forms and designs are novel. So
  Mycenaean potters had escaped destruction and taught
  their craft to children and apprentices, handing on to
  classical Greece the appropriate pre-Indo-European names
  for their products. The same must have been true of other
  crafts. Certainly ‘Crete had preserved the secret of the
  purple and had not forgotten metal-working’. The Phoe-
  nicians had indeed temporarily ousted the Greek mariners
  from supremacy even in Aegean waters; incidentally the
  Asiatics taught the Iron Age Greeks their alphabet some-
  where between 1000 and 700 B.c. But the traditions of
   Minoan seamanship were never lost. The Greek ships
  depicted on the early Iron Age geometric vases seem to be
                                                               eh See




                    THE EARLY      IRON AGE                  187
  Bronze Age Mycenaean ships with a ram added for fighting.
  Finally, that sparks of Minoan art gleamed through the
  dark age is evident from Homer’s poems.
    So the Indo-European Greeks of the Iron Age did not
 _have to create miraculously out of sheer barbarism the
  foundations for Classical techniques, sciences, economy, and
  art. The barbarians had not demolished the whole Minoan-
  Mycenaean edifice. In fact, here as everywhere, the inva-
  sions merely gave the final push to fabrics already tottering
  through internal decay. In the most favourable instances,
  particularly in Greece itself, they just swept away top-heavy
  superstructures to make room for more progressive additions
  to a fundamentally healthy building. The substantial
 _ achievements of the Bronze Age were on the whole saved.
_ By 1000 B.c. recovery was beginning. The losses were more
    than made up in the next five centuries.
       In the first five centuries of the Iron Age the continuous
 _ area of civilization, after the temporary contraction at its
_ start, expanded more than it had in the previous fifteen
    centuries of the Bronze Age. By 500 B.c. the zone of literate
    societies, accustomed to urban life and dependent on an
    urban economy, extended continuously from the Atlantic
_ coasts of Spain to the Jaxartes in Central Asia and the
_ Ganges in India, from southern Arabia to the north coasts
    of the Mediterranean and the Black Sea.
       The several portions of this zone were integrated and
 _ interconnected to a degree never before attained. An
    educated Persian or Greek, however vague and inaccurate
    his knowledge of its extremities, could feel himself an
  inhabitant of a humanly populated world — an oikoumene,
    as the Greeks called it — four times as large as an Egyptian
    or Babylonian could have dreamed of a thousand years
    earlier. And in the barbarian fringe on either side, but most
    noticeably among the Celts of western Europe and the
    Scyths of the Eurasiatic steppes, new techniques and
  _ devices were penetrating rapidly and fruitfully.
    The expansion had been effected on the one hand by the
  enlargement and consolidation of Asiatic military empires



bi
188          WHAT   HAPPENED      IN HISTORY

on the Akkadian model, on the other by colonizing activities _
of Phoenicians, Greeks, and Etruscans following Minoan-
Mycenaean traders along the Mediterranean seaways.
   In the Near East the Bronze Age collapse had left, besides
the ruins of Egypt, an enfeebled Babylonia, the Phoenician
cities, and vigorous Assyria, only a debris of partially
barbarized communities that in time reorganized them- —
selves into small-and feeble imitations of the Bronze Age
theocratic states. Of these the Hebrew kingdom in Palestine,
the realm of the Phrygian Midas in western Asia Minor,
and the commercial kingdom of Lydia to the south-east
displayed significant originality. The first stage in the
reduction of these economically interdependent units was
effected with unparalleled brutality by the Assyrians. By
 700 B.c, the Assyrian Empire extended from the Nile and
 the Mediterranean coasts to the mountain countries north
 and east of the Tigris.
    In 610 this empire changed masters, and was divided
 between a renascent Babylonia and the Aryan Medes, who
 added to it their homeland in Iran. But after 540 both
 domains fell into the hands of the equally Aryan Persians,
who subsequently added the rest of Iran, western India,
Egypt, Asia Minor, and the Eurasiatic steppe. By 500 B.c.
the Empire of Darius extended from the Nile and the
Aegean to the Indus and the Jaxartes.
   This unification had doubtless been achieved at frightful
cost in human lives and real wealth. The Assyrian kings in
particular boast how they have massacred, flayed, and
impaled the inhabitants of cities that ‘rebelled against
Assur’ (their tribal god), and have destroyed fruit-trees,
gardens, and canals so that once populous lands are ‘left
 for the asses, the gazelles, and all manner of wild beasts to
 people’ (referring particularly to Elam). Nevertheless,
 political unification had promoted intercourse on an un-
 precedented scale over a wider area than ever before and had
 enormously accelerated the pooling of human knowledge.
    Albeit primarily for the collection of tribute, the As-
 syrians, and still more the Persians, had organized
                    THE EARLY     IRON AGE      °            189
  communications. From Sardis in Asia Minor through Baby-
 lon and Susa to Persepolis in southern Iran the Persians con-
  structed the famous ‘royai road’, equipped with inns and
  relays of horses for the use of official messengers. The
  journey of 1,700 miles from Sardis to Susa could thus be
  accomplished in ninety days. Such facilities for travel en-
  abled even intelligent Greeks of modest means, like the
  historian Herodotus, to visit distant Babylon. The Assyrians
  and their Neo-Babylonian heirs forcibly transported whole
  communities from one end of their empires to the other,
  thus incidentally effecting a very thorough pooling of experi-
_ ence and making their cities eminently cosmopolitan. The
  effects of this transplantation on the Jews are well known.
  Members of subject communities were recruited for service
  in the imperial armies. Under Darius and Xerxes Indian
  chariotry and nomad archers from Central Asiatic steppes
  fought side by side with Greek mercenaries and Syrian levies
  in Egypt and Greece itself. Moreover, when all the plunder-
  ing was done, the imperial power did establish a regime of
  comparative security within its domain and check small wars.
     The unification of Hither Asia and the civilization of its
  backward enclaves was thus effected by the forcible im-
  position of alien rule and of a modified version of the
  government and economy created in the Bronze Age
 monarchies. In the Mediterranean basin, on the contrary,
  civilization was diffused by the plantation of colonies on
_ the coasts from which urban life spread inland.
    The new cities founded by the Phoenicians, the Greeks,
 and the Etruscans were not established, as Sargon’s founda-
 tions in Syria had been, to be provincial collecting posts for
 a surplus to be partly drawn off as tribute to the parent city.
    The new cities were actual overseas settlements of emi-
 grant farmers for whom there was no room in the narrow
 coastal plain of Phoenicia and the still narrower valleys of
 Greece. The colonists sought beyond the seas new lands to
 till, new fishing grounds and bases for piracy and commerce.
 They brought with them the economy and equipment of
 their homeland, though as pioneers they had at first to forgo


:
                                 ry   ;   ad   A   .
                     if   A

            WHAT    HAPPENED     IN HISTORY            |
190                                                             ,
                                                          the j
some of its refinements. But migration by sea, owing to
slow, precarious, and irregular voyages of ancient ships,
                                                                ry




always involved a greater dislocation and disassociation of —
cultural elements than follows upon landwise migrations.
By the voyage itself the component elements get jolted out of —
the rigid frame of custom in which they are embedded.
They can be resorted and reintegrated in new wholes. The
colonial cities in North Africa were far less replicas of the
parent Phoenician states than the new foundations of Sargon
or the kings of Ur in Syria (p. 142) had been. They did not
reproduce in the West the centralized economy and theo- —
cratic polity of the Orient; even Carthage was a republic. —
   The colony was not dependent upon or tributary to the ©
mother city. But it was connected with the latter by
 traditional sentimental ties and found there a natural
market where any surplus of home-grown produce and raw
materials obtained from the barbarian hinterland could be
exchanged for the manufactures of the more highly skilled ©
 artisans who would remain at home in the metropolis. So
 the Phoenicians colonized particularly North Africa and, -
from Carthage, western Sicily, Sardinia, and the coasts of
Spain. The Greeks for their part, having occupied all the
coasts of the Aegean, spread round the Black Sea and west-_
ward to eastern Sicily, southern Italy and Campania, and
thence to Marseilles, thus securing a port in western Europe. —
   Finally the Etruscans or Turseni, a people from Asia
Minor who had learned civilization through mercenary
service in imperial armies, turned their backs on their
eastern home and established themselves as a ruling class
among Indo-European farmers on the western coasts of
Central Italy and across the Apennines as far north as the
modern Bologna. They brutally imposed civilization on
conquered. barbarians, founding small cities as centres of an
urban economy. But some of the conquered, notably the
Romans, like Sargon’s victims in the Third Millennium,
were enabled to expel their alien masters and turn the
weapons of civilization against their oppressors.
   In the Iron Age civilization not only spread over a wider
                     eer    Ley
                     fice


                     THE    EARLY   IRON   AGE                Ig!

  area than in the Bronze Age, it also spread deeper; it was
  more popular. That was because it made use of two ‘ popu-
  lar’ inventions already mentioned — iron and the alphabet —
  to which was soon added a third — coined money. Iron, as
  already explained, first gave the masses, and especially the
  rural population, a real independent share in the benefits of
  civilization. Cheap iron tools abolished or at least reduced
  the dependence of the small producers on State monopolies
  and great household stores. With the new metal implements
  for breaking the ground, clearing it of trees and digging
  drainage channels, the small farmer might earn independ-
  ence by reclaiming for himself a piece of waste; in any case,
  he could produce more. Similarly the efficiency of industry
  was enormously increased. As a result transport costs could
  be reduced; vessels and vehicles were improved or cheap-
  ened. Use of the new metal spread rapidly after 1200 in
  Hither Asia and Greece and thence westward with the
   Phoenicians and Etruscans. On the other hand, it did not
    become common in Egypt till after 650 B.c. How and when
    iron-working spread to India and China is still uncertain.
       The alphabet, as explained on page 182, made literacy
    possible to all classes. By the seventh century common mer-
    cenary soldiers, both Greek and Phoenician, were educated
    enough to be able to scratch their names on Egyptian
   statues. The Phoenicians’ invention had spread rapidly. In
    Mesopotamia, indeed, the old cuneiform script remained
    the normal medium even for private correspondence down
 _ to 500 B.c., and in the temple schools and observatories
 _ continued in regular use till 50 B.c. Even the Persians, like
  _the Hittites a thousand years earlier, used cuneiform signs
   as the basis of a syllabary for transcribing their own Indo-
y European language. In Egypt, too, hieroglyphics and their
   simplified cursive derivatives were current till the beginning
_ of our era. Nevertheless, the alphabetic writing, well estab-
  lished on the coast of Syria by 1100 B.c., was adopted by the
  new States in Southern Arabia and was used in competition
_ with cuneiform by Aramaic merchants in Mesopotamia
  even under the Assyrian Empire. Thence the idea spread to
192         WHAT     HAPPENED     IN   HISTORY

Iran. Finally, before 300 B.c., it had inspired the creation
ofa suitable alphabet for expressing the sounds of the Aryan
languages of India. Westward the Phoenicians took their
alphabet to Carthage and thence to her colonies. Between
1000 and 700 B.c. the Greeks learnt to write it too. They
converted some superfluous signs for peculiarly Semitic
consonants and invented others to express the vowel sounds
that the Semites had ignored (p. 181), but that are indis-
pensable for the unambiguous expression of an Indo-
European language. It was apparently from the Greek
colonists in Italy that the Etruscans and Romans learned
to read and write.             <          ;
Two grave embarrassments to early trade were, firstly,
that at every transaction the quantity of silver representing
the price had to be weighed out — and it was all too easy to
falsify the weights — and, secondly, that the metal paid out —
might be fraudulently debased. Soon after 800 B.c. Assyrian
and Syrian kings began stamping bars of silver, guarantee-
ing the quality of the metal. The second defect of the old
Bronze Age money was thus eliminated. Coins, pieces of
metal of a fixed shape and a standard weight stamped and
guaranteed by the State as to both quality and weight,
eliminated the first too. Greek tradition attributes to
Croesus of Lydia, a frontier kingdom owing its prosperity
to transit trade, the initiation of this practice about 700 B.c.
It immensely simplified all commercial operations, but was
not in itself absolutely revolutionary.
    The earliest Lydian coins were in electron, a natural alloy
of gold and silver, and of relatively high value. The first
Greek silver coins and the gold coinage of Persia were also
 for high denominations. But shortly after 600 B.c. the Greek
 city states of Aegina, Athens, and Corinth began issuing —
small change, copper or small silver coins, with truly revo-
 lutionary consequences. Now it had doubtless been a
 nuisance for the wholesaler to have to travel about with
 scales and weights, bars of metal and sacks of grain; for the
 small retailer it was a crippling handicap. A big landowner
                     THE   EARLY    IRON    AGE                 193
  when he sold his harvest or oxen may have grumbled at
   the bother of weighing out the silver and the sharp practices
  of the purchaser who tried adulterating his silver with lead.
  But how was the small farmer to pay for a new pot, an iron
  ploughshare, or a trinket for his wife? Under a natural
  economy such little men must have generally been done
  when haggling with a travelling pedlar. Again the work-
  man paid in kind had little choice in the disposal of his wages.
      Small change corrected these difficulties. The peasant can
  convert his small surplus of farm produce into an easily
  divisible medium of exchange which he can reconvert into
_ manufactured goods of any kind and quantity. The work-
  man is no longer condemned to eat his wages. The small
  producer or the retailer can exchange his goods for coins,
  which can be added together till substantial values are
  accumulated. So in the long run coinage made accessible to
  small primary producers and artisans an increasing variety
  of the refinements made possible by civilized technology.
  Conversely it made the manufacture of cheap goods for pop-
  ular consumption profitable, and allowed even the small land-
  holder to turn from subsistence agriculture to specialized
  farming — the production, for instance, of olives or oil for sale.
     But if coined money emancipated the small producer
 from one set of masters, it threatened to hand him over to
 another just as money in general had done (p. 158). Usury,
 mortgages and enslaved debtors followed the new medium
 of exchange wherever it was introduced. In the early
Jewish, Greek, and Italian communities that had only
 recently abandoned a natural economy the struggles of
 debtors against creditors dominated the first political con-
 flicts, if they did not, as Engels argues, call forth the State
 itself among the Greeks and the Romans.
    In continental Asia neither the barbarian invasions nor
 the use of iron changed permanently and radically the
 structure of society and the economic organization that had
been established since 2000 B.c. The barbarian war chiefs
generally usurped the sacred thrones of Bronze Age king-
 lets, taking over the existing administrative machinery, but




me
             WHAT HAPPENED        IN HISTORY
restaffing the higher offices from their own retinue. Most _
tried to imitate Sargon’s imperialism, and the Persians 4
                                                               "

                                                               W


eventually succeeded brilliantly.                              2


   In primary production the organization of servile
                                                               |



peasants practising subsistence agriculture as the household
of a great landowner was found as convenient by the new —
tax-gatherers as by the old. The conquerors, notably the
Persians, just replaced the old nobility as lords of such
domains. They thus became an aristocracy ruling serfs and
forgot altogether the communistic forms of land-ownership©
appropriate to their recent condition of barbarism. Owing
to the cheapness of iron such estates could often attain to an
almost neolithic self-sufficiency. To provide the tenantry
with the metal tools that were now necessities, all that was
needed was to purchase a smith in the slave-market and
perhaps to buy him raw iron if no sort of ore were available
on the estate. The surplus requisite was not large, and owing
to the increased efficiency of agriculture could be collected
fromasmaller estate than formerly. The balance was available
to purchase industrial products and imports on the market.
   At the same time land transport was still extravagantly -
costly. It is true, of course, that the roads, built primarily
for administrative and military purposes by the Assyrians |
and the Persians, did simplify travelling. Moreover, for
caravan traffic across the deserts camels and dromedaries-
were now extensively used, though a camel-load is not very
large. Still, only high-priced luxuries could be profitably
carried far, or rather anything thus carried became a luxury.
   With the rural economy and a transport industry thus
constituted, the urban economy supported thereby must
follow the familiar Bronze Age lines. As the number of large
estates was greater, they could support more nobles, and
therefore :a larger middle-class of merchants, craftsmen,
clerks, artists, and even teachers to share in the surplus
collected by the landowners by supplying their wants. At
Nineveh the walls encompassed an area of 1,800 acres —
including parks, gardens, and temples - in the seventh
century. The middle class was also freer in that its members
                                                                      x". a




                         THE   EARLY    IRON   AGE              195

    had a wider market and a greater choice of patrons.
    Accordingly it could live better. A merchant’s two-storeyed
    house in Babylonia covered a hundred feet by eighty-two
  _ feet and boasted eighteen rooms (including a bathroom)
    grouped round a central court. Real wages, too, were
    doubled in Babylonia under the Persian Empire.
           Moreover, the variety of crafts plied, commodities manu-
  factured, and materials imported and used had greatly
  multiplied. In building his new palace at Susa, Darius got
  his cedars from Lebanon via the Euphrates, oaks from
  Gandhara (the upper Indus and Kabul valleys) and Car-
_ mania (Iran), gold from Sardis in Asia Minor, ivory from
 India, Seistan, and Ethiopia, silver and copper (? bronze)
  from Egypt (perhaps really via Egypt from Spain and
_ Britain, as there is neither copper nor silver in Egypt).
  Though the Persian king goes farther afield, he was just
  following the example of Sumerian city-governors in the
_ Third Millennium. So again it was in an equally ancient
  tradition to employ on the work Egyptian, Greek, Lydian,
 - Babylonian, and Median craftsmen, as Darius says he did.
    In fact, as in the Bronze Age, the craftsman went to the
  - market instead of sending his products thither.
     In the Persian Empire of Darius the economic objective
 | of Sargon’s Akkadian imperialism had been realized. All
         the materials needed for the crafts and even the luxuries
   demanded by nobles were obtainable within its bounds.
   Trade and industry had in fact expanded as a result, though
aea)-e
—Cit



_ the position of the peasantry was little if at all bettered, But
   a disproportionate amount of the surplus produced was
   absorbed by the imperial exchequer, and there not used to
   support reproductive works, but stored as bullion or
   squandered on war and futile display. So the absolute
   increase of real wealth was not very great and purchasing
 _ power was still unduly restricted. The centralized imperial
_ system of Persia began to break up as the smaller and still
   more centralized empires of Mesopotamia and Egypt had
   done. In the next period it was absorbed in a European
_ Empire embodying an economic system evolved in Greece.
196          WHAT    HAPPENED      IN   HISTORY

   The possibilities opened up by iron tools, alphabetic
writing, and coined money were more fully realized in
communities that could exploit the cheapness of maritime
transport for commerce, or such as had emerged from bar-
barism directly into an Iron Age civilization unfettered by
too many legacies from the Bronze Age. The Phoenicians
and Etruscans enjoyed the first advantage, the Jews, the
Romans, and the Phrygians the second. Only the Greeks
benefited from both.
   The geography of their poor and mountainous homeland
drove the Greeks to the sea, and they inherited from the
Bronze Age traditions of Minoan-Mycenaean seamanship.
But Mycenaean civilization as an economy in which crafts
functioned had been obliterated. The Dorians and other
invading tribes were frankly barbarians with an appro-
priately communistic system of land tenure. The uncon-
quered provinces had sunk into illiteracy. The Bronze Age
hero’s castle as a nucleus for accumulating surplus wealth
had been dismantled. The city, in so far as it survived to
become the polis, differed from a village only in the presence
of professional potters, smiths, and perhaps a few other
craftsmen. It was almast self-sufficing, for trade had vir-
tually ceased. The multiplication of distinct styles of ceramic
decoration in each district, in contrast to the uniformity
prevailing all over the Aegean in the Mycenaean age, is
symptomatic of parochial isolation, which led also to the
multiplication of distinct dialects.
    Most of the ‘citizens’ must have lived by subsistence
 agriculture and fishing. To find land for its growing popula-
 tion each city tried to steal from its neighbours in neolithic
 fashion. The Dorians of Sparta (who had already won their
 own Laconia by force and reduced its Mycenaean occupants
 to serfdom) thus found allotments for three thousand young
 men at the expense of their Messenian neighbours, but only
 after a prolonged contest and organizing their whole life for
 war in truly totalitarian fashion.
    It was better to emigrate. Land-hungry peasants followed
 piratical raids by permanent settlements on the coasts first
                       THE EARLY IRON AGE                         197
    in Asia Minor, then round the Black Sea and in Thrace and
    Macedonia, in Italy, Eastern Sicily, and even in Cyrenaica
_ in North Africa. But trade and industry soon began to offer
  alternatives to piracy, emigration, and mercenary service in
  Oriental armies to the farmers’ superfluous younger sons.
  For the traditions of Minoan craftsmanship and navigation
  were not dead, and Phoenician visitors gave ocular demon-
  strations of the possibilities of commerce. The new overseas
    colonies, with their barbarian and agricultural hinterlands,
  guaranteed a market (p. 190).
     Even in the eighth century B.c. industry was getting so
_ crowded that the poet Hesiod sings of ‘potter competing
  with potter and carpenter with carpenter’. Early in the
  seventh century the mass production of cheap but remark-
    ably good commodities for the export market was started,
    first apparently in Aegina, which as an island was soon con-
    gested, and at Corinth, commanding seaways to east and
    west alike, shortly thereafter in other coastal cities, including
    Athens, and overseas in Ionia (Asia Minor), and later in the
    western and northern colonies. The best evidence for the
    extent and intensity of Greek trade is supplied, as in the
    Mycenaean age, by the distribution of pottery vases. These
    cheap articles of universal use, exported from various Greek
  cities — Aegina, Corinth, Athens, Rhodes — begin to turn up
  in quantities in graves and city ruins all round the Mediter-
  ranean and the Black Sea and far into the hinterland in
_ Asia Minor, Syria, and Egypt from 700 B.c. till, before 400,
  Greek (mainly Attic) vases reach right to the edge of the
  forest belt north of the South Russian steppes and to the
  Celts of south-western Germany and the Marne Valley in
  North-Eastern France.
     Of course these ceramic exports are only indices of the
  manufacture of and trade in other articles that may have
  been equally popular. And the vases contained the products
  of specialized agriculture, too. By the sixth century even the
  small peasants of Attica (the territory of Athens) could
  switch over from subsistence farming to the specialized
 cultivation of vines and olive trees; thanks to coined small



a
198          “WHAT HAPPENED IN HISTORY                =
change, not only the surplus collected on large estates, but
the exclusive produce of small gardens and vineyards went
to swell the volume of export trade.                           |
    As a consequence the Greek cities became increasingly
dependent on overseas trade for foodstuffs —- not only for
luxuries and supplements to the daily cereal diet, but even
for the basic necessity, corn itself; the latter was brought
from or through the colonial .cities in Macedonia and
Thrace and, above all, round the Black Sea. By 450 B.c.|
Athens provides perhaps the first example of a politicai
unit risking dependence for the staff of life upon distant lands
across the sea in order to concentrate on the production of
goods for which the country and its inhabitants were peculiar- |
ly fitted. By the fourth century it is estimated that the cereals
imported into Attica were four times the home production.
   The venture was successful. As a manufacturing and
mining country and a producer of olive oil Attica supported
three or four times the population she could have fed if
devoted to producing her own food supply; the latest|
estimate of the Athenian population in the fifth century is
of the order of 300,000. Of course Athens was in a rather|
exceptional position as owning at Laurion the richest silver|
mines in the eastern Mediterranean. But other classical|
cities of the Iron Age were immensely larger than their|
Bronze Age forerunners and could compare with the Bronze
Age cities of the Orient, though not with Iron Age capitals
like Nineveh. At Samos, one of the most prosperous cities of
the sixth century, the walls enclose an area of some four
hundred acres, not all built over. Miletus in Ionia as re-
planned in 480 B.c. covered two hundred and twenty-two
acres, of which fifty-two were parks and gardens. In Sicily the|
original colony of Selinus had been confined to an acropolis|
of twenty-one and a half acres, but extension in the sixth|
century gave it an area of over forty-eight acres. Megara |
Hyblaea in the same island straggled over one hundred and|
fifty acres. Syracuse was still larger. Moreover, every
Greek city enjoyed amenities foreign to the Orient — an agora
or market square used for public assemblies, government
                   ‘THE EARLY       IRON    AGE
                                                             7D
   offices, a theatre, a gymnasium, and a fountain supply-
  ing a constant stream of water to a basin. A large private
: house at Olynthos covered eighty-five feet by fifty-six feet,
_while a block fifty-six feet square contained a house and three
 shops, each measuring sixteen feet by fourteen and a half feet.
    The manufactures that helped to pay for the imported
_foodstuffs were, like the olives and wines, mainly produced
by small but independent working proprietors. Archacolo-
gists have identified from their trade-marks no less than a
 hundred different makers of Attic pottery in the sixth and
  fifth centuries. Nevertheless, they were producing en masse
  and for the market. Accordingly several workers might be
   ollected in a single workshop and different operations
“might be divided’ among them. In other words, classical
 Greece exhibits the germs of a factory system with special-
 ization of labour — but hardly on a larger scale than is
illustrated by the workshops of Egyptian mortuary estates
Miepicted in Old Kingdom tombs (p. 122), or attached to a
Sumerian temple (p. 95).
i In the ceramic industry, for example,a vase in Munich
shows a pottery employing four throwers, a painter, and a
Beicicesnain |in addition to the owner. At first the master
_potter was also the painter of the vases. Later vase-painting
became a distinct branch of the craft. At Athens the firm
esHischylos published works of three different painters who
each signed     their   own   products.    Conversely   we   know
 ‘painters who worked in three or even five different ‘fac-
tories’.. These artists’ pictures are now displayed in places of
honour in European and American museums as master-
pieces of classical beauty; judging by their names they were
in most cases either slaves or enfranchized slaves (freedmen)
‘andiin no case ‘citizens of Athens’. This factory system, of
course, was adopted in other industries too. At the end of
‘the fifth century the father of Demosthenes, the most
 amous Attic orator, owned a bedstead workshop, employ-
ing twenty slaves, and an arms factory with thirty-two. No
 ess than a hundred and twenty artisans worked in the
shield factory of a certain Kephalos.
200          WHAT    HAPPENED     IN HISTORY                  q
   Greek industry provided citizens with many amenities
and refinements — and the modern world with objects of |
great beauty. It secured for the cities supplies of food and
real wealth. But it did not in practice offer an effective and
expanding outlet for the overflowing rural population. In-
stead, as the cities grew rich from industry — and less
legitimate pursuits — they invested their wealth in slaves
and turned over to these craftsmanship and all sorts of
manual labour. The typical industrialist in a rich city of the
fifth century like Athens was no longer even a working
craftsman assisted by slaves, but a capitalist like Kephalos,
living on.the produce of his slaves.
    The number of slaves and their réle in production must
not be exaggerated. The number of Athenian slaves in the
fifth century has been put as high as 365,000, four times the |
citizen population. But Gomme’s recent estimate of 115,000
is more probable. Even that is a third of the total population —
on the same author’s calculations. Still there were plenty of -
free craftsmen. Free citizens as well as resident aliens and —
slaves worked on piecework contracts for the Athenian
State, at fluting temple columns, for instance. The silver |
mines at Laurion had been developed first by free labour, |
and there were still free miners in the fifth century, though |
 the majority were slaves. On the other hand, slaves held |
 official positions as policemen and in even more responsible
 posts. Nor did the competition of slave labour reduce wages
 to a subsistence level. On the contrary, working at a
 minimum wage of two obols a day an Athenian day
 labourer in the fifth century would earn in a hundred and
 fifty days enough to provide the subsistence minimum of
 food and clothing for the whole year. But a century later
 real wages fell catastrophically.                              {
    Still slavery did impede the expansion of industry. It !
 restricted the home market, since slave producers, receiving |t
little more than their bare keep, could not purchase their |
own products. It made industry appear degrading (ban- j
ausic). So even successful industrialists instead of putting
their profits back into industry invested them in the more
                    THE   EARLY     IRON   AGE                201

  reputable channels of farming and money-lending. On the
  other hand, the manufacturer in so far as he was producing
  not for local consumption but for a Mediterranean market
  was very much at the mercy of the merchant who bought
  his products and through his personal knowledge of foreign
  demands could make the larger profit. And just as in the
  Oriental Bronze Age (p. 158) merchants themselves as well
  as producers were liable to become indebted to financiers
  who collected the largest profits as interest.        ,
     Finally the Greek ‘industrial cities’ were not only cleft
  internally into contending classes, but were also opposed to
  one another as autonomous States continually dissipating
  real wealth in internecine wars that benefited only the
' slave-dealers. It is this state of perpetual internecine war-
  fare, itself duc partly to the class struggle (in as much as
 _ slavery prevented the productive employment of surplus
    population) and in turn aggravating it (by replenishing the
    slave-market), that appears in history as the occasion for the
   ruin of the classical economy and the collapse of the polity
    it supported.
       Barbarians, entering civilization in the Iron Age, even
    when they lacked the outlet of sea-borne commerce, were
    not inexorably doomed to servitude in great households.
_ Under its new money economy and with its cheap tools
    they could become small proprietors, especially where a
    diversity of soils favoured specialized farming more than did
    the alluvia of river valleys.
       In Italy the conquering Etruscan landlords had sup-
    ported, from their surplus luxury and armament industries,
   mining and reproductive engineering works. Their irriga-
    tion and drainage channels show what could be done with
    iron tools towards the reclamation of stony land. But the
   Romans, when they had expelled their Etruscan overlords,
 the Tarquins, found themselves civilized farmers, blessed
 with money, mortgages, and debt-slavery, but with no outlet
 in an exporting industry. The dangers of their situation are
 revealed by the historian Livy, who records famines in the
 yeats 490, 477, 459, 453, 440, 411, and 392 B.c.
   In the sequel they alan          two industries — usury and
war — even more successfully than the Assyrians. The bigger—
usurers became noble landlords and imitated the Phoeni- |
cians of Carthage in farming their large estates with slave —
labour which war provided. The evicted smallholders had —
the privilege of dying in glorious battles or, if they survived,
were granted new allotments in a colony (colonia) on con-
quered territory.
   In the barbarian fringe iron tools opened up virgin land
to cultivation and armed fresh war-bands for conquest.
From Central Europe indeed, even in the later Bronze Age,
cultivators, provided, by the innovations mentioned on
page 172, with cheaper bronze equipment, had been spread- ©ant
ing in all directions with the aid of ploughs and broadswords. —
At length mixed farming based on plough agriculture began —
to replace the regime of pastoralism combined with scratch      *

agriculture (hoe-cultivation), even in southern England; the -+2
old aristocracies perished about 1100 B.c. But trade, even to ¥ +
                                                                it

the Mediterranean world, was intensified and extended; i
amber, for instance, was traded southward through Upper i
Italy ante the old Bronze Age route (p. 171) cou
the Dark Age. Conversely the secret of iron working was |
diffused northward, mainly by the same route through A.
Upper Italy, to regions rich in iron ore and fuel too.
   North of the Alps, the first Iron Age, termed theHallstatt
period after a cemetery in Upper Austria, began about
750 B.c. In the British Isles, however, where local ores of
copper and tin kept the older metal cheap, a Bronze Age
lasted longer — in England till 500, in Scotland till 250,
in Ireland even later. With iron tools the farmer could clear
forested land and the population grew fast with the enlarged
food supply; Hallstatt cemeteries contain over 1,000 graves
in Upper Austria. Still, this very growth intensified the
competition for land (farther accentuated perhaps by a
general deterioration of the climate and therefore warfare).
   With their iron tools Hallstatt farmers fortified hilltops
with deep ditches and stupendous ramparts of timber and
stone or earth.to serve as tribal refuges. War-chiefs rose to



                                                            yn i
                                                          FP     yet




                     THE   EARLY   IRON   AGE              203

  affluence. Some acquired improved war chariots from the
 _Etruscans to consolidate their power like Mycenaean her-
_ oes; other tribes learned to ride from the Scythians and be-
 came knights. And so Greek traders from Marseilles found
  them. The wily Greeks found a key to unlock barbarian
  wealth — wine — the same charm as white traders use upon
  Negroes and Redskins. In Iron Age European settlements
  Greek wine-jars take the place of the Tsar’s vodka-flasks in
_a Siberian encampment or gin-bottles in an African kraal.
 _A later Greek writer, Diodorus, describes how cheaply the
  Celts sold the captives to get wine, ‘exchanging a servant
  for a drink’.
   But if the Greeks thus secured slaves — and of course tin,
-amber, and forest products too — they likewise armed and
incited fresh and fiercer war-bands to invade the civilized
world, In the Second Iron Age or La Téne period beginning
 after 450 B.c., Celtic warriors sacked Rome, ravaged North
 Greece, and carved themselves out a kingdom, Galatia, in
_ Asia Minor.
     In the meantime nomads, breeding horses both for milk-
  ing and for riding, spread all over the Eurasiatic steppes.
  They worried the Chou state in China, raided Asia Minor,
  and even threatened Assyria. In South Russia such nomads,
_as Scyths, subjugated a Bronze Age peasantry and estab-
  lished feudal kingdoms, collecting a large surplus of grain
  and other produce from their subjects. With this they sup-
ported blacksmiths, goldsmiths, armourers, and other native
  craftsmen; they purchased gold from Transylvania and the
  Altai, and forest products from beyond the steppes, but also
 Greek wines and manufactures from the colonies on the
 Black Sea coasts.
   The swiftly-moving nomads must have been important
agents in diffusing ideas between the Far East and the
‘West. They may have taught both the Assyrians and
Europeans the military value of cavalry. Perhaps they intro-
duced trousers to the Celts. But they no more succeeded
 in creating a civilized State than did their Hallstatt neigh-
_bours farther West.



aS
                            x

