         GORDON         CHILDE



            What
          appened in
             History
——




     A study of the rise and decline of
     cultural and moral values in the
         Old World up to the fall of
             the Roman Empire




                                          3/6
prehistorians. He has travelled widely and has done muc
work of great importance to the specialist; he has, as
were, personally added many bricks to the edifice of pre-
historic knowledge. But he has also long realized that
prehistory and early history form a continuum, and that,
by standing back and contemplating the whole, many ry
general conclusions can be arrived at with regard to the ©
rise and fall of civilizations .                           ;
   ‘For this reason a special welcome must be accorded to:
Professor Childe’s fascinating little book now under re-—
view. In it he discusses the changes in material well-being —
and mental outlook which have taken place throughot
the ages up to the break-up of the Roman Empire. H
gives us a brief survey of what he describes as Palaeolithi
and Mesolithic savagery, of Neolithic barbarism, of
rise of the Metal Age cultures, and so on until a climax
was reached as a result of the Old World unity,m
possible by the exploits of Alexander the Great. Final
there is a stimulating chapter with the author’s views
about the decline and fall of the ancient world...
   ‘This more than worth-while book contains many fa
— the background material for the study; but it |
primarily intended to stimulate thought and to help     the
reader to understand the general story of human develop-
ment and, maybe, to draw lessons which will help when
our own civilization, now in danger of collapse, is once
again in process of reconstruction.’ — M. C. Burkitt
                                                   in
Nature

             For a complete list of books available
                 please write to Penguin Books ©
               whose address can be found on the
                      back of the title page
IAT HAPPENED   IN HISTORY
  - GORDON CHILDE
PENGUIN BOOKS
U.S.A.S,
     .:PenguinBooks hie 38c
    AUSTRALIA: Penguin Books ty Lt /
                      Mitcham, Victoria

                      First published 1942 !
                Reprinted 1946, 1948, 1950, 1952
                      Revised edition 1954.
                                             CCR
                         Reprinted 1957




                                                   4

                Made and printed in Great Britain f
                 by CG, Nicholls & Company Ltd
     : THE URBAN REVOLUTION IN
 _ MESOPOTAMIA                              89
     EARLY BRONZE AGE GIVILIZATION
     “IN BoePy AND INDIA                   113
      THE EXPANSION OF CIVILIZATION        130
 1      aiCULMINATION    OF BRONZE AGE
      CIVILIZATION                    Ce   Sa




     SCIENCE IN THE IRON AGE               204

- GIVILIZATION                             230
     “THE DECLINE AND FALL OF
 - THE ANCIENT       WORLD                 260
                         PREFACE

How has Man progressed during the several hundred thousand
years of his existence on the Earth? That is the question to
 which this book offers an answer which does not pretend to.
 exhaustive. It is thus an extension of the account of Ma:
 progress in the long ages before the dawn of written histo iS
 advanced five years ago in Man Makes Himself (Watts & Co.)
 indeed in chapters II-V I have had to recapitulate in a ‘co m
 pressed form many events and conclusions set forth more ft
 there. But in other respects I have had to amplify what I tk
 wrote to adjust it to the wider perspective. For in the s
 sequent chapters I trespass upon the domains of
 history in which written records disclose aspects of
 endeavour that can only be inferred speculatively |
 historic archaeology. Yet here, too, I have tried to kee
 foreground the concrete archaeolgical facts of the sam
as those available in prehistoric times. ee if on


be the main stream of human progress and even so have
to close my account some fifteen hundred years ago.
                                     V. GorDON     CHILDE
  Edinburgh, October 1941                             aa




and exciting of these new results have been included i
present edition, but no substantial rewriting has been nee
nor attempted.
      .


  March   1954
                        a
                            .     a ieee Tekh
                                yer           ’   (     Sy,
                                          a




                                      I

       ~ ARCHAEOLOGY                          AND     HISTORY
      RITTEN history contains a very patchy and incomplete
      ord of what mankind has accomplished in parts of the
      rld during the last five thousand years. The period sur-
       ed is at best about one hundredth part of the time during
      ich men have been active on our planet. The picture pre-
      ted is frankly chaotic; it is hard to recognize in it any
         ing pattern, any directional trends. Archaeology sur-
       $ a period a hundred times as long. In this-enlarged field
       tudy it does disclose general trends, cumulative changes
     ‘oceeding in one main direction and towards recognizable
     ults.
 oy Aided by archaeology, history with its prelude prehistory
_ becomes a continuation of natural history. The latter studies
in  the geological record the ‘evolution’ of various species of
      g creatures as the result of ‘natural selection’ — the
      ival and multiplication of those bodily adapted to their
  environments. Man is the last great species to emerge; in the
     logical record his fossil remains would occur in the top-
   ost layers, so that in this literal sense man is the highest
     duct of the process. Prehistory can watch the survival
_and multiplication of this species through improvements in


     their environments to them. And archaeology can trace the
       me process in historical times, with the additional aid of
       ritten records, as well as in regions where the dawn of
       tten history has been retarded. Without any change of
      ethod it can follow down to the present day the working

     _ Our species, man in the widest sense, has succeeded in
         iving and multiplying chiefly by improving his equip-
banipetent that man acts on and reacts to the exter
world, draws sustenance therefrom and escapes its peril
in technical language adapts himself to his environmen
even adjusts his environment to his needs. Man’s eq
ment, however, differs significantly from that of othe
animals. These carry their whole equipment about v
them as parts of their bodies; the rabbit carries paws to di
with, the lion claws and teeth for tearing his prey, the b
carpenter’s tusks, most beasts hairy or furry coats to ke


some that he started with during            ee times. Iti
replaced by tools, extracorporeal organs that he makes, u:Ise
and discards at will; he makes picks and shovels for diggin

cutting wood, clothing to keep him warm in cold w
houses of wood, brick, or stone to provide shelter. Some
early ‘men’ indeed had projecting canine teeth set in


not inflict mortal wounds.
   As with other animals, there is of course a bodily|
logical basis to man’s equipment. It may be summed u
two words, hands and brains. Relieved of the bur eI
carrying our bodies, our forefeet have developed into
cate instruments capable of an amazing variety of subtl
accurate movements. To control the latter and to link tl
up with impressions from outside received by the eye:
other sense organs we have become possessed of a peculi
complicated nervous system and an creep Hayy big
complicated brain.
   The detachable and extracorporeal cha          of the1
                                                        rest
of human equipment has obvious advantages. Itis m re
convenient and more adaptable than other animals’ eq
           d digging tools, but cannot compete with a cat’s as
          apons, while feliné paws are poor spades. Men can make
i        th tools and weapons.        In brief, an animal’s hereditary
    a equipment is adapted to performing a limited number of
         operations in a particular    environment.   Man’s extracor-
           al equipment can be adjusted to an almost infinite
           ber of operations in almost any environment — ‘can be’,
         te, not ‘is’.
         As against these advantages man has to learn not Sal to
          e but also to make his equipment. A chick soon finds
        tself equipped with feathers, wings, beak, and claws. It
         rtainly has to learn their use — how to keep its feathers —
-     clean, for instance. But this is very simple and will not take
        long. A human infant arrives with no such outfit and it will
         t grow spontaneously. The round pebbles on the ground
         ‘not in themselves suggest knives. Many processes and
       stages must intervene before the wallaby’s skin can be
        ansferred to the child’s back as a coat.
           Even the simplest tool made out of a broken bough or a
             pped stone is the fruit of long experience — of trials and
           .


        srrors, impressions noticed, remembered, and compared. The
     _ skill to make it has been acquired by observation, by recol-
       lection, and by experiment. It may seem an exaggeration,
         ut it is yet true to say that any tool is an embodiment of
        cience. For it is a practical application of remembered, com-
         yared, and collected experiences of the same kind as are
    _ systematized and summarized in scientific formulas, des-
    - criptions, and prescriptions.
     _ Happily the individual infant is not left to accumulate in
       its own person the requisite experience or itself to make all
      the trials and mistakes. A baby does not indeed inherit at
       yirth a physical mechanism of nerve-paths stamped in the
     : germ-plasm of the race and predisposing it to make automa-
     tically and instinctively the appropriate bodily movements.
                                               7



10           WHAT    HAPPENED      IN HISTORY       _
But it is born heir to a social tradition. Its parents an
elders will teach it how to make and use equipment i
accordance with the experience gathered by ancestral
generations. And the equipment it uses is itself just a-con- |
crete expression of this social tradition. A tool is a social 4
product and man isa social animal.
   Because it has so much to learn, a human infant is pecu-
liarly delicate and helpless, and its helplessness lasts longer _
than with the young of other animals. The physical counter-
part of learning is the storing of impressions and the build-
ing up of connexions between the various nerve-centres in
the brain. Meanwhile the brain must keep on growing. To
allow of such growth the skull-bones protecting the infant’s
brain remains very loosely joined together; only slowly doy.
the junctions (or sutures) knit up. While the brain is thus — is
unprotected it is very vulnerable; an infant can be Killed
terribly easily.                                           A


must keep together for several eae until the infants are 4
reared. In our species the natural family of parents an
children is a more stable and durable association he “a
among species whose young mature faster. In practice, how- —
ever, human families seem generally to live together in —
larger societies comparable to the herds and packs of gre- _
garious animals. Indeed, man is to some extent a gregarious _
animal.                                                     o
   Now in human, as in animal, societies the elder genera- —
tions transmit by example to the younger the collective —
experience accumulated by the group— what they in turn —
have learned in like fashion from their elders and parents. —
Animal education can all be done by example; a chick
learns how to peck and what to peck at by copying the hen.
For human infants who have so much to learn the imitative   _
method would be fatally slow. In human societies instruc- 5
tion is by precept as well as by example. Human societies     _
have gradually devised tools for communication between _
their members. In so doing they have brought forth a new
                                                          “
                 ARCHAEOLOGY         AND    HISTORY        ;      Il
 _ sort of equipment which can conveniently be labelled
     spiritual.
   _ Owing to the structure of the larynx, tongue muscles and
     other organs human beings, in common with some other
   creatures, are capable of emitting a very large range of
      noises that are technically called articulate sounds. Living in
     societies and possessing expansive brains, men have been
     able to invest these sounds with conventional meanings. By
     agreement sounds become words, signals for action and
     symbols for objects and events familiar to other members of
    the group. (Note, incidentally, that gestures too can be given
        eanings in the same way, though less conveniently): The
     cries of birds and the bleats of sheep have meanings in this
   sense; on hearing the signal all members of the flock act in
   _the appropriaté way. It means to them at least action and
     provokes an appropriate response in the creatures’ be-
_ haviour. Among men spoken words (and of course also
   gestures) fulfil the same function, but on a tremendously
    richer scale.
   _ Men’s first words may perhaps have carried their mean-
     ings on the face of them. Our word ‘peewit’ simulates the
     cry of the bird thus named. Paget suggests that the shape
     assumed by the lips in pronouncing a word may pictorially
    mimic the thing indicated. In any case such self-explanatory
     noises would not carry us very far. Most words used even by
  the lowest savages bear no recognizable similarity to what
  they denote. They are purely conventional; that is, meanings
k have to be attached to them artificially by some sort of tacit
jagreement between members of the society using them. The
     process becomes explicit when a conference of chemists
     agrees on the name for a new element. It is usually far more
  _ subtle.
        It is just because the meanings of words are thus conven-
 tional that children have to be taught to talk. Learning to
q talk means essentially learning what meanings the society
   ‘to which the child belongs attaches to noises that it can
    make. Incidentally this is a substantial addition to the for-
    midable list of things a poor human infant has to learn. It
victim cannot understand       ee is said to him, i.e., cann
remember the meanings attached to the noises he he
Even the earliest ‘human’ skulls bear marks of a swellin
the brain in the speech regions, so that language seems as
and universal a human trait as tool-making.
   Language transforms the process of social tradition; p
cept accelerates education. By example a mother can sh
her offspring what to do when a savage beast appears.-
many young things find such concrete lessons fatal! By pre-
cept, she can explain in advance what to do if the savag:
beast does appear — a method of instruction much m re
economical of life! In general by imitating your fellows°
learn how to act in a concrete case actually present.
the aid of language you can be taught how to mee
emergency before it arrives. Language is the vehicle fo
transmission of the social heritage of experience; byit
means experience  — the results of trials and errors, what
happen and what to do — is collected and transm



biological inheritance — but also that of all their group.-
only can parents describe to their descendants the crises 0



Human experience can be pooled. In learning to make a ;
use your equipment you are being initiated into this pooled iY
experience.
   Language is more than a mere vehicle of tradition,
affects what is transmitted. The socially accepted meanin
of a word (or other symbol) is almost necessarily somewhz
abstract. The word ‘banana’ stands for a class of objects
having in common    certain visible, tangible, odorous, and    —
above all edible qualities. In using it we make abstraction
  omething of this abstract character. By its very nature
     nguage involves classification. On the practical side, by
     ample you learn to imitate accurately and in detail a
     rticular set of manipulative movements. By precept you
     n be taught the sort of movements to perform, but you
       ‘still left a little room for variation. In engineering the
       trast between apprenticeship and a university education
   eally goes back to this. Language makes tradition rational.
     Reasoning has been defined as ‘the ability to solve pro-
  blems without going through a physical process of trial and
   rror’. Instead of trying to do a thing with your hands and
    erhaps burning your fingers, you do it in your head using
     as — images or symbols of the actions which would be
   avolved. Other animals than men certainly behave as if
  they reasoned in this sense. Faced with a banana midway
  yp a tube, open at both ends but too long to reach up, a
      mpanzee discovered how to push the banana with a
     ck from one end and then grab it from the other, without
   oing through a number of futile movements, by sitting and
    reasoning’. The ape must have imagined the banana in
        ous non-existent positions before it hit upon the trick.
      t it did not have to go very far from the concrete situation
_ with which it was actually confronted. What is distinctive of
 human reasoning is that it can go immensely farther from
 the actual present situation than any other animal’s reason-
 ing ever seems to get it. In this distinctive advance language
 has surely been a very great help.
    Reasoning and all that we call thinking, including the ~
-chimpanzee’s, must involve mental operations with what
Vsaychologists call images. A visual image, a mental picture of,
 say, a banana, is always liable to be a picture of a particular
  banana ina particular setting. A word on the contrary is, as
 explained, more general and abstract, having eliminated
  ust those accidental features that gives individuality to any
real banana. Mental images of words (pictures of the sound
  14            WHAT    HAPPENED       IN HISTORY
  or of the muscular movements entailed in utteringit) fo:
  very convenient counters for thinking with. Thinking with —
  their aid necessarily possesses just that quality of abstract-_
  ness and generality that animal thinking seems to lack. Men ©
  can think, as well as talk, about the class of objects called
  ‘bananas’; the chimpanzee never gets further than ‘that
  banana in that tube’. In this way the social instrument
  termed language has contributed to what is grandilo
  quently described as ‘man’s emancipation from bondage to.
  the concrete’.                                                 4
     To reason is to operate with symbols ‘in the head’ and not i
  with things or actions in the external world. Conventional—
  words are symbols, though by no means the only kind. You—
  can put such symbols together and combine them in all —
  sorts of ways in your head without moving a muscle. The {
  term ‘idea’ is generally used for what words and other
  symbols denote, mean, or refer to. In a sense ‘banana’ does |
  not refer to anything you can see, touch, smell, or even eat,a
  but only to an idea — the ‘ideal ey . Still this idea is.
  happily represented by plenty of substantial edible bananas.
  even if none of them quite comes up to the standard of the
  ideal banana. But in society men make names for and talk
  about ideas which cannot in fact be seen, smelt, handled
  tasted like bananas — ideas such as two-headed eagle, mana, —
~ electricity, cause. All these are social products, like the words *
  that express them. Societies behave as if they stood for real—
 things. In fact men seem to be impelled to far more strenu-|
 ous and sustained action by the idea of two-headed eagle,
 immortality, or freedom than by the most succulent
 bananas!
    Without going in for any metaphysical subtleties, socially
 approved and sustained ideas that inspire such action ie
 be treated by history as just as real as those which stand for
 the more substantial objects of archaeological study. In E
 practice ideas form as effective an element in the environ-
 ment of any human society as do mountains, trees, animals,
 the weather and the rest of external nature. Societies, that is,
 behave as if they were reacting to a spiritual environment as —
ii),
zy                  ARCHAEOLOGY         AND HISTORY                  15
P
‘    well as to a material environment. To deal with this spiritual
     environment they behave as if they needed a spiritual
 _ €quipment just as much as they need a material equipment
  _ of tools.
_       This spiritual equipment is not confined to ideas which
_ can be - and are — translated into tools and weapons that
_ work successfully in controlling and transforming external
  _ nature, nor yet to the language which is the vehicle for ideas.
   _ It includes also what is often termed society’s ideology — its
re
Pen _ superstitions, religious beliefs, loyalties, and artistic ideals.
    Apparently in pursuit of ideologies and inspired by ideas,
  _men perform actions of a kind never observed among other
_animals. At least 100,000 years ago those strange-looking
;creatures termed Neanderthal men ceremonially buried
  their dead children and relatives, and provided them with
,food and tools. Every known human society to-day, however
E savage, performs rites — often quite painful — and abstains
_ from pleasures that are available to them. The motives for
_ —and stimuli to — these actions and abstentions to-day, and
-Presumably i in the past too, are socially sanctioned ideas
    of the sort denoted by our words ‘immortality’, ‘magic’,
es“god’. Such actions are strange to the rest of the animal
_kingdom, presumably because brutes do not use a language
   symbolism and hence cannot form such abstract ideas.
: Flints over a hundred thousand years old seem to have
  been fashioned with more care and delicacy than was
:requisite for mere utilitarian efficiency. It looks as if their
_ author had wanted to make an implement that was not only
_ serviceable but also beautiful. More than 25,000 years ago
 _ people began painting their bodies and hanging round their
   necks shells and beads, made with considerable labour.
_ To-day all over the world we find people knocking out their
_ teeth, binding their feet, deforming their bodies with corsets
_or submitting to some other mutilation in obedience to the
   dictates of fashion. Such behaviour again seems peculiar to
the human species. It results from and gives expression to an
ideology.
_ So with the aid of abstract ideas men have evolved and
however remote from obvious biological none, is foun
practice to be biologically useful — that is, favourable to
species’ survival. Without such spiritual equipment not
only do societies tend to disintegrate, but the individua
composing them may just stop bothering to keep alive. Th
‘destruction of religion’ among primitive peoples is alw.
cited by experts as a major cause in their extinction in co




have ee            to that by       ue aoadienes They ae
ceased to increase sufficiently to prevent the diminuti
the island’s population.’
   Evidently societies of men ‘cannot live by bread alot
But if ‘every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of
does not directly or indirectly promote the growth a
biological and economic prosperity of the society that sancti-
fies them, that society and its god with it will vanish u
mately. It is this natural selection that guarantees that
long run the ideals of a society are ‘just translations and in
sions in men’s minds of the material’. The religion o
Eddystone Islanders provided a motive for living and ke
economic system functioning. But in practice head-hu
kept down the numbers of the islanders. So it ee



judged by historical selection. But the verdict may be lor
 delayed.                                                  j
   An ideology is evidently a social product. ‘Notonly


 reality, their power to influence pevb to their pei
 by society. Seemingly absurd beliefs can win and maint
    ence provided every member of the group accepts them
and has been taught to believe in them from childhood. It
    never occur to any one to question a belief universally
    - Few of us have any better grounds for believing in
   ms than for believing in witches. Our society inculcates
     former belief and ridicules the latter, but other societies
   verse the judgements. Of course a number of acknow-
   dged experts have seen germs under the microscope. But
  “ill more experts in medieval Europe and in Negro Africa
   ave seen witches functioning. The superiority of our belief
  ;in the long run established if antiseptics and vaccines
    cceed better in preventing deaths, and so permitting
   cial growth, than do incantations and witch-burnings.
_ Not the least important function of an ideology is to hold
society together and lubricate its workings. And in this guise
at least ideology reacts on technology and material equip-
ment. For, like spiritual equipment, material equipment is a
social product not only in the sense that it springs from social
tradition. In practice the production and use of tools also
       ires co-operation between members of a society. To-day

       s housing, clothing, and satisfaction for other needs only

 as a result of the co-operation of a vast and highly com-
 plicated productive organization or economy. Cut off from
   lis we should be very uncomfortable and should probably
‘starve. Theoretically ‘primitive man’, with simpler wants
and more rudimentary equipment, could shift for himself
   one. In practice even the rudest savages live in groups
   rganized to co-operate in getting food and preparing
  :quipment as well as in performing ceremonies. Among the
 Australian aborigines, for instance, we find a division of
labour between the sexes in hunting and gathering as well
as in making implements and vessels. There is also a division
of the product of this co-operative activity.
_ Even the student of material culture has to study a society
is a co-operative organization for producing means to
 atisfy its needs, for reproducing itself - and for producing
 ew needs. He wants to see its economy working. But its
18           WHAT    HAPPENED     IN   HISTORY

economy affects, and is affected by, its ideology. The
‘materialist concept of history’ asserts that the economy —
determines the ideology. It is safer and more accurate to —
repeat in other words what has been stated already: in the ©
long run an ideology can survive only if it facilitates the —
smooth and efficient functioning of the economy. If it —
hamper that, the society — and with it the ideology — must —
perish in the end. But the reckoning may be long postponed.
An obsolete ideology can hamper an economy and impede|         ‘
its change for longer than Marxists admit.
    Pdcally social tradition is one: the man of to-day is_
theoretically heir to all the ages, and inherits the accumu- %
lated experience of all his forerunners. This ideal is, how- —
ever, far from realization. Mankind does not form one —
society to-day, but is divided into many distinct societies;
all the available evidence suggests that this division was not
less. but even greater in the past as far as archaeology can -
penetrate. Each society may have not only different lan-—
guage conventions, but also equally different conventions—     i
about spiritual and even material equipment; for each has |
preserved, transmitted, and built up its own peculiar tradi- 4
tion.
   The babel of tongues is painfully obvious to-day; it will -
suffice here to recall that each language is the product of a”
social tradition, and itself reacts upon other traditional
modes of behaving and of thinking. Less familiar is the way —
in which divergences of tradition affect even material cul-_
ture. Americans use knives and forks differently from
Englishmen, and the difference in usage finds concrete
expression in subtle differences in the shapes of the knives
and forks themselves. In Ireland and Wales rural workers
use long-handled shovels; in England and Scotland the
handles are much shorter. The work accomplished i is in each
case the same, though the handling of the tool is, of course,
different. The differences are purely conventional. They |
reflect divergences in the social tradition. As such diver-
gences are concretely expressed in the forms of the tool
employed, they fall within the purview of archaeology, and”
                                                                -
                                                                ie




                                                                yi
                   ARCHAEOLOGY        AND   HISTORY                19

    can be followed into a remote past when no written records
    permit the recognition of linguistic differences.
       Man-like creatures appear some four to five hundred
    thousand years ago dispersed from England to China, and
    from Germany to the Transvaal. We can only assume that
    they lived in social groups and that these were small,
    sparsely scattered and mutually isolated. Under such con-
    ditions we should expect that each would develop rather
    different traditions in accordance with the varying climatic
    and other environmental conditions with which they had to
    contend. And, in fact, among the earliest undoubted pro-
    ducts of human handiwork in the oldest certain tools,
  7 regional differences in the methods   of shaping stones and in
    the forms given to the resultant implements can be detected.
_   They are seemingly arbitrary, not conditioned either by the
    nature of the material or by the use to which the product
    must be put. Like knives and forks in England and America,
    and shovels in England and Wales, these differences in
    technique and form must correspond to divergent traditions
    developed and practised by distinct societies — bands,
    hordes, troops, clans, tribes, or what you will. As time goes
    on and the archaeological record becomes fuller, more and
    more differences can be detected and affect an ever widen-
    ing range of concrete products. One of the principal aims
    of prehistoric archaeology has been to define the several social
    traditions expressed in the differences among their relics.
       Archaeologists classify the objects of their study not only
    by function into knives, axes, huts, tombs, and so on, but
   also into different ‘types’ of knives, axes, dwellings and
   graves. The several types of knife or tomb each fulfil
  roughly the same function; the differences between them
   repose upon divergences in the social tradition prescribing
   the methods of their preparation and use. In each functional
  class archaeologists can distinguish a variety of types current
 _ over a restricted area at a given period in archaeological
   time. The totality of recognized types current simultane-
   ously in a given area is termed a ‘culture’. Archaeology is
   liable to become a study of cultures rather than of culture!




a
    The variety of types is testimony to the multiple
social traditions governing their manufacture and employ
ment, The remarkable uniformity of types in a given loc
and chronological group or ‘culture’ just discloses t.
uniformity and rigidity of the traditions actuating thx
makers. As the peculiarities of the component types a
determined by convention rather than by function, th
culture must correspond to a social group which sanctifi
the distinctive conventions and carries the social traditio
It would be rash to try to define precisely what sort of so
group corresponds to the archaeologist’s ‘culture’. Since
language is such an important vehicle in the formation and
transmission of social tradition, the group distinguished b
possession of a distinct ‘culture’ might be expected also t
speak a distinct language.
   Now is is a priori likely that divergences in linguistic co
ventions are at least as old as divergences in material eq
ment or burial rites. The extraordinary multiplicity of
tinct languages or mutually incomprehensible dial
among savages who have remained near the economic l
of pleistocene men gives some positive justification for t
assumption. The aboriginal Australians, estimated as som:
200,000 in all, spoke no less than five hundred languages.
In the 150,000 square miles of California Kroeber
tinguishes thirty-one families of languages and at least 135
dialects. Again, when the first written documents begin
reveal men’s speech, we find several widely diverge
linguistic traditions established in the tiny areas we can at
first survey — Egyptian, Sumerian, Semitic (Akkadian
and Elamite, with hints of others in personal and geograph
cal names. As writing spreads, ever new tongues are
revealed — Nasili, Luvian, Hurrian, Proto-Hattic, Phoeni- ©
cian, Chinese, Greek, Persian, Urartian, Etruscan, Latin,—
Celtic ... to name only the most notable. The tendenc
for the traditional conventions of language to diverge is still
observable even where the English language is standard- —
ized by awidely-circulated printed literature. ‘Next Friday’ os
in England becomes ‘Friday first’ in Scotland; when you —
                                      r eae   PUR a     Aree   age   os Pe   sy

                      ye
                     >

                     ARCHAEOLOGY         AND          HISTORY                     21
      2

    cross the Atlantic ‘lorry’ must be translated ‘truck’. The
   _tendency which can resist the standardizing effect ofwriting
    and the unprecedented facilities for travel, must have
. worked more rapidly and more effectively before writing
    and regular means of communication were available.
_ Linguistic divergences must be just as old as the cultural
 _ divergences traceable directly in the archaeological record.
  __ Nevertheless culture and language need not coincide. The
  differences in equipment between Denmark, England,
 _ France, and Germany are insignificant in comparison with
     the differences between Danish, English, French, and Ger-
  _man. Material equipment is more permanent than spoken
 _ words; its preparation and use can be learned by example
   as well as by precept. Useful devices can - and do - leap
     linguistic frontiers. But if the culture does not necessarily
  represent a linguistic group, it is generally a local group
 _ occupying a continuous geographical area.
  _ Regarding cultures as geographical units, the differences
 between them appear less arbitrary and more significant.
_ They can be partially explained as adjustments to different
_ environments. The various species of lower animals are
  generally adapted to life under particular conditions of
     climate, soil, and plant-life; many of their differentiae, the
    features that distinguish one species from another, have
_ been established by natural selection precisely because they
_   proved favourable to survival under such a specific set of
 hygeographical   conditions: that, for instance, is obviously
a  true of the mountain hare with his variable coat, and the
zq# lowland hares that do not turn white in winter. The human
 species is not physiologically adapted to any particular
environment. Its adaptation is secured by its extracor-
_ poreal equipment of tools, clothes, houses, and the rest. By
_ devising suitable equipment a human society can fit itself
     to live under almost all conditions.             Fire, clothing, houses
and an appropriate diet enable men to endure arctic cold
_ and tropic heat equally well.
          Material culture is thus largely a response to an environ-
_ment: it consists of the devices evolved to meet needs evoked
i
as
Mar    eTeT eeae    a   Le ee   ae




      22           WHAT HAPPENED IN HISTORY
                                                                \
      by particular climatic conditions, to take advantage of local t
      sources of food and to secure protection against wild beasts,

      societies have been prompted to invent different devices and _
      to discover how to use different natural substances for food, —
      fuel, shelter, and tools. Forest dwellers can develop wood-—
      working, carpenters’ tools, log-cabins, and carved orna-
      ments; steppe folk must make larger use of bone, basketry, ©
      and leather, can do without axes and dwell perforce in skin—
      tents or in subterranean shelters.                            q
         In response to the promptings of its own peculiar environ-
      ment, each society may be expected to evolve distinctive —
      processes and devices. But luckily the appropriate inven-—
      tions and discoveries are not confined to the regions where -
      they were evolved. Societies may migrate to regions which
      have evoked other responses in other societies. The migrant
      society does not throw away its traditional equipment to
      adopt that appropriate to its new home; more usually the
      immigrant and the native traditions blend: Again inven-—
      tions and discoveries do transgress the boundaries of
      locality and linguistic convention; they can be — and are —
      diffused from one society to another; despite all obstacles of
      space and language. The richness of our own cultural tradi-
      tion is due very largely to diffusion, to the adoption by our
      progressive societies of ideas created by many distinct |
      groups in response to the diverse conditions and oppor-—
      tunities of many regions. For instance, as staple vegetable-
      foods we have added to the wheat, barley, and fruits of
      Hither Asia, rice from East Asia, maize, potatoes, marrows, _
      and other plants from North America, bananas from tropi-
      cal Africa, and so on; our alimentary tradition has been
      enriched froth every quarter of the globe.                     E
          Prehistory and history do indeed show how culture grows-
      more and more diversified through the differentiation of
      societies in response to special stimuli — geographical, techni-
      cal, or ideological. What is, however, even more striking is _
      the growth of intercourse and interchange between socie-
      ties. If the streams of cultural tradition go on multiplying
    ey nonetheless tend to converge more and more, and to
 flow into a single river. A main stream with ever-growing
 emphasis dominates the whole drainage system to canalize
  the waters of fresh springs. Cultures are tending to merge
     0 culture.
     If our own culture can claim to be in the main stream, it
     only because our cultural tradition has captured and
     de tributary a larger volume of once parallel traditions.
      ile in historical times the main stream flows from
     esopotamia and Egypt through Greece and Rome,
     zantium and Islam, to Atlantic Europe and America, it
    as been repeatedly swollen by the diversion into it of
    urrents from   Indian,    Chinese,   Mexican,   and   Peruvian
 civilizations, and from countless barbarisms and savageries.
   thinese and Indian civilizations have indeed not failed to
  absorb currents from one another and from farther west.
 But, on the whole, they have hitherto discharged these into
     cid unchanging      backwaters.     The   civilizations of the
   fAayas and the Incas, on the other hand, have ceased to run
   ltogether, save in so far as their waters are carried on in the
     in stream of modern Atlantic civilization. In the sequel
     shall be frankly concerned primarily with the course of
  the main stream,     even   though we have to diverge from
_ time to time to trace its enrichment from lateral tributaries.
  _ If the whole long process disclosed in the archaeological
   and literary records be surveyed, a single directional trend
   is most obvious in the economic sphere in the methods
  whereby the most progressive societies secure a livelihood.
      n this domain it will be possible to recognize radical and
       deed revolutionary innovations, each followed by such
       creases in population that, were reliable statistics avail-
     ble, each would be reflected by a conspicuous kink in the
     opulation graph. These revolutions can accordingly be
      sed to mark off phases or stages in the historical process
which may be summarized in advance as follows.
    (1) The story begins perhaps 500,000, perhaps 250,000
 years ago, with man emerging as a rare animal and a food-
- gatherer, that lived like any other beast of prey a parasite on
      We   aa     Sstl Ge

                WHAT        HAPPENED IN HISTO
other creatures by catching and collecting what food n
happened to provide. This gathering economy, corresp
ing to what Morgan terms savagery, provided the sole so
of livelihood open to any human society during nearly

the whole of what archaeologists call the Palaeolithic or 0 |
Stone Age, and geologists name the pletstocene. Itiisstill Pree

of Malaya or Central Africa, in the deserts of a
western Australia and South Africa, and in the Arcti
regions.
  (2) Perhaps not more than 8,000 years ago, some
societies, first apparently in the Near East, by actively co-
operating with nature began to increase the supplies of foo
available by cultivating plants and often also by breedi
domestic animals. The new food-producing economy is dis-
tinctive of what Morgan calls barbarism, and is represente
in its simplest form in what archaeologists term the JVeol:
or New Stone Age. But in the economic sense, at least, ne
lithic does not correspond to a period of time, since the
Maoris of New Zealand were still neolithic in equipment _
and economy in A.D. 1800. Moreover, many societies tha
economically are still barbarian have learned to use iro1
or bronze tools and weapons, although the full industr
use, at least, of bronze was possible only after the ne:
economic revolution.
   (3) This was initiated in the alluvial valleys of the Ni
the Tigris-Euphrates, and the Indus about five thous.
years ago, with the transformation of some riverside villa
into cities. Society persuaded or compelled the farmers
produce a surplus of foodstuffs over and above their dom
tic requirements, and by concentrating this surplus usedit1
support a new urban population of specialized craftsmen,
merchants, priests, officials, and clerks. Writing was, as will‘
be shown, a necessary by-product of this urban revolution
which ushers in civilization and initiates the historical record
   (a) The first two thousand years of civilization coincide.‘
with what archaeologists describe as the Bronze Age, because
         ons. ‘Both are sO expensive as normally to be available
          to gods, kings, chiefs, and the employees of temples and
        ies. The social surplus, derived primarily from sub-
      ence agriculture by irrigation, was concentrated in the
     nds of a relatively narrow circle of priests and officials,
     nose limited expenditure limited also the growth of the
      ban industrial and commercial population.
       b) The Early Iron Age, initiated by the divulgation of an
    onomical method of producing wrought iron about
  1200 B.G., meant the popularization of metal equipment. At
 thhe same time in the Near East the invention of an alpha-
  betical script popularized writing, which had hitherto been
     mystery confined to a small class of learned clerks, while
       r 700 B.c. small change in coined money facilitated
    tail transactions. In the Classical or Graeco-Roman economy,
        g these popular innovations combined with the facilities
    r cheap transport offered by the Mediterranean, the sur-
     us, now partly derived from specialized farming, was more
     dely distributed among an upper middle class of mer-
     ants, financiers, and capitalist farmers. This permitted a
     table growth of population, at least in the Mediterranean
  basin, which was, however, ultimately checked by the
    lative impoverishment or actual enslavement of the
     imary producers and artisans.
 BCC) Feudalism in Europe tied to the soil the hitherto
  semi-nomadic barbarian cultivator, ultimately increasing
_the productivity of the temperate forest zone. But it emanci-
   sated him from chattel slavery of the Roman pattern, while
 tk e guild system secured to the artisan as well as to the mer-
    2ant not only freedom but an unprecedented economic
    atus. So eventually trade and industry, superimposed
      on a more intensive and settled agriculture and now using
    ater power, promoted an unparalleled growth in the
 European population.
    (d) Finally the discovery of the New World and of seaways
  to India and the Far East opened to Atlantic Europe a
  world market. In exchange for mass-produced popular
ood societies on the Atlantic eaheariee
draw upon the food stock of the whole> worl it




phases.
                                   II

               PALAEOLITHIC              SAVAGERY

      [ue first chapter of human history is still interwoven with
   atural history. Prehistoric anthropology studies what is to
     known of man’s physical evolution, the bodily changes in
 the human animal. Prehistoric archaeology shows how man
became human by labour and studies the improvement of
 his extracorporeal equipment. Both the anthropological and
   .e archaeological records cover a span of time roughly a
   indred times as long as that covered by the oldest written
record. The emergence of man and the manufacture of
the first tools may be put somewhere about five hundred
thousand years ago. That is the age assigned on one
 Rew to the beginning of the pleistocene epoch, the last
    lume in the geological record before the holocene or recent,
   hich may begin ten thousand years ago and is far from

      _ Such figures are only approximate and are in any case so
         ge that they mean relatively little to most people. What




        oT Much of what is now the North Sea must have been
dry     land, and men could have followed the equivalent |of


    en’ began to make tools, men lived to see quite important
hills thrown up by the folding of the earth’s crust. One
    ool, indeed, holds that such gigantic cracks as the Rift
Valley in Africa opened up when men were already inhabit-
ra
        o@that continent.
      - Catastrophic changes in climate undoubtedly affected the
       shole earth; three or four Ice Ages followed one another in
      :
5
high latitudes, and were accompanied by periods of torren
rain in now arid sub-tropical zones. The snow caps
glaciers that to-day cover the high Norwegian mountains
grew slowly bigger, crept down the valleys, and eventually
spread out in a huge ice sheet over the plain of Northe
Europe. Ice caps developed on the Scottish Highlands, to
and thence ice sheets spread out over Ireland and over En
land to join the Scandinavian ice sheet to the east. T
Alpine glaciers likewise crept down stream. The Rh6
glacier that now terminates high above the Lake of Gene
flowed down tillit reached almost to Lyons in France. Now
glaciers are not rivers that have frozen, but rivers of ice that4.
flow at not more than ten or twenty feet a year. In Green-
land and Antarctica we can still see ice sheets like those  th
covered England and northern Europe in the pleistocene.
they ‘flow’ at the rate of about a quarter of a mile pe
annum. So one can guess how long it took for the Scottish
ice to reach Cambridge or the Scandinavian ice to cover
Berlin. And the process of retreat, the melting of the hu
ice masses, was almost as slow.
  But melt they did. The climate grew warm enough fi
hippopotami and tigers to live in Norfolk, and for rhod
dendrons, now at home in Portugal, to grow in the Tyr
And then the ice spread once more, only to contract agai
Indeed, most geologists admit four major Ice Ages or glac
periods separated by three inter-glacial warm interva
Some authorities would, in fact, admit a still larger number —
of glacials and inter-glacials.                                 ;
    Meanwhile man witnessed new species of animals emer:
and become established by natural selection, sometimes on
to die out. In the first inter-glacial some very curious cre
tures — the sabre-toothed tiger, the little three-toed horse a
the southern elephant — survivors from the pliocene, wer
still competing with newer varieties that eventually replaces
them. To withstand the cold of the ice ages species of elephan
and rhinoceros — the mammoth and the woolly rhinoceros
acquired hairy coats. Such variations were presumably        es
tablished bya process ofnatural selection extending over ma:
                 PALAEOLITHIC      SAVAGERY

  generations — and elephants are notoriously slow breeders.
_ The most curious of all the Species emerging was, how-
ever, Man himself. The first ‘men’ differ so radically in
their bony structure from any race living to-day that zoo-
-logists classify them in distinct species or genera and refuse
_ to them the scientific name for modern man, Homo sapiens.
 Such can be called hominids, ‘men-like creatures’, or just
Femen’ in inverted commas. The oldest fossil hominids
;exhibit many ‘simian traits’, features proper to apes that
modern men can do without for reasons hinted at on p. 8
ipond more fully explained in Man Makes Himself.
         ‘Pithecanthropus, the ape-man oFJava, had avery thick
Pa    but very small skull with a cranial capacity varying
      from 1,100 to 750 cubic centimetres — on an average
      about midway between that of chimpanzees and
    +


      modern man. His forehead sloped back behind a bony
      visor or torus that protected the eyes and supported
      the massive architecture of skull and jaw. Buta rudi-
      mentary swelling over the area devoted to speech in
ee our brains shows that Java man was already talking
ee
See
poET
~ =
      and investing sounds with socially approved meanings.
er:   But his jowl was disproportionately large and his jaw
      chinless. Sinanthropus, the generic name for the hominids
Se
aS
eae
      found in the cave of Chou-kou-tien, near Peking,
 ‘    exhibits the same sort of peculiarities.’
r
_ Thus in Lower Pleistocene times the anthropological
  record disclosed, as might be anticipated, the emergence of
_species and genera intermediate in some ways between apes
  and men in the full sense of that term. The extreme rarity
_ of documents illustrating this phase of evolution is signifi-
_ cant. In digging drains or railway cuttings or other excava-
  tions through the gravels of ancient rivers or the debris of
_ pleistocene ice-sheets, or where erosion has laid bare old
-seashores and river banks, the fossilized bones of sabre-
— toothed tigers, rhinoceros, and mammoth may often be
_ picked up. But down to the approach of the last ice age only
four incomplete fragments of fossil hominids are known in

|
‘
30           WHAT     HAPPENED      IN   HISTORY

the whole of Europe, although scientists and amateurs are q
everywhere on the look-out for ‘missing links’. Four fossils
to represent the hominid population of our Continent dur- —
ing say 200,000 years! Asia has proved more productive.
Java men and China men combined now take us into the ~
twenties. Still the rarity of human fossils does justify the con- —
clusion that during the first millennium or so of their existence
‘men’ were rare animals. The minute groups of hominids —
cannot have seemed dangerous competitors to the contem-
porary mammoths, cave-bears, tigers, and hippopotami.
    This conclusion is not really falsified by the evidence of
archaeology. It is true that cartloads of tools, made by early
hominids, can be picked up on the high veldt where once
 the Vaal and Zambesi flowed. Admittedly museums’
 cellars in France and England are crammed with imple-
 ments dug up in equally ancient gravels. But a single
 hominid might in a day make, use and discard three or four
 such tools. The many tons of them spread over a couple of
 hundred thousand years of 365 days do not attest a vast
multitude of tool makers.
   They do tell all that is to be learned directly of the
development of that extracorporeal equipment that was to
make its users masters of all the brutes. Admittedly the first
beginnings of that development elude the grasp of arch-
aeology. A critical moment was when men learned to con-
trol and later to initiate the chemical process of combus-
tion — to use the terrible red flower from which other jungle
dwellers flee in terror. But evidence for the use of fire is
unobtainable in the conditions under which the oldest
archaeological remains are normally unearthed. Still in the
earliest known    ‘home’,   the cave of Chou-kou-tien,     near
Peking, charred bones indicate that even that odd hominid
Sinanthropus was controlling and using fire. Similarly the
first tools must have been natural objects only slightly
modified to serve human needs. In so far as they were of
wood, these have perished irretrievably. Those made of
durable stone are so like natural chips as to be scarcely
recognizable. The archaeological controversy about what
               PALAEOLITHIC       SAVAGERY                 31

are termed ‘eoliths’ centres around just such doubtful
products.
   When in lower, or on a modern view only in early middle,
pleistocene times unmistakable tools, stones patently shaped
in an intelligent and purposeful way, do appear, their use is
still uncertain. Probably each had many uses; tools were not
yet specialized as with us to specific ends, but the same
roughly-chipped flint served all purposes from dispatching a
tiger to scraping the hairs off his hide or digging up roots.
Gradual improvements can be detected as traditional skill
was slowly accumulated; instead of just knocking off coarse
chips by banging one stone against another, some men
found out howto detach neater flakes by blows with a
billet of wood. And we can observe methods of flint working
diverging in different areas as divergent traditions grow up »
among distinct social groups.
    Throughout Africa, in western Europe, and in southern
India the favourite and most carefully shaped tools were
made by knocking bits off a large lump or core till this was
reduced, to one of four or five standard forms. The products
can all be classified as core tools and are currently designated
hand-axes. In Europe during the ice age and in northern
Eurasia we meet on the other hand almost exclusively
what are termed flake-tools. Their makers do not seem to
have cared much what shape was ultimately assumed by
the parent lump or core; they were primarily interested in
 the flakes detached and trimmed these up to form imple-
ments, less rigorously standardized than hand-axes. Finally
 the tools made by China man and the earliest implements
 (termed Soan) from northern India and the Malay Penin-
sula cannot be classed as either core or flake tools, but are
regarded as representative ofa distinct ‘chopper’ or ‘pebble’
cycle.
   The divergent traditions thus revealed no doubt reflect
different responses to differing environments. But they are
essentially conventional and conditioned by distinct social
traditions. No factor of climate or habitat obviously obliges
a tool maker to choose the core rather than the flakes
                                             My
             WHAT    HAPPENED      IN HISTORY

detached from it. And no less striking than the divergences —
between the main cycles are the uniformity and continui
within each. Notably in the core-tool province the same
peculiar forms were given to hand-axes from the Cape of —
Good Hope to the Mediterranean and from the Atlantic ‘
coasts to central India. For a couple of glacial cycles we —
can detect only minor variations and improvements on a €
small assortment of traditional forms. And in each part of q
the province these variations succeed one another in the
same order. It looks as if some sort of intercourse were
being maintained among the widely-scattered groups so
that ideas were interchanged and technical experience
was pooled.
   Finally, many of the later tools; particularly of the hand-
axe class, display extraordinary care and delicacy of work-—
manship. One feels that more trouble has been expended |
on their production than was needed just to make them —
work, Their authors were trying to make something not
only useful, but also beautiful. If so, the tools in question—
 are really works of art, expressions of aesthetic feeling. But
 this expression was conditioned by the traditions of the —
 group that used hand-axes. Some not quite unambiguous~
 indications (an imperfect jaw of doubtful geological age
 from Kanam in Kenya and the occipital bone of a skull
 found in a gravel pit at Swanscombe, Kent) suggest that
 the hand-axe makers may have been more like ourselves
 than Pithecanthropus or Sinanthropus; they may have been
‘our evolutionary ancestors, a status some would deny to
 the fossil men of Asia and even to Homo heidelbergensis, the ©
proud but unhappily unknown possessor of a massive fossil
jaw found in a deep sandpit at Mauer in Wiirttemberg.
    It may be assumed that all early hominids were just
gatherers. Hand-axes would serve as well for digging up
‘edible roots as for hunters’ weapons. Sinanthropus was
 almost certainly carnivorous; the animal bones from his
 cave seem to have been split deliberately by the hominid.
 Among the bones thus treated are those of hominids too.
‘So Sinanthropus may have been a cannibal. Probably all
                                       PRE        Ung oe eee

                   PALAEOLITHIC       SAVAGERY                    33
_ hominids were in fact omnivorous; they ate whatever they
   could get. Not the least important lesson they had to learn
   by experience and transmit by social tradition was what
   was safely edible and what was poisonous. Their mistakes
 _ are not recorded in. the archaeological record, but the
   simplest surviving savages have learned the necessary
   lessons and embodied them in their traditions. The deter-
mination     of edible plants and animals,        the discovery of
        ways of collecting or catching them, the recognition of the
      _ appropriate times and seasons were steps towards science.
        In jungle lore lie the roots of botany and zoology, of
     _ astronomy and climatology, while the control offire and
        the manufacture of tools initiate the traditions that emerge
        as physics and chemistry.
           Only towards the close of middle pleistocene times, on
        one chronology about 140,000 years ago, does the archaeo-
        logist’s picture of hominid life become clear enough to
        allow an economy to be tentatively sketched. As the last
        great ice age was approaching, men were sufficiently well
emoma
 e
 e,
        equipped to evict other denizens and themselves to find
        shelter in caves. There we find true homes.
           The best-known groups thus inhabiting Europe all belong
 - to a curious race termed Neanderthal and perhaps specifi-
        cally distinct from Homo sapiens. Though their brain-cases
        are as capacious as those of many Europeans to-day, there
     _ is a huge bony vizor or torus above the eyes instead of two
        eyebrow-ridges; the forehead is retreating, the jowl enor-
        mous, a chin lacking. The head was so balanced on the
        spine that it hung forward; the structure of legs and feet
        permitted only a shuffling gait.
           Many authorities believe that Neanderthal man repre-
        sents a distinct species of humanity specialized and adapted
        for living under Arctic conditions and that the species
        became extinct when those conditions passed away.
        Whether any ‘Neanderthal blood runs in the veins’ ‘of
        Europeans or other modern races is doubted. Hominids
        exhibiting many Neanderthal features, such as the supra-
        orbital torus, retreating forehead and excessively heavy jowl,




.
34           WHAT    HAPPENED      IN HISTORY

have been found in recent years in Palestine, South Africa,
and Java. While some anthropologists incline to regard
these as representing in a general way a stage in the
evolution of Homo sapiens, others regard most of them as
aberrant branches from the main human stem that had
gone up an evolutionary blind alley and then died out.
But some of the Palestinian fossils admittedly exhibit traits
such as a rudimentary chin that suggest at least hybridiza-
tion with Homo sapiens, and men of the latter type did exist,
making flake tools, during the last interglacial.
   Whatever their biological status, Neanderthalers and
their other middle palaeolithic contemporaries must be
credited with positive contributions to human culture. All
possessed a more varied and differentiated equipment than
their predecessors. It includes specialized weapons (repre-
sented by spear-heads), as well as distinct tools for scraping
and chopping. Most of these are made from flakes. Rarely
in Europe, regularly in Hither Asia and Africa these are
made by an ingenious process, known as the Levallois
technique, requiring much foresight and scientific planning
ahead; for the desired shape was blocked out on the core
before the flake was detached.
   In the case of the European Neanderthalers we know a
good deal of their economy and culture as well as of their
skeletons and implements. They lived by hunting, princi-
pally the mammoths, woolly rhinoceros, and other thick-
skinned beasts that browsed on the tundras along the
margins of the European ice-sheet and in Siberia. Evidently
such big game could not be pursued profitably by isolated
families. The Neanderthalers must have hunted together as
organized packs, and, however small these may have been,
their economy required some social organization.
   For all their primitive bodies they needed a spiritual
culture too. For their dead relatives they devised and
socially sanctified burial rites which they perhaps fondly
hoped would somehow reverse or cancel death. They buried
the bodies in specially excavated graves, sometimes placing
stones to protect them from the pressure of the earth. The
                      PALAEOLITHIC      SAVAGERY                  35
     . graves were normally dug in the caves that the living used
    _ for homes. Sometimes they are situated near to hearths as
       if in the hope that the fire’s heat would restore to the cold
       corpse the warmth of life. The bodies are placed in de-
       liberately chosen attitudes, generally doubled up. In one
      grave the skull had been separated from the trunk. Joints
      of meat and implements were regularly buried with the
      corpse. Neanderthalers must have imagined that life some-
      how continued so that the dead experienced the same needs
      as the living. From middle palaeolithic times ceremonial
    _ burial can be traced continuously, till to-day the wreaths,
       the nodding plumes and the wake embody a complex of
       ideas which, however much altered in the transmission, are
       at least a hundred thousand years old.
    _     This was not all. In some Alpine caves heaps of bones |
      and skulls, particularly of cave bears, have been found
       deliberately, one might say ceremonially, arranged. The
       arrangement suggests the rituals still performed by hunting
       tribes in Siberia to avert the wrath of the bear spirit and
       ensure the multiplication of bears to hunt. Perhaps then
_     we have here proof of hunting magic, if not worship, before
_ the last ice age. In any case even the rude Neanderthaler
    had an ideology.
        Despite the seemingly unfavourable conditions prevailing
    _ we get the impression that humanity had multiplied. In
      any case we have from Europe at least five times as many
      middle palaeolithic as lower palaeolithic skeletons, though
   the phase lasted perhaps only a fifth as long. But the
 _ Neanderthal stock and its industrial traditions too seem to
_ yanish abruptly frorn Europe at the close of the first phase
_ of the last ice age. In the more genial interval which ensued
   modern men appear already fully formed and with skeletons
   at least that would be hard to distinguish from recent
           imens in an anatomical museum.
         Men of modern type, fully fledged ‘wise men’, appear
      in the anthropological record much about the same time
      not only in Europe but also in North and East Africa,
     in. Palestine and even in China       (in an upper cave at
Chou-kou-tien).. They emerge already differentiated into
several distinct varieties or races. Even in Europe anato-
mists distinguish the faintly negroid Grimaldi race, the tall
C16-Magnon stock, a shorter Combe Capelle variety sometimes
round-headed,    perhaps a Briinn type exhibiting possibly
Neanderthaloid traits, while a later skull from Chancelade
 is said to resemble that of modern Eskimos. Such variety
 among the earliest modern men enhances the plausibility
 of the theory that direct ancestors of Homo sapiens had been
 evolving earlier in the pleistocene, even though most
 earlier fossil documents so far authenticated are more like
Neanderthalers.                                                 §
   In the archaeological record modern men appear in the
 upper palaeolithic enormously better equipped than any
 group so far distinguished in lower or middle palaeolithic
 times. The new equipment is found from the first differ-
 entiated by divergent social traditions, doubtless in response
 to varying environments, so that archaeologists can hence-
 forth distinguish several cultures corresponding to several
 social groups. The best-defined of these are (1) the Chatel-_
 perronian of France; (2) the Aurignacian found in Hither
Asia, the Crimea, the Balkans, Central Europe and, after
the Chatelperronian, in France; (3) the Gravettian of the
north Pontic zone, which succeeds the Aurignacian in
Central Europe and France and spreads to England and >
Spain (all the foregoing used to be treated as mere phases
of a single culture termed Aurignacian); (4) the Aterian of
Africa; and (5) possibly later the Capsian in North Africa.
Subsequently other local cultures crystallize out, notably |
the Solutrean and the Magdalenian in Western Europe |
(these are strictly local cultures, though their names, like |
Aurignacian, are used in the older text-books to designate |
periods within the upper palaeolithic). None of these social |
groups defined by archaeology demonstrably coincides with |
any of the races distinguished by anatomists; for instance,
Grimaldians and Cré-Magnons alike used a Gravettian|
equipment in the famous Grottes de Grimaldi near Men- |
tone.
                                                              ih
     Common to all these upper palaeolithic societies are the
  use of bone and ivory for tools and distinctive traditions in
 flint-work. All had learned how to prepare a lump of
  flint or obsidian so that a whole series of long narrow
  flakes, termed blades, could be struck off a single core once
  the long preliminaries had been executed. The method was
  more economical in material and, in the long run, in labour
_too than even the Levallois technique, which, however, was
 still employed extensively by the Aterians and other
 societies in Africa, Siberia, and China. Moreover, common
 to all upper palaeolithic groups in the Old World is an
  ingenious instrument termed a burin or graver — a blade
_ pointed by removing a facet along one edge in such a way
  that it can be repeatedly repointed by simply removing
 another facet. /
    Economically upper palaeolithic societies must still be |
 designated savage inasmuch as they relied for a livelihood
 on hunting, fishing, and collecting. But their methods and
 equipment have undergone an almost revolutionary im-
 provement. From the collective experience of ancestral
 generations they have learned how to take full advantage
 of natural conditions and how to manufacture ingenious
 new engines.
    The several hunting communities who occupied Europe
 had still to brave the severities of a subarctic climate; for
 the great ice sheet still covered the northern plains, though
 the mountain glaciers had retreated, albeit only tempor-
 arily. But, equipped to support these disabilities, they
 entered a land of steppes and tundras where vast herds of
 mammoths, reindeer, bison, wild cattle, and horses offered
 an easy prey to organized hunts. On the plains of South
 Russia and Central Europe the Gravettians pitched their
 camps along the routes the herds of big game must follow
 on seasonal migrations from winter to summer pastures.
 Along the Don the sites were cleverly chosen in river
 valleys which provided shelter against blizzards but adja-
 cent to the mouths of lateral gullies which could be used
 as natural corrals to trap the herds. Immense piles of bones
38           WHAT    HAPPENED     IN HISTORY
testify to the success rewarding the choice of such locations.
   Artificial protection against the cold was provided by
tents, presumably of skins, or even by substantial ‘houses’,
dug in the soft loess soil and roofed by skins and turfs
similar to those inhabited by arctic hunters to-day. As wood
was scarce the hunters burned bones to keep them warm —
the bone heaps may take the place of wood-piles —- and
could construct fireplaces provided with sunken flues to
supply a draught to this fuel. They made clothes of skins,
since the scrapers for preparing these and needles for sewing
them together are found. A statuette from Mal’ta in
Siberia seems to be clad in a trousered suit of furs such as
Eskimos wear.
   In the Dordogne and on the slopes of the Pyrenees and
Cantabrian mountains ample caves offered shelter to Aurig-
nacians and Gravettians who hunted on the adjacent
plateaux and plains. Yearly the salmon ran up the rivers _
to breed, and the Magdalenians      at least had learned to
catch the fish with hook and line or spear them with |
‘harpoons’ of reindeer antler.
   Upper palaeolithic hunting tackle had been enriched by ~
many fresh inventions. The Aterians and Capsians in
Africa certainly, their European and Asiatic contemporaries
probably, employed the bow, the first composite mechanism
devised by man; the total energy gradually expended by
the archer’s muscles is stored up in the bent wood or horn
so that the whole can be concentrated at one point and
released simultaneously. The Magdalenians and probably
also other upper palaeolithic societies used the spear-
thrower, another mechanical device for increasing the
range of a missile and the accuracy of its aim.              .
    Specialized tools were needed and used for manufacturing
this tackle and for satisfying the new needs for housing,
clothing, and adornment. Men were no longer content to
extemporize tools to meet immediate needs, but had: the
 foresight to make tools for making tools — secondary and
 tertiary tools, in fact. In addition to wood and stone, men
 had now secured mastery over other materials, notably
                                      ae            ee ee



               PALAEOLITHIC      SAVAGERY                   39

bone, antler, and ivory. For sharpening these a new process
was employed — polishing, which applied to stone used to
serve old-fashioned archaeologists as a criterion of the new
stone age. Moreover antlers, bones, and even flat stones
were sometimes perforated with circular holes. If not
requiring the use of a drill, perforation seems to imply
some application of rotary motion, so preparing the way
for such critical inventions as the wheel.
   The pursuit of large gregarious animals by Aurignacians,
Gravettians, and the rest required the co-operation of a
group larger than the natural family, even more certainly
than among Neanderthalers. But speculations as to how
such groups were organized are hardly profitable. Some
division of labour between the sexes may be deduced from
modern analogies, but each ‘family’ or ‘household’ could
probably manufacture its own equipment. And each group
could be self-contained and self-sufficing.
   Yet there are indications of interchange of products — in
fact of a sort of ‘trade’ between distinct communities,
though the articles traded were normally luxuries not in-
dispensable. Mediterranean shells have been found in the
caves of the Dordogne (west-central France). Some of the
flint found at Gagarino on the Don seems to have been
brought from exposures more than seventy miles down
stream, perhaps at Kostienki, where there was another
large camp. Finally, the bones of sea-fish are so common
in Magdalenian refuse heaps in the Dordogne that it looks
as if there may have been a regular interchange of com-
modities between coastal and inland communities living
in France contemporary with mammoths and reindeer.
Such intercommunal specialization can be illustrated among
recent savages on the same economic plane as the Mag-
dalenians. Evidently upper palaeolithic groups were not
entirely isolated from one another. The interchange of
material objects attested by archaeology gave opportunity
also for the pooling of ideas.
   Upper palaeolithic societies had further elaborated that
spiritual equipment already vaguely attested among
 Neanderthalers   and earlier. Dead    Grimaldians    and Cré-
 Magnons    were interred with even greater ceremony than
  Neanderthalers. Their graves were furnished with food,
  implements, and ornaments. Often the bones are found
  reddened with ochre. The mourning relatives had sprinkled
  the corpse with the red powder, surely in the pathetic hope
  that by restoring to the pallid skin the colour that sym-
  bolized life they would also restore the missing life itself.
  Such a confusion of the symbol with the thing symbolized
  lies at the root of ‘sympathetic magic’. It is symptomatic of
_ the tenacity of tradition that the practice of sprinkling the
  dead with ochre persisted for 20,000 years, long after
  experience should have convinced everyone of its futility. _
      Magic rites to ensure the food-supply, to promote the
  multiplication of the hunted game and secure success in
 the chase, were also devised. The Gravettians used to carve
 little figures of women out of stone or mammoth ivory, or
 model them in clay and ash. Archaeologists term these
 Venus figures (Venuses). But they are generally hideous;
 most have no faces, but the sexual characters are always
 emphasized. They were surely used in some sort of fertility
 ritual to ensure the multiplication of game; Zamiatnin
 suggests puppet plays imitating and so magically causing
 the generative process. In any case they must mean that
 the Gravettians grasped the generative function of women,
 and sought magically to extend it to the animals and plants
 that nourished them.
    In France Gravettians and their Magdalenian descen-|
 dants elaborated other rites. In the deep recesses of lime-
 stone caverns, perhaps two miles beneath the earth, the
 impenetrable gloom lit only by the feeble flame of fat
 burning in a stone lamp with moss wick, and often on rock
 surfaces accessible only by standing on a helper’s shoulders,
 artist-magicians painted or engraved the rhinoceros, mam-
 moth, bison, reindeer, that they must eat. As surely as a|
 pictured bison was conjured up on the cave wall by the
 master’s skilful strokes, so surely would a real bison emerge|
 for his associates to kill and eat. The beasts are always highly
           _-- PALAEOLITHIC SAVAGERY                           ary:
         ividualized, actual portraits not abstract shorthand
          bols (p. 14). They reflect minute and deliberate ob-
      ervation of real models. But the models so carefully studied
    and so accurately reproduced were very likely dead beasts.
       In fact, so important was this magic art in the estimation
   of upper palaeolithic society that the artist magicians may
  _have been liberated from the exacting tasks of the chase to
   concentrate on the reputedly more productive ritual; they
   would be assigned a share in the proceeds of the hunt in
  return for a purely spiritual participation in its trials and
   dangers. At least, the pictures are so masterly that they seem
   to be the work of trained and specialized craftsmen. In
   fact, from the Magdalenian site of Limeuil (Dordogne) we
    possess a collection of stone slivers and pebbles on which are
 _ scratched what look like small-scale trial pieces for the cave
    pictures; some show correction as if by a master’s hand.
    The collection may be scraps from the copy-books of a
  school of artists. Thus we dimly discern the emergence of
    the first specialists — the first men to be supported out of a
   social surplus of foodstuffs to collecting which they had
    made no direct contribution. But of course the Magda-
  lenians regarded their magical contributions as just as
_ important as the acumen of the tracker, the precision of
   the archer, and the valour of the huntsman.
       The economic prerogatives of the specialized magician
   are based upon socially sanctioned superstition. But the
   surplus that the magician thus appropriated was available
_ only because just at this time the hunting grounds and
   rivers of France were exceptionally well stocked with game
 _and fish. When forest invaded the steppe at the end of the
 ice age, magic was of no avail; bison, reindeer, and man-
 -moth vanished, and with them the Magdalenians and their
art.
    At the close of the last ice age, when the tundra zone was
% hifting north, the reindeer migrated, too, and men followed
_ them, Every summer a band of hunters from farther south
 used to repair to Holstein and encamp besidea little mere
at Meiendorf, not far from Hamburg. They succeeded in
42           WHAT    HAPPENED      IN   HISTORY-.
                                                           h

slaughtering hundreds of reindeer. But the first kill of each
season was not eaten. Its body, weighted with a stone, was
cast into the mere, presumably as an offering to the spirit
of the herd or the genius of the land. If this interpretation
be correct, the idea of sacrifice and some correlative con-
ception of spirits to be placated and conciliated had been
reached by these rude savages at least 10,000 years ago.
So even in the savagery of the Old Stone Age we can discern
the germs of religion, the propitiation by a collective social
sacrifice of spirits, conceived as having human emotions
and desires, in contrast to the vaguer and impersonal forces.
that magic is supposed to ‘control’, often for individual
rather than social ends.
   Art, too, enriched the spiritual culture of upper palaeo-
lithic societies. The engravings and paintings in the French
caves are admired as beautiful by artists to-day. If they
were executed for prosaically utilitarian magical purposes,
that did not debar the artist from an aesthetic satisfaction
in making his drawing beautiful, even though he could see
it no more than Beethoven could hear the Ninth Symphony.
Music, as well as graphic art, may have played a part in
Magdalenian magic, since bone pipes and whistles have
been found in the caves.
   With the same duality of motive, hunting tackle was
embellished with life-like carvings and engravings of
animals by the Gravettians and Magdalenians of France
and Spain. All upper palaeolithic peoples tried to increase
their beauty and enhance their personalities by mutilating
their bodies or decking them with ornaments. In Africa a
tooth was knocked out — at the behest of fashion, no doubt, |
but also as a ritual act. Everywhere shells or animals’ teeth |
were collected, pierced, and strung together to serve as
necklaces. But they were not only personal ornaments but |
also charms. Cowrie shells were so highly valued as to be’
brought from the Mediterranean to the Dordogne; they |
were valued because they resemble the vulva and therefore
confer fertility. Bracelets might be made from mammoth’s
tusks. One from Mezin in the Ukraine is carved very |
                                                     Peer     ee ee




                    PALAEOLITHIC        SAVAGERY                   43

        beautifully with a purely ‘ornamental’ geometric pattern —
         the meander. But to Australian black-fellows patterns
         equally devoid of representational content have a meaning,
         tell a story and work magic. Art and fashion are as defi-
        nitely rooted in the Old Stone Age as magic and super-
        stition. They were as necessary socially then as now. It
        is permissible to doubt whether the ‘Highland Cattle’
        on the sitting-room wall or the diamond necklace on the
        dowager’s throat be an advance on the bison in the lime-
        stone cave or the shell necklace of the Cré-Magnon
        savage.
            In Ice Age Europe savagery produced a dazzling culture
        and, judging by the relatively numerous skeletons that sur-
        vive, supported a substantially increased population. But
eee
eee
veee    this cultural efflorescence, this expansion of population were
        made possible by the food supply bounteously provided by
——
_—
     - glacial conditions and an economy narrowly specialized to
~—      exploit these. With the end of the ice age these conditions
        passed away. As the glaciers melted, forest invaded tundras
        and steppes, and the herds of mammoth, reindeer, bison,
        and horse migrated or died out. With their disappearance
       the culture of societies which preyed upon them also
      withered away. In early holocene times, during what
       archaeologists term the mesolithic phase, we find instead of
       the Gravettian and Magdalenian cave-men small groups
       scattered about in the vast forest in open glades, on the
       shore of sea or meres and along river banks hunting and
       snaring forest game, wild fowl, and fish.
           By contrast to what had passed away, the mesolithic
       societies leave an impression of extreme poverty. Neverthe-
       less, all seem to have enjoyed one advantage: in mesolithic
  sites in Portugal, France, the Baltic region, and the Crimea,
- bones of dogs are first found. Now it is precisely in hunting
  red deer, wild boar, hares, and similar game that dogs could
  help men. The wolfish or jackal ancestor of the domestic
  dog may have begun hanging round camp fires, a tolerated
  scavenger, much earlier. In mesolithic Europe he is first
  disclosed as a partner in man’s food quest, exploiting man’s
 44           WHAT    HAPPENED      IN HISTOR           ¢   Ohad


  superior cunning, but helping in the hunt and rewarc d
  with offal from the catch.                                   a
                                                                   i
     Again the mesolithic societies inhabiting the wooded plai 1
  extending from the central English Pennine chain to the
. Urals seem the first in Europe to have devised any equip-_
  ment for dealing with timber — and the forest was the out-
  standing factor differentiating the holocene from the late
  pleistocene environment. Beginning with splitting tools ~
  handle wedges — of antler, such as had been employed al
  ready in late pleistocene times in south-eastern Europe (Ru-
  mania and Hungary), the mesolithic forest-folk armed their.
  wedges with blades of flint or of stone, sharpened like the
  antler tools by grinding. Eventually they thus created a regu-
  lar kit of carpenter’s tools of axes, adzes, and gouges with
  which, among other achievements, they could solve the prob-
  lem of transport over snow and ice by making sledges. (Run-
  ners of sledges found embedded in mesolithic peat in Finnish
  bogs are, perhaps, the oldest surviving vehicles.)
    Savages, in fact, could — and did — advance after the end|
 of the Old Stone Age, though remaining savages. But}
 within the limits of savagery the scope for progress was very|
 small, and. its pace as slow as in the pleistocene period.,
 Some societies, by an economic revolution, emerged from|
 savagery and progressed much faster. So it would be tedious,
 were it possible, to enumerate the timid steps forward made
 by savage societies from the end of the Ice Age till the
 present day.
    The fate of the most brilliant savagery of the past — the
 Magdalenian cultures of France — will have sufficiently}
 disclosed the biological limitations of that economy. A}
 happy conjunction of circumstances, quite outside their
 own control, provided the Magdalenians with sufficient}
 food to support a growing population, obtainable with so
 little effort that they had leisure to embellish life with aj
 brilliant spiritual culture. But the magic superstructure}
 did nothing to increase the supplies of food which, after all,
 were not inexhaustible. So population was limited and
 eventually waned with the specially favourable conditions.
                    PALAEOLITHIC      SAVAGERY                   45
      _ The same conclusions could be drawn from an ethno-
     graphic study of modern savages. Red Indian tribes on the
     north-west coast of America, by exploiting salmon runs
     and similar resources as the Magdalenians had done,
     attained an even richer culture and were relatively very
_ numerous. Kroeber estimates that the population density
  _ in the more favoured regions was as high as 1.7 to a square
  mile. But that is quite exceptional for savagery. Even on
_ the Pacific coast the same author puts the density in other
 _ regions as low as 0.26 per square mile, while on the prairies
_ the hunting population would not have exceeded 0.11 per
  square mile. In the whole continent of Australia ‘the
 _ aboriginal population is believed never to have exceeded
 _ 200,000 — a density of only 0.03 per square mile.
   _ However approximate such estimates may be, they give
_a fair idea of the inherent defects of savagery as an economy.
_ It led to an impasse — a contradiction — and, had that con-
_ tradiction never been surmounted, Homo sapiens would have
  remained a rare animal — as the savage in fact is.
 wae   ‘Still, on the margins of tropical jungles, deserts, and ice-
ag
   fields, isolated tribes have continued to eke out an existence
|   with a palaeolithic economy long enough for recent anthro-
   _pologists to be able to study their spiritual culture. From
  _ the reports of these observers it is possible to deduce what
    sort of ideology effectively lubricates the operations of a
    food-gathering economy. Such deductions cannot disclose
  with scientific precision what savages in the Old Stone Age
    actually believed, or how Moustierian or Gravettian socie-
  _ ties were organized — that is unknowable — , but are relevant
    in as much as ‘survivals’ from inferentially savage ideo-
   logies seem to clog the workings of barbarian and civilized
|   economies.
_      Contemporary savage tribes are generally groups of clans
which, being more stable, overshadow or'even replace the
family as an institution. All clansmen are regarded as related
    in virtue of mystical descent from a totem ‘ancestor’. The


|
 totem is generally an edible animal, insect, or plant, im-
_             in the tribal economy, more rarely a natural
                               saSei




     .
46           WHAT    HAPPENED          IN   HISTORY

phenomenon, a feature of the landscape or a man-made
implement. ‘Descent’ is reckoned sometimes in the male
sometimes in the female, line. The system of kinship which—Me
determines the mutual rights and duties of clan-members ©
and, in particular, who may marry whom, is frequently
‘classificatory’. Not only the natural father, but also all
paternal (or maternal) uncles, etc., are classed as ‘fathers’,
first and second paternal (or under a matrilinear system,
maternal) cousins are classed as brothers, and so on.
Membership of the clan is theoretically based on ‘blood’,
practically on ceremonial initiation at puberty. While
‘kinship’ guarantees the ‘right’ to initiation, the same rites.
may secure adoption into the clan. Hence the relationship
of clansmen may be more or less fictitious.
   Hunting and fishing grounds, and the food obtained
therefrom, are generally owned and enjoyed in common.
But something like personal property in weapons, vessels, —
and finery and even in spells or dances may be recognized.
   Old men generally enjoy authority and prestige that
entitles them to a major share in women or any other sort
of ‘wealth’. But, particularly in America, these privileges
have often been monopolized by hereditary ‘chiefs’ who
can sometimes accumulate considerable wealth. Occasional
or endemic warfare between tribes or even between clans
is reported even in Australia, and more often in America,
where it serves to enhance the prestige of chiefs.
   The ideology of savages seems to be expressed in words
(spells) and imitative actions, rites, that symbolize changes
in the real world that society wishes to bring about. Each
totemic clan performs periodically dramatic ceremonies
supposed to ensure the multiplication of the ancestral
animals or plants. It looks as if the symbol were confused
with the result. The savage behaves as if he thought that
with spells and rites he can control natural phenomena
 that we now hold cannot be controlled by these means, if
 at all. All such operations are here termed magical. But it
 must not be assumed that they are, in fact, performed for
 any such clearly formulated reasons. That would be no
                                                      ira




                     PALAEOLITHIC      SAVAGERY                  47

   more legitimate than if a Negro in A.D. 2050 inferred that
_ Europeans of 1950 wore white collars to avoid sore throats.
   Nor can it be assumed that, besides magically ‘controlling’
   nature, savages do not ever also invoke the interposition of
   supernatural beings that might be termed ‘personal’ and
   divine. On the contrary, Australian aborigines and others
   tell stories or myths about such beings. The impersonation
   of the totem by clansmen might lead to the personification
   of the ancestor. The word-book to a dramatic ceremony
   may become a myth.
      Finally magic, though it cannot produce the results its
 _ practitioners are supposed to desire, can be biologically
   useful. Totemic ceremonies and abstinences, for instance,
   promote not only social solidarity but also. the efficiency
   of the hunter both by giving him confidence, and by
   familiarizing him with the habits of the totem. Moreover,
     the clansmen’s abstinence from the totem as food does, at
     least, retard the destruction of this source of livelihood for
     the rest of the tribe.
        The foregoing remarks are not intended to define the
     religion or the social organization of all savages. There is,
     in fact, as much variety of spiritual and of material culture
    among modern savages as there was at least of material
    culture among the men of the Old Stone Age described
    more fully in this chapter.




ee
0!
a




Se
eee
Slhl8S.
                               DE

             NEOLITHIC            BARBARISM

 THE escape from the impasse of savagery was an economic
 and scientific revolution that made the participants active
 partners with nature instead of parasites on nature. The
 occasion for the revolution was the climatic crisis that ended
 the pleistocene epoch; the melting of the northern ice sheets
 not only converted the steppes and tundras of Europe into
 temperate forests, but also initiated the transformation of the |
 prairies south of the Mediterranean and in Hither Asia inte
 deserts interrupted by oases. The revolutionaries were noi|
 the most advanced savages of the Old Stone Age — the|
 Magdalenians were all too successfully specialized for
exploiting the pleistocene environment — but humbler
groups who had created less specialized and less brilliant
cultures farther south. Among them while men hunted, }
women — we must suppose — had collected among other
edibles the seeds of wild grasses, ancestral to our wheat and|
barley. The decisive step was deliberately to sow such seeds on}
suitable soil and cultivate the sown land by weeding and other |
measures, A society that acted thus was henceforth actively
producing food, augmenting its own food supply. Potentially
it could increase the supply to support a growing population.
   This was the first step in the neolithic revolution, and
suffices to distinguish barbarism from savagery. In the
archaeological record it is, perhaps, illustrated in certain
caves in Mount Carmel and elsewhere in Palestine. The
Natufians, as the caves’ inhabitants have been named,
hunted with an equipment of flints very similar to those
current among mesolithic peoples in Europe. But they used
some flints, mounted in rib-bones, as sickles for cutting grass
stems or straw; a peculiar lustre on the flints proves this,
but unfortunately does not disclose what sort of grass was
cut, still less whether it were cultivated or wild.
                                     Poke eT    See     eT   -




                     NEOLITHIC BARBARISM                         49
     Many barbarian societies known to ethnographers to-day
  have gone no further than the cultivation of some cereal or
  other plant. But the neolithic societies of Hither Asia, the
  Mediterranean region, and cis-Alpine Europe, whose culture
  we inherit, also domesticated certain food animals. It
  happens that just in those regions of Hither Asia where
  ancestors of wheat and barley grew spontaneously, there
  lived also wild sheep, goats, cattle, and pigs. Now the hunters
  whose wives were cultivators had something to offer some
  of the beasts they had hunted - the stubble on grain plots
  and the husks of the grain. As suitable animals became
_ increasingly hemmed in to the oases by the desert, men
_ might study their habits and, instead of killing them off-
   hand, might tame them and make them dependent. One
 _ school of ethnographers holds that stockbreeding arises
 _ directly from hunting without the intervention of cultiva-
     tion. Mixed farming would be due to the conquest of cul-
_ tivators by pastoralists, producing mixed or stratified
     societies. But the oldest neolithic societies known to the
  _ archaeological record consist of mixed farmers who have
     already domesticated some or all of the beasts named above.
_ Their abstinence and their foresight in finding water and
   _ pastures and warding off beasts of prey allow the flock
     and herds to multiply. Their accumulated observations on
_ their charges have perhaps already disclosed that the latter
  can not only be tame game, reserves of food and skins, but
  also living larders and walking wardrobes. Cows, goats, and
- ewes can be induced to provide food in the form of milk
_ without being killed; selected varieties of sheep grow yearly
    a woolly fleece (wool sheep seem to be the result of selective
  - breeding; in most wild sheep the coat is hairy and only a
__ thin down represents what becomes wool).
_      The new aggressive attitude to the environment did
    not stop short at producing new food supplies.. Most
_ known neolithic societies and most neolithic barbarians
E of recent times also created new substances which do not
    occur ready-made in nature. By heating friable and plastic
    clay, the farmer’s wife can induce a chemical change (driving
out the ‘water of constitution’ from the hydrated alumin
silicate that is the principal component of clay) and pro.
duce fottery, a substance with quite different sensible
qualities — no longer plastic and no longer disintegrated by
water. By the rotary motion of spinning she can convert
certain natural fibres — wool and flax, later also cotton and
silk — into threads byastill mysterious rearrangement of
the molecules.
   From their plastic clay the potters built up with sicilAall
hands new shapes, suggested, indeed, by older vessels cut out |
of wood or soft stone or gourds, but still free constructions |
that allow some play for the constructive fancy. From their
threads the womenfolk wove fabrics, using an elaborate
mechanism — the loom. The new ideas of construction were
applied to habitations, too; neolithic households normally
live in built huts of mud, reeds, logs, stone, or withies
plastered with clay. To assist them in these activities
neolithic societies manufactured a greatly enlarged assort- |
ment of specialized tools. Among these an axe-head, made
from fine-grained rock sharpened by grinding, is generally, |
but not universally, conspicuous. Archaeologists take the|
polished stone axe as the hall-mark of a neolithic equip-.
ment. But it is not quite unknown to savages and not
invariably employed by barbarians whose economy is or
was neolithic.                                                   |
   The foregoing incomplete inventory (which may be}
supplemented by reference to Man Makes Himself) will show |
how enormously neolithic equipment was richer than that|
of any palaeolithic or mesolithic savagery. Barbarism results |
from applying a regular complex of scientific discoveries |
and inventions. In the archaeological record, as in ethno-
graphy, most of the traits just enumerated are found already|
fully developed and applied. But they are applied in
different ways and to the production of distinct forms in}
each province and by each society that can be distinguished. |
Archaeology reveals no single neolithic culture, but a num-|
ber of distinct cultures. These may have been differentiated |
by divergent applications of common basic traditions,
                    NEOLITHIC BARBARISM                          51
   adjusted perhaps to varying local opportunities and needs.
   Such is the contention of the diffusionists. If it be accepted,
 ; itfollows that the ‘neolithic revolution’ began a very long
  time ago.
   ~ On the other hand, no trace of the revolution’s effects has
 Bsyet been detected in any geological deposit assignable to the
 pleistocene. Within the succeeding holocene, the geological
 ‘present, its antiquity can best be inferred in the East
 Mediterranean area. There the early invention of writing
_ provides a horizon, dateable by historical records, about
 3000 B.c. There, too, communities were forced to live on the
 ‘same site for many successive generations. The clustered
 huts of reeds or mud would decay with the passage of
 time, but new structures would be built upon the ruins.
 yiEventually the accumulated debris forms a regular hill or
  tell, The valleys and coastal plains of Greece, the plateaux of —
    Asia Minor (Turkey) and Iran, the steppes of Syria and
aT Curkestan   are studded    with thousands    of such tells. In
_ Hither Asia and Iran an ‘historical horizon’ — street levels
      I and house floors on which have been dropped objects
    ; fashionable about 3000 B.c. — can often be recognized high
       up in the mounds. Working back from this level by dead
      reckoning, the depth of the underlying deposits gives a
      ‘rough indication of the age of the oldest village on the
      ‘site.
       - More accurate indications have been given since 1950
    » pby ‘radio-carbon dates’ based on the amount of the radio-
  _ active isotope, C14, still left in organic substances that have
     Bcased to absorb fresh supplies from the atmosphere. An
      unexpected antiquity, about 7000 B.c., has been thus attri-
      buted to the earliest farming settlembnt thus dated — the
  _ oasis village of Jericho in the Jordan valley. The village was
   _ surprisingly large — perhaps 8 acres in area — and, still more
    _ surprisingly, was defended by a rock-cut ditch, 27 feet wide
      and 5 feet deep, and a stone-built rampart. Its earliest
   _ inhabitants supported themselves by hunting and collecting,
      but also by growing crops, watered by a perennial spring,
       and grazing sheep and goats, but probably not kine, on
 ANTE   otfoee ca eSPe
                     ;Ae Cetra




 52            WHAT     HAPPENED   IN HISTORY     |    .     a

irrigated meadow land. But in contrast to later, more familiar
  villagers, they used no ground stone axes and did not con-
 vert clay into pottery by firing. So Jericho I is said to
 illustrate a pre-pottery neolithic stage. The same stage is
 represented in a second village, Jericho II, built on the site
 a thousand years later by a fresh people, and still later,
 about 4750 B.c., at Jarmo in Kurdistan. The farmers of
 Jarmo were cultivating cereals that still show clear traces of
 their origin in the wild grasses of the region, but bred cows
 as well as sheep and goats. They did use axes, or rather
 adzes, of ground stone and made unbaked clay figurines of
 women. But they made no pottery, and used instead, as
 even the Jerichoans had done, vessels of stone and doubtless
 also of wood.                         .
    The next stage can be illustrated by the village at the
 base of a tell at Sialk on the western edge of the Persian
 desert near Kashan. Here, as at Jericho a perennial spring
 would not only attract game and wild fowl, but provide
water for the irrigation of small plots. The builders of the -
first village at the base of the tell hunted with slings and ~
clubs the game that congregated round the waters. But they
bred cattle, sheep, and goats. They grew cereals by irriga-
tion and reaped them with sickles of bone armed with flint
teeth like the Natufians’. They spun and wove some un-
determined fibres and made vases out of stone and pottery.
They even knew how to decorate their pots with patterns
painted in dark colour on a background that after firing
was pale pink and thus enhanced the likeness of the vases
to the plaited-grass baskets which had suggested many of |
the shapes.
    West of the Nile small communities settled about 4300 _
B.c. on the shore of a lake that then filled the Fayum de-
pression to a height of 180 feet above the level of the present
lake. All that remains of the settlements are middens — the
heaps of food-refuse left by the settlers. The debris from their
repasts, as well as immense numbers of flint arrow-heads,
bone harpoons, and bone dart-heads prove that the Fayu-
mis hunted the game that watered at the lake and the wild
                      NEOLITHIC BARBARISM                     53
 - fowl that nested on its reedy banks, and speared the fish
   swarming in its waters. But bones of cattle, sheep or goats,
 _ and pigs, presumably domestic, occur with remains of
 _ game in the middens. Near-by straw-lined pits were found
   filled with grains of emmer wheat and barley. From the
   volume of the grain that could be stored in the silos it has
_ been deduced that the cereals alone could not have sup-
_ ported the community; they must have provided, rather, a
_ reserve supply of food and supplemented a diet consisting
' mainly of game. On the other hand, the grains are already
   definitely cultivated forms, many stages removed from wild
 _ grass seeds; the barley from the Fayum is, indeed, almost
   identical with that now cultivated by the barbarous socie-
_ ties of North Africa.
      Moreover, granaries were dug and lined with straw to
_ preserve the crop. Special tools — sickles consisting of fiint
 _ teeth mounted ina straight wooden handle — were made to
   reap the crop and stone querns to convert it into flour.
_ Society’s equipment has been enriched with new artificial
_ materials — pottery for vessels and linen for clothing — and
_ new implements, axe-heads sharpened by grinding and
_ polishing, spindles, looms.
      On the western edge of the delta a few miles north of
_ Cairo, Austrian excavators at Merimde explored avillage
_ of flimsy huts sprawling over some six acres. Again, the
_ food refuse and relics of equipment for hunting and fishing
 _ demonstrate the predominant importance of hunting, fowl-
_ ing, fishing, and gathering. But bones show, too, that pigs,
     cattle, sheep, and goats were bred. Beside each hut site were
Pane
ase
    granaries    containing barley and emmer, and remains of
_ threshing floors where the grains were separated from the ©
 chaff. All the new equipment found at the Fayum sites
_ recurs at Merimde, too. Moreover, here the arrangement of
     the huts in regular rows, along streets in fact, reflects a
 recognized social order and organization of the communal
ul



’ life.
Bt In Europe the neolithic economy could be illustrated
more fully from a great variety of well-excavated sites.
54           WHAT    HAPPENED      IN HISTORY
While these disclose a bewildering variety of distinct cul-
tures, often more primitive — that is to say, poorer — in
equipment than those of the Near East, the oldest all show.
a significant divergence from the economy just described.
In the oldest neolithic settlements so far known north of
the Alps the productive activities ofgrain-growing and
stock-breeding are so far dominant that hunting has been
relegated to a secondary role. They no longer cage        a
‘mixed economy’, properly so called.                        :
   For instance, all over Central Europe from the Drave to,
-the Baltic and from the Vistula to the Meuse, wherever
patches of loess offer easily cultivated soils neither swampy
nor densely forested, we find what are termed Danubian|
villages and cemeteries. In all, remains of wheats and barley.
stone hoeblades, sickles, andl querns, as well as their loca.
tions, emphasize    the importance    of cereal   cultivation.
Bones of cattle, pigs, and sheep occur, too, but in relatively
small numbers. Bones of game, on the contrary, are prac-
tically non-existent and hunting tools extremely rare. Over
this vast territory the Danubians’ equipment is astonishingly
uniform: pots, axes, ornaments everywhere preserve the
same traditional shape. They must be the products of a!
single people who had spread. As their pots seem to
imitate vessels made from gourds, it is inferred that the
Danubians themselves came from a warm southerly region
where gourds will harden, as they will not north of the
Hungarian plain. They seem, moreover, to have brought
with them from the south a superstitious attachment to the
shells of a Mediterranean mussel, Spondylus gaederepi, which}
they imported even into Central Germany and the Rhine-
land for ornaments and amulets.
   The process of Danubian expansion has been illustrated
by the excavation of a complete village at K6ln-Lindenthal,
near Cologne. The settlement at one time consisted of 21
gabled long houses, neatly grouped parallel to one another
in a fenced area of 6} acres within which were enclosed vari-
ous irregular hollows, dug originally to provide clay for
house walls and pots but later converted into rubbish-pits
                   - NEOLITHIC     BARBARISM         *
  _    pig-sties or working places. Some houses measured as much
    as 100 feet in length with a width of 20 feet, enough
_ to accommodate a clan rather than asingle natural family.
   But after perhaps ten years these were deserted; the villagers
   left the site, only to return again after an indeterminate
    interval. Presumably they had found they could no longer
  _ secure decent crops from the exhausted plots round the
 _ village and had shifted bag and baggage to fertile virgin soil.
 _      The Danubians were adopting what seems the simplest
 _ device for escaping the effects of soil exhaustion through
  repeated cropping. It is a solution adopted still by barbarian
 cultivators in Africa, Assam, and elsewhere. But the Danu-
  _bians had found out that if they let the brushwood grow
 _ over their deserted plots and then burned down the scrub,
 _ they could then reap good crops once more; the ashes from

 _ of its lost virtue. So the village was rebuilt on the old site,
_ with a slightly different alignment of its houses, and then
_ again deserted for a while.
     After several repetitions of this cycle the Danubians
  whose fashions in pottery decoration had meanwhile
_ changed somewhat were obliged to surround the latest vil-
_ lage with a defensive ditch and rampart to exclude human
_ foes — apparently a new people, the so-called Westerners,
_ whose earlier settlements are known in Switzerland, France,
 _ Belgium, and Britain.
  _    These settlements emphasize another aspect of neolithic
_ economy. The Westerners, too, cultivated cereals and also
 _ flax, and, perhaps, apples. But cattle formed the staple
_ source of food; in their kitchen refuse the bones of cattle
_ far outnumbered those of any other animal. The bones of
  _ game are relatively scarce — in Switzerland only 30 per
    cent, in Normandy as little as 2.5 per cent, of the total food
    animals. So in Western Europe, too, the productive activity
_ of the herdsman had ousted the gathering of the huntsman
 _ from its primacy in the social economy of the earliest
  neolithic communities.
       But while pastoralists, these Westerners were no more
Oe   I   a    RNC   Ph ee ae   eee




         56             “WHAT        HAPPENED   IN HISTORY
         nomadic than the Danubians. On the shores of the Swiss
         lakes they laboriously built wooden houses raised on piles.
         On the South English downs and on hills overlooking the
         Rhine they encircled encampments with multiple ditches
         quarried in the solid chalk and supplemented by stockades.
         Their equipment was of the same kind as the Danubians’,
         but the forms of the individual tools are quite different.
         They preferred axes for carpentry while the Danubians
         relied exclusively on adzes. Their pots seem to imitate
         leather vessels. These and other articles in Western equip-
         ment are so strongly reminiscent of those used at Merimde
         and in the Fayum that the Westerners’ traditions seem to
         derive from North Africa. They may have been gradually
         spread by a quest for fresh pastures comparable to the
         Danubians’ search for virgin soil. But in each case the
         gathering economy that must still have been dominant in
         the first phases of the revolution had been largely discarded
         to make way for a purer neolithic food production.
            These five concrete examples must suffice to suggest the
         complexity of the neolithic revolution, the expansion of its
         results, and the divergent applications to which it could give
         rise. These points could be amplified by further reference
         to the archaeological record or by ethnographical citations.
         Four thousand years ago archaeology discloses societies
         practising a neolithic economy dispersed over Eurasia from
         Ireland to China. Barbarian communities on a comparable
         level live, or lived quite recently, in parts of Africa, round
         the Pacific, and in the Americas. All shared such basic arts
         as the cultivation of plants, manufacture of pottery, con-
         struction of houses, and sharpening of axe-heads by grind-
         ing; only the Amerinds lack a true loom, but stock-breeding
         had a more restricted vogue outside Eurasia and was
         practically strange to America. However, the concrete ap-
         plication of the principles diverges enormously.
            Our debt to preliterate barbarians is heavy. Every single
         cultivated food plant of any importance has been dis-
         covered by some nameless barbarian society. So we find
         neolithic peoples relying not only on wheats and barleys, —
                                    ete Werte    ee




                    NEOLITHIC       BARBARISM                  57
   but on rice, millet, and maize, or even on yams, manioc,
   squashes, or other plants that are not cereals at all. The
   methods of cultivation found appropriate for each species
   are naturally different. Even for cultivation of the same
   species — wheat and barley, for example — different geo-
   logical and climatic conditions impose corresponding
   differences in method. Particularly in arid regions like Iran
   natural or artificial irrigation is the normal procedure. In
   a well-watered temperate zone like Europe rain will supply
   the necessary moisture, but a plot will not yield a decent
   crop for more than two or three successive years: The
   simplest escape from this dilemma is to clear a new plot
   every year and, when all the land round the village has been
   used up, to shift bag and baggage and start again on virgin
   soil. This was the solution adopted by the Danubians in
   prehistoric Europe and still applied by some African tribes,
   such as the Lango, by the hill tribes of Assam and other
   peoples. Its former prevalence helps to explain the world-
   wide expansion of neolithic cultures.
      Such agricultural nomadism is a bar to any luxury in
   domestic architecture and household furniture, but these
   inconveniences might be overlooked as long as land seemed
   unlimited. But even in prehistoric times some societies were
   finding out ways of restoring fertility to exhausted plots or
   preventing exhaustion. If a plot be allowed to go back to
   bush and then cleared again by burning, the ashes will
   have restored to the soil much of its lost virtue. Mixed
   farmers can graze stock on plots they have cleared for
   crops, and then the droppings of the flocks and herds will
   serve as fertilizers and permit of a new crop being grown
   in time.   Or human    excreta   or animal   manure   can   be
  deliberately collected and applied to exhausted fields,
_ effecting a more rapid regeneration. One or other of these
  devices must have been employed in Greece and the Balkans
   in late neolithic times, for there we find successive settle-
   ments built upon the same site just as much as among the
   irrigation cultivators of Hither Asia.
     ‘To accomplish the neolithic revolution mankind, or
             WHAT    HAPPENED     IN   HISTORY

rather womankind, had not only to discover suitable inn’ "
and appropriate methods for their cultivation, but must —
also devise special implements for tilling the soil, reaping —
and storing the crop, and converting it into foods. For —
breaking up the ground the commonest implement used by —
modern barbarians is just a pointed stick that may be
weighted with a perforated stone near the point. But most —
African tribes prepare the ground with a hoe, and hoes were _
demonstrably used by the prehistoric Danubians, and
probably by other European and Asiatic peoples. Cereals
were first reaped with sickles composed of flint teeth set in
a straight wood or bone handle, as among the Natufians_
and Fayumis, or in an animal’s jaw-bone or a wooden
imitation thereof.                               t
   It is an essential element in the neolithic economy that
sufficient food shall be gathered at each harvest and stored
to last till the next crop is ripe, normally in a year’s time.
Granaries or storehouses were accordingly a prominent
feature in any barbarian village, and have been identified
in such early prehistoric settlements as Merimde, the
Fayum, and Kéln-Lindenthal. Wheat and barley need to
be separated from the husk by threshing and winnowing, —
and then ground into flour. The grinding could be done
by pounding in a mortar, but the standard procedure was
to rub the grains on a saucer-shaped or saddle-shaped |
stone with a bun-shaped or sausage-shaped rubbing-stone.
Such querns must, however, be made of tough stone, or
the meal will contain as much grit as flour.
   The flour can be easily converted into porridge or into
flat cakes, but to make it into bread requires a knowledge
of some biochemistry — the use of the micro-organism,
yeast — and also a specially constructed oven. Moreover,
the same biochemical process as was used to make bread
rise opened to mankind a new world of enchantment.
All modern barbarians prepare some sort of fermented
liquor. By the dawn of history beer was being brewed in
Egypt and Mesopotamia and it was already established
as the appropriate drink to stimulate the oldest Sumerian |
                                                             |
                                                               eee ee

                      NEOLITHIC    BARBARISM                   59
     gods to potent beneficence. By 3000 B.c., indeed, intoxicants
     had become necessities to most societies in Europe and
_    Hither Asia, and a whole service of jars, jugs, beakers,
     strainers, and drinking-tubes had come into fashion for
     their ceremonial consumption.
        All the foregoing inventions and discoveries were, judged
    by ethnographic evidence, the work of the women. To that
     sex, too, may by the same token be credited the chemistry
     of pot-making, the physics of spinning, the mechanics of
     the loom, and the botany of flax and cotton. On the other
     hand, in the prehistoric societies we have cited and in
     others like them in Europe and right across Asia to China,
    the feminine achievements have been welded into asingle
i
    economy with others attributable to men. For among —
    modern barbarians the care of flocks and herds and the’
    processes and equipment pertaining thereto fall to the men.
    In the archaeological record the neolithic economy is an
    economy of mixed farming, and we must now see how such
    an economy works.
       The neolithic populations of Europe and Hither Asia
    are normally found living in small communities — villages
    or hamlets, When fully explored these have been found to
    cover areas from 1} to 63 acres. The community that lived
    at Skara Brae in Orkney comprised not more than eight
    households; in Central Europe and Southern Russia
    twenty-five to thirty-five households seems to have been a
    not uncommon number.
       Such spatial aggregates formed social organisms whose
    members all co-operated for collective tasks. In the western
    villages on Alpine moors the several houses are connected
    up by corduroy streets, at Skara Brae in Orkney by covered
    alleys. Such public ways must be communal not individual
    works. Many neolithic villages in western Europe and in
    the Balkans are surrounded by ditches, fences, or stockades,
    as a protection against wild beasts or human foes, and these,
    too, must have been erected by collective effort. It has been
    calculated that to dig the defensive ditch round the latest
    village at Kéln-Lindenthal must have taken nearly three
60           WHAT    HAPPENED       IN   HISTORY

thousand man-days of labour. The arrangement of the
dwellings along definite streets noticed already at Merimde
in Egypt again gives expression to some form of social
organization, and a similar orderliness has been reported |
in some Western villages from south-western Germany and
again in south Russian settlements.
   But there is no need to assume any industrial specializa-
tion within the village apart from a division of labour
between the sexes. On the analogy of modern barbarians
each neolithic household would grow and prepare its own
food, make,its own pots, clothes, tools and other requisites.
The women would till the plots, grind and cook the grain,
spin, weave and manufacture clothes, build and bake the
pots and prepare some ornaments and magic articles. Men
on the other hand may have cleared the plots, built the
huts, tended the live-stock, hunted and manufactured the
needful tools and weapons.
   Moreover each village could be self-sufficing. It grew its
own food and could make all essential equipment from
materials locally available — stone, bone, wood, clay, and
so on. This potential self-sufficiency of the territorial com-
munity and the absence of specialization within it may be
taken as the differentiae of neolithic barbarism to distinguish
it from civilization and the higher barbarisms of the Metal
Ages. A corollary therefrom is that a neolithic economy
offers no material inducement to the peasant to produce
more than he needs to support himself and his family and
provide for the next harvest. If each household does that,
the community can survive without a surplus.
   Probably no known neolithic community conformed
strictly to these standards. Even in the earliest neolithic
villages and graves archaeologists have found materials
brought from long distances. Shells from the Mediterranean
and from the Red Sea were strung on necklaces by the
Fayumis. At Sialk and at Anau (in the Merv oasis) small
ornaments were made from native copper and semi-
precious stones that had been transported a hundred miles
or so. The Danubian peasants in Hungary, Bohemia,
                    NEOLITHIC      BARBARISM                   61
_ Central Germany, and the Rhineland wore bracelets and
    beads made from shells of Spondylus gaederopi imported
    from the Mediterranean.
       Imports were not entirely restricted to such luxury
    articles. Neidermendig lava from near Mayen on the
    Moselle, a good tough stone, was used for querns by the
   Danubians even in the Meuse valley in Belgium and perhaps
   even by the Westerners of southern England. Good cutting
   stones — obsidian   in Hither Asia and Central Europe, high-
   grade flints and attractive greenstones for axe-heads — were
   transported quite long distances. Even pots, presumably
   containing something, were brought from the Main valley
 _ to Kéln-Lindenthal, fifty miles down the Rhine, and were
   often interchanged between neolithic villages in Thessaly.
   Ethnographers have described quite intensive trade over.
   long distances between barbarians whose equipment is
   still formally neolithic.
       Moreover, the neolithic economy seems to have found
   room for some rudiments of intercommunal specialization,
   even in early prehistoric times. In Egypt, Sicily, Portugal,
   France, England, Belgium, Sweden, and Poland neolithic
   groups were mining flints. The miners had evolved a quite
   elaborate technique for sinking shafts through the solid chalk
   and cutting subterranean galleries to exploit seams of good
   nodules, From their winnings they manufactured axes, which
   are found distributed over wide areas. The miners were in
   fact highly skilled specialists. They almost certainly lived by
   bartering their products for the surplus corn and meat pro-
   duced by farmers. In Melanesia and New Guinea to-day a
   very few villages specialize in making pottery and supply
   other communities over a wide area even across the sea.
       Societies of savages continued and continue to exist side
   by side with food-producers. The latter now barter farm
   produce with hunters and gatherers in exchange for game
   and jungle products. The same complementary relationship
   may have existed in the past. The neolithic herdsmen and
   miners of the English South Downs used vast quantities of
   stags’ antlers as picks, though bones of deer are not
conspicuous among the refuse from their repasts. The antlers
may have been supplied by descendants of mesolithic—
huntsmen who continued to live on the greens and country
north of the Downs.                                          |
   Now in pursuit of game hunters are wont        to wander
farther and more frequently than even the most primitive
cultivators and herdsmen. They might profitably combine —
hunting trips with the transportation of those exotic sub-
stances that neolithic villages certainly did somehow ob-
tain. In Britain the distribution to Wiltshire and Anglesey
of axes made from Graig Llwydd rock at Penmaen Mawr in
North Wales appears to be associated with a type of pottery
favoured:  by descendants of the native mesolithic stock as
contrasted with the immigrant Western food-producers. In
brief professional merchants   may have been recruited in
part from residual food-gatherers.
   So the self-sufficiency of the neolithic community was
potential rather than actual, just as such a community was
seldom strictly sedentary. Intercourse with other groups was
probably more frequent and more extensive than among
palaeolithic food gatherers. The pooling of human ex-
perience had to that extent been accelerated by the neo-
lithic revolution.
  Nevertheless, fixed in an oasis in the desert, huddled in a
valley bottom between rugged mountains, or hemmed in by
trackless forests to a glade, neolithic villagers enjoyed only
occasional contact with the outside world. For the greater
part of the time they were engaged in adapting their
economy and their equipment to astrictly specialized and
localized environment. The latter would offer each society
its own distinct opportunities for discoveries and inventions.
So each group would develop peculiar traditions appro-
priate to its own circumstances. This is just what archae-
ology and ethnography reveal.
  There is no ‘neolithic culture’, but a limitless multitude
of neolithic cultures. Each is distinguished by the varieties
of plants cultivated or of animals bred, by a different
balance between cultivation and _ stock-breeding, by
                              r                    .

                         NEOLITHIC      BARBARISM

_ divergences in the location of settlements, in the plan and
          construction of houses, the shape and material of axes and
_         other tools, the form and decoration of the pots and by
        _ still greater disparities in burial rites, fashions in amulets
      _ and styles of art. Each culture represents an approximate
       _ adaptation to a specific environment with an ideology more
          or less adequate thereto. The diversity results from a multi-
     _ plicity of minor discoveries or inventions, at first purely local
    _ and conditioned by geological or climatic or botanical pecu-
          liarities, or from arbitrary, i.e. unexplained, idiosyncrasies.
              Hence we cannot speak of ‘neolithic science’, but only of
    _ ‘neolithic sciences’. Barbarian societies had at their disposal
      __and successfully applied a richer stock of scientific traditions,
     __ based often on more active experimentation, than ancestral
      _ savages. They included indeed new sciences such as the.
          chemistry of potting, the biochemistry of baking and brew-
          ing, agricultural botany and the like, quite unknown in the
          Old Stone Age. But these traditions were handed on and
          enriched by each society in its own way. There was, for
          example, no universal potters’ lore, but as many traditional
           recipes as there were societies. Even though such traditions
          seem to us only variations on a single theme, the women
         who transmitted them can hardly have discriminated
          between the essential theme and its accidental embellish-
           ments. The practical technical prescriptions of barbarian
           science were, for sure, inextricably entangled with a mass
           of futile spells and rituals. Even the intelligent and highly
           civilized Greeks still feared a demon who used to crack the
           pots while they were being fired, so they affixed a hideous
       Gorgon mask to the kiln to scare him away.
           Nevertheless the intercourse that demonstrably took place
       between neolithic societies did involve some interchange of
       technical ideas. In this process comparison would help to
       sift out non-essentials. The subsequent history of science is
       largely taken up with the diffusion of useful ideas beyond
       the environment that originally inspired them and with
       the selection of the effective processes from among the
       traditional rituals in which they were once embedded.
64           WHAT    HAPPENED      IN HISTORY
   Still less would it be legitimate to speak of ‘neolithic
religion’, though barbarian societies behaved and behave as
if they needed ideological support no’ less than savages.
Most neolithic societies buried the dead (either in regular
cemeteries or under and beside their houses) with still more
pomp than had palaeolithic hunters. In the Mediterranean
world, indeed, mortuary traditions inspired the excavation
with terrific labour of subterranean replicas of the deceased’s
house; in western and northern Europe these were repro-
duced in gigantic stones and artificially put under ground by-
burial under enormous cairns at the cost of still greater
social effort. That the dead so reverently committed to the
earth were supposed somehow to affect the crops that
sprang from the earth is for some societies a plausible
inference that cannot, however, be generalized. Ritual
burial is not practised by quite all barbarians and has not
yet been demonstrated archaeologically for all neolithic
societies in Europe.
   Female figurines were moulded in clay or carved in stone
or bone by neolithic societies in Egypt, Syria, Iran, all
round the Mediterranean and in south-eastern Europe, and
occasionally even in England. Such figurines are generally
interpreted as images of the ‘ Mother Goddess’; it is inferred
that the earth from whose bosom the grain sprouts has been
imagined as a woman who may be influenced like a woman
by entreaties (prayers) and bribes (sacrifices), as well as
‘controlled’ by imitative rites and incantations. These
figurines in fact seem in some cases to be the direct ances-
tresses of images of admitted goddesses made by historical
societies in Mesopotamia, Syria, and Greece. The male
partner in fertilization is, however, represented only by
phalli of clay or stone that were carved in Anatolia, the
Balkans, and England.
   Now magic must have still been practised in neolithic
times despite the enlarged real control over nature possessed
by barbarian societies. We have direct proof of this in the
amulets made by neolithic peoples all round the Mediter-
ranean and already at Merimde (p. 53); there, for instance,
                 aes: ie A,   oe ae, F
                -—



                      NEOLITHIC          BARBARISM                       65
, miniature   stone   axes    were       perforated   for hanging   on    a
__ necklace, presumably in the belief that such a model would
   confer upon its wearer something of the queer power or
  mana inherent in the new tool. Indeed Thurnwald asserts
  that ‘it is above all in societies where skill in craftsmanship
  is highly developed that importance is attached to magical
  precautions and ceremonies’. Naturally the magic of bar-
  barians as of savages would find expression. In particular a
  ceremonial union of the sexes would symbolize and so
  ‘cause’ the fertilization of nature. But among grain-growers
  at least the fertility drama has to assume a more individu-
  alized form than in savage rituals. From a cycle of myths
  and cult practices widespread among the ancient peoples
  of Hither Asia and the Mediterranean basin, it has- been
    inferred that the ceremonial marriage became restricted
    to a selected pair. For the male actor impersonates the
   grain (or vegetation in general) and assumes for a time a
- Jeader’s role: he becomes a ‘corn king’. But like the grain
    he must be buried and rise again. In mortal society that
    means he must be slain and replaced by a young and
    vigorous successor. In such actors the productive forces .of
  - nature assume personal forms and become ‘goddesses’ and
    ‘gods’.
        But if society be persuaded that the corn king’s death
    can be replaced by the slaughter of a captive or made
    purely symbolical by magic rites, the ‘corn king’ would be
    on the way to becoming a temporal king too — a transition
    which would be facilitated had he also functioned as a
     war chief. This is one way in which ‘divine kings’ such as
     we meet at the dawn of history may have arisen. Whether
     such kingship or chieftainship actually had arisen in neo-
     lithic times in Hither Asia or Europe cannot be directly
     established. In Egypt and Mesopotamia and Greece
     historical kings did perform many of the functions in
   fertility rituals attributed to the hypothetical corn king.
     Many modern barbarians acknowledge hereditary chiefs
     whose authority is as much magical as military. In neo-
     lithic Europe a single house marked out by its greater size
             WHAT    HAPPENED IN HISTORY          >

and central position in some Western villages has
explained as the residence of a chief. The great stone tom
of the Atlantic coasts and the vast long barrows of Britai
have been interpreted as chieftains’ sepulchres. But not
even German believers in the ‘leadership principle’ have}
been able to detect any indications of chieftainship in a:
Danubian village like K6ln-Lindenthal.
    In any case it may be assumed that the clan structure and
community based on ‘kinship” survived the neolithic
revolution unscathed. Among barbarians to-day land is
normally held by the clan in common. If not tilled collec-;
tively, plots are allotted to individual ‘families’ for use only;
and are generally redistributed annually. Pastures are of}
course commons. Among pure cultivators, owing to the}
role of the women’s contributions to the collective economy, |
kinship is naturally reckoned in the female line, and the! 4
system of ‘mother.right’ prevails. With stock-breeding, on
the contrary, economic and social influence passes to the}
males and kinship is patrilinear.
    The neolithic revolution was vindicated biologically by}
the numerical increase in the species, Homo sapiens, that
followed it. Small though they were, neolithic communities |
were substantially larger and far more numerous than|
palaeolithic or mesolithic groups. From Hither Asia, Egypt!
and Europe literally thousands of skeletons have survived!
from the period between the neolithic revolution and the}
urban revolution or the transition to a Bronze Age economy,|
as against the few hundred human fossils from the whole of|
the Old Stone Age. Yet the Old Stone Age must have}
lasted ten to fifty times as long as the New!
  . The growth of neolithic population was eventually limited
by contradictions in the new economy. The expansion in
numbers involved expansion in space. Additional families|
could be supported only by cultivating fresh plots and|
finding fresh pastures for growing flocks and herds. Food-|
producers within the limits of barbarism just had _ to|
spread. Each self-sufficing village must keep budding o
daughter villages. The worldwide expansion of the}
                                                                 di Tee   a




                                                                67
  neolithic economy bears witness to this process. In practice
 of course the food-producers often expanded at the expense
_of food-gatherers. And the latter did not always submit
passively to expulsion or extinction; sometimes savages
_adopted and adapted the economy of encroaching bar-
_barians. The neolithic cultures of Northern Europe seem
 to be due mainly to mesolithic forest-folk who had secured
_ stock and grains from advancing Danubians and other
- farmers and had learned from them how to make pots,
  _ spin, and weave. Such disciples swelled the flood of expand-
   _ ing peasantry and accelerated its advance. In the long run
      various streams met. Proximity gave opportunity for ex-
    changing experience and pooling knowledge.
        But contact is‘not likely to be always amicable. For each
   and all are competing for the same sort of land, and the
    ‘supply is not unlimited. Such competition might of itself
    lead to war. The earliest Danubians seem to have been
     peaceful folk; weapons of war as against hunters’ tools are
    absent from their graves. Their villages lacked military
     defences. It is no accident that the latest village of Kéln-
   _Lindenthal was defended by elaborate fortifications and
    that weapons were buried in contemporary graves. In the
     later phases of the neolithic period in Europe, armaments
   - in the form of stone battle-axes and flint daggers became
 _ the most conspicuous items of funerary furniture.
         In central and northern Europe we almost see the state
    of war of all against all arising as unoccupied but easily
     cultivable land became scarce. Elsewhere the same process
                                                                the
_ is traceable, if less explicitly. In the successive layers of
  settlement tells in the Balkans, Greece, Anatolia, Syria, and
                                                              s
__ Iran we see radical changes in culture. Such abrupt change
                                                        by
  are taken to symbolize the replacement of one society
    another with different social traditions — in other words,
                                                              by
 _ the conquest, expulsion, or enslavement of one people
~ another. Such changes of popula   tion  effecte d by war are.a
   ‘recurrent feature of barbarian life as described by ethno-
  _graphers in North America, Africa, and the Pacific.
     Naturally to seize the grain-plots and pastures that others
                                   Wi       Deansub
                                        (eile         &          o  Ste
                                                                    >
                                                          dy    bes th      eg
                                                4              Rien   tee        a5,




68           WHAT    HAPPENED     IN HISTORY

have been cultivating and grazing allows no addition to the
total population those lands supported; it is no solution to
the contradiction. War and slaughter diminish rather than |
increase the human species.
    Nevertheless change of culture in the archaeological
record need not always mean the extinction of the older |
society; the result may be a ‘mixed culture’ in which items
of the older equipment persist, implying the survival of
some members of the society formerly established on the >
site. In Central Europe late neolithic cultures exhibit some |
traits derived from the native Danubian traditions com- |
bined with others that had been developed on the wooded |
plains of the North. Some of the older Danubian stock |
must have been left alive even though they may have been
enslaved by the Northerners. Mixed cultures may denote
stratified societies divided into rulers and ruled. In any
case they are richer than either of the component cultures _
in that they result from the blending of two social traditions _
evoked by distinct environments. They illustrate one of the ©
most important processes in the pooling of human ex-
perience. Moreover, they probably symbolize the incipient
break-up of the clan and ‘kinship’ organization of society. —
    A second defect in the neolithic economy was the very |
self-sufficiency the barbarian village prized so highly. Such |
a community had indeed far greater control over its food- |
supply and environment than any group of savages, and
could reasonably plan ahead to meet future eventualities. -
But all its labours and plans might be frustrated by events -
still beyond its control: droughts or floods, tempests or |
frosts, blights, or hail-storms might annihilate crops and |
herds. And even a local failure might spell famine and
annihilation for the self-contained and isolated community.
Its reserves were too small to tidt it over any prolonged:
succession of disasters or to let it take preventive measures —
on an effective scale.
    The urban revolution eventually offered an escape from
both contradictions. .
                               IV

            THE     HIGHER          BARBARISM
               OF    THE     COPPER        AGE

THE worst contradictions in the neolithic economy were
_ transcended when farmers were persuaded or compelled to
_wring from the soil a surplus above their own domestic
 ‘requirements, and when this surplus was made available to
“support new economic classes not directly engaged in
_ producing their own food. The possibility of producing the
  requisite surplus was inherent in the very nature of the
neolithic economy. Its realization, however, required addi-
  tions to the stock of applied science at the disposal of all
_barbarians, as well as a modification in social and economic
_relations. The thousand years or so immediately preceding
;3000 B.C. were perhaps more fertile in fruitful inventions
_and discoveries than any period in human history prior to
the sixteenth century a.p. Its achievements made possible
that economic reorganization of society that I term the
 urban revolution.
__ The neolithic revolution took place in the grey night of
  ‘remote prehistory. From a few peaks faintly lit by the
reflected light of an archaeological sun and by inferences
  from the landscape subsequently revealed we have recon-
 structed very tentatively the course of this first revolution.
 The second takes place almost before our eyes in the full
¢ twilight of prehistory and reaches its climax only with the
  dawn of history. It must therefore be described.
      Its theatre can be provisionally delimited; it is bounded
feon the west by the Sahara and the Mediterranean, on the
east by the Thar desert and the Himalayas, on the north
   by the Eurasiatic mountain spine — Balkans, Caucasus,
   Elburz, Hindu-Kush - and on the south, as it happens, by
  the Tropic of Cancer. The geological, physiographical, and
  ‘climatic conditions of this zone proved propitious to the
revolutionary development. It provided the raw materials}
for the decisive discoveries. It offered inducements to in-
tensive social organization and rich rewards for large-scaley
co-operation. It gave facilities for communications bywhichy
new knowledge might be pooled and essential materials col-
lected and concentrated. Finally its cloudless skies presented!
‘nightly the impressive spectacle of the uniform motion of they
 heavenly bodies that in other latitudes is too often veiled.
    The whole belt is relatively arid, though it was bette
 watered in prehistoric times than to-day. Permanent settle-|
 ment is possible only beside a river or a perennial spring.;
 Agriculture is largely dependent on irrigation; though you
 may ‘catch a crop’ watered by showers in Palestine and
 Syria or from the flooding of a torrent even in Arabia,}
 irrigation alone guarantees success. At the same time}
 several varieties of fruit tree and the vine grew wild in thes
 region; the prospect of a regular crop of dates, olives, figs
 or grapes every year is a powerful inducement to remain
 fixed where the plants grow. The orchardist must abandon
 the nomadism that may still appeal to the grain-grower.        :
    The digging and maintenance of irrigation      channels are
 social tasks even more than the construction of defensive!
 ramparts or the laying out of streets (p. 59) .The community
 as a whole must apportion to individual users the water thus
 canalized by collective effort. Now control of water puts in}
 society’s hands a potent force to supplement sugernaeieeal
 sanctions. Society can exclude from access to the channel i
 recalcitrants   who   will not conform     to rules of conduct
 generally approved. Banishment in an arid zone is a more
 drastic penalty than in a temperate or tropical clime where}
 land and water are still relatively abundant.
    The zone is interrupted by mountains and desert unfit)
 for habitation. But around and between these are mor
 hospitable steppes over which villages can be dotted no
 too sparsely and herdsmen may wander with their flocks,}
 so that intercourse is on the whole easier than in fores ‘|
 and jungles. The western part of the crucial belt has beeni
 termed by Breasted the Fertile Crescent.
   Oy
 “oa    LE E   HIGHER   BARBARISM    OF   THE   COPPER   AGE    71
 5
 _ The Crescent’s western horn is Egypt. There the narrow
valley of the Nile forms a thread of greenery through the
   forbidding desert of the plateau. The annual flood irrigates
   a strip of either bank and the broad Delta to the north.
  At the same time the river affords a moving road on which
   even bulky goods can be transported between the First
    Yataract and the Mediterranean. The valleys and plains
_ of Palestine and the narrow strip of coast land in Syria form
     continuation of the Crescent where the rainfall is sufficient
  to allow even of dry cultivation. Thence east of Lebanon
 and Anti-Lebanon a broad belt of steppe extends to the
Tranian mountains beyond the Tigris. Throughout this
‘saddle’ — the ancient Syria and Assyria (the Mosul vilayet)
 — the winter rains suffice to provide pasture for sheep and
  even to water precarious crops of corn. But permanent
 settlement is in effect restricted to oases and the banks of
‘many streams issuing from the Armenian mountains — the
 Euphrates, Balikh, Khabur, Tigris, Zab. Finally the eastern
 horn is formed by the lower Tigris-Euphrates valley, in
 which the two rivers fulfil the function of the Nile in irriga-
tion and transport.
     Beyond its border chains the Iranian plateau is desert
 at the centre. But on the mountain slopes all round rise
    rings and streams sufficient to water fields and gardens.
   inally beyond the mountains of Baluchistan lie Sind and
    e Punjab. Here Mesopotamian conditions recur on an
 immensely larger scale, with the Indus and six tributaries
 to irrigate and carry freight.
_ The archaeological record begins in small oases on steppes
 and plateaux. Despite the threat of drought the difficulties
  of taming the soil were less formidable there than on the
  flood plains of the major rivers. By small beginnings
 societies had the chance of learning the techniques of
  rrigation and drainage.   _
_ Such a society has been encountered already at Sialk in
"western Iran (p. 51). The earliest culture found there can
be matched at other sites upon the plateau and northward
‘up ‘to Anau       in the Merv      oasis in Russian     Turkistan
                          ST     edenee ee aba asia3th:
                               a ty                A     er
                                         rN,  eked   Nise Wiles   ees
                                     x     ax  ‘                D     +



7            WHAT      HAPPENED           IN HISTORY                           a
(Turkmenian S.S.R.). At Sialk a second phase can be seen in
the villages built on the ruins of those described. The houses
are no longer built just of packed clay (pzsé), but of moulded
bricks, dried in the sun. Gathering is less prominent in the |
communal economy; horses have been added to the do- |
mestic stock. Shells are brought across the mountains from |
the Persian Gulf. Copper is commoner, but it is still treated |
as a superior sort of stone worked by cold hammering.
Equipment    is made    from     local bone,             stone,       and   chert |
supplemented by a little imported obsidian. But special|
kilns are built for firing pots.
   Then with Sialk III the village was removed to a new|
site, close by the old and watered by the same spring.
Equipment is still mainly home-made from local materials.
But copper is worked intelligently by casting to make axes
and other implements that must still be luxuries. Gold and |
silver are imported and lapis lazuli from northern Afghanis- |
tan. Potters appear who make vessels quickly on a fast|
spinning wheel instead of building them up by hand. And
men use seals to mark their property. Finally Sialk IV is a
colony of literate Elamites who have achieved civilization |
in the alluvial valley of the Kerkha and impose it upon
the barbarian mountaineers about 3000 B.c.                   j
   The same sort of stages can be recognized in Syria and
Assyria, though it cannot be proved that these are parallel |
in time with those disclosed at Sialk in Iran. From                          Ras|
Shamra on the coast of Syria (near Alexandretta) to |j
Nineveh and Tepe Gawra, east of the Tigris, the village
ruins at the bottom of the tells disclose a ‘neolithic’ culture, |
not identical with those of Iran and Egypt, but probably |
parallel thereto though still very imperfectly known. The |                        .
next set of settlements, representing phase II, were built |
by people with different traditions from the first but sur- |
prisingly homogeneous throughout the whole belt. Archaeo- |
logists call them Halafians, after Tell Halaf on the Khabur, |
where their distinctive products were first identified. They |
too lived as mixed farmers and relied for their equipment )
mainly on local stones and bones. But even on the Upper
      THE   HIGHER    BARBARISM       OF    THE   COPPER    AGE   73

_ Khabur they received shells brought from the Persian Gulf
_ while obsidian imported from the volcanic mountains              of
_ Armenia was extensively employed; indeed a Halafian
_ village near Lake Van seems to have been inhabited by an
_ industrial community engaged in quarrying the volcanic
_ glass for export, like the neolithic flint-miners in England.
  Moreover the Halafians were almost certainly acquainted
; with metal, if not with intelligent metallurgy. Vases were
 _ superbly decorated with polychrome designs and fired in
_ specially constructed kilns as if their makers were becoming
 professionals. Amulets were not only carved into the like-
 _ ness of ‘potent’ objects, but were also engraved with equally
  _ magical patterns. So they could be, and were, used as seals:
 _ stamped on a blob of clay affixed to a jar-stopper or bundle
 _ the pattern and so its magic was transferred to the clay,
_ put a ‘tabu’ on the object and marked it as someone’s
 property. Finally the villagers co-operated in erecting
' shrines to local deities. And so did their contemporaries,
  the first colonists of lower Mesopotamia.             For the first
  shrine of Ea at Eridu must have been founded in this
_ phase.
     In phase III the Halafian culture disappears to make
. room for another, presumably borne by new settlers and
_ called, not very euphoniously, the al ’Ubaid culture, after
  a site in Lower Mesopotamia near Ur. The break in
- tradition is not indeed complete. The old shrines were
  reconstructed on a larger scale on their hallowed sites; so
_ the old local gods survived         and   therefore   some   of the
: community of worshippers that had imagined them. The
  largest of three shrines grouped round a court at Tepe
 ‘Gawra now measured over all 40 ft. by 28 ft. and was built
_ of sun-dried bricks, painted on the outside. But in general
_ domestic architecture   declined.    On the other hand metal
  was now worked intelligently by casting, though in Syria
 and northern Iraq the al ’Ubaid people seem to have been
  normally content to go on using local stone instead of
 organizing their economy to secure regular supplies of
 metal, while potters still made vases by hand. Nevertheless
             WHAT    HAPPENED      IN HISTORY
the amulets had been developed into specialized square or
button seals with a loop on the back, and engraved on the
face with animal figures instead of purely gcomots
patterns.
   In Syria some sites were temporarily deserted after phase
III, but some villages in Assyria, notably what was to
become Nineveh and Tepe Gawra only 15 miles away,
grew into regular little townships. At Tepe Gawra the
shrines, whose repeated reconstruction on the same spot
proves the continuity of tradition through all the drastic
changes in material culture, have now grown into little
temples built of kiln-burnt bricks and divided into several
rooms. They still form a group of three round a court, but
one now covers an over-all area of 57 ft. by 43 ft. Clay
models of carts and even covered wagons leave no doubt
that wheeled vehicles were familiar. And pots are made
on the wheel too. Objects of copper or even poor bronze
are not very rare. But axes, sickle-teeth, and the rest of the
industrial equipment and even weapons were still normally
made of stone and other local materials. Lapis lazuli from
Afghanistan, small manufactured articles from Sumer, and
other luxuries are indeed imported. But fundamentally the
self-sufficiency of neolithic economy has been preserved.
Yet the imports from the south show that these Assyrian
villages -were contemporary with genuine cities in Lower
Mesopotamia.
   On the relatively well-watered steppes of northern Iraq
arable lands and pastures were still so abundant that no
overpowering need compelled villagers to transform their
economy. It was simpler to use the plentiful local materials
for equipment than to organize the importation of regular
supplies of metal to replace them. First in the next phase,
V, were elements of a new economy imposed in Assyria as
at Sialk in Iran. But this imposition is almost historical.
It can be better explained when the urban revolution has
been examined in southern Iraq.
   Communities like Sialk III and the comparable al Ubaid
villages in Syria, as well as others similarly equipped on the
          ns


   _ THE HIGHER BARBARISM OF THE COPPER AGE                   75
  plateau ofAsia Minor, in Cyprus, and in peninsular Greece,
 disposed of all the technical knowledge and apparatus of
 civilization. The economic organization and social frame-
_ work were alone deficient. During the thousand odd years
_ of the Chalcolithic Age the peoples of the Near East had
_made discoveries pregnant with revolutionary consequences
_ - the metallurgy of copper and bronze, the harnessing of
_ animal motive power, wheeled vehicles, the potters’ wheel,
  bricks, the seal. Even before 3,000 B.c. these achievements
 _ were being diffused at least to the Aegean and to Turkistan
    and India. In a thousand years or so they will reach China
_ and Britain. But, save for two localized centres of bronze
  working in Mexico and Peru, none reached the New
~ World, Oceania, or Africa south of the Sahara till late
    historical times. The significance and nature of the ad- .
 ~ vances noted above in the archaeological record must now
_ be underlined.
_ The implications and revolutionary consequences of
-metallurgy have been explained in detail in Man Makes
_ Himself, as well as in more technical books on archaeology.
_ In practite it meant the combination of four major dis-
 coveries: (1) the malleability of copper; (2) its fusibility;
 _ (3) the reduction of copper from ores; and (4) alloys. Copper,
_ native or produced by reduction, may have seemed a
_ superior sort of stone that can not only be sharpened to
   cut like flint, but can also be bent, shaped by hammering,
' and even beaten out into sheets which can be cut up.
_ This property seems to have been known and utilized in
 Sialk I, by the Badarians and Amratians of Egypt men-
_ tioned in the next chapter, and was familiar to the pre-
 - Columbian Indians of North America. By itself it did not
_ take man very far.
_     Secondly, when heated, copper becomes as plastic as
_ potter’s clay; nay, it will become liquid and will assume
_the shape of any container or mould into which it is poured.
  Yet on cooling it not only retains this shape, but becomes —
   as hard as stone and can be given as good a cutting edge
 as‘flint. For tools copper possesses all the virtues” of the
76     ;     WHAT    HAPPENED      IN   HISTORY

older materials — stone, bone, wood - with others super-
added. In fashioning a tool out of the old materials the
only thing to do was to detach bits from a larger lump or
matrix. An implement of copper, like a pot of clay, can
be made by joining pieces together indissolubly; in practice,
it is generally the mould, often made of clay, that is built
up, liquid metal being then run in till the cavity is full.
The sole limit to the size of the mould and therefore of the
casting, the metal implement, is the operators’ technical
skill. And of course the shapes that can be given to the
casting are equally unlimited. Moreover, the form of the
casting can be further modified by hammering, as copper
is malleable. Finally, a metal tool is more durable than one
of stone or bone. A copper axe or knife neither cuts better
nor keeps its edge longer than a stone axe or a flint blade.
But, apart from a very limited amount of resharpening,
once a flint or stone tool is broken not all the king’s horses
nor all the king’s men can put‘it together again. A copper
tool can not only be resharpened by whetting or hammer-
ing; if broken, it can be recast with trifling loss and a new
tool turned out as good as the old.
    The utilization of these advantages required in practice
a complex of ingenious inventions — a furnace with a draught
to produce the relatively high temperature requisite for
fusion (in the event bellows were invented, but their use
is not directly demonstrated before 1500 B.c. in Egypt and
1000 in Europe), crucibles to contain the molten metal,
tongs to lift them with, and above all moulds to confer
upon the casting the desired shape.
   Thirdly, this superior stone, that occurs very rarely in
the metallic state in the Old World, can be produced
artificially by heating with charcoal several much com-
moner sorts of stone or earth, the ores we call oxides,
carbonates, silicates, and sulphides of copper. None of these
looks in the least like metallic copper nor possesses its desi-
rable qualities, but they are fortunately brightly coloured
and so the sort of stones early man looked for as pigments or
charms. The discovery of the magical transubstantiation
                                     ,   rir wats   ep re         i




      THE   HIGHER    BARBARISM     OF   THE        COPPER      AGE    eh

  of these crystalline minerals into metallic copper unlocked
   adequate supplies of the metal. It had been made by the
_ time of Sialk III and the al ’Ubaid phase in Syria. It was
 followed in the Near East by the reduction of other metals
_ ~silver, lead, and tin — and so led on to the fourth discovery
_that was certainly the latest in time.
_ Casting is easier, and the product is more reliable, if to
the copper there can be deliberately added antimony,
_ arsenic, lead or, best of all, tin. By 3000 B.c. the advantages
  of an alloy of copper and tin had been realized in India,
_Mesopotamia, Asia Minor, and Greece; bronze had been dis-
 covered. (In the sequel bronze means this alloy of copper
and tin unless otherwise stated,)
  _ The sciences applied in metallurgy are more abstruse
than those employed in agriculture or even pot-making.
_ The chemical change effected by smelting is much more
 _ unexpected than that which transforms clay into pottery.
  The conversion of crystalline or powdery green or blue
_ ores into tough red copper is a veritable transubstantiation.
   The change from the solid to the liquid state and back
    again, controlled in casting, is hardly less startling. The
actual    manipulations   themselves     are more           intricate and
_ exacting even than those involved in pot-making, spinning,
_ or boat-building.
     Hence it is not surprising that in the earliest historical
_ societies, as among contemporary barbarians, metallurgists
are always specialists. Probably from the first metallurgy
_ was a craft as well as a technique. Smiths and miners not
only possess peculiar skills, they have also been initiated
_ into ‘mysteries’. Presumably their craft lore was transmitted
 by the same concrete methods of precept and example as
_ hunting lore or textile skill. But it was not divulged to all
  members of the community as these would be; not every
Belansman was trained as a smith. The operations of mining
 and smelting and casting are too elaborate and demand
 too continuous attention to be normally conducted in the
  intervals of tilling fields or minding cattle. Metallurgy is a
 full-time job.
78           ‘   WHAT HAPPENED             IN HISTORY
   These occupations are the first industries not normally |
conducted within the household to provide for domestic
needs, but to meet the demands of others. The operators—
must therefore rely for their sustenance mainly on surplus —,
foodstuffs produced by their customers. After the magicians,—
they may be the first class to be withdrawn from direct
food-production. They are therefore not immediately de-—
pendent on the land for food; their livelihood depends
upon the possession of portable suis. and generally also of
portable goods, which they exchange for food.
     Such   craftsmen    are   therefore   less amenable   to social
discipline than fishermen or farmers, less dependent on
territorial society than even the magician; for his authority |
is rooted in the ‘subjective’ beliefs and superstitions of his —
fellow clansmen.        But the craftsman     might find a market —
for his objective skill and substantial wares even among
strangers. The rare metal objects that we have encountered 4
in the Copper Age villages were very likely made by ‘
itinerant smiths travelling about the country with ingots —
of metal and producing* implements on the spot ‘to order’. -
This was demonstrably the case in the European Bronze
Age. It is the rule for iron workers in Negro Africa to-day. —
The tinker in rural Europe is a survival of the same
system.
   Now, as the craftsmen were the practical bearers of the
scientific traditions of barbarism, their ability to migrate
contributed materially to the diffusion of discoveries and
the pooling of experience. The comparative uniformity of j
the very earliest metal products, anterior to the urban_
revolution, may be explained as the result of such diffusion.
Metallurgical lore is the first approximation to international
science. But it remains craft lore. All the practical science
of the ancient smiths and miners was certainly embedded
in an unpractical matrix of magic ritual. Assyrian texts,
even in the First Millennium B.c., contain hints of what.
such rituals may have involved — foetuses and virgins’
blood. So do the remains of a bronze-workers’ encampment
in Heathery Burn Cave (Co. Durham) in England. To- da
       m     Ae
     OF us        vs   3          {
 _ THE HIGHER BARBARISM OF THE COPPER AGE                      79
   rbarian smiths’ operations are surrounded with a com-
 dex of magical precautions.
  In the second place, the transmission of such lore by
   pprenticeship is largely imitative and therefore con-
   ervative. The processes need not be described in abstract
   erms. All the apprentice need do is to imitate as closely
as possible every operation of the master. In so doing he
  has no opportunity of introducing a variation which might
be beneficial.
     Finally, craft lore is liable to be secret. It is passed on
 from father to son or from master to apprentice. Craftsmen
  hus tend to form guilds or clans which will guard jealously
  he mysteries of the craft. Among barbarians we find here-
  jitary craft-clans organized on the same ‘kinship’ basis as
   avage clans.
 _ The adoption of metal tools will thus make room for a
    ew class that had no place in a pure neolithic economy.
      t it will at the same time destroy the self-sufficiency
 distinctive of that economy. The individual householder
  sacrifices his independence in so far as he regards as
  necessities metal tools that he cannot make himself but
  must acquire by barter from the smith. He must henceforth
  produce a surplus beyond his domestic needs to support
    pecialists who produce not food but indigestible ores,
  ngots, and axes.
  _ The neolithic village, too, will have to sacrifice its highly-
erized self-sufficiency. Copper ore is by no means common:
 the lodes are generally located among infertile mountains;
 very few villages can have had a copper mine in the im-
  mediate vicinity. Nearly always the raw material at least
  will have to be imported; its regular use involves the
  organization of a regular supply — trade, in fact, and that
  10 longer a luxury trade. As soon as metal is regarded as
  4 necessity and no longer a luxury, the local unit becomes
  by that very fact dependent on imported materials. Society
   nust intensify its production of foodstuffs to support the
     ecialists engaged in mining, extracting, and working the:
   xewly necessary material.
80            WHAT   HAPPENED     IN   HISTORY
                          I            \          h              ?

   Now, owing to the relative rarity of copper and the
absolute rarity of tin (as soon as the alloy becomes the
standard metal), and owing further to the difficulties of
transporting heavy materials, the surplus required to sup-
port the essential specialists is large. Bronze equipment
involves a great deal of social labour; it is inevitably
expensive. The advantages enumerated on page 75 do not
appear in themselves to have been sufficient to induce
peasants to produce the requisite surplus, to stimulate an
‘effective demand’, as modern economists would say. ‘wo
factors seem to have contributed to that end, to convert
metal into a necessity.
   On the one hand, under the peculiar            ada       of
alluvial valleys like the Tigris-Euphrates delta, where even
stone is scarce, the greater durability of copper or bronze
tools may have made them actually more economical than
stone or obsidian. On the other hand, in war, especially
for in-fighting, a copper knife or dagger is much more
reliable than a flint one; the latter may break just at the
awkward moment when you must stab your enemy or
perish. The first metal objects, apart from small trinkets, to
be commonly or regularly deposited in graves are, in ce
weapons, not tools. In practice we shall find that such
depositions are common only after the urban revolution in
the alluvial valleys had produced a new economic order
which made the demand effective. But in the meantime
another series of independent discoveries and inventions
had simplified the satisfaction. of the demand by reducing
 transport costs.
   Having tamed cattle to provide meat and then milk,
some societies hit upon the idea of shifting to the shoulders
of oxen part of the heavy burden of toil. The first step,
perhaps, was to make a pair of oxen drag over a field a
variant on the hoe that women had hitherto wielded — a
plough. Besides the plough itself, a yoke and harness had
to be invented, by means of which the beast’s tractive
power could be imparted to it. Fortunately the broad
shoulders of the ox give purchase for the yoke without
       THE   HIGHER    BARBARISM     OF   THE   COPPER   AGE    8I

  impeding the animal’s movement or respiration. Ploughs
 _ being at first made entirely of wood, no direct evidence as
  _ to the invention’s antiquity is available. Written or inscribed
  documents attest the use of ploughs in Mesopotamia and
  _ Egypt by 3000 B.c., and in India not much later. Soon
_ after 1400 B.c. ploughing is similarly attested in China, and
   not very much later pictures of ploughs were carved on the
rocks of distant Sweden. So by 1000 B.c. the plough, like
bronze, had attained the limits of its ancient diffusion
(p. 161).
_ The plough changed farming from plot cultivation to
 agriculture (the tillage of fields), and welded indissolubly
cultivation and stock-breeding. It relieved women of the
most exacting drudgery, but deprived them of their mon-
 opoly over the cereal crops and the social status that con-
_ ferred. Among     barbarians,   whereas women     normally hoe
 _plots, it is men who plough fields. And in even the oldest
    Sumerian and Egyptian documents the ploughmen really
_ are males. To support the heavy work plough-oxen need
 _ better fodder than can be got by grazing on the steppe;
 _ they are generally kept in stalls and fed on specially-grown
    hay, or even barley. So stall dung .became available to
 _ fertilize the fields. But the most decisive innovation was
_ that by harnessing the ox man began to control and use a
 _ motive power other than that furnished by his own muscu-
_ lar energy. The ox was the first step to the steam engine
    and petrol motor.
 _     The new motive power could be applied in other ways.
_ On the dusty plains of Hither Asia as on the snows of
_ Northern Europe heavy loads can most conveniently be
  _ transported on sledges. As a sledge was known in Northern
_s Europe in mesolithic times (p. 44), it was almost certainly
_ known in Hither Asia before 4000 B.c. Of course, a yoke
 _ of oxen can pull a sledge as easily as a plough. The same
  _ harness will serve in both cases. There is no more evidence
_ for prehistoric sledges than for ploughs, but sledges were
-still being used — at feast for funerals — in Mesopotamia as
_ late as 2600 B.c.
                                                  4)



 82            WHAT   HAPPENED     IN HISTORY          |.

    Long before that transport had been revolutionized by
 the application of rotary motion, by the invention of the
 wheel. There are ambiguous indications of its use in North
 Syria as early as the Tell-Halaf phase. In any case, the
 models from Gawra (p. 74) show two-wheeled and four-—
 wheeled carts already in general use about 3000 B.c. From
 Sumerian sculptures and actual specimens from tombs of.
 the Third Millennium the details of their construction can
 be deduced. The wheels consisted of three pieces of solid
 wood mortised together and bound with leather tyres
 attached with copper nails, The wheels turned in one piece
 with the axles, which could be secured to the body of the
 sledge-wagon merely with leather thongs.
   Carts like these can still be seen in use in Sardinia,
 Turkey, and Sind. Though heavy and clumsy, they are
 durable, and denote an immense advance on porterage or
 sledge transport. They are, indeed, the lineal ancestors of
 the automobile. By about 2000 B.c. wheeled vehicles were |
 in use from the Indus valley to the Syrian coasts. In Egypt,
 however, no wheeled vehicles were in use before 1600 B.c.
- But the invention had reached Crete by 2000 B.c., and
 ‘before the end of the Second Millennium was known from
  China to Sweden. But in the interval, by crossing with
 other inventions, vehicular transport had been materially
 accelerated.
    Man’s (or generally woman’s) shoulders were the oldest
 means of transport. But when animal motive power came
 into use, it was natural to transfer the pack to the shoulders
 of some dumb beast. For this purpose the ox is not well
 adapted. The oldest pack animal would seem to have been
 the ass, a native of East Africa. Before 3000 B.c. the tame.
 ass was known in Egypt, and presumably used for transport.
 Asses were certainly so used in Syria and Mesopotamia
 early in the Third Millennium. But there was a wild ass,
 the onager, in Hither Asia which was domesticated, too, so
 that it is not clear how far the pack asses of the Orient were
 of African origin.
      In the Fourth Millennium horses’ bones have been found
                                                 p                            eo eae we
                  eae     ty   Apt er
                                 ing   LA   b.       LJ   .
                                                              "4
                                                                   4

                                a     oT
    pame
             Pr   ee tc
      Peay   iv

   “THE HIGHER BARBARISM                             OF THE COPPER AGE   83
at Sialk, in Iran, and at Anau, in Turkestan. A native
habitat for horses lay probably in that direction, and the
Merv oasis would be a quite likely centre for their domesti-
cation. But, of course, horses can be kept to provide meat
and milk, as they were by the Mongols and the Scythians.
  et they can be used for riding, driving, and as pack
 nimals. Riding as a means of accelerating travel and facili-
 ating intercourse is a factor to be reckoned with, but the
 xtent of equitation and of the use of horses in general
 yefore 2000 B.C. is still problematical.
  That is all that can be said at the moment of the use of
 amels, too. Since 1000 B.c. transport and communication
 cross the deserts of Hither Asia have depended on the
  hip of the desert’. But long before that, camel bones
turned up in a layer at Anau, equated with Sialk I or II,
  vhile there is an isolated model of a camel from an Egyptian
   rave said to be a little older than 3000 B.c, So some
 societies may have disposed of this means of cross-country
transport even in the Fourth Millennium.
_ In any case, travel by land had been accelerated by
 3000 B.c. by harnessing Asiatic asses or horses, or both (for
 safety let us say ‘equids’, which embraces both species) to
   ght two-wheeled cars or chariots. The harness (familiar
  from Sumerian pictures in the Third Millennium) employed
  was that already devised to control the ox. But as these
   nfortunate equids do not possess broad shoulders like the
     , tractive power was transmitted to the yoke by a breast-
                                                             to
  band across the animal’s throat against which it had
 pull. In so doing the wretched beast was half-choking
                                                            al
  imself. Despite the loss of power thus caused, the Orient
                                                           d,
 harness was copied wherever the horse-chariot was adopte
                                                      was in-
 ind was not finally. reformed till the horse-collar
                                             about  the ninth
‘yented in Dark-Age Europe somewhere
 century A.D.
                                                        the
   So before the end of the Fourth Millennium 8.c.
                                                       had
 strength of oxen, horses, and asses, and the wheel
                                       motiv e power   and
‘provided Oriental societies with the
                                               super seded
equipment for land transport which were not
ROR   gn cor ee   ra   oe Ny Memeo Gee




         84                   WHAT       HAPPENED   IN HISTORY
         till the nineteenth century. And by 3000 B.c. wind was
         providing motive power for water transport, too. Even
         palaeolithic hunters must have possessed some sort of rafts.
         and canoes. Mesolithic Europeans could succeed in crossing
         the stormy seas between Ulster and Kintyre; their neolithic
         successors made still more adventurous journeys. The Poly-
         nesians, of Oceania, though equipped only with stone tools,
         could build boats over one hundred feet long, capable of
         accommodating more than a hundred persons and pro-
         visions, in which they made journeys of a thousand miles
         or more. The Polynesian boats were equipped with sails,
         and sailing boats are frequently represented in the Mediter-
         ranean and Egypt during the Third Millennium. But the
         oldest evidence for the sail is provided by a model from an
         al ’Ubaid grave at Eridu and then by late Egyptian vases.
         The boats depicted on the latter are believed to be foreign
         to the Nile valley, but perhaps at home on the Persian
         Gulf. In any case they prove that the sail had reached
         Egypt before 3000 B.c. By this invention man for the
         first time harnessed an inorganic force to provide motive
         power. In this respect it remained unique till the invention
         of the water-wheel at the end of the First Millennium B.c.
         The clumsy square sails depicted on the Egyptian vases
         needed much improvement before ships could be man-
         oeuvred freely, but they must still rank as the direct pre-
         cursors of those that propelled shipping till the nineteenth
          century. In any case, whether sailed, paddled, rowed, or
          merely hauled from the banks of rivers or canals, the boats
          of the Fourth Millennium could transport heavy and bulky
          loads far more economically than pack-asses or ox-carts.
          The commerce of antiquity, in so far as it handled cheap
          and popular goods in bulk, was mainly waterborne.
             The new means of transport just described, by simplifying
          the distribution of goods, naturally furthered the emergence
          of the new class of artisans dependent on imported materials.
          They may themselves have evoked new specialists. The
          construction of wagons and boats calls for great skill in
          carpentry. Before the linguistic ancestors of the Hindus,
       THE    HIGHER   BARBARISM     OF   THE   COPPER   AGE   85
_ Greeks, and other Indo-European peoples split up, Carpentry
  seems to have been already a specialized craft, since the
_ carpenter is the only craftsman denoted by a word common
_ to Sanskrit, Greek, and other branches of the linguistic
_ family. Nevertheless, ethnography shows that farmers do
_ construct carts and boats without calling in professionals.
_ We cannot, therefore, deduce the specialization of boat-
_ builders or wainwrights before the urban revolution. But
one craftsman beside the smith is attested by archae-
_ ology.
 _     From a lump of plastic clay thrown on the centre of a
_ wheel spinning fast on a vertical pivot, an expert hand-can
    elicit in a ‘couple of minutes a vessel that it might take
   several days to build up by hand. And the vessel thus made
 _will be perfectly symmetrical. On the other hand, its
_ production requires extreme dexterity that must be labori-
_ ously acquired through long apprenticeship. Ethnography
_ shows that potters who use the wheel are normally male
_ specialists, no longer women for whom potting is just a
_ household task like cooking and spinning, In antiquity, too,
_ it may be assumed that the use of the wheel indicates the
_ industrialization of ceramic production, the emergence of a
_ new specialized craft.             f
_    Since his equipment is very simple and his raw material
_ is available everywhere, the expert potter may be a per-
- ambulating craftsman as easily as the smith. In Crete and
  the Aegean to-day potters, with their ‘families’ and their
 wheel, travel from village to village and from island to
 _ island, turning out in each what local taste demands. We
_ have a little direct evidence for such itinerants in the
   Second Millennium from Crete and Aegina. Perhaps,
indeed,      the earliest wheel-made      pots were   everywhere
, produced by such travelling workers. In any case, potters
_ did exhibit the same mobility as characterizes other early
 craftsmen. They, too, might be emancipated from the
  restrictions of territorial society; potters’ lore could become
  intertribal, if not international.
     Hence the wheel early invaded the ceramic industry
86           WHAT    HAPPENED     IN HISTORY        ~~

throughout Hither Asia. We have met it in phase III o
the Copper Age of Assyria, at Sialk III in Iran, and by—
2500 B.G. it was firmly established in India. In Egypt, on j
the contrary, the potters’ wheel arrived only after the
urban revolution under Dynasty III, and in a less efficient
form than in Asia, but still a thousand years before wheeled
vehicles were known beside the Nile. In Europe, the rela-
tions between these two applications of the wheel were
reversed. North of the Alps wheeled vehicles were known
by the Second Millennium, the potter’s wheel not till the
end of the First.
   In contrast to the predominantly female contributions —
described in chapter III, the discoveries and inventions just
considered seem all due to the men, and certainly strength-
ened their economic position. By relieving women of a lot
of heavy but essential tasks in the way of hoeing, carrying
burdens, and making pots, they cut away the economic
foundations of mother-right. Moreover, the new specialists
will not really fit in to the old kinship organization. Even
if the potter settles permanently in a village, he is obviously
not a clansman in any physiological sense. His membership
of the local group and his duties therein are determined by
residence and function. A new basis is needed for a social
order that embraces such strangers. Moreover, their number
may have been augmented by the conquests and mixtures of
populations deduced from the change of cultures in the
archaeological record.
   Now, among barbarians where some of the innovations
here discussed have been adopted, sociologists expect to
find the patriarchal ‘family’, and even that form of it in
which the household comprises married sons, their wives
and children, and perhaps even slaves, as well as the
patriarch. In such a society personal property may extend
from ornaments and ciothes, implements and weapons, to
flocks and herds — and slaves — capital goods which can
increase. And now a man who has distinguished himself
as a ‘war-chief’ (in matriarchal society often a temporary
and elective office), has a chance of consolidating his
    =
        THE   HIGHER   BARBARISM    OF   THE   COPPER   AGE    87

  authority on an economic basis by wealth in cattle or
  servants. As this wealth will pass to his sons, so the authority
  it gives may become hereditary. But to become royal power
  it must be consecrated, perhaps in some such way as that
  suggested on page 65. But another institution may ease the
  transition.
     Among barbarians on this sort of level of technical and
  economic development some of the fertility and other
  rituals that had been performed communally by all clans-
  men in savagery are often found to have been monopolized
  by ‘secret societies’, initiation into which must be purchased
  by feasts and presents. Within such a society there are
  generally grades; advancement up this ladder of rank is,
   like initiation, a‘sacramental rite, but it must be none the
   less purchased. The members of such a society normally
   remain fishers or hunters or herdsmen or farmers. If they
   became specialists and were exempted like craftsmen from
 _ these productive avocations, they would become professional
   priests. And if rank be hierarchical, the richest and highest
   will be very like kings. The archaeological material just
   described gives some hints that this sort of development had
   been going on in the Copper Age in Syria.
      Seals, such as we met already in Halafian villages (p. 73),
   no doubt start as amulets that confer mana on their lucky
   wearers. But as well as, or instead of, being carved into the
   shape of a totem or a ‘thing of power’, they are engraved
   with magic patterns or representations of the totem. This
   pattern with its magic could be transferred to a lump of
   clay. By pressing his seal-amulet on such a lump affixed to
   the stopper of a jar, an individual could put a ‘tabu’ on it,
   transfer part of his personality to it, and mark it as his
_ property. Even Halafians used amulet-seals in this way,
   presumably indicating a recognition of proprietary rights.
   Incidentally, the standardized symbols engraved on the
   seal for this purpose will help to provide the characters
   for a conventional script when the urban revolution has
   made writing necessary.
      The repeated reconstruction on the same spot of the



—
88           WHAT    HAPPENED      IN HISTORY

shrines at Gawra through all the abrupt changes of other
aspects of material and spiritual culture (pp. 73-4) can
best be explained by assuming that, despite all changes of
population, some society of votaries maintained its corporate
personality. The hypothetical corporations may correspond
to the ‘secret societies’ of modern barbarians or to the
priesthoods into which these develop. By the fourth phase
at Gawra the shrines had already assumed the distinctive
form that farther south is attested as the house of a god
where stands his cult image and the altar for sacrifices.
The colours with which they are painted are those pre-
scribed as symbolic and magical in later theological litera-
ture. The shrines are, then, the lineal precursors of temples
 that will symbolize the world order, and give some justi-
fication for assuming the worship or cult of personalized
deities.
    Now, the abrupt changes in secular architecture, pottery,
 and burial rites, noted at Gawra and other Syrian. tells,
 must reflect substantial changes in population. It is difficult
 to believe such changes were peaceable. Just as much as in
 temperate Europe (p. 67), and, indeed, even sooner, growing
 populations had to find an outlet for surplus families by
 stealing other people’s land. Presumably the Halafians had
 supplanted older ‘neolithic’ communities, to be replaced
 in their turn by the al ’Ubaid people. In that case the
 changes of archaeological ‘cultures’ must be the results of
 wars of conquest that would afford the chief the oppor-
 tunity of winning secular power. But the vanquished need
 not have been exterminated. If some survived as guardians
 of the ritual tradition of a local god, others may have been
 left alive as serfs or slaves. Men would have been ‘domesti-
 cated’, like oxen and asses. Conquests would have produced
 stratified societies, divided into masters and slaves, em-
 bryos of the class division revealed in the oldest historical
 cities.
                                  meen
                                    ee       ae




                                  V

             THE      URBAN       REVOLUTION
                     IN MESOPOTAMIA

q   METALLURGY,        the wheel, the ox-cart, the pack-ass, and
- the sailing ship provided the foundations for a new eco-
  nomic organization. Without it the new materials would
    remain luxuries, the new crafts would not function, the
    new devices would be just conveniences. The societies
_ living, albeit precariously, on the Syrian steppes or the
  plateaux of Iran, /like those inhabiting the Mediterranean
_ coasts and temperate Europe, could still scrape along with-
_ out feeling the imperious need to face the formidable task
_ of reconstructing the whole fabric of neolithic barbarism.
  The alluvial valleys of the great rivers offered a more
  exacting environment, but also greater material rewards
  for its exploitation. In them Copper Age villages turned
  into Bronze Age cities by processes more fully described
  in Man Makes Himself.
     In a small tract no larger than Denmark, on the Tigris-
_ Euphrates delta, the ancient Sumer (Shinar in the Bible),
  the transformation can be followed step by step in the
  archaeological record. Sumer was new land only recently
  raised above the waters of the Persian Gulf by the silt
  carried down by the two rivers. It was still covered with
  vast swamps, full of towering reeds, interrupted by arid
  banks of mud and sand, and periodically inundated by
  floods. Through tortuous channels among the reeds the
_muddy waters flowed sluggishly to the sea. But the waters
  teemed with fish, the reed brakes were alive with wild
  fowl, wild pig, and other game, and on every emergent
  patch of soil grew date palms offering every year a reliable
    crop of nutritive fruit.
      By contrast to the arid desert on either side, this jungle
    must have seemed a paradise. If once the flood waters
go            WHAT    HAPPENED       IN   HISTORY

could be controlled and canalized, the swamps drained, :
and the arid banks watered, it could be made a Garden of
Eden. The soil was so fertile that a hundred-fold return
was not impossible. Actually, documents dating from 2500
B.C. indicate that the average yield on a field of barley was ©
eighty-six times the sowing. Here, then, farmers could easily
produce a surplus above their domestic needs.
   They would have to; raw materials requisite for equip-
ment were not so bountifully provided. From alluvial mud -
you cannot pick up stones or flints suitable for even the
simplest cutting tools. Even such substances, as well as
timber and stone for building, had to be imported from
outside the delta. But the river channels not only unite
the whole plain but provide moving roads on which boats
can easily transport the essential materials from the
mountainous lands upstream or from across the Persian
Gulf. Trade was necessary, but also relatively easy. Inci-
dentally, if material for axes and knives had to be imported
in any case, copper would be found more economical than
the less durable stones and flints.
   The first pioneers arrived in Sumer with an equipment
similar to that found in countless Copper Age settlement
mounds in Iran and no less closely resembling that of
Halafian villages in Syria and Assyria (p. 73). The oldest
settlement yet recognized is marked by a tiny shrine at _
Eridu. Successive reconstructions and enlargements of the
shrine converted its site into a tell surmounted by the
historical temple of the god, Ea. The sixth reconstruction
of the primeval shrine formed the centre of a village of
reed huts of the al ’Ubaid culture described on p. 73.
Remains of similar al ’Ubaid villages have been found
on the sites of most historical cities - Erech, Eridu, Lagash,
                                                                    |
Ur - in Sumer, but not yet farther upstream in what
became Akkad.
   At all these sites the barbarian villages of the first al’ Ubaid
colonists are separated from the oldest ‘historical’ cities
(in which legible written documents occur) by fifty or more
feet of debris, accumulated as in Syrian and Iranian tells
       _   THE   URBAN   REVOLUTION     IN   MESOPOTAMIA        gt
                  .             .   5
   from successive reconstructions of the nuclear settlements.
   Though cult was celebrated at all levels on the same hal-
_ lowed spot, e.g., at Eridu, changes in ceramic styles, the
   introduction of the potter’s wheel, the gradual substitution
 _ of cylinder seals for stamps, and so on must reflect an influx
   of fresh settlers with new traditions, who amalgamated
   with the pioneers to form a stratified society with composite
   traditions. Between the al ’Ubaid culture and the first
   historical or Early Dynastic civilization, archaeologists dis-
   tinguish at least two phases, designated respectively Uruk
   and Jemdet Nasr, both of which are represented not only
   in Sumer but also in the later Akkad, as far north as-the
| junction of the Diyala and Tigris near Baghdad, and up
   the Euphrates to Mari, opposite the mouth of the Khabur.
   So, too, from later written records, philologists deduce the
   presence of three linguistic groups — ‘ Japhetites’ (known
   only inferentially from a few place-names) ; Semites (speaking
  a language akin to Hebrew and Arabic); and the dominant
_ Sumerians. (It is not yet possible to attach these linguistic
    labels to the archaeologists’ cultures, but it is known that
    Sumerian was being written in Sumer before the close of
    the Uruk phase, and the Sumerian script was being used
    to transcribe Semitic names at Mari near the beginning
    of the Early Dynastic phase.)
       Before the end of the Uruk phase at Erech, the ruins of
    successive settlements had already formed a tell some sixty
_ feet high. At the top one is no longer standing in a village
- green but in the square of a cathedral city. In the fore-
_ ground lie the ruins of a gigantic temple measuring over all
    245 feet by 100 feet (cf. the Assyrian shrines mentioned on
_ page 74) later dedicated to the goddess Inanna. Behind,
  - attached to the temple of Anu, rises an artificial mountain
    or ziggurat, thirty-five feet high. It is built of mud and sun-
    dried bricks, but its steeply-sloping walls have been con-
     solidated by hammering into the brickwork while still wet
 _ thousands of pottery goblets. A flight of steps leads up to
_ the summit — a platform covered with asphalt. On it stands
    a miniature temple measuring over all 73 feet by 57 feet
|
ee oe   ao
         ee ee        ee    eee
  ¥
                                                  2      2




        92           WHAT     HAPPENED    IN   HISTORY

        6 ins., containing a long cult room with narrow chambers"
        on either side and an altar or an idol at one end. The walls, —
        of white-washed brick and imported timbers, were em-_
        bellished with niches and buttresses and pierced with
        clerestory windows; the doors were framed with imported
        pinewood and closed with mats.
           The erection of these monumental temples and artificial —
        mountains, the manufacture of the bricks and pottery |
        goblets, the importation of pinewood (from Syria or the
        Iranian mountains), and of lapis lazuli, silver, lead, and
        copper to adorn the shrines presuppose a substantial labour |
        force - a large population. In point of view of size the |
        community has expanded from a village to a city. It has|
        grown rich too.
           The artisans, labourers, and transport workers may have
        been ‘volunteers’ inspired by religious enthusiasm. But if
        they were not paid for their labour, they must at least have |
        been nourished while at work. A surplus of foodstuffs must,
        therefore, have been available for their support. The
        fertility of the soil that enabled the farmer to produce far
        more than he could consume supplied this. But its expendi-
        ture on temples suggests what later records confirm, that '
      _ ‘gods’ concentrated it and made it available for distribution |
        among their working servants. Perhaps these gods were|
        projections of ancestral society and were regarded as the
        creators, and therefore the eminent owners, of the soil that
        society itself had reclaimed from desert and marsh by the
        collective labour of ancestral generations.
           But the gods, being fictions, must have had real repre-
        sentatives, nominally their specialized servants, who must|
        have done much to give concrete form to the imaginary
        beings, and by interpreting must have invented their |
        desires. Temples presuppose priesthoods. Did these begin |
        in ‘secret societies’, such as among some modern barbarian |
        tribes have monopolized once communal rituals (p. on
        By the beginning of historical records the Sumerian priests |
        formed corporations as eternal as the gods they served and |
        maintained; individual priests might die, but the vacant|
     a *




           THE   URBAN   REVOLUTION     IN   MESOPOTAMIA        93

   seats would find new occupants. Presumably these had
   already in the Fourth Millennium undertaken the not
 - unprofitable task of administering the gods’ estates and
   directing the works on which their surplus wealth was
   expended.
      The construction of a temple was a co-operative task.
   The labour of the hundreds of participants must be co-
   ordinated and directed. The whole must be planned
   accurately in advance. The outlines of the temple were in
   fact laid out with strings before the walls were begun. The
   ground plan of a temple, marked out on the bitumen floor
   by the thin red lines left by a coloured string, has actually
ee
ee
Ae
ee
ee
   been found on the summit of the artificial mountain at
a Erech rather earlier than the one described above. From
   other cities and/later times we have temple plans drawn
    to scale on clay tablets. The Sumerians believed that such
    plans were designed by the gods themselves and revealed
    in dreams. But the real architects were presumably the
See
ee  priests.
       In a later temple, still belonging to the Uruk phase at
    Erech, and in the next phase in Akkad too, clay tablets
    turn up scratched with shorthand pictures and numerals.
   They are accounts, the direct precursors of the oldest
    tablets that we can read to-day. As administrators of the
    temple estates, the priests must give account of their
    stewardship to a jealous master and their colleagues in the
    perpetual corporation. So they have agreed upon a con-
    ventional method of recording receipts and expenditures in
 _ written signs that shall be intelligible to all their colleagues
    and successors; they have invented writing. Soon after
    3000 B.c. the writing becomes fully intelligible to modern
   philologists too, and the documents speak to us across the
    millennia. With their aid let us examine the Sumerian
    cities of the Early Dynastic period, the first half of the
  Third Millennium B.c.
     The city itself is girt with a brick wall and a fosse, within
  the shelter of which man found for the first time a world
  of his own, relatively secure from the immediate pressure of
94.        | WHAT HAPPENED IN HISTORY
raw external nature. It stands in an artificial landscape -
of gardens, fields, and pastures created out of reed swamp
and desert by the collective activity of preceding generations _
in building dykes and digging canals. The canals that drain
the land and make it fruitful also provide the citizens with —
water and fish and bring to the quays merchandise from afar.
   Even in physical size the city is contrasted with the older —
village. Though insignificant in comparison with London ~
or New York, it represents a new magnitude in human
settlement. The built-up area of Ur occupied 150 acres;
on the analogy of contemporary Near Eastern cities that
would accommodate 24,000 souls. A governor of Lagash,
one of the smaller cities of Sumer about which we happen
to be exceptionally well informed, claims to rule over ten
shars of men — a round number, literally thirty-six thousand,
and perhaps applying only to adult males. The populations
of Lagash, Umma, and Khafajah are reliably estimated to
have been 19,000, 16,000, and 12,000 respectively during
the Third Millennium.
   The spiritual and economic unity of the new aggregate
was expressed most obviously in the temples of the gods,
raised on an artificial platform and dominated by the
towering ziggurat, but comprising also granaries, maga-
zines, and workshops. The gods, as representatives of the
tribe and clans, own the farm land created by social labour;
town land is apparently individually owned already, while
pasture remains common. The tribal territory of Lagash,
for example, appears divided into the estates of some twenty
deities, eminent domain over them all being perhaps
retained by the chief god of the city or tribe. His consort,
Bati (whose temple accounts alone have been preserved
almost intact), thus owned seventeen square miles. As with
the arable land of a barbarian clan, the use of three-
quarters of this area was allotted to individual families in
plots of varying size. The rest Baii retained as a ‘personal
estate’, worked for her by wage-earners, by tenants paying
the equivalent of a seventh or an eighth of the produce as
rent, or by the customary labour of the remaining ‘clansmen’.
                                                           rt. “
                                                          eet         eeere
          rien   vie   ae

          THE    URBAN      REVOLUTION   IN'MESOPOTAMIA          95

        Then in her temple worked twenty-one bakers, receiving
     ‘wages’ in barley, and assisted by twenty-seven female
     slaves, twenty-five brewers with six slave assistants, forty
     women engaged in. preparing wool from the goddess’s
     flocks, female spinners, female weavers, a male smith, and
     other artisans, as well as officials, clerks, and priests. The
     temple also owned and provided its employees with equip-
     ment — metal tools, ploughs, plough animals, wagons, and
     boats. Baii possessed further breeding stock, including a
     stud bull imported from Elam. (Stock was liable to de-
     teriorate on the sultry plains if not crossed periodically
      with mountain breeds.)
-        So the temple appears as a sort of divine household, an
    - enormously enlarged version of the patriarchal household of
      barbarism. But in this household the several tasks which
      were performed collectively by the members of a neolithic
      household (p. 60) have been differentiated and divided
      between specialists, each of whom concentrates on per-
      forming one of the functions which in a neolithic economy
      would be only one item in the daily toil. So the several
     operations of the textile industry, all of which would have
     been completed by the barbarian housewife, have been
     allotted to three distinct groups of craflswomen. The
     specialists thus withdrawn from direct food production are
     nourished by the surplus produced by the god’s tenants
     and concentrated in his granaries.
        The new class of specialist craftsmen which was arising
     before the revolution is provided for in the same way and
     fits easily into the temple organization. But, if thereby
     assured of food and shelter, the smith, for instance, loses
     the freedom and prestige earned by his skill under bar-
     barism (p. 78). He must sell his skill and his products to
     the head of the household and will be dependent upon the
     household store for his raw materials. The same fate
     threatens other craftsmen who arise about this time —
     glaziers, jewellers, seal-cutters.
         The system of divine households ensured the rational
     exploitation of the land, the maintenance of essential canals,
 “ee   oF    gal   Pa oe




96           WHAT          HAPPENED   IN   HISTORY   :   i

and the production of a surplus on a scale large enough to -
support a substantially increased population. But the divine —
households were not self-contained units, though all united
under the overlordship of Ningirsu. The urban population
was hardly exhausted in the foregoing enumeration based
upon early temple wage-lists. It included professional
merchants or traders, who would not all belong to any
particular divine household and so seldom figure in the
lists of temple employees that are our principal source for
knowledge of professions in Early Dynastic times. ‘The arch-
aeological record in any case gives abundant evidence for
the activity of traders.
  Imports, as remarked on page go, were essential for life on
an alluvial plain. By 3000 B.c. copper or bronze, timber for
building, stone, at least for querns and door-sockets (in the
ancient East wooden doors were not hinged, but pivoted on
a hollowed stone set at the base of the jamb) had become
necessities to the urban population. For the gods, at least,
gold, silver, lead, lapis lazuli and other precious substances
were regarded as necessities, too. These and other materials
were, in fact, imported, and that fairly regularly, judging by
the quantities found in ruins, and still more in graves from
the Jemdet phase on. Copper came chiefly from Oman
(Magan) on the Persian Gulf, but probably also from the
eastern mountains; tin may have been obtained from
Drangiana in eastern Iran, from Syria, from Asia Minor,
or even from Europe. The Taurus mountains were a main
source of silver and lead. Timber came from the mountains
to the north-east, and perhaps also from the coastal ranges
of Syria, the best stone from Oman, lapis lazuli from Badak-
shan in north-eastern Afghanistan, mother-of-pearl from
the Persian Gulf, sank shells from peninsular India. Trade
was, indeed, so extensive and so active that it brought
from cities in the Indus valley manufactured articles — seal-
amulets, beads and, perhaps, even pottery bases.
   The personnel engaged in this traffic must have been
heterogeneous. For reasons adduced on page 62 it may well
have been partly recruited from savages surviving on the
          THE    URBAN   REVOLUTION       IN   MESOPOTAMIA      97

     desert fringe, or at least from nomadic tribes devoted
     mainly to pastoralism. These may well have been Semites
     who in later historical times were everywhere conspicuous
     as traders. The conditions of commerce must have been
     exacting. Caravans must cross swamps, deserts, and moun-
     tain ranges; flotillas had not only to thread their ways
     along the canals and tortuous river channels between
     shoals and marshes, but also to brave the open waters of
      the Persian Gulf and perhaps also of the Arabian Sea.
     Both must    traverse   the territories of foreign tribes, who
     had to be either induced by bribes or forced by arms to
     permit passage and to supply water and other necessities.
     So transport was expensive. The merchants needed, besides
     trading stock, supplies and equipment for the journey, and
     means of bribery, and defence.
        Semi-permanent agencies must be established at the
     termini for the collection of freight and cargo, just as
     European business houses have established ‘factories’ and
     colonies on the coasts of Africa and China or in the cities
     of the Levant and Istanbul. Many business documents and
     letters have survived that belonged to such a merchant
     colony established at the beginning of the Second Millen-
     nium at Kanes, on the plateau of Asia Minor, and engaged
,
——
2.


     in the export of copper, silver, and lead from the Turkish
:F   mines. References in later epics imply that this colony
     existed already about 2500 B.c.
|        Owing to these conditions ‘trade’ in the Orient was a
F
      more potent agency in the diffusion of culture than it is
      to-day. Free craftsmen might travel with the caravans
      seeking a market for their skill, while slaves would form
      part of the merchandise. These, together with the whole
      caravan or ship’s company, must be accommodated in the
      home city. Foreigners in a strange land would demand the
      comforts of their own religion just as much as English
      colonies in a Catholic or Mohammedan country expect an
      Anglican service every Sunday. So a scene carved by a
      local Sumerian artist on a vase, recovered from a ruined
      city on the Diyala, depicts an Indian cult being celebrated
98           WHAT    HAPPENED      IN   HISTORY

apparently in a local shrine in Akkad. If cults were thus —
transmitted, useful arts and crafts could be diffused just as
easily. Trade promoted the pooling of human experience.
   Under such conditions the commerce essential to their
maintenance would increase the heterogeneity of the cities’ —
populations. The latter already consisted, according to the
testimony of philology and archaeology, of disparate lingu-
istic and cultural stocks. The indispensable merchants,
compelled by their profession to travel, could not well be
obliged to trade with one city alone, and craftsmen, too,
could still sell their skills abroad; in the early accounts from
Lagash we read of a man from the neighbouring city of
Umma working in Baii’s brewery. As a social order for
uniting such disparate elements, the barbarian principle
of kinship was becoming a threadbare fiction.
   Now, traces of totemism can in fact be detected in the
symbols of the deities and in representations of cult scenes
in which the participants are dressed as animals. The
divine estates, plots on which were allotted — perhaps perio-
dically — to the deity’s ‘people’, may well be derived
from the communally owned clan lands distributed annually
for cultivation by the clansmen in many barbarian societies,
But any approximation to equality of lots in such common
farmland has disappeared by the time of the earliest
Lagash accounts. While many of Baii’s ‘people’ seem to
have held only 0.8 to 2.5 acres, a high temple official held
35.5 acres. Moreover, though all members of a divine
household may have been in theory servants of the god,
the conditions of service were very different for the priestly
administrators on the one hand and the tenants, wage-
earners, and slaves on the other. The share farmers and agri-
cultural labourers received only a fraction of the produce of
their labour. From the surplus collected by the temple the
 bakers and brewers and other artisans were paid only a
modest wage in barley; the slaves who helped them presu-
 mably got little beyond their bare keep.
    Indeed, before 2500 B.c. the divine households had ceased
 to be anything like happy families. The abuses that
  |   THE URBAN REVOLUTION             IN MESOPOTAMIA           99
disturbed the households’ harmony are quaintly set forth by
Urukagina of Lagash in a decree aimed at restoring the old
order ‘as it had existed from the beginning’. Favoured
priests practised various forms of extortion (overcharging
for burials, for instance), and treated the god’s (i.e. the
community’s) land, cattle, equipment, and servants as their
own private property or personal slaves. Then ‘the High
Priest came into the garden of the poor ... and took wood
therefrom.’ ‘If a great man’s house adjoined that of an
ordinary citizen’, the former might annex the humble
dwelling without paying any proper compensation to its
owner. ‘If a fair ass be born to a subject and his overlord
say, “I will buy it,” ’ the privileged purchaser seldom paid
‘as much as satisfied the owner’s heart’. For all its clumsy
language, this archaic text gives us unmistakable glimpses
of a real conflict/of classes.                      ;
   The surplus    produced   by the new   economy      was, in fact,
concentrated in the hands of     a  relativel y small    class. Such
concentration was doubtless necessary for       the   accumula  tion
of absolutely small individual contributions into reserves
sufficient for the great tasks imposed on civilized society. But
it split society into classes and produced a further contra-
diction in the new economy. For it limited the expansion
of industry and consequently. the absorption of the surplus
rural population.
    In so far as only ‘gods’ and their favourite servants were
in a position to purchase the products of the new industries,
 the effective demand for such products would remain small.
Only a few craftsmen could be sure of a livelihood in
 supplying it. For the rest, as in a neolithic economy, the
 offspring of a prolific peasantry must find new lands to till.
 So while reclamation works, the warfare against desert and
 swamp, might satisfy this need, warfare against neigh-
 bouring cities to seize the land their citizens had already
 reclaimed might be made to seem an easier outlet for the
 overflow, as in a barbarian community.
    Be that as it may, though all the cities of Sumer and
 Akkad enjoyed a uniform culture and though, or because,
100          WHAT    HAPPENED     IN   HISTORY

all were dependent on the waters of the same rivers, each
was politically independent and ready to fight its neigh-
bours. Almost the oldest legible documents, other than
account tablets, describe wars between the adjacent cities
of Lagash and Umma for the possession of a strip of frontier
territory. Metal war gear forms a prominent item in the
furniture of all early graves. Even in the Uruk phase some
seals were engraved with battle scenes. Of course citizens
might also have to repel onslaughts by starveling barbarians
from the desert fringe who cast envious eyes on urban
wealth and on the cities’ lands, created by centuries of toil.
   A new institution was needed to restrain these conflicts.
By the beginning of historical times the State had emerged,
but it was embodied in the single person of the city-governor
or king, who may be just ‘corn-king’ and war-chief amal- —
gamated and writ large. The later Sumerian clerks pre-—
tended that ‘kingship had descended from the heavens’
thousands of years before the mythical Deluge, Noah’s
Flood of Hebrew tradition. In the archaeological record ©
palaces and royal insignia are entirely overshadowed by
temples and their furniture during the Uruk and Jemdet
Nasr phases. But the symbols on some early seals may be —
pictographic representations of royal titles. And as soon as
decipherable inscriptions begin, perhaps about 2750 B.c.,
 ‘royal’ names occur.                                          :
    The earliest city governors generally style themselves
 ‘tenant-farmer’ (of the god) — ishakku — only rarely lugal or
 ‘king’. But as representative of the State a governor of
 Lagash, Urukagina, intervenes in the reform decree on
 page 99 to check the exaction of the rich; he appears in fact
 ‘as a power apparently standing above society, but neces-
 sary to moderate the conflict of classes and keep it within
 the bounds of order’.
    ‘The city governor may have owed his authority on the
 one hand to a magical identification with the chief god of
 the city; he may, that is, have been the actor who played |
 the réle of the deity in some such fertility drama as was
 described on page 65. It is certain that in later times the
       THE   URBAN     REVOLUTION      IN   MESOPOTAMIA       IOI

_“ king did impersonate the god in this way at great annual
    festivals. On the other hand, the magical authority of the
    ishakku was at least reinforced by the temporal power
    earned by leadership in war. The king as victor, smiting
    his enemies, is a favourite theme in Early Dynastic art.
       As vicegerent on earth of the head of the local pantheon
    the city governor united the several ‘divine households’
    into a sort of vaster family, albeit this time purely meta-
    phorically. At Lagash the several deities worshipped by
    the citizens were imagined as related like the members of
    a patriarchal household. So under Urukagina the ishakku
    was high priest of the chief god, Ningirsu; his wife was
    high-priestess of Ningirsu’s consort, Baii, and so on. As
    war-chief the ishakku commanded the citizen army. Never-
  _ theless in the earliest historical documents it is the gods of
  the cities who go, to war and win victories; the prize at
_ stake is not described as a strip of the territory of, say,
   Lagash, but as the field of Ningirsu; when a peace treaty
 _ is concluded it is drawn up in the names of the belligerents’
 _ deities.
      As representative of the ‘tribal’ god the ishakku receives
   the largest plot of the clan lands — at Lagash he enjoyed the
     use of 608 acres of Baii’s estate alone — and ‘taxes’, the
     civilized counterparts of the gifts customarily offered to a
     barbarian chief. On behalf of the god too he receives a
     major share of the booty won by the victorious deity. The
     city governor thus came to concentrate a considerable
ee
et
ee
Pe
pe
ee
ee
ee   portion of the land’s surplus produce. The gods themselves
     might be indebted to the governor’s munificence. In early
     inscriptions these dwell with special pride on the building
     or adornment of temples. But they also recall the expendi-
     ture of the accumulated surplus on reproductive works -
   _ the digging of canals and the building of granaries. They
aT
~~_  record also expeditions sent to Oman and other foreign
  countries for métal, stone, timber, and other war materials,
  needed by the crafts. The artisans were to this extent
  indebted to the ishakku for the requisite supplies. ‘The
  industrial population were dependent on the city governor
                                          Lye
 102                      IN HISTORY.
              WHAT HAPPENED
for their raw materials.’ Indeed after 2500 B.c. trade in|
metals, vital for the armament industry, became at least—
at times and in theory a royal monopoly. In any case the —
 king, as the State, must have been the principal purchaser
 of metal and similar commodities and so dominated the
market.
    Nevertheless the city state in Mesopotamia did not (as
 Heichelheim alleges) attain the exclusive position of a
 modern totalitarian State; the ishakku was never quite a
 Fuhrer. The temple corporations could always maintain a
‘certain freedom, both economic and intellectual; however
 much they might depend on the city governor’s muni-
 ficence, the perpetual corporations of priests were more
 permanent than any temporal dynasties. Rulers might be
 deposed by internal revolutions or subjugated by foreign
 rivals. The priesthood maintained its continuity in spite of
 dynastic changes; conquerors generally respected the
 temples and often embellished them as generously as native
 governors. At the same time always down to 2400 B.c.
 and often thereafter till 1800 the small area of Sumer and
 Akkad was divided among a multitude of independent city
 states, which offered alternative markets for exotic mer-
 chandise, industrial products, and the skill of artisans.
    Naturally, ambitious city governors sought in the contra-
 diction mentioned on page 99 an excuse for eliminating such
 competition by establishing hegemonies for themselves, their
 gods, and their cities. By 2000 B.c. the clerical historians of
 Sumer believed that one city or another had always enjoyed
 such a supreme sovereignty over the whole land. Some
 moderns too have seen in the universal worship of deities
 like Enlil, whose chief temple was at Nippur, the reflexion
 of political union in prehistoric times. But such contem-
 porary documents as survive give no definite evidence of
 the supremacy of one city over all the rest until about 2400
 B.c. Lugalzaggizi of Umma conquered a number of cities.
 Even his ‘empire’ was transient. It was first a little later
 that a Semite, Sargon, the upstart ruler of a new city, Agade
 (tradition says he was the son of a gardener) achieved a real
           *
                       f

     THE       URBAN       REVOLUTION   IN   MESOPOTAMIA   108

unification which endured for about a century. His achieve-
ment was repeated by the Sumerian kings of Ur, by Ham-
murabi of Babylon and others. But with Sargon the Early
Dynastic period ends.
   The new economic order not only invested barbaric
chieftainship with the sanctity of kingship and bestowed
upon its holders the authority of a territorial State. It also
by its very nature called forth a novel method of trans-
mitting human experience — accurate and impersonal — and
generated sciences of a new kind — exact and capable of
predicting results precisely. The invention of writing,. the
creation of a script, during the Uruk phase in Sumer has
already been mentioned in passing on page 93. It deserves
more than a passing reference, not only because the step
was fraught with portentous consequences for the subse-
quent history of mankind, but also because nowhere else
in the world is the whole process of building up a system
of writing — a written language in fact — illustrated by a
series of contemporary documents from the first experi-
ments to the final adoption of an agreed orthography; for,
very luckily for us, the Sumerians employed from the start
as writing materials tablets of clay which by baking were
made imperishable.
   As explained already, perpetual corporations of priests
found themselves charged with the heavy task of adminis-
tering the unprecedented accumulations of wealth belong-
ing to the Sumerian deities. The administration by such
corporations of the temples’ revenues on behalf of a divine
master required the keeping of accurate records of all
receipts and expenditures; a god’s servants must be able
to give account of their stewardship. The record must be
intelligible not only to the official who made it, but to his
successor and all the partners in the joint undertaking.
No private system of reminders like the knot in the hand-
kerchief was any use. The head of the brewery must note
down what quantities of barley he received and how much
beer and of what strength he delivered and note it in
synibols that not only reminded him of something, i.e.,
104          WHAT    HAPPENED      IN   HISTORY               a

meant something to him, but meant the same thing to his
successor, to the controller of the granaries, and to other |
colleagues.                                                    |
   The invention of a system of writing was just the agree-
ment on the meanings to be attached to the symbols by
the society using them for its common ends. The symbols
(characters) on the oldest tablets are mostly pictures which
are often self-explanatory. They may be called pictograms
(and a script composed of them pictographic). But even the
simplest pictogram is more or less conventional. To denote
an ass it is not necessary to draw painfully on the tablet a i
photographic portrait of an individual ass: a simplified and
abbreviated shorthand sketch will suffice. The abbrevia-
tions used on the oldest tablets still show a certain variety;
but they rapidly become standardized. This means that a
particular shorthand version of an ass was gradually agreed
upon and sanctioned by the consensus of the corporation.
   The idea was just a development of that underlying the
designs on seals from al ’Ubaid times, for these had been
imprinted on clay and already bore symbolic meaning
(p. 73). Even the particular abbreviations used as characters |
had sometimes been suggested by seal engravings.
   Now many things to be recorded could not conveniently |
be represented by pictures at all. The difficulty was over-
come by agreeing to attach a quite arbitrary meaning to a
picture. For instance, a spouted jar was taken to stand for
a given measure of volume, say a gur. By drawing strokes
on the body of the jar a gur of barley (two strokes) might be
distinguished from a gur of beer (three strokes). This was
being done already in the Fourth Millennium s.c. The
signs stood not only for things but for ideas or words
(names). In technical language the script was no longer
purely pictographic, but also ideographic. It would have
been possible by adopting new pictures and agreeing upon
further arbitrary modifications and combinations to expand
the system to express most of the ideas to be recorded. Later
on the Chinese actually took this course.
   The Sumerians adopted a different line. Most of the
      THE   URBAN    REVOLUTION      IN   MESOPOTAMIA     105

  common Sumerian names were words of one syllable; the
  word for mouth, for instance, is ka. So the picture of the
  human head which stood for the word ka and the idea
  ‘mouth’, also stood for the sound ka. It thus got a phonetic
  value and could be used as a phonetic symbol or phono-
  gram. By combinations of such phonograms it was now
  possible to spell out names and compound words instead
  of inventing new signs (ideograms) for them. The Sumerians
  worked out this idea in Early Dynastic times. They pre-
  served a number of their conventional pictures and still
  used them as ideograms. But they also used them phoneti-
- cally to spell out words. Very often they spelt a word and
  also added an ideogram (in this context termed a determina-
  tive) to suggest what sort of a word it was. Hence the
  number of current signs was not increased with the develop-
  ment of the script (as it was in China), but was actually
  reduced; in the earliest tablets of the Uruk phase some
  2,000 signs may have been used; soon after 3000 B.c. the
  number current had been reduced to 800, by 2500 B.c.
 to about 600.
    At the same time the signs themselves were simplified.
 For convenience and speed of writing the pictures were
 made so cursory that they often bear no recognizable
 similarity to the object denoted by the ideogram. Ultimately
 they were no longer traced but formed by the impressions
 of a wedge-shaped stylus that was stamped into the clay.
 The Mesopotamian script is therefore called cuneiform
 (wedge-shaped). The script was apparently devised by
 Sumerians for writing the Sumerian language in the
 manner just described. But the urban populations were
 cosmopolitan and comprised in Akkad at least a large
 Semitic element. Just after 2500 B.c. at latest Sumerian
 characters were being used phonetically to transcribe the
 names of Semitic kings. Soon Semites came to employ the
 script for official and business documents in the (Semitic)
 Akkadian tongue, spelling out the Semitic words as well
 as using ideograms.
    A’ numeral notation was as necessary as a script. For
             WHAT    HAPPENED      IN   HISTORY

recording the reindeer slain in a communal hunt or the
sheep in a village flock notches on a tally stick would meet
all the requirements of savages and barbarians. For enumer-
ating the vast herds of a civilized temple or the contents of a
city granary such a notation would be intolerably clumsy.
A convention must be agreed upon to save the trouble of
making hundreds of notches on the tally or hundreds of
dots on the tablet that replaced it. Numbers below ten
were simply indicated in the old way by groups of from
one to nine semi-circular impressions made with a reed
held obliquely. But ten was denoted by a new symbol, the
circle made by stamping the reed vertically into the clay,
20 by two such, and so on. In measuring volumes of beer
a new symbol, a large semi-circle made with a larger
reed, was introduced to denote 60, but in measuring grain —
this stood for 100 in the oldest tablets. So a decimal (1, 10,
100 ...) and a sexagesimal (1, 10, 60, 3600 ...) notation
were once used concurrently. In Sumer the decimal system
was abandoned and the so-called sexagesimal reckoning
alone used after 2500 B.c.
   Fractions other than two-thirds were always expressed
as aliquot parts, i.e. fractions with the numerator unity:
fractions with a numerator more than one would have to
be resolved into a sum of aliquot parts, e.g., would become
4 + }. Of course, in the practical arithmetic of the Fourth
and Third Millennia it was hardly.ever necessary to use
these clumsy sums, for it dealt with concrete measures and
weights. Five-sixths of a mina would be written 50 shekels
and so on.
    Owing to its conventional character the system of writing
and ciphering had to be perpetuated by education. To
fulfil their duties as administrators priests had to learn to
read and write; that is to say they had to be taught the
meanings and the phonetic values arbitrarily assigned to
the characters by their colleagues, just as every child has to
be taught the meanings attached by its society to the sounds
of its spoken language (p. 11). Schools became a necessary
adjunct to the temple. Of course they helped to standardize
                                                     mee ae   so   =



   :    ea)                        ‘
       THE    URBAN   REVOLUTION       IN   MESOPOTAMIA    107

and maintain the approved conventions. Since in every
temple and in every city from Jemdet Nasr times the same
signs and the same: conventions were accepted and em-
ployed, the priestly corporations must have co-operated at
least in their educational work on an ‘international’ scale.
   The oldest surviving collections of tablets include, beside
accounts, lists of signs. The latter may have begun as simple
records of the conventions agreed upon; some such record
would be essential from the start to fix and maintain the
standards approved. They were doubtless copied for use in
schools where they would be no less necessary. By Early
Dynastic times they had grown into regular dictionaries.
Of course, as the first lists were collections of ideograms and
they fixed the form, an alphabetical arrangement, such as
seems both natural and convenient to us, was impracticable.
 Instead, words denoted by similar picture-signs were
grouped together — for instance all words denoted by an
 abbreviated picture of a vase (phonetic value duk) and
 modifications thereof form a group. As a result not only
various kinds of vases, but also contents of vases, such as
beer and milk, and even measures would be classed
together. The same principle was generally followed when
dictionaries of spelt words came to be compiled in addition
to the lists of ideograms. These lists, moreover, are confined
to nouns — names; verbs and adjectives are not included.
Later the lists of ideograms and of words were expanded
by the addition of a column giving the Semitic (Akkadian)
equivalent.
   Both the monumental works carried out by States and
temples with co-operative labour and the business activities
of the priestly corporations and private merchants required
the standardization of weights and measures, agreements
by society for the use of common units. Measurement is of
course necessary even for savages and barbarians. But for
their simple needs the concrete standards of comparison
supplied ready-made by nature suffice - the length of a
finger, a palm, or a forearm, the weight of a grain or a
jar full. If, for instance, a farmer were cutting rafters to
108          WHAT    HAPPENED      IN   HISTORY

span his barn he could measure the space to be bridged as
sO many times his forearm (so many cubits) and use his
forearm to measure off the requisite lengths on his timbers.
But if a hundred or more labourers were cutting rafters
for a Sumerian temple, serious trouble might occur if each
man used his own arm as a measuring rod. Men’s arms
are not all of the same length, and some beams measured
by their aid might fail to span the temple, while others
would project beyond its walls. The personal or natural
cubit (forearm) must therefore be replaced by a social or
conventional cubit, accepted by all co-workers as a stand-
ard of comparison. The agreed standard must then be in-
scribed on measuring rods of wood or metal that replaced
individual limbs. Naturally it was found convenient to make
the conventional cubit a simple multiple (in practice five
times) of the ‘finger’, the next unit of measurement below
it, and an aliquot part (one-sixth) of the next highest unit,
the reed, and so on.
    In the same way conventional standard ‘ grains’ or ‘loads’
replaced the varying natural grains and actual loads in
measuring cereals and other materials for social purposes.
The new conventional units of weight were related nu-
merically in the same simple way as units of length, and
were represented by carved weights of haematite such as
are often found by excavators. Incidentally a balance must
have been invented before such standards could be estab-
lished and used.
   Finally the organized co-operation of an urban popula-
tion requires more accurate divisions of time than are
needed in a rural village. The Sumerians agreed to divide
day and night into twelve double-hours (hence our twenty-
four-hour day) and devised instruments — a sort of sundial
and a water-clock worked on the principle of the hour-glass
~— for measuring these intervals. But for the year they were
content to keep a lunar calendar, though learned clerks,
by observation of the heavens, knew the length of the
sidereal year and at least in later times corrected discrepan-
cies between the calendar and the seasons by intercalating
    ‘THE   URBAN    REVOLUTION       IN   MESOPOTAMIA      109

an. extra month when astronomical observations indicated
the need for correction.
   Exact sciences were the direct outcome of the foregoing
social agreements. The complicated economy that had
evoked these demanded also arithmetic and geometry that
could foretell quantitative results. The Sumerian clerks
were not interested in the properties of numbers as such,
nor in the measurement of abstract empty space (they
probably could not conceive anything of the sort), or even
of uncultivable desert and unharvested sea. They did need
to know - at least approximately — how much seed should
be laid aside for sowing the god’s fields, how many bricks
should be ordered for a temple wall, how much earth must
be dug for a ziggurat or a dyke and how many men would
be needed to finish the job in the appointed time; the unit
for area was a measure of grain, the word for ‘volume’
means literally ‘mass of earth’. The chequer patterns so
easily made on mats of coloured reeds and particularly
popular on painted vases of the Jemdet Nasr phase gave
visual demonstrations of our rule that the area of a rectangle
can be obtained by multiplying length by breadth. A
brickstack gave the corresponding ‘formula’ for volume.
   The very form of the numerical notation would have
graphically illustrated the simplest rules of reckoning had
they not already been familiar from counting on the fingers.
Multiplication is just repeated addition; ‘24 by 4’ means
‘add four twenty-fours together’. Before 1500 B.c. the
Sumerians had noted the results of such additions and
drawn up multiplication tables such as we learn at school.
Even on pictographic tablets of the Fourth Millennium the
areas of fields are calculated as length by breadth. Very
soon the ratio of the circumference ofa circle to its diameter,
what we call z, had been approximately worked out by
actual measurement. The Sumerians accepted the rough
approximation 3. This was accurate enough for estimating
the contents of a cylindrical granary which would of course
be checked by weighing or gauging the number of bricks
required for a column drum where a few spares would
IIo          WHAT    HAPPENED     IN   HISTORY      _

not matter and irregularities in shape could easily be
amended.
   The arithmetical and geometrical rules that the Sumerian
clerks applied are the true prototypes of the quantitative
‘laws’ of modern science. They reduced to a generalized
numerical form relations that had been actually observed
and measured between classes of objects in the external
world. They told men what to do in order to obtain a
desired result. Obviously we need not bother to ask the
names of the laws’ discoverers. They are too patently social
products called forth by the needs of a society affected by
the urban revolution and discovered with the aid of the
spiritual equipment produced by the revolution.
   Observations on the stars proved so successful in fore-
telling when to begin agricultural operations that the
Sumerians were induced to hope by the same means to
predict the unpredictable. In other words astronomy led
to astrology, in pursuit of which the motions of heavenly
bodies were studied not unprofitably by the Sumerians’
cultural heirs.
   The urban revolution provoked or at least         cums
another convention that likewise led to standardization,
generalization, and quantization. The exchange of goods
and services had been increased so greatly by the new
economy as to demand a common standard in terms of
which the several kinds of goods could be measured and
‘valued’. This conventional standard of value would at the
same time serve as a medium of exchange with which all
services could be rewarded (i.e., wages paid) and every
commodity purchased. The first standard socially approved
was apparently barley, the staff of life that everyone needed
and to obtain which they must work and produce goods;
even in Early Dynastic times wages and rents were still
most frequently paid in barley.
   But already metal - silver and, for small sums, copper -
had been generally accepted as the most convenient
medium and standard, and so it remained in Mesopotamia
for two millennia.   The   units, however,   were       not coins,
      THE   URBAN    REVOLUTION      IN   MESOPOTAMIA      III

  guaranteed as to quality and weight by a State, but
 ‘quantities weighed out for each transaction in accordance
with the approved standards of weight. Nevertheless the
  adoption of a conventional metallic standard is equivalent
  to the transition to a money economy from what is termed a
  natural economy. In the latter individual objects were
  bartered one against the other; now all can be priced at
  so many shekels of silver or gurs of barley and thus com-
  pared quantitatively.
      Wealth can now be estimated not in foodstuffs, slaves,
  and commodities, which can themselves be consumed, used,
  and enjoyed, but in terms of the ‘commodity of commodi-
  ties’, the general abstract medium which cannot itself be
  consumed but can be exchanged for any consumable
  commodity or useful service. As a consequence ‘production
  for the market’ of objects to be sold for silver can begin to
  replace production for use of commodities desired by the
  maker himself or ordered by somebody who desires them
  and promises the maker an immediate and chosen recom-
  pense.                ‘
      Moreover, the new generalized wealth is regarded as
   possessing the property naturally inherent in the primary
   form of wealth — corn and cattle — of multiplying and
 reproducing itself. Like grain and livestock it may be
   treated as capital and used to secure an increase — profit.
   Censequently interest will be charged on any loans. In
   Mesopotamian society the — largely Semitic - merchant
  class that became increasingly prominent and prosperous
  from the days of Sargon developed and exploited these
  ideas brilliantly. They were destined to have revolutionary
   effects completing the breakdown of gentile organization,
   begetting a new middle class, and oiling the machinery of
  production. In Sumerian society of the Early Dynastic age
   the solvent process was only beginning.
      In Elam, east of Mesopotamia, the lower valley of the
   Kerkha, that even in 700 B.c. still flowed directly into the
   Persian Gulf east of the Tigris-Euphrates delta, offered an
  environment very similar to that of Sumer, but on a smaller
112             WHAT      HAPPENED        IN   HISTORY

scale. Here the excavations at Susa reveal, albeit less clearly
than at Ur or Erech, the successive stages of the urban
revolution. The several steps seem strictly parallel to those
described above down to the end of the Uruk phase. Till
that point the similarities in ceramics and seal designs are
striking. Even the pictographic script (termed proto-
Elamite), traced on clay tablets, that marks the culmination
of the revolution, shares many conventions with the
Sumerian writing of the Uruk and Jemdet Nasr tablets,
though the numeral notation seems exclusively decimal.
No doubt Elamite civilization was not only based on the
same elements as Sumerian but also organized in much the
same way.
   In the sequel Elam and Sumer developed along divergent
lines, or rather Elam did not share in the progress of the
Early Dynastic age. So the proto-Elamite pictographic
writing does not spontaneously develop into a script that
we can read. At the end of the Third Millennium it was
simply superseded by developed cuneiform that was adapted
to transcribe the local language. Our knowledge of Elam
in the interval is indirect and fragmentary.
   Susa had remained an influential military power and
commercial centre. The Elamites successfully raided Sumer
and Akkad and extended their domains inland to Sialk in
Iran (p. 72). Their trade reached India as well as Meso-
potamia. But in the end Elam became a province of the
Mesopotamian economic system and culture just as from
about 2100 to 2000 B.c. she was even politically incorporated
as a tributary in the Empire of the Sumerian Third Dynasty
of Ur.



    Note. While it will not affect the over-all picture and need not worry
the general reader, students should note that since this book was written
it has become the fashion to deflate Mesopotamian dates prior to 2350
B.c. (Sargon of Agade). So they might replace 3000. B.c. by 2500 and
  oe corresponding reductions throughout chapters IV and V. (June,
1957)-
                                                  Tee    ey a




                               VI

    EARLY       BRONZE         AGE     CIVILIZATION
                IN EGYPT         AND     INDIA

  IN the Nile Valley the urban revolution that we have traced
  as a process in Mesopotamia can be studied only after its
  culmination. This coincided with the union of the whole of
  Egypt under the absolute rule of a sovereign king who was
 _also a god — an event comparable to Sargon’s unification of
  Mesopotamia, but more than five centuries earlier. The
  preparatory stages can be inferred only precariously from
  later legends and from indirect indications in the archaeo-
  logical record. Only the wide marshy Delta offered the
  challenge and reward that had evoked the artificial en-
  vironment of Sumerian cities. But archaeologically man’s
  response is not directly known; the early settlements are
  buried deep in Nile silt under modern towns and cultivated
  fields. Indirect evidence comes from Upper Egypt.
      South of Cairo the narrow valley through the barren
  desert plateaux has analogies, real but remote, with Sumer.
_ It too was occupied by a chain of swamps covered with a
  jungle of papyrus that sheltered waterfowl and game and
   dangerous hippopotami. Through the swamps the Nile
   provides a perfect highway for transport. Its annual inun-
   dation, more regular and better timed for agricultural
   operations than the Tigris and Euphrates floods, will
   automatically irrigate such land as human labour has
   reclaimed. Within the valley neither timber for building
   nor metal is available.
      On the other hand the desert on both sides offers supplies
_ of good flint for knives and axes. Between the valley’s pre-
_ cipitous sides there are strips of desert still raised above the
- floods from which the swampy valley-bottom could be
   exploited. On these settled the so-called Predynastic
_ Egyptians in much the same stage of culture as the societies

|
e
114          WHAT    HAPPENED     IN   HISTORY

described at Merimde and the Fayum on page 53. Within |
the valley these settlers, by combining for a resolute assault |
on swamps and wild beasts, succeeded in creating an |
artificial environment in which they prospered and
multiplied.
   They appear grouped in apparently autonomous villages, _
each perhaps occupied by a totemic clan. Later the totems, |
the animals, plants, or natural objects from which the
villagers may have believed themselves descended, became
the emblems and standards of the counties or nomes into
which Egypt was divided in historical times. In the earliest
stages, termed Badarian and Amratian, the villagers still
relied largely on hunting and fishing. But they did grow
grains by natural irrigation and breed stock on the meadows.
They could build large boats of bundles of papyrus for navi-
gation on the river. For painting their eyes, malachite was
obtained regularly from Sinai, perhaps by barter with
desert hunters. The villagers were acquainted with gold and
copper (perhaps derived from the reduction of malachite, a
carbonate of copper), but they treated metal as a superior |
sort of stone without appreciating the advantages conferred |
by its fusibility.
   The remarkable preservation of bodies buried in the dry |
desert sand seems already to have suggested particularly |
lively speculations about the future life and started a quest |
for ‘immortality’. The need for ‘a good burial’ certainly |
provided a motive for the accumulation of surplus wealth
and magic jewels. Our knowledge of the Predynastic people |
is derived mainly from their graves, which are richly fur-
nished with jars of food and drink, hunting tackle and fish-
ing gear and toilet articles — particularly an almost cere-
monial set of slate palettes, rubbers, and decorated porches
for eye-paint.
   Next in the Gerzean stage the importance of hunting|
waned; the villagers devoted themselves to farming and
fishing. Implements and weapons of cast copper and new
imported materials, many such as lapis lazuli of Asiatic
origin, began to reach Upper Egypt. Ships, flying standards |
           EARLY    BRONZE     AGE   CIVILIZATION           II5

  that in historical times belonged to counties in the Delta and
  on the Mediterranean coast, visited the southern villages;
  they are depicted there on vases from Gerzean graves that
  may themselves have been made in the north. The new
  materials certainly denote the influx of new ideas and new
  techniques emerge; the chemistry of glazing was discovered
  and faience was made.
     The Asiatic substances and products of the Delta found in
  Upper Egypt may denote an infiltration of Semites and even
  a political domination of the Valley by the Delta, of Upper
  Egypt by Lower; later legends tell of a conquest of the South
- by ‘Followers of Horus’ from the North and of the subse-
  quent formation of two kingdoms of Upper and Lower
  Egypt respectively. But the archaeological record attests
  neither kings nor specialized craftsmen nor the use of
  writing.
     Finally in the Late Gerzean phase sailing boats of the type
  reputedly native to the Persian Gulf (p. 84) reached Upper
  Egypt. They are depicted on the rocky walls of dry wadis
  between the Nile and the Red Sea and on a tomb at Falcon-
  town (Hierakonpolis, in historical times the county town of
  the Falcon nome and presumably the capital of the Falcon
  clan). On the tomb walls they are seen in battle with native
  papyrus boats. The same scene of a naval battle is carved on
  an ivory knife-handle found at Gebel-el-Arak, significantly
  near the Nile end of a cross desert route to the Red Sea. Its
  other side depicts a figure whose costume is quite alien to
  Egypt but agrees precisely with that shown on a basalt stele
  from the Jemdet Nasr city at Erech in Sumer. Moreover, in
  contemporary Egyptian art we find motives, at no other
  time popular on the Nile, but familiar on the Tigris-
  Euphrates from the Uruk period on. However indirectly,
  Sumerian ideas were surely influencing Upper Egypt;
  Nilotic barbarism was being fertilized by contact with
  Mesopotamian civilization.
     To the same phase belong a-series of ivories and slate
  palettes carved with pictures of animals in combat, mytho-
  logical versions of struggles between totemic clans and in
=   ve




                      WHAT    HAPPENED     IN HISTORY

         particular of the victories of the Falcon clan. This clan may |
         already have occupied the walled town covering twelve
         and a half acres, the ruins of which mark its capital.         |
            Meanwhile some tombs become increasingly elaborate
         and richly furnished; one at Falcon-town is lined with
         bricks and adorned with painted scenes. A growing con-
         trast between rich and poor tombs marks a division of
         society into classes, if not the emergence of chiefs. It cul-
         minates in the so-called Royal Tombs of Abydos in Upper
         Egypt. The simple trench in the sand that held the predy-
         nastic dead has now grown into a huge excavation, at the
         bottom of which is a miniature palace — it measured 26 ft.
         long by 15 ft. wide by 10} ft. high in Bro — built of bricks”
         and imported timber, surrounded with storerooms and a
         range of small tombs for court officials who must serve their
         lord even in death.
            The Royal Tombs are crowded with jars of grain, fruits
          and liquors, superb vases of stone and precious metal,
          ornaments of gold, turquoise, lapis lazuli and other gems,
          arms, and toilet articles of copper. These attest the concen-
         tration of unheard-of wealth, the existence of a multitude
         of specialized and expert craftsmen, extensive foreign trade
         And in the Royal Tombs the first written documents
         appear; a system of writing, the hieroglyphic script, has been
         invented. The archaeological record merges in the literary.
         record. The latter explains what has happened.                 |
            ‘Menes’, chief of the Falcon    clan and  himself magically
         identified with its totem, the divine Falcon (Horus), has con-
         quered the rest of the Valley and the Delta and welded the
         independent villages and clans into a single State - we!
         might almost say a single household. The head of this State:
         is not the tenant-farmer of a god, but himself a god, made
         immortal by magic rites and guaranteeing by his own magi
         the fertility of flocks and crops. By right of conquest he ad
         absorbed — in the cannibalistic terminology appropriate tos
         barbarism the texts say ‘devoured’ — the local totems that
          personified the ancestral generations who created the lan
          out of swamp and desert. Therefore, like the Sumerian city;
           EARLY BRONZE        AGE   CIVILIZATION           117
| god, he holds eminent domain over the whole land of
  Egypt and is entitled to a tribute of offerings and services
  from its cultivators.
     Thus the pharaoh instead of the temple concentrates in
  his treasures the surplus products of the land - a surplus
  that dwarfs into insignificance the revenue of any Sumerian
  temple or city-governor. The symbol of this concentration
  is not a temple — temples to local and national gods exist but
_ by favour of and with endowments from the king — but a
  monumental tomb. It is designed to preserve the physical
  remains of the god-king and so to ensure the continuance of
  his magic work on behalf of his land. As the land’s popula-
_tion and wealth increased, the tombs were made ever
 grander and stronger, until the maximum was reached
 under Cheops (Khufu) of Dynasty IV. His Great Pyramid
measures 755 ft. on a side and rises to a height of 481 ft. It
 contains some 2,300,000 blocks each weighing on an
_average 24 tons. The blocks were quarried on the east side
_of the valley, floated across during the inundation, and then
 dragged up an enormous stone ramp toa plateau, 100 ft.
 above the river, on which the pyramids stand. A tradition
preserved by the Greek historian Herodotus and accepted
_by Petrie reports that the pyramid demanded the labour
 of 100,000 men for twenty years.
    But the pharaohs used part of the vast surplus they con-
trolled in ways that even modern sceptics will admit as
 practical. Menes himself girt with the ‘White Wall’ Mem-
_phis, a new city at the apex of the Delta. A king of Dynasty
I had himself depicted ‘cutting the first sod’ of a new canal.
_The pharaohs sent expeditions supported by the royal army
 to Sinai to mine copper. The State equipped and manned
 ships to sail to Byblos for the Cedars of Lebanon; by the end
 of the Third Dynasty these sea-going ships might attain a
length of 170 ft., though 70 to 100 ft. was more normal. As
 military chiefs the early pharaohs organized a system of
 frontier defences that kept out raiding Asiatics, Libyans, and
Nubians. Finally they enforced internal peace, suppressing
the wasteful feuds between neighbouring villages that have
xs


     ,
118          WHAT     HAPPENED      IN   HISTORY

always plagued the Nile valley whenever the central
government is weak.
   A civil service appointed by the real god fulfilled the
functions of the self-appointed servants of a Sumerian deity.
As a perpetual corporation engaged in collecting and ad-
ministering the enormous revenues of Egypt it too required
a script to record receipts and expenditures. In Egypt as in
Sumer pictures were assigned conventional meanings, and
in the hieroglyphic script the characters preserved their pic-
torial form for over 3,000 years.
   The earliest hieroglyphs are better pictures than the
Sumerian ideograms of the Uruk phase and show no less
variability. Nevertheless, they hardly represent the begin-
nings of Egyptian writing; for they co-exist from the first
with simplified cursive forms, precursors of the hzeratic script
that throughout historical times was used concurrently with
the hieroglyphic without ever replacing it. The cursive signs
are written in ink on pottery or wood in the Royal Tombs,
later on papyrus. The hieroglyphs and their cursive forms
presumably are pure ideograms, but as in Sumer many soon
acquired phonetic values too; some indeed came to stand
not for syllables as in Sumer but for single consonants. The
Egyptians had in fact all the elements of an alphabet. But
they continued, like the Sumerians and Babylonians, to use
ideographic, syllabic, and consonantal signs side by side.
   Writing accordingly must remain a mystery, a specialized
profession too abstruse to be combined with manual avoca-
tions. The initiates, the clerks, formed a class apart to whom
alone was open the coveted career of a government official
or the steward of a great estate. But the clergy did not form
a caste; for the recruitment of officials schools were main-
tained by the Treasury and later literature seems to imply
that a lad has a choice between going to school, spe
ship to a craft, or agricultural work.
   Though the principles of Egyptian writing were essen-
tially the same as those followed by the Sumerians, even the
pictographic forms are quite different in the two areas. So!
too the Egyptians devised a numeral notation constructed
               EARLY      BRONZE    AGE     CIVILIZATION        TI9

    on the same principle as the Sumerian, but on a purely
    decimal basis with different signs for units, tens, and powers
    of ten. Again for the same reasons as the Sumerians the
    Egyptians had to standardize weights and measures, but
    they gave different values to the units. Even for the conven-
    tional division of time they adopted the principle of ‘seasonal
    hours’ — daylight and dark were each equally divided
    into hours, the lengths of which would vary with the season.
       Writing, being a mystery, was not used to transmit craft
    lore, and its adepts being ‘exempt from all manual: tasks’
    were divorced from the practical science applied in the
    workshop. But as in Sumer the urban revolution had genera-
 ted learned sciences and pseudosciences transmitted in
  writing — arithmetic, geometry, astronomy, medicine, theo-
  logy. Treatises on’ these survive only from ‘the Second
  Millennium. But it is plain from the results achieved and
  attested in the monuments that the Egyptians under the
 early dynasties were already successfully applying the simple
 arithmetical and geometrical rules illustrated by examples
in the later ‘mathematical papyri’.
_ From these we see that in arithmetic the Egyptian clerks
 were behind their Sumerian colleagues. In fractions they
 too were tied to aliquot parts (p. 106), but they had not
tabulated the results of additions to form multiplication
 tables beyond the first — ‘twice one is two, etc.’ Multiplica-
tion therefore was laboriously performed by the tedious
 process termed duplation, a combination of multiplication
 by two and addition. In geometry on the contrary they used
‘more accurate formulae, owing presumably to better obser-
 vation. Owing to the importance of pyramids in funerary
 cult, the Egyptian clerks were expert in calculating the
 *batter’ of a pyramid so as to enable the mason to cut the
 facing blocks of such a monument accurately. They had
discovered, moreover, the curious formula for the volume of
a truncated pyramid: 1/3 A (a?+-ab+-6?), where a stands for
dength of base and 6 length at top — which was never used in
    Mesopotamia.    Even this formula could be obtained by
    Measurement.    But    the   Egyptian    approximation   to 7,
      *

r




bs
120          WHAT     HAPPENED      IN HISTORY

(16/9), much more accurate than the Sumerians’ 3, isnot.
easily explained.
   The greatest achievement of Egyptian science and one
unmistakably inspired by the conditions of the urban revo-
lution in the Nile valley was the creation of a solar calendar
that is the immediate ancestor of our own. Pharaoh’s
officials from the days of the first kings measured and
recorded each year the height of the Nile flood on which the
Egyptian harvest depends and on which taxes can accor-
dingly be assessed before jthe harvest. By collating these
records they found that in fifty years or more the average|
interval between floods is to the nearest day 365 days. On
this basis they established an official calendar which for a |
century or more must have really helped Egyptian agri-
culture by indicating to the farmers when to start agricul-
tural operations; in Egypt the whole cycle of agriculture is
pivoted round the inundation.
   When the accumulated effect of the six hours’ error had)
produced a manifest discrepancy between the calendar year
and the natural phenomena it should predict, it was too
late — or too soon — for calendar reform. But by the Thir
Dynasty observations on the stars disclosed in the heliacall
rising of Sirius in the latitude of Cairo a herald of the flood
The bureaucracy, used the sidereal year based on this ob
servation to correct the abortive official calendar, to instruct
their peasants when to start work on the fields.                3
  So, about 3000 B.c., an economic revolution not onl
provided Egyptian craftsmen with a livelihood and raw
materials, but also called forth writing and learned science
and produced a State. But the social and economic organ
ization conferred upon Egypt by Menes and his successor:
as agents of the revolution was centralized and totalitariay
in harmony, with the homogeneity of a land watered by 4
single river and isolated by deserts.                        :
   In theory, at least, the whole land belonged to th;
Pharaoh, and its surplus produce was concentrated in roy.
granaries and treasuries. In practice a substantial share w.
assigned to a nobility of office — the ministers of state an
                                                             a    eae




                                                            121

povernors of counties (nomarchs). At first, at least, these
  re appointed by Pharaoh and held office at his pleasure.
Indeed, to the king they owed literally their immortal souls;
for had not the king devoured and digested the totem souls
of the clans, and by his own magic won immortality? On
 avourite officials the king might graciously bestow souls
  nd immortality by granting them individually, as their
tombstones proclaim, the right to build, and facilities for
     uilding and endowing, the monumental tombs essential
for the future life.
_ In practice, ministers and governors were reciiikesk from
      limited circle — perhaps royal children, the companions
  f the first conquerors and the families of such local chiefs
     s had made timely submission. They enjoyed the use and
     evenue of landed /estates or whole counties which were
     rganized as self-contained ‘households’, miniatures of the
  oyal ‘household’ of which they formed parts. Later such
      tates came to be inherited by the holders’ children, and
  eventually disposable by will. After the Pyramid Age
-governorships too became hereditary, and the governors
  ‘reated their counties as their own estates or principalities,
though owing dues and services to Pharaoh.
 _ Even local and national gods depended for their temples
  ind offerings upon the king who was also a god; in theory
 he alone worshipped the gods on behalf of the nation. In
 practice he appointed priests who actually presented the
  offerings ‘for the life, prosperity and health of the Pharaoh’.
  These offices, too, may have been filled in some cases by
descendants of the local priesthoods or ‘secret societies’ who
  had served the totems of pre-dynastic clans. They too might
i           hereditary. Permanent endowments in land were
consecrated to the service of the temples and the mainten-
     ce of their priests. So too from the First Dynasty parts of
the royal domain had been dedicated to the service of the
  departed kings whose tombs were combined with mortuary
 ‘temples, and to the support of chantry priests. Later nobles’
  tombs too were similarly endowed - at first by the king,
  later by their future occupants.
 122             WHAT   HAPPENED      IN   HISTORY                “!

   Thus priests and clerks started out as officials of the
 totalitarian State, members of the Pharaoh’s ‘household’,
 supported by the royal revenue. In time the former gained
 ‘households’ of their own; clerks might find an alternative
 livelihood in the ‘households’ of the nobles and the temples.
    The specialist craftsmen and industrial workers, placed
 in Pharaoh’s great ‘household’, were guaranteed sustenance
 from the surplus collected in the royal granaries, and were
 supplied with metal tools and raw materials from the king’s
 stock. By the Pyramid Age we find smiths, carpenters, jewel-
 lers, masons,    boat-builders,   potters,   and   other   artisans
 permanently attached also to the mortuary foundations and
 the nobles’ estates; for such were largely self-contained |
 economic units aiming at supplying their own needs in
 industrial products as well as foodstuffs. In each case the}
 craftsmen can have enjoyed very little economic freedom:
 probably indeed they, like the cultivators, changed hands
 with the estate on which they worked. The crafts plied were
 the same as in Mesopotamia, but their individual products!
 were quite different. So even the simplest Egyptian copper}
 tools can be readily distinguished from the Sumerian. The;
 potter’s wheel was adopted only under the Third Dynasty, |
 and then in a less efficient form than the Asiatic. Tinj
 bronze seems to have been unknown. For textiles flax, but!
 not wool, was used.
     The requisite foreign materials — copper from Sinai, gol
  from Nubia, ebony, perfumes, and spices from Arabia or
  Somaliland, lapis lazuli and other magic gems from Asia +
  were secured largely by expeditions despatched by the}
_ State, manned by royal servants and led by government
  officials. There was thus much less scope for merchants i
  Egypt than in Mesopotamia.
     Within the ‘households’ a natural economy reigned:            ——

  paintings in tombs illustrate market scenes where a pot ig
  bartered for a fish, a bundle of onions for a fan, a wooden
  box for a jar of ointment. Nevertheless, metals (gold an
  copper) were socially recognized as standards of value an
  rings served as currency in certain transactions.
,         EARLY     BRONZE   AGE   CIVILIZATION          123

   The great peasant masses — the farmers and fishers who
supplied the foodstuffs to maintain themselves and the
whole economy as well as collecting the raw materials
(hides, fibres, papyrus) for industry — multiplied exceed-
ingly. The union of Egypt had put an end to deadly feuds
between villages; the Pharaohs’ frontier policy protected
the cultivator from the depredations of raiding nomads;
public works had added to the arable land; the calendar
permitted rural operations to be rationally planned; the
surplus grain stored in the royal granaries might provide
relief in time of famine.
    On the other hand, these reserves had been collected by
 force. Their producers had little left for the purchase of
 industrial products. Save when directly employed by a king
 or a noble they could not afford metal tools, but made shift
 with a neolithic equipment of stone hoes and wooden
 ploughs and mattocks. By gift and by dedications, later
 even by testament, peasants were disposed of together with
 the land they cultivated as if they had been part of its
 livestock. They were liable to compulsory labour, digging
 canals, towing barges upstream, quarrying and trans-
 porting stone, building pyramids and the like. When thus
 removed from agricultural production they were presum-
 ably fed and clothed by the State or the noble employer —
perhaps better than a free neolithic cultivator. In any case,
in the Second Millennium King Seti I records that he
‘provided each of the thousand labourers employed on
building his temple with ‘4 lb. bread, 2 bundles of vege-
‘tables and a roast of meat daily, and a clean linen garment
‘twice a month’!
    Under this regime the enormous wealth produced by the
‘new economy in Egypt was more highly concentrated than
in Mesopotamia.     Industry was cramped within narrow
bounds. Export trade absorbed relatively few industrial
products; for imports were either taken as tribute without
payment, or paid for in gold and foodstuffs. Internally the
market for industrial products and craftsmanship was
limited to the State and the dependent nobility. To these
  fa DO Tate) RedesSie




124                      WHAT HAPPENED. IN HISTORY |
preparations for the future life constituted the main object
for the accumulation and expenditure of wealth. An extrav-
agant proportion of the surplus they collected was buried —
in tombs. (To the chagrin of the scientific robbers of the
twentieth century, a flourishing industry of tomb-robbery
rapidly restored a not inconsiderable fraction of the buried
treasure to circulation; the avarice of nobles and officials
in time diverted to mundane use the produce of mortuary
estates dedicated to feed and cheer the corpses in their
tombs !)
    ‘Ancient Egypt,’ writes Keynes satirically, “was doubly
fortunate, and doubtless owed to this its fabled wealth, in
 that it possessed two activities, namely, pyramid building
and the search for precious metals, the fruits of which, since
they could not serve the needs of men by being consumed,
did not stale with abundance. Two pyramids, two masses
for the dead, are twice as good as one; not so two railways
from London to York.’ In the event the bounds of these
activities were reached with the pyramids of the Fourth
Dynasty Pharaohs. Not even the fabulous reserves of fertile
Egypt could support indefinitely such unproductive expen-
diture. The economic system began to shrink. The nobles’
great estates became increasingly self-contained ‘house-
holds’, a relapse towards neolithic self-sufficiency. After the
Fourth Dynasty they could aim at political autonomy, too.
The Old Kingdom dissolved in political and economic
anarchy about 2475 B.C.


Before 2500 B.c. a third Bronze Age civilization, sym-
bolized by populous cities, highly skilled industries, far-flung
commerce, and a pictographic script, had emerged in India.
On the flood-plains of the Indus and its five tributaries (the
Punjab) peoples of mixed origin and diverse racial types
had combined to create artificial islands of culture in a|
desert jungle. The natural environment differed from the
Mesopotamian and Egyptian in its vaster expanse, in the
regime of the flood, in its scrub of ugly useless trees and in
}       :     EARLY    BRONZE    AGE   CIVILIZATION           125

the animals sheltered by these trees. It agreed in the low
rainfall and the lack of building timber, good stone, and
metal. The Indus and its tributaries provided moving roads
for the transport even of heavy goods over long distances;
foodstuffs could be collected from a wide area to support
 large urban populations.
      Over a huge triangle, four times the area of Sumer,
 bounded on the west by the mountains of Baluchistan and
 Waziristan, on the north by the Himalayas and on the east
 by the Thar desert, reigned a civilization as uniform as that
 of Mesopotamia or Egypt. The physical remains of the
 artificial world in which it flourished are equally imposing.
 The cities, as large as those of Sumer, are built almost
entirely of kiln-fired bricks, the manufacture of which must
have consumed stupendous quantities of laboriously
 gathered fuel (presumably the ugly trees that disfigure the
 desert). The ruins of Mohenjo-daro, in Sind, cover at least
 a square mile; at Harappa, 400 miles farther north, the
 walled area visible in 1853 had a perimeter of 24 miles, but
 buildings once extended farther. Since then bricks from its
ruins have provided ballast for a hundred miles of railway
 line and material for the modern village of five thousand
 souls. Yet the mounds are still impressive.
    The cities were devastated by several severe floods. After
 each inundation the lower floors of the houses were filled up
‘with brick so that the whole quarters of a city now rest on
an artificial platform, 20 feet or so high. We can, therefore,
 infer populations at least as large as those of contemporary
 Mesopotamian cities supported by the surplus produced by
‘a rural peasantry. The latter cultivated the same grains
‘and bred the same beasts as their Sumerian colleagues, but
perhaps grew rice also and certainly kept zebu cattle,
 domestic fowls, and probably elephants, but apparently no
 asses or camels,
    The same variety of specialized crafts as in Mesopotamia
    is attested in the archaeological record, and often the pro-
    cesses are identical in both countries. For example, the
    potters used (as they still do) the same sort of fast spinning
 126          WHAT    HAPPENED      IN HISTORY

 wheel, and the smiths alloyed copper with tin to make
 bronze. On the other hand the craftsmen’s products are
 quite different. Even the simplest metal tools made in India
 — axes, saws, daggers, and spearheads — can be distinguished
 at a glance from Sumerian or Egyptian products. Weavers
 worked cotton, not wool or flax. The chemistry of glazes
 was understood; vases and ornaments were made of
 faience, and even pottery vessels were occasionally glazed.
    Carts with solid wheels, such as are used in Sind to-day,
 as well as boats, were available to transport produce to the
 cities. The raw materials for industry had to be imported
 from long distances; deodara wood was obtained from the
 Himalayas, copper from Rajputana and perhaps Balu-
chistan, sank shell from southern India. Tin, gold, and
 various precious stones, including lapis lazuli (which was,
 however, rare), were brought from countries outside India
 altogether.                                                     |
    Regular supplies of these materials can have been ob- |
 tained only as the result of extensive trade. Indeed, as eq
 marked on page 96, manufactures from the Indus cities
 reached even the markets on the Tigris and Euphrates.|
 Conversely, a few Sumerian devices in art, Mesopotamian
 toilet sets and a cylinder seal were copied on the Indus. |
 Trade was not confined to raw materials and luxury articlel|
 fish, regularly imported from the Arabian Sea coast |
 augmented the food-supplies of Mohenjo-daro.                    |
    The stalls of water-sellers and other retailers have been)
 recognized among the cities’ ruins, giving quite the im-'
 pression of a modern Indian bazaar and implying an inter-;)
 change of goods by small-scale transactions such as takes
 place there. The floor of the water-stall at Mohenjo-daro
 was found strewn with the shattered fragments of roa
 clay cups. Presumably these were turned out on such at
 scale that each client of the stall, after drinking, threw away
 his cup as is done in India still, or - with papier maché
 cups — in American trains and restaurants.
    It would seem to follow that the craftsmen of the Indie
 cities were, to a large extent, producing ‘for the market’,
               EARLY       BRONZE      AGE     CIVILIZATION             127

  What, if any, form of currency and standard of value had
  been accepted by society to facilitate the exchange of com-
  modities     is, however,       uncertain.    Magazines    attached    to
  many spacious and commodious private houses mark their
  owners as merchants. Their number and size indicate a
  strong and prosperous merchant community.
    In India, too, extreme concentration of the social surplus
  by a divine monarch, or a small priestly caste, may be
  deduced from a strongly walled citadel unearthed in the
   heart of Harappa during 1944. In its shadow stood symboli-
   cally a vast granary measuring 150 feet by 56 feet. At
   Mohenjo-daro a similar citadel actually enclosed the
. granary in which the rulers’ real wealth was accumulated.
   Commodious two-storeyed houses of baked brick, pro-
   vided with bathrooms and a porter’s lodge and covering
   as much as 97 feet by 83 feet, may be contrasted with
   monotonous rows of mud brick tenements, each consisting
   of only two rooms and a court, and not exceeding 56
 _ feet by 30 feet in over-all area. The contrast doubtless re-
   flects a division of society into classes, but it would seem only
~ into merchants or ‘ business men’, 3g and labourers or artisans.
  A surprising wealth of ornaments of gold, silver, precious
  stones, and faience, of vessels of beaten copper and of metal
_ implements and weapons, has been collected from the ruins.
 Most appear to come from the houses ascribed to ‘rich
_merchants’. But a hoard of copper tools and gold bangles
turned up in the ‘workmen’s quarters’ at Harappa.
     Many well-planned streets and a magnificent system
  of drains, regularly cleared out, reflects the vigilance of
  some regular municipal government. Its authority was
  strong enough to secure the observance of town-planning
  bye-laws and the maintenance of the approved lines for
-streets     and   lanes   over    several     reconstructions   rendered
' necessary by floods.
     In any case, society in the Indus valley could agree upon
  a conventional script and numeral notation (on a decimal
  basis), and on standards of weights and measures (different
  from the Sumerian and Egyptian). The script was current
128          WHAT    HAPPENED      IN HISTORY
throughout the huge province of Indus civilization. Itsyé
characters are conventionalized pictograms like the hiero-
glyphic, early Sumerian, and proto-Elamite writings, though ©
quite distinct from these. The values of the characters,
whether ideographic or phonetic, and the meanings of the —
words they transcribe are alike unknown. Only brief in-—
scriptions, too short for decipherment without a bi-lingual
but most probably incantations, survive, mostly on ‘seals’
which were never used for sealing anything and were per-
haps just carried as amulets. Of course the letters were not
invented for this purpose, but the documents for which they
were primarily devised (on Sumerian and Cretan analogies,
accounts) have perished with the unknown material on
which they were written.
    With this equipment the Bronze Age citizens of the Indus )
valley could have — and, indeed, must have — developed
 exact science as well as Sumerians and Egyptians, and for
 the same imperious reasons. For instance, a free use in
 decorative art of squares inscribed in compass-drawn inter-
 secting circles suggests a study of geometry. But the results
 of such sciences are not directly known.
    Small clay figures of women, scenes on ‘seals’ and ritual
 objects, notably large stone lingas and yonis (phalli and
 vulvae), give glimpses of totemic survivals, of magic fertility
 rites and of personal deities arising out of them. Some of the
 rites thus disclosed unmistakably foreshadow practices dis-
tinctive of later Hinduism;     the latter represents   certain
 deities under the same forms as the Indus art. Indus art
 itself used patterns, and was inspired by principles, quite
 different from those accepted in Egypt and Mesopotamia.
 Representations of the human form are unusually natural-
 istic; a small bronze figure of a dancing girl breathes an
 air of movement and vitality that cannot be matched
 elsewhere till the classical period of Greece.
    This imposing civilization perished utterly as a result
 of internal decay accelerated by the shock of barbarian
 raids (p. 168). Only since 1920 have its dumb outlines
 been rescued from complete oblivion by archaeologists.
             EARLY    BRONZE   AGE   CIVILIZATION            129

    Its antiquity can be determined solely by the importation
    of Indus products into Mesopotamia during the Third
~ Millennium.
      Nevertheless, since Indus manufactures were imported
   into Sumer and Akkad, and Indus cults were actually»
   celebrated there (p. 97), the forgotten civilization must have
   made direct if undefinable contributions to the cultural
   tradition we inherit through Mesopotamia. Moreover, the
   technical traditions of the Bronze Age craftsmen, at least
   of potters and wainwrights, persist locally until. to-day.
   Fashions of dress, established in the Indus cities, are still
   observed in contemporary India. Hindu rituals and deities
   have roots in the cults depicted in the prehistoric art. So
   classical Hindu science too, and through it occidental
Le
   science, may be indebted to the prehistoric to an unexpected
   degree. From this standpoint the Bronze Age civilization of
   India has not utterly perished; ‘for its work continueth, far
   beyond our knowing’.




ee
aes
ee
ASose
(en




SSR
rE
ae
                            VII

   THE    EXPANSION           OF CIVILIZATION

By 3000 B.c. economic revolutions had integrated the dis-
coveries of the preceding thousand years into civilizations in
three tiny patches of the earth’s surface. The new social
 organisms, contemporary and interrelated, were all distinct,
 and differ from one another in the details of their compo-
 sition and structure. Yet all exhibit certain features in
 common, notably dependence for industrial equipment on
 relatively uncommon and socially expensive metals or alloys
 of metals. The label Bronze Age may sum up their distinct-
 ive peculiarities, but it needs expansion.
    In the great alluvial valleys of the Nile, the Tigris-
Euphrates, and the Indus system collective effort had created
artificial environments. Societies dwelling therein had
emancipated themselves from immediate dependence on the
caprices of raw nature and had discovered uniformities
that permitted rational planning. The organized exploita-
tion of lands reclaimed from swamp and desert was yielding
unprecedented supplies of corn, fish, and other food-
stuffs. A local failure of crops need no longer mean starva-
tion; for thanks to improved and artificial waterways food
supplies could be collected for storage in the city granaries
and distributed all over the valleys. State organizations,
based on residence instead of kinship, abolished blood-feuds
between clans, mitigated the violence of other internal
conflicts, and probably reduced the frequency of wars.
   The biological consequence had been an immense numer-
ical increase in the species Homo sapiens within the valleys.
The vast areas of the new cities as compared with any
barbarian village, the immense cemeteries attached to them,
and the stupendous works executed by the citizens, place
this conclusion beyond question. The standard of life had
risen, too. The rulers and the new middle classes certainly
           THE   EXPANSION      OF   CIVILIZATION             131

enjoyed a variety of food and drink, and comfort in
accommodation and clothing that no barbarian chieftain
could imagine. Even the masses secured a more varied diet
and more salubrious housing. The sea-fish, for instance,
brought to Lagash from the Persian Gulf and to Mohenjo-
daro from the Arabian Sea were probably articles of popular
consumption that a Stone Age peasant could never enjoy.
The workmen’s quarters at Harappa are more commodious
than neolithic huts.
  The new economy, furthermore, permitted the effective
utilization of the discoveries described in Chapter IV for the
improvement of man’s equipment for living, the reduction
of drudgery, and the enrichment of enjoyment. It secured in
particular adequate supplies of metal, and guaranteed a
livelihood to the specialists who could alone work it. It
engendered exact and predictive sciences that could really
lift at least a tiny corner of the veil that shrouded the
menacing future. At the same time the new order encour-
aged and consolidated old but, as we think, delusive hopes
of predicting the unpredictable and controlling the future.
Finally it opened new possibilities to architects, sculptors,
 painters, and musicians, and new values in art.
    On the other hand, the enjoyment of these benefits was
 restricted at once by the scarcity of the industrial metal and
 by the form the revolution had assumed. In the first place
 copper or bronze remained too costly to replace stone in
 industrial equipment. For deposits of copper ore, large
 enough to be worked economically, are far from common
 and always remote from alluvial valleys; tin is absolutely
                                                            and
 rare. With the technical equipment at first available
 under the conditions of transport outside the river valleys
                                                  distribution
 and coastal tracts, the extraction, working, and
                                                                 is
 of metal must have absorbed a lot of social labour — that
                                                               ted
 to say, consumed the time of agents who had to be suppor
 out of the surplus of food-stuffs availab le to society .
                                                               had
    Secondly, this surplus — at first absolutely small —
                                                           es, and
 been concentrated in the hands of a few kings, templ
                                                               red
 nobles. So the peasant masses from whom it was gathe
              WHAT HAPPENED IN HISTORY                          a
could hardly afford the new equipment. In practice the
cultivators. and quarrymen of Egypt had to be content with
neolithic tools through the Third Millennium. Wool in.
Sumer was still plucked, not shorn. Even in the Indus cities
chert knives are common enough to suggest a shortage of
metal tools. In general it was only the divine and royal
households as such, the Army: and Navy, craftsmen         em-
ployed by the State, by temples and, in Egypt, by the noble
and mortuary estates, the tenants and serfs of gods and
territorial magnates that were regularly equipped with
metal tools or weapons.
   Both the cost of metal equipment and its superiority
reacted to consolidate the authority of those who could
alone command its use. An actual or virtual monopoly of
metal armament placed the pharaoh, the king, and the city-
governor — the personifications of the Egyptian and
Sumerian States ~ in an almost impregnable position. On
the other hand, the craftsmen, for their part, had lost the
independence they enjoyed under barbarism. They were
dependent on the city-governor or pharaoh for their raw
materials, and could in practice hardly dispose of their
products or their skill save to great households.
   The merchant class was similarly, if less severely, handi-
capped. Under the totalitarian regime of Old Kingdom
Egypt merchants    had little scope.   In. Mesopotamia    the >
market for the rare goods of small bulk that could alone be
profitably transported over long distances, at least by land,
must have been to a large extent restricted to the city-
governors’ courts and the gods’ temples. In India alone the
archaeological record suggests a wider market and larger |
profits, but it is unsupported by written documents. A
corollary was the slow and incomplete replacement of a |
‘natural’ by a ‘money’ economy.
  The distinctive achievements of civilizations that differ-
                                                                    |
entiate them from barbarism are the invention of writi
                                                         ng |
and the elaboration of exact sciences. In Sumer, Egypt, and
India the new economy had required and elicited conven-
tional systems of writing and numeral notation, of weight
                                                          s
 aad measures aha of time-keeping. It had thus revolution-
  ized the methods of accumulating knowledge and trans-
|mitting experience, and produced sciences of a new kind.
     By the written word a man can accurately transmit his
   experiences to correspondents in another city and to genera-
;tions yet unborn — provided, of course, they use the same
4
   conventional symbolism. Written tradition is more imper-
:sonal and more abstract than oral. An artisan shows an
;mepprentice concretely how to make a given article or to
 _perform a specific operation. Craftsmanship is therefore
 _imitative and so conservative, as explained on page 79. A
"prescription on the contrary, just because it is expressed iin
    words, deals with general classes of objects and actions.
_ More scope is given to originality when a verbal rulé or
  abstract formula is translated into action and applied to
    individual cases. ,
   ; But the cuneiform and hieroglyphic scripts and doubtless
   the similarly constructed Indus script too were so cumber-
     some and complicated that their mastery demanded a long
    and specialized apprenticeship or education. On purely
    practical grounds a peasant or an artisan had no chance of
     learning to read and write. Literacy was confined to a
     special class of initiates, comparable to the Mandarins in
    China. Like the latter, the adepts enjoyed a privileged
- status in Egypt and Mesopotamia. A late Egyptian papyrus
   in the form of a father’s advice to his son contrasts the
 fprospects of a clerk who may ‘become an official of high
   rank’ and will be ‘exempt from all manual tasks’ with the
     position of a metal-worker ‘with fingers like a crocodile’s’
 ‘ fa mason and of other craftsmen.
    _ Consequently, craft traditions were not committed to
  f writing, craftsmanship and literacy were divorced. To the
    practical sciences, successfully applied in the workshops,
   _ were opposed a body of ‘higher learning’ and literary or
    learned sciences— mathematics, astronomy, and medicine —
  ‘ ‘andpseudo /sciences — theology, astrology, hepatoscopy, and
 other vain methods of foretelling the future.
 _ Owing to its specialization and remoteness          from the
134          WHAT    HAPPENED      IN   HISTORY

successful activities of the workshop, the written tradition
tended to be as conservative as craftsmanship. What was
painfully expressed with the symbols of the abstruse Bronze
Age scripts acquired a sanctity and magic prestige. As a
class, the clerks tended to attach more value to the products
of their craft than to the experiences of daily life. A scho-
lastic attitude is engendered in the cloisters. The develop-
ment of theoretical science was in fact entrusted to a leisured
class, relieved by society of the active labour whereby the
opposition between mind and matter is overcome, and thus
cut off from the sources of empirical knowledge. On the Nile,
in the Second Millennium, clerks were busily copying down
medical prescriptions and arithmetical problems that, they
claim, had been composed in the Third. A medical text is
advertised as having been ‘found in ancient writing at the
feet of Anubis (a god) in the days of King Usaphais’ (of the
First Dynasty). A certain Ahmes boasts, in the fifteenth
century, that his arithmetic book is ‘in the likeness of a
writing of antiquity made in the time of King Nemare’
(1880-50 B.c.). In Babylonia and Assyria clerks still dili-
gently collected and copied texts in the long extinct
Sumerian tongue as late as the First Millennium.
   Moreover, judged by the extant texts, teaching in the
schools may have been almost as concrete and imitative as
in an artisan’s workshop. The so-called mathematical
tablets and papyri are just collections of concrete examples
worked out — in fact, specially constructed so that they
will work out with the means available to their composers.
No general rule is ever stated, nor written explanation of
the reasons for any step added. Egyptian and Babylonian
medical texts describe symptoms of particular maladies and
prescribe remedies — drugs and spells — again without a
word of explanation.
 _ The compilation of sign-lists or dictionaries, the arrange-
ment of accounts or tax-assessments required more rigor-.
ously systematic classifications than did the craft or ritual
lore of barbarians. The rules applied, if never formulated, by
the temple-administrators of Sumer and the architects of
              THE   EXPANSION      OF   CIVILIZATION       ie   135
:
_ Egypt to obtain the areas of fields and the volumes of
_ pyramids served the same purpose as the mathematical
  laws of physics and mechanics; they did enable the officials
  to foretell the quantities of grain needed for sowing the fields
  and of stone required for the monuments. The Egyptian
  calendar and its correction by Sirius were truly applications
  of quantitative astronomical laws.
     Nevertheless, the scope of science was circumscribed by
  the nature of the Bronze Age civilization. The limitations of
  Mesopotamian and Egyptian sciences were not, of course,
    due to any hereditary deficiencies in the Sumerian, Semitic,
    or Hamitic races, but to the social background from which
  the sciences sprang. The charge is commonly levelled
  against ancient Oriental science that it was inspired by
_ purely practical aims and not by a ‘divine curiosity’ as to
  the ‘essence’ of things. But the aim of science is surely to
    amass and systematize knowledge that society can use to
   control events in the external world, in fact to operate more
   efficiently on nature; the best test of the ‘truth’ of scientific
   laws would seem to be their success in so doing.
      Now Egyptian and Sumerian societies — and apparently
   that of the Indus valleys too — were firmly convinced, as are
   barbarian societies to-day, that the most reliable way of
   operating on nature was by means of sympathetic magic or
   by religious ceremonies that were themselves largely
   magical. Their clerks and officials naturally accepted this as-
   sumption without question. Their whole view of the world
__ was inevitably based on the philosophy — or lack of philoso-
   phy — behind it. They had perforce to use its language
   for the new scientific terminology they were creating.
      It is an accepted principle of magic among modern
   barbarians as among the literate peoples of antiquity that
   the name of a thing is mystically equivalent to the thing
   itself; in Sumerian mythology the gods ‘create’ a thing when
   they pronounce its name. Hence to the magician to know a
   thing’s name is to have power over it, is — in other words —
   ‘to know its nature’. (The silly questions with which a
   scientist-is plagued: ‘What do you call that?’ ‘Who built
this?’ show a popular anal of this attitude to-day.) The
Sumerian lists of names may then have not only served a
useful and necessary function as dictionaries, but also have ©
been regarded as constituting in themselves instruments for _
mastering their contents. The fuller a list was, the more of —
nature could be mastered by its knowledge and use. This —
may explain the extraordinary fullness of the lists, and the —
care with which they were preserved and copied.               ,
   A Nazi has indeed argued that the aims of Sumerian —
science were confined to the compilation of exhaustive lists _
of such magical names and their arrangement in an order
which should correspond to the order of the real world. The —
latter would naturally be conceived in terms of the hier-
archical order of Sumerian society. As that society was still
dominated in the last resort by tribal custom to which even
city-governors were subject, so the world order would be
ruled by an impersonal Fate, older than gods and superior
to them. Of course, this concept was never very sharply -
formulated, and later had to contend with that of a high
god whose personal legislation constituted Fate when a con-
quering king, like Sargon, attained such power that he
could override Custom and create Law by his fiat.
   Again, architectural forms — like the Sumerian ziggurat
and the Egyptian pyramid — came to be regarded as symbols
of the divine order of nature, and the contrast between |
symbol and meaning was not yet sharply defined. But
Babylonian and Egyptian geometry had been partly
devoloped by — and for - the construction of these symbolic
monuments (hence the accurate knowledge of pyramids
displayed in Egyptian arithmetic books). As successful _
instruments for the construction of symbols of the natural
order, geometrical propositions were liable to be regarded
also as instruments for the knowledge of that order, for
controlling the external world.
   Finally, the terminology for the new sciences might be
borrowed from the language of liturgy and magic; the
Akkadian word for ‘working out a sum’ is the same as that
for ‘performing a ritual act’.
              ;   ”   y                                   *

              THE         EXPANSION   OF   CIVILIZATION       137

    Accordingly, it was not the business of Egyptian and
 Sumerian clerks to test experimentally or criticize the
 magico-theological view of the world held unquestioningly
 by their societies; were they not themselves servants of gods
 and divine kings, owing their existence and prestige to
 superstitions? Their task was rather to systematize the
 incoherent beliefs of barbarism that they had inherited. So
 they created not what we call philosophy, but a theology or
 mythology. Thereby they gave to the nebulous and fluid
 superstitions of the barbarism from which Sumer and
 Egypt were just emerging the more rigid forms of theo-
 logical dogmas, backed up by organized ‘churches’ and
 supporting the vested interests of priesthoods, their royal
 patrons and divine4 kings.
      As the converse of this inevitable confusion between theo-
 logy and science, the aims of Oriental religion seem to us
materialistic. The cult of the gods was, in fact, designed to
secure not what we call holiness, purity, and the peace of
 God, but good harvests, rain in due season, victory in war,
 success in love and business, children, wealth, health, and
 an indefinitely long life. Immortality was conceived by the
   Egyptians (the Sumerians and Akkadians had only the
   vaguest notions of anything of the sort) as essentially a
   prolongation of earthly life. That is why the noble dead
   have to be provided continually with food, drink, and other
   offerings, supplies of which were to be secured by the per-
_ petual dedication of mortuary estates and chantry priests.
   The recognized passports to their “heaven’ were magic
   rituals — particularly embalmment.
      It is true that even in the Pyramid Age a judgement of
- souls had been conceived. In securing a favourable verdict
 _ the appropriate spells and ritual purity were supposedly the
  essential factors, but what modern, like barbarian, societies
 consider moral virtues were admittedly helpful. So nobles
  plead in their sepulchral inscriptions: ‘Never have I taken
_a thing belonging to any person . . . Never have I done aught
  of violence towards any person.’ And a county governor:
  ‘T gave bread to the hungry (of my district); I clothed him



ss,
138    :      WHAT    HAPPENED      IN   HISTORY   ~—

who was naked therein ... I never oppressed anyone in
possession of his property.’ Even so the attainment of im-
mortality was not presented as a motive for moral virtue.
Still less did an Egyptian or a Sumerian pray to his god,
as Christians do, to help him to be honest, just, or charitable.
   In the same way, the Bronze Age artist did not aim at
expressing an abstract ideal of beauty, or.even primarily at
delighting his fellow men. The Sumerian architect must
design a temple worthy of the gods, symbolical of the divine
order, and yet modelled substantially on the barbarian
shrine of reeds in which gods had been worshipped from
time immemorial. The result, judged by contemporary
representations and modern reconstructions (the actual
buildings of mud-brick and timber have lost all pretence at
beauty), must have possessed the severe beauty of an
American sky-scraper. The Egyptian architect had to trans-
late into imperishable stone and so immortalize a palace of
reeds, planks, and mats. Incidentally he created the colon-
nade of fluted columns (copying the papyrus bundles that
had been the first pillars). But it was an illiterate barbarian
who discovered how to compensate for the perspective
foreshortening that would spoil the effect of the Stonehenge
lintels when viewed from the ground.
   The Egyptian sculptor had to carve in the hardest and
most durable stone a portrait statue of the deceased that
contributed magically to his immortality. The statue was
not intended for display to mortal eyes, but was walled up
in the funerary chapel. None the less, the statues of Myceri-_
nus in Boston, for example, are to-day hailed as masterpieces
of the sculptor’s art. His Sumerian colleague was charged
with expressing the divine presence as an idol in human
form, and with carving statues of city-governors and high
priests that, by standing perpetually before the idol, should
magically keep the originals ever before the deity’s eyes.
His efforts fail to arouse enthusiasm among art critics
to-day. They, at least, illustrate a connexion between the
urban revolution and an art that seeks to portray the human
form realistically. That, at least, can be said of a couple
                                              Peete te ee
                                                $4
                t




‘              THE    EXPANSION     OF   CIVILIZATION            139

    of statuettes    from   Mohenjo-daro    in the   Indus    valley
    too,
       In Egypt, lively representations of life on the mortuary
    estate — seed-time and harvest, boat-building, pot-making,
    even the sports of the peasantry — painted on the tomb walls
    would ensure to its dead owner the enjoyment of its pro-
    duce. To depict them the painter had consciously to face
    the problem of representing the three-dimensional in two
    dimensions, solids on a flat surface. A selection from his
    solutions has passed at length into the aesthetic tradition of
    Atlantic civilization.
       The music of drums, pipes, or stringed instruments
    excites exaltation even in savages. It is no less efficacious on
    civilized worshippers, and therefore on their gods. With the
    technical aids of civilization the Sumerians could gather in
    the temple a regular orchestra       of drums,   rattles, flutes,
    horns, trumpets, and harps. They doubtless gave form to
    barbaric melodies. They certainly used, if they did not
    invent, the heptatonic scale that has been characteristic of
    civilized music ever since.
       In architecture, sculpture, painting, and music Oriental
    societies established canons of art, not ‘for art’s sake’, but
    for supposedly practical ends. Once the requirements of
    society had been met, the canons became rigid conventions.
    The artist inevitably turned copyist, so that his products lost
    the individuality that had made the models truly artistic.
    But in the sequel the dead conventions, adopted, adapted,
    and blended by fresh societies with new requirements,
    could — and did — provide the materials and scaffolding for
    a living art.
                                   *

    If the economy of the Early Bronze Age cities could not
    expand internally owing to the over-concentration of pur-
    chasing power, if its ideological expression were doomed to
    fossilization, the fossils were at least preserved to serve as
    models and building materials for the future, the urban
    economy must — and did - expand externally, as explained
    in Man Makes Himself.
   PR   Toes Aha
              Oeve%ae
                  +




  140           WHAT HAPPENED         IN HISTORY                i
     The alluvial cradles of civilization were dependent on
  imports for many of the raw materials required by the urban
  industries, and for luxuries that became necessities. It is not
  surprising that products of urban workshops are found in
  barbarian lands from — or through — which the requisite
  imports must come. In the ruins of villages in Baluchistan
  Stein found metal-ware and even pottery exported from the
  cities of the Indus valley. Seals such as were fashionable in
  Mesopotamia in the Jemdet Nasr phase just before 3000
  B.C. have turned up as far afield as central Asia Minor and
  the Isles of Greece. Egyptian manufactures were carried to
  the North Syrian coasts and to Crete, and imitated there.
     In fact not only the products of urban industry, but the
  new economy that produced them spread and were bound
  to spread. To persuade their possessors to exchange
  the needed raw materials for manufactures,       they must be
  induced not only to demand the latter, but also to adjust
  their economy to absorb them. In practice the manufac-
  tures that could be exported over long distances under the
  conditions of Bronze Age land transport were mainly luxury
  goods of modest bulk that would appeal to a small class
  enjoying a concentrated surplus of wealth. To market them
  the chiefs or gods of barbarian tribes must be induced to
  extort from their followers and worshippers a surplus of
  foodstuffs to support woodsmen and miners as well as courts
  and temples. And this is apparently what happened.            48
     Byblos, the best port for the Lebanon lumber trade, had
  even before the unification of Egypt been occupied by a
_ Copper Age community of fishers and farmers who culti-
  vated olive trees as well as barley and bred chiefly goats and
  sheep. After the revolution in Egypt a stone temple to the
  local deity, Ba’alat Gebal, was built in the village, covering
  about eighty by fifty feet. It was soon replaced by a quite
  monumental temple measuring over ninety by sixty-three
  feet of handsome and richly adorned masonry.
    The pharaohs sent to the shrine stone vases inscribed with
 their names and other offerings. Egyptian ambassadors,
 officials, clerks, and merchants frequented the temple and
            HE   EXPANSION    OF   CIVILIZATION          I4I

the local chieftain’s court, and even settled at the port.
Native Giblite clerks were apparently trained in Egyptian
hieroglyphic writing. In exchange for the cedars of Lebanon
and perhaps olives and dyes, the Giblites received and
adopted elements of Egyptian civilization, including writing
and all that that implied, as well as manufactured articles
and corn. They remained a friendly but independent
civilized community.
   The same sort of thing must have been going on round
Mesopotamia. Just after 2000 B.c. we find a regular colony
of Semitic (Assyrian) merchants established round the court
of the local prince of Kanes in the Halys basin in Central
Asia Minor. They were engaged in trading metals in ex-
change for Mesopotamian textiles and other manufactures.
Their business letters which happen to have survived give a
lively picture of caravans of pack-asses regularly crossing
the Syrian steppes and the Taurus Mountains on the way to
and from Mesopotamia. Legends imply that such colonies
were already established in the Halys basin in the days of
Sargon about 2400 B.c. The seal, mentioned on page 140,
and contemporary copies of Sumerian devices may mean
that such commerce went back to 3000 B.c.
   An alternative way of securing the necessary raw mater-
ials was to turn the new metal weapons against the societies
controlling the supplies and to extort the requisites as
tribute. The Egyptians, who traded amicably with the
Giblites as with Arabians and Ethiopians, ‘smote the
wretched nomads’ who dwelt round the copper mines of
Sinai. The pharaohs sent armed expeditions to extract the
ores and left warlike inscriptions on the mountain’s rocks.
They conquered the gold-bearing region of Nubia and
compelled the natives to send them gold as tribute. But
beyond this the Egyptians avoided imperialist ventures
outside the Nile valley till about 1600 B.c.
   It was otherwise with the Semitic kings of Mesopotamia.
The Sumerians too may have tried conquests outside the
delta as well as over one another. The alluvial plain of
Sumer and Akkad was no more a self-sufficing unit than
  142         WHAT        HAPPENED   IN   HISTORY

  was the individual city state within it. As imperial hegemony
  was the accepted recipe for overcoming conflicts between
  the cities, so military and political domination over the
  sources of indispensable raw materials — metals, stone,
  timber — would be the dream of an ambitious city-governor.
  The expeditions these sent to get stone and timber may have
  been ventures in economic imperialism. The earliest temple
  of Ishtar at Assur (the capital of Assyria) looks like the
  foundation of a Sumerian conqueror. The annexation of
  Sialk by ‘Elamites’ (p. 72) was apparently a military con- —
  quest designed to secure routes to the north. But on the
  whole the stalwart inhabitants of stony, well-wooded and
  metalliferous mountains were able to defend their indepen-
  dence till the rise of the Dynasty of Akkad about 2350 B.c.
     Sargon, his sons, Rimush and Manishtusu, and his grand-
  son, Naram-Sin, extended their conquests ‘from the Lower
  Sea (the Persian Gulf) to the Upper Sea (the Mediterran-
  ean)’. Sargon not only imposed his sway upon the rival —
  cities of Mesopotamia. He was the first to create a vast
_ military empire, the prototype of all the conquerors who
  have captured popular imagination from Alexander to
  Napoleon. Like Alexander, Sargon became a hero of
  romance. Nearly a thousand years after his empire had
  crumbled, his deeds were being celebrated in epics, frag-
  ments of which have turned up in the Egyptian archives at
  Tell-el-Amarna and in the Hittite library at Boghaz Keui
 in central Asia Minor.
    Both the poetic tradition and the actual inscriptions of
 Sargon and his successors reveal economic objectives in
 their conquests. An epic fragment depicts Mesopotamian
 merchants in the Halys basin inviting his aid against local
 princes and not asking in vain. Sargon himself explicitly
 boasts of reaching ‘the Cedar Forest’ (Lebanon?) and the -
 “Mountain of Silver’ (Taurus). He ‘caused the ships of
 Melukha (Arabia ?), the ships of Magan (Oman, source of
 copper) and the ships of Dilmun (the Bahrein Islands?) to
 anchor at the quay in front of Agadé’. His son, Manishtusu,
 again ‘took possession as far as the Silver Mines, and
                               wee ee     eS   ee




             THE   EXPANSION     OF   CIVILIZATION          143

  from the Mountains of the Lower Sea he carried off their
  stones’.
     The kings of Akkad brought back vast booty. Therewith
  they endowed and adorned temples, not only in the capital,
  but also in the subjugated Mesopotamian cities. Their
  victorious soldiers shared in the spoils. Thus the forcible
  distribution of the wealth, hoarded in conquered treasuries,
   spread purchasing power in Mesopotamia. Production was
    thereby stimulated. At the same time war captives swelled
    the supply of service producers. In disposing of loot and
    tribute merchants could make profits. So the middle-class,
   now comprising victorious veterans as well as merchants, and
 _ independent of the old ‘divine households’, profited from
   imperialism. Money economy spread till land was now
   bought and sold like any other commodity.
       Nevertheless, trade in metals was made an imperial
   monopoly. To consolidate his position Naram-Sin took a
   leaf out of the pharaoh’s book and became a god of empire;
   he styles himself no longer ‘tenant-farmer’ nor even ‘king’,
   but ‘the divine Naram-Sin, the mighty, god of Agadé’.
   Thereby he set a precedent that later imitators of his im-
   perialism, the kings of Ur, of Babylon and of Hatti, and at
   last the Roman emperors, did not fail to follow. Neverthe-
   less, the Empire of Akkad was ephemeral and collapsed in
   chaos after a century.
      But it had more permanent results than the forcible ex-
   traction of raw materials for Mesopotamian industry. At
   Nineveh (opposite Mosul in Assyria), previously at best a
   country town, Rimush, Sargon’s son, built a monumental
   temple to Ishtar. Still further west, Naram-Sin founded an
   imposing palace at Tell Brak on the Khabur. As in Sumer,
   such monumental buildings are outward symbols of the
   establishment of the new urban economy with all its con-
   sequences; written documents have actually been found in
   both buildings. Literate city life persisted here even after
   the disruption of the empire and the recovery of indepen-
_ dence by the new cities.
      Even where full city life was not thus established by the
144          WHAT HAPPENED IN HISTORY
conquest, successful resistance or revolt involved an adop- —
tion of part at least of the urban economy. The success of the
Akkadian, as of the Egyptian, armies was due to their
superior copper weapons and armour against which sling
pellets, flint daggers, and stone axes were of little avail. To _
resist them similar armaments must be manufactured; —
smiths must be trained and supplied with raw materials; —
copper and tin must be collected; trade must be organized; _
a sufficient surplus must be available to support the artisans. —
Even resistance to imperialism generates a ‘Bronze Age —
economy’, dependent on trade at least for armaments to —
supersede neolithic self-sufficiency.                             .
   So, like peaceful trade, economic imperialism did extend —
the area of civilization. As a result of one activity or another —
on the part of the original nuclei, new cities, new centres of |
civilization arose around the original foci and beyond them
barbarians abandoned neolithic self-sufficiency at least far
enough to secure the new metal armament. And of course —
each Bronze Age city or township became itself a new centre
of demand, irradiating, if only by reflected light, an ever-
widening hinterland.
   Now the new centres were not just copies of the old.
Urban arts and crafts were superimposed upon neolithic —
cultures, but did not obliterate them. These cultures were
adaptations to varied environments, different from those
of the great alluvial valleys. They offered opportunities for
novel developments in industry and organization. The sea,
for instance, now offered new means of livelihood to the          |
peoples of the Mediterranean, and doubtless of the Persian }
Gulf too.                                                      |
   On the Syrian coast we have seen how Byblos quickly
rose to urban status as a result of maritime commerce with
Egypt. In Cyprus villages with burials under house floors
disclose a vigorous neolithic population. No cities of the
early Bronze Age have yet been identified, but large ceme-
teries of collective tombs bear witness to larger aggregations
that must be nearly urban. In one cemetery at Vounous no
fewer than forty-eight family vaults, each used over many
            THE   EXPANSION      OF   CIVILIZATION           145

  generations, have been explored. The island’s exceptional
  wealth in copper — the metal takes its name from Cyprus —
  must have contributed to the support of the increased
  population.
     A wealth of metal tools in the tombs shows that the local
  ores were exploited, that specialist miners and smiths were
  working on the island. But neither pottery nor any other
  craft had demonstrably been industrialized. Nor do foreign
  imports in the tombs show where the surplus metal was
  marketed. Indeed, though the Cypriotes cast for their own
  use a very distinctive kit of metal tools and weapons, the
  Cypriote forms are hardly ever found outside the island, even
  when the exportation of Cypriote copper onalarge scale is
_ proved by written documents. As then, so even in the early
  Bronze Age, the metal must have been exported in the form
 of crude ingots or ore and not worked on the island.
      The neolithic farmers and fishers of Crete were joined
   about 3000 B.c. by refugees from the Nile Delta and fresh
  colonists from Syria, bringing with them some of the tech-
  nical and artistic traditions of Egypt and Asia. The cultiva-
   tion of vines and olives, and the exploitation of the island’s
   natural resources in timber, copper and murex shell (used
   for dyes), could now profitably yield an exportable surplus.
   Above all, the island’s geographical position between
 Egypt, Asia, and Mainland       Greece, its endowment      with
 timber for ship-building and a happy conjuncture of winds
 and currents offered prospects of wealth in the carrying
 trade.
    Little townships arose, even on tiny islets utterly destitute
 of arable land wherever there was a good harbour. A surplus
 was available to support smiths, carpenters, goldsmiths,
 jewellers, and seal-cutters. Craftsmen, traders, and sea cap-
 tains became rich enough to need seals on which are carved
 the tools of their craft or their high-prowed rowing-boats.
_ Otherwise there is no evidence for concentration of wealth.
  Large collective tombs, often constructed with considerable
  labour, perhaps in imitation of the houses of the living,
  crowded with skeletons and quite richly furnished, may well
                            ER      eee   Oe aa



146           WHAT    HAPPENED      IN    HISTORY

be the communal burying-places of clans and not just of
chieftains’ families. Stone axes and obsidian knives were
still used side by side with metal tools and weapons. But self-
sufficiency had been left behind. Gold, silver, lead, obsidian,
and marble were imported; even Egyptian and Asiatic
manufactures in the shape of stone vases and faience beads
reached the island.
   Farther north the little islands scattered in a belt across
the Aegean (the Cyclades) had no attractions for self-
sufficient farmers. But they possessed marketable resources —
copper, emery,   obsidian, marble — which, if not edible,
could be exchanged for foodstuffs. So in the Third Millen-
nium they were thickly populated by people who worked
metals, quarried obsidian and carved marble vases and
traded the products to Egypt, Crete, the coasts of the
Dardanelles, and Mainland Greece. Their graves are
aggressively furnished with metal weapons. So it may be
suspected that these insular communities combined piracy
with peaceful trade, adding loot to profits, a practice normal
in the Mediterranean at many subsequent periods. They
would then have discovered the secret of making a living
off the urban surplus by simply stealing it!
   The plateau of Asia Minor is dotted with settlement tells,
so small that they look like villages rather than townships.
Their inhabitants were able to secure perhaps from travel-
ling merchant artificers and migratory smiths some copper
weapons and trinkets, but on the whole retained a barbaric .
self-sufficiency. For their agriculture (probably based on
irrigation) they still relied entirely on a neolithic equipment.
But on the western coast piratical commerce under the
leadership of militarist chiefs led to the accumulation of
wealth. The ‘city’ of Troy, made famous by the epics |
ascribed to Homer, began as a fortified hamlet or citadel, |
not much more than one and a half acres in area, dominated
by the chief’s palace. In time it expanded till as ‘Troy II’ it
covered nearly two acres. Accumulated loot and profits now
attracted to the chieftain’s court goldsmiths trained in
Asiatic schools and skilled in filigree work, and at length
                                                   “——)   2s   ft




           THE   EXPANSION     OF    CIVILIZATION                   147

even professional potters using the wheel. Trade and plun-
der secured supplies of copper, tin, lead, silver, gold, and
obsidian and manufactured luxuries like vases of ‘island
marble.
   This wealth was concentrated in the personal treasury of
a petty war-chief. For its administration neither writing nor
even seals were needed. Nor did it support any substantial
industrial population. The chief’s subjects or followers con-
tinued to use stone axes and hoes, picks and mattocks of
stags’ antlers and sickles armed with flint or obsidian blades.
There were apparently enough demand and reserves to
justify a quest for further supplies for the armament
industry in Europe;     ornaments,   fashionable     in Troy II,
were scattered about in the Lower and Middle Danube
basins as a result.
    Industry on the scale attested at Troy and at other less
warlike villages could not absorb an expanding population,
which must accordingly seek fresh land. With barren
mountains and an already populous plateau behind it, the
surplus could only overflow westward in overseas coloniza-
tion. And so in Macedonia and Mainland Greece com-
munities of neolithic peasants, already established in the
narrow valleys and coastal plains, were joined by Asiatics
 and islanders, already accustomed to metal tools and weap-
ons and practising the culture of vines and fruit trees in
 addition to mixed farming and fishing. The resultant Early
 Helladic settlements show already an urban character; for
 the culture of vines and olives, metallurgy and a few other
 specialized crafts, small-scale but fairly regular trade in
metal and luxury articles and perhaps some piracy were
superadded to the subsistance farming of the neolithic
 population. There is no more evidence for a concentration
 of wealth than in Crete. Though jars or bales of merchan-
dise duly sealed in Crete reached Helladic ports, no need
was felt locally for seals, and writing was of course unknown.
    So all round the eastern Mediterranean maritime cul-
 tures arose in which the subsistence economy of barbarism
was tinctured with civilized industrial specialization and
 an,
148           WHAT    HAPPENED     IN HISTORY
commerce. They built up new traditions of seamanship
and geographical lore and transmitted to the Oriental pool _
knowledge of new lands, materials, and techniques.        ‘
   These partially urbanized communities then served in
their turn as new centres from which civilized ideas were i
diffused westward and northward. East Mediterranean :
manufactures were transported as far west as Sicily and
Malta. In Sicily they are found in collective tombs or|
family vaults, each containing fifty to two hundred skele- ‘
tons. These are grouped in cemeteries of from ten to thirty —
which must belong to small villages whose inhabitants,
while relying mainly on home-made tools, did import a
few ornaments or amulets from further east. It is thought
by many that they imported spiritual goods too; for the
tombs and the ritual observed in them are suspiciously like
those of Crete, Cyprus, and Syria.                             i
   Now all civilized peoples are troubled to know how to.
appeal to barbarian tastes and how to induce ‘natives’ to
work for them. The most acceptable inducements to-day
are arms, showy trinkets, and spirits. Perhaps in antiquity
spirituous inducements to labour were replaced by spiritual
incitements — hopes of immortality. That might be one
explanation for the Copper Age of Sicily.                     :
   In that case the same enticements must have been held
out to induce the natives of Sardinia, south-eastern Spain
(Almeria), and southern Portugal (Algarve) to mine and
smelt the local ores of copper, silver, and lead. They cer-
tainly did extract these metals and did build tombs more
or less on the same general plan as those used farther east.
But they supplied the dead at least with a predominantly
neolithic equipment, very few copper tools and daggers
and no east Mediterranean manufactures.
   Still farther afield the great family vaults built of huge
undressed stones and termed megalithic tombs (in Britain
long barrows or chambered cairns) that are scattered along |
the Atlantic coasts of Portugal, France, and the British Isles
and across the North Sea to Denmark and southern
Sweden are regarded by one school as clumsy and barbaric
               THE   EXPANSION         OF   CIVILIZATION             149

attempts to copy Spanish, Sicilian, and Cretan funerary
 architecture and as inspired by the same beliefs. If the
 megalith-builders were thereby induced to produce a
 surplus above domestic needs, they certainly did not
 expend it on obtaining metal tools, still less Oriental
 manufactures. The megalith-builders of Britain and Den-
 mark   are,    in fact,   classical    examples     of neolithic   self-
sufficiency.
    In Central and north-western Europe the competition
 for land, described on page 67, had prepared societies to
 desire superior weapons and in places had produced ruling
 Classes, extracting from a vanquished peasantry a surplus
 which they were prepared to expend in gratifying that
 desire. The necessary technical knowledge reached Central
 Europe from Syria, Britain, probably from Spain. Hungary
 and Bohemia, Ireland and Cornwall could provide the
 requisite copper and tin. So soon after 2000 B.c. a Bronze
_Age could and did begin in Central Europe and Britain — a
 few centuries later also in Denmark,              northern Germany,
 and southern Sweden.
    A regular trade in metal linked up the whole of Central
Europe from Upper Italy to the Harz Mountains and from
 the Vistula to the Rhine into one economic system which
joined on to a second in the British Isles and was subse-
 quently extended to embrace Denmark where metal was
 bartered for amber. It was conducted by itinerant artificers
 who manufactured or at least ‘finished’ metal goods to
 order and may, like the pedlar in Derbyshire during the
 eighteenth century, have practised petty brigandage as a
 side-line. But metal remained rare and very costly «for
 centuries and was used almost exclusively for weapons .and
 ornaments. The only specialized metal tools current were
 those of the metal-workers themselves. For tree-felling,
 reaping, and other rural pursuits, the peasantry had still
 to rely on stone axes, flint sickles, and a general Stone Age
 equipment. Bronze did not open forest lands to the hoe
 or the plough as iron later would.
    So. the new bronze industry neither absorbed any




xs
150          WHAT   HAPPENED      IN   HISTORY

appreciable proportion of the surplus rural population nor
equipped it to conquer virgin lands. Pressure on the land
was thus unrelieved. Moreover, at least in Denmark and
southern England, the costly bronze armament merely
consolidated the authority of ruling groups as did the
knight’s armour in the Middle Ages. Here Bronze Age
burials reveal ‘an aristocratic world with richly developed,
upper class life based on organized luxury trade and the
labour of the lower classes’.
   But the petty chieftains were now equipped with weapons _
not only to enforce obedience on their followers, but also to
lead them to conquer the new lands that their still neolithic
rural economy demanded — even to plunder the rich civili-
zations that had unwittingly armed them. In the sequel
civilization is repeatedly threatened by onslaughts from
barbarian war-bands impelled as much by the failure of
their own economy to support a growing population as by
envy of civilization’s wealth. The war-bands from Europe,
whose arming archaeology allows us to observe so clearly,
had not perhaps yet reached the frontiers of the tiny
civilized world. But the process revealed in Europe may
have been repeated in Asia. There Sargon’s ‘tottering
Empire was finally overthrown by the barbarians from
Gutium who fell upon Mesopotamia.
                              VIII

    THE        CULMINATION           OF BRONZE         AGE
                      CIVILIZATION
| Soon after 2300 B.c. the imposing State organizations just
 described and the economic systems they dominated dis-
 integrated.    In Egypt,   Mesopotamia,   and   India, eras of
| prosperity that have left a vivid impression in the archaeo-
   logical record were succeeded by Dark Ages from which
 few buildings and inscriptions survive. In India civilization
   itself seems to have been extinguished. In Egypt and Meso-
   potamia it soon re-emerges, and re-emerges liberated from
   some of the shackles of ancestral barbarism and deepened
   so as to benefit more fully new classes in society. In the
   interval in the newly urbanized areas like Assyria the germs
   of civilization have had time to develop on original lines.
      In Mesopotamia the clouds of darkness are represented
  by the barbarians from Gutium, armed, as we have seen,
  against imperialism to attack their civilized attackers. In
  the devastation they wrought, imperial monopolies were
  violently overthrown, the hoarded wealth collected in
  treasures was brutally restored to circulation, or simply
  annihilated, great households were broken up.
     But by no means all temples were sacked; invaders
  generally feared the gods of conquered lands too much to
  violate their sanctuaries. Perpetual corporations of priests
 survived to preserve their deities and their traditions. Most
  temple libraries remained intact; their schools still func-
 tioned. The conquerors may have been illiterates; still they
 would want clerks and their sciences.
     Similarly craftsmen survived, even though they had to
 work for barbarian masters and may have been hampered
 by some shortage of raw materials. Above all, trade was
 never completely paralysed, however many merchants may
have been killed or robbed. Even the barbarians would
‘Set tidal   yom ;   Upwear



             152          WHAT    HAPPENED     IN HISTORY

           want metal for armaments and some civilized luxuries, an
           these, in default of a State system of distribution, private
           traders could supply. Indeed, as the merchant class had
           made profits out of the plunder of conquered provinces|
         _ (p. 143), so it could out of the loot of palaces and estates
           at home. Moreover, as the urban economy spread, traders
           found ever wider scope.                                      ;
              Hence, when after about a century Sumerian kings of
             Ur reunited once more the rival cities of Sumer and Akkad,
             establishing internal peace and security for foreign trade,
             civilization started to expand again from the level attained
             under the Empire of Akkad. By 2100 B.c. the Sumerian
             monarchs had recovered at least so much of Sargon’sSs
             Empire as to be able to dominate Elam and Assyria and to.
             found cities as far west as Qatna between Homs and
             Damascus. They began the organization of a professional
             imperial administration and the codification of customary
             laws. But their empire too collapsed just before 2000 B.c.,
             and with it the Sumerian ruling class became extinct.        :
                In the second Dark Age that followed semi-barbarous
             Amorites, Semites from the West, filtered into Mesopo-
             tamia. About 1800 B.c. an Amorite dynasty, ruling from
             Babylon in Akkad, welded Sumer and Akkad into a king-
             dom that may henceforth be termed Babylonia. Kings
             Hammurabi consolidated the new kingdom, not only by
             becoming himself a god of empire, but by giving it a civil
             service of governors and judges appointed by the king and
             a unified code of laws to supersede independent traditional
             codes hitherto observed in each city. Improvements in the
             old Sumerian war-chariot had enhanced the military power
             of the Babylonian monarchy and accelerated communica-
             tions within its domains; for the heavy solid wheels were
             about this time replaced by spoked wheels and swift horses
             were replacing asses as tractive power.
                Still the machine thus created was not strong enough to
             prevent infiltrations by barbarian Kassites and invasions by
             Hittites and Elamites. The Amorite Dynasty of Babylon was
             replaced by a Kassite Dynasty. But the Kassite monarchs
     _ CULMINATION OF BRONZE AGE CIVILIZATION     153
 took over the administrative machinery Hammurabi had
  created and the whole apparatus of Sumerian-Babylonian
 civilization. Babylonia survived as a civilized State, albeit
 impoverished and cramped by new States in Elam, Assyria,
  and Syria.
     In Egypt it was the great landlords, county governors who
  had become hereditary counts, who were the agents in the
 destruction of the Old Kingdom (p. 121); they made them-
  selves independent of the pharaoh, or rather each tried to
 make himself a pharaoh on his own. The result was not only
 political anarchy, but also economic chaos; for it was the
  centralized State that had secured and distributed supplies
  of raw material and had accumulated the surplus needed
  for the support of artisans. Later clerks have left vivid
  glimpses of the chaos of the resultant Dark Age. One writes:
_ ‘Men take up arms for battle, because the land lives on
  disorder; they make them spears of copper to beg their
  bread with blood.’ And another: ‘All the materials for the
  crafts are lacking; no worker works any more; enemies have
 _despoiled the workshops.’
   But on the Nile, as on the Tigris and Euphrates, craftsmen
 and craftsmanship survived, even if rendered idle for lack of
‘materials. If there were no promising careers for clerks as
 State officials, they could be county officials and were as
 necessary as ever on nobles’ estates. So learned sciences too
could survive. From the very depths of the Dark Age designs
painted on coffin lids illustrate a development of astro-
nomical lore in the direction of stellar clocks, dividing the
watches of the night month by month by the appropriate
rising constellations, with the aid of which the dead man
 could tell the time. -
  _ Local temples and their gods were generously endowed
 by county magnates. The latter and their priests were as
 anxious as ever for ‘immortality’. But they no longer looked
 to the god-king to bestow it; instead priestly specialists and
 embalmers provided - for a fee — the needful spells and
 rites.
    Finally private merchants could do what the State had
           STG   Toye econTe eamma Oe ean


 154         WHAT        HAPPENED           IN HISTORY
done, in importing raw materials. The various independent
courts might compete with one another for merchandise as
well as for craftsmen’s skill. This multiplicity of competing
buyers enlarged the opportunities for a middle class of
artisans, priests, and merchants            to sell their skill, their
 magic, and their wares. So in Egypt, too, the techniques of
 civilization and many of its superstitions were preserved
 intact.
    The political framework requisite for their full revival
 was provided by what is termed the Middle Kingdom. The
 counts of Thebes by war and diplomacy reunited the whole —
 of Egypt into a feudal monarchy. Those rival counts who
 made timely submission were continued in their provinces; —
 recalcitrants were replaced by royal children and suppor-
 ters; all were made vassals owing tribute and allegiance to
 the royal house of Thebes. So about 2000 3.c. Egypt
recovered a political unity commensurate with the land’s
unity as symbolized by the Nile.
    After a couple of centuries this unity was again destroyed
by the insubordination of the vassal counts. In the ensuing
anarchy barbarians, usually known as the Hyks6s or Shep-
herd Kings, and armed with new engines of war, burst in —
from Asia and established from the Delta a temporary —
barbarian empire that drew tribute not only from the Nile
valley but also from adjacent parts of Asia. In 1580 B.c.
the barbarians were expelled by the military power of a
count of Thebes, Ahmose, founder of the New Kingdom.
He had adopted the new Asiatic war engine, the light
horse-drawn chariot. With it the wheeled vehicle appeared
for the first time on the Nile, albeit as a piece of armament.
   As military conquerors the new pharaohs made Egypt a
centralized military monarchy, as Sargon had made Sumer ©
and Akkad. Like Sargon, too, they set out on a career of
imperial expansion and won Egypt an Asiatic empire which
extended over Palestine and Syria to the Euphrates and
the Amanus Mountains and across the sea to Cyprus.
Conquest brought to the New Kingdom of Egypt as it had
to the empires of Akkad, Ur, and Babylon an immense
        CULMINATION     OF   BRONZE   AGE   CIVILIZATION     155

  access of wealth. But this new wealth arrived as loot and
  tribute concentrated in the treasuries of the new royal
  war-lords. The New Kingdom became atotalitarian State
  as the Old had been.
     The rejuvenated civilizations of Mesopotamia and Egypt
  in the Second Millennium differ from their parents of the
  Third most significantly in the greater prominence of a
  middle class of merchants, professional soldiers, clerks,
  priests, and skilled artisans, no longer embedded in ‘great
  households’ but subsisting independently alongside these.
     The partial disruption of great estates and the pillaging
_ of the country-side had emphasized the value of conven-
  tional, incorruptible metal wealth as against the real but
  perishable wealth produced by the land. In periods of
  invasion and anarchy the impoverishment or destruction
  of ‘great households’ within which a natural economy
  reigned had encouraged the spread of a money economy.
  Of course, gold or silver gained by usury, trade, plunder
  or even manual labour smells as good as that earned by
  the ownership of land or agriculture. In Mesopotamia,
  indeed, land had become a commodity, saleable and dis-
  posable by will since the days of the Empire of Akkad.
  Even in Egypt under the New Kingdom parcels of land,
  though held on lease from pharaoh and generally carrying
  obligations to military service, could be transferred by
  testament or sale.                    ;
     With the spread of the money economy production for
  the market became commoner. The speculative importa-
  tion of miscellaneous cargoes for sale in the market might
  yield greater, if less reliable, profits than the collection on
  commission of specific articles ordered by great households
  or States. Merchants could in this and other ways (p. 153)
  make money and find uses for it as purchasers. Soldiers
  brought back from the war gold, silver, or saleable com-
  modities like slaves, and must use the proceeds to buy
 in the bazaars satisfactions for their needs.
    Both in Egypt and Mesopotamia an army of literate
 officials appointed by the State, and ranging from junior
clerks to judges, now enjoyed assured incomes in money
and a secure status. They were no longer attached to
‘households’ that supplied all their needs, nor could many
possess such households of their own. So they too must
appear as buyers in the bazaar. In Egypt professional
priests had multiplied as a result of the generous temple
endowments by victorious pharaohs and the credulity of
their fellow-citizens, These and their Mesopotamian col-
leagues found needs to satisfy by ‘shopping’.   ;          i
   Hence craftsmen need no longer be attached to great
households, but had an open market for their products. —
Whether they produced for stock or only worked to order,—
craftsmen could earn enough to purchase the products of
other crafts. Even peasants found a market for produce|
outside great households, and could so obtain a larger share
in the technical benefits conferred by civilization. In Egypt
the rural population remained indeed legally ‘royal serfs’,|
liable as before to compulsory labour and_ practically
attached to the estate on which they worked, even when it
was held by a noble or small tenant. Still, even the Egyptian
fellah was sometimes left with a surplus of rural produce
for sale when dues and taxes had been paid.
   Under this regime the circulation of commodities cer-
tainly increased, industrial production expanded, and im-
ports were multiplied. New luxury manufactures -— in
Egypt, for instance, glass vessels and new imports — ap-
peared on the market and soon became necessities for the
middle-class. The use of metal at last spread effectively to
the countryside. In Egypt bronze first became known under
the Middle Kingdom, and almost plentiful under the New.
Even the peasantry were equipped with metal tools.
   The growth of the middle-class was reflected ideologically
in law and religion. Universally valid codes of law and
Judges appointed by the king replaced local and customary
laws administered by elders or nobles. Indeed the reign of
law began to limit even the absolutism of monarchs. A
king of Babylon or a pharaoh of the Middle and New
Kingdoms prided himself on being the ‘guardian of just
        ore   hae


        _     CULMINATION   OF   BRONZE   AGE   CIVILIZATION   157
rs

     laws’ rather than the unfettered creator of law by the fiat
     of his divine will.
        Now in Egypt rights for the masses meant rites for the
     masses. So after the first Dark Age immortality, originally
   the prerogative of the divine king and of nobles on whom he
   had conferred it, was made open to all — in practice to all
_ who could pay the embalmers’ fees and buy the magic
_ passports to heaven. This was equivalent to a popular
   revolution, but for the benefit only of the middle-class.
   An inevitable corollary of opening the gates of heaven was
    to enlarge the maws of hell too. Even in the Pyramid Age
    the divine king and his nobles had to submit to a judgement
    of souls (p. 137). Naturally in the case of such august
 _ personages little was said of the punishments in store for a
    transgressor. In the Second Millennium for the encourage-
    ment of a more vulgar clientele the pains of hell were
    vividly depicted; the most powerful instrument for domina-
  _ tion over men’s unruly wills was forged !
        In practice hell was not made a sanction for morality.
   The lucky Egyptian could buy a magic passport through
    the dread tribunal. Rolls containing the welcome verdict
    of acquittal were sold by the priests’ clerks. The fortunate
    purchaser’s name was inserted in blanks left for the purpose,
    thus securing by itselfa verdict before it was known whose
    name should be inserted. Charms were even purveyed to
    still the voice of conscience. Breasted describes an amulet
    inscribed, ‘O my heart, rise not up against me as a witness’.
        So the ‘popular revolution’ in Egypt did not promote a
    higher morality, but reinforced the powers of the new
    professional priesthood. In the same way the Babylonian
    business men provided credulous clients for the soothsayers
     and fortune-tellers of the old temples.
     _ Yet even under the new economic regime the use of
     civilized equipment was still relatively restricted, and the
     possibilities of industrial expansion were limited in like
     degree. In the alluvial valleys that expansion had been
     made possible in the first instance by the collection of a
     surplus from a peasantry practising subsistence agriculture
 158         WHAT    HAPPENED      IN   HISTORY

in the great households of kings or gods. The system not
 only secured the accumulation    of an adequate surplus and
 the maintenance of irrigation works, it proved very con-
venient to the tax-collectors of the new military States.
Contributions were more easily collected and converted
into money from the real wealth stored in the granaries of
great landlords than from the tiny stores of individual
farmers. Great landed estates, so organized as to be as far
as possible self-sufficing, therefore remained common eco-
nomic units, though now often in possession of the captains
and veterans of war-lords. They may have been extended
at the expense of tribal lands farmed communally, since we
read of Sumerian cities buying these up.
   Then the new money economy became itself an instru- mi
ment for concentrating wealth. Neither artisans and prim-
ary producers, not even travelling merchants and retailers,
were the principal beneficiaries of the new metal currency.
Insolvent debtors were added to war-captives in replenish-
ing the slave market and so degrading the status and
reducing the emoluments of manual labour. The free
craftsman was often dependent on the merchant both for
raw materials and for the sale of his products, and such
dependence might easily lead to indebtedness. The peasant,
too, after a bad harvest or a hostile raid might find interest —
added to the burden of taxes and rent. The small merchant
who travelled abroad often borrowed trade goods or capital -
from a temple or a private capitalist who became a sleeping
partner in the venture entitled to a share in the proceeds.
  Babylonian law as codified by Hammurabi might be said
‘to secure the creditor against the debtor and consecrate the
exploitation of the small producer by the possessor of
money’. The debtor might not only mortgage his land, but
pledge his children, his wife, or his own person. Enslavement
for debt was legalized. Trading partnerships were regulated
in the interest of the capitalist, and fraud by the working
partner was severely punished. Interest rates on loans in
barley ranged from 20 to 33 per cent, from 10 to 25 per cent
on silver. The concentration of wealth in the hands of
      CULMINATION     OF   BRONZE   AGE   CIVILIZATION    159

financiers would in the end react to restrict the market for
industrial products and so industry itself.
    At the same time producers in their capacity of con-
 sumers must have suffered from the price fluctuations that
 followed the introduction of metallic money. In Mesopo-
 tamia the price of the staple food, barley, rose steadily
 throughout the Bronze age. A gur of barley cost a shekel of
 silver under the Empires of Akkad and of Ur, two shekels
 by the time of Hammurabi, three and a third perhaps
 under the Kassites.
    Such price increases may just as well be regarded as
effects of inflation. The new wealth with which imperialism
enriched Babylonia and Egypt was really just loot, and
represented no addition to the total supply of real wealth
available to humanity; quite the contrary. The destruction
of houses or the ravaging of gardens is the reverse of wealth-
production. ‘An’ army is a body of pure consumers, nay
negative producers, producers of illth.? But money veils
any discrepancy between real wealth, the available supply
of commodities, and its consumption. Its possessors did not
suffer from any shortage and could indeed make more
money by loans to those who needed it to meet the rising
prices.
    At the same time professional soldiers are hostile to pro-
duction, in that their trade is robbery on a grand scale, and
robbery has been described as ‘the oldest labour-saving
device’. They were even liable to plunder their fellow-
citizens, as fragments of Egyptian legislation make painfully
clear.
    The new judges and officials did not scruple to enrich
themselves by extortion and bribes from rich litigants.
Hammurabi’s letters contain instructions for the suppression
of such abuses. Harmhab, a pharaoh of the fourteenth
century, found it necessary to prescribe the cutting off of
the nose and exile as a punishment to check extortion by
tax-collectors against the poor. An earlier papyrus describes
the plight of the poor man ‘who stands alone before the
court when his opponent is rich while the court oppresses
160           WHAT     HAPPENED       IN HISTORY            WEA
him (demanding) “silver and gold for the clerks, clothing ~
for the servants”’.’                                                  ‘—
   Finally the money economy spread and the middle-class
grew under the shadow of absolute theocratic monarchy.
No private accumulation of silver and gold could possibly
compete with the hoards in imperial treasuries. Even in —
Mesopotamia the kings took care to keep private capitalists _
in their proper place. The seal of an Assyrian merchant in ©
Asia Minor is perhaps symptomatic of the position of —
commerce in Mesopotamia; it is inscribed ‘N., servant of
the King of Ur’. There was no question of states borrowing —
from private capitalists as they do in Europe and did in ©
Hellenistic Greece. The metal trade remained a royal —
monopoly, or at least strictly regulated. The comparative
scarcity of copper and tin made this none too difficult.       ae Deaae
                                                                  gy


   By decree Hammurabi of Babylon and later Hittite and —
Assyrian kings fixed maximum prices and maximum - not |>
minimum — wages. The great estates of kings, temples, and |
nobles, internally independent of money, further limited —Se
production for the market. So throughout the Bronze Age —
the middle-class remained completely subordinate to the —
monarchy and the priesthood.                                    i
   To the peasant and the small man, on the contrary, the
divine king appeared as a saviour from the rapacity of —
usurers, the extortions of officials, oppression by the nobles
and abuse by the soldiery. Hammurabi published his law —
code ‘to make manifest justice in the land, to destroy the
wicked and evil-doer and to prevent the strong oppressing
the weak’. A pharaoh warns his vizier (chancellor): ‘It is
an abomination of the god to show partiality’. Egyptian
popular tales repeatedly introduce an oppressed peasant
turning confidently to pharaoh for redress.
   Mythologically the absolutism of the ruler was reflected
not only in his own deification. The whole world of gods
was increasingly conceived as an empire presided over by
a supreme god. So under the Amorite dynasty Marduk, god
of Babylon, usurped the place of the Sumerian Enlil as
creator. In Egypt, Amon, a local deity of Thebes, had



                                                                   =o
                                                           ¢

      CULMINATION      OF   BRONZE    AGE   CIVILIZATION       161

‘absorbed attributes of Ra, the sun-god, under the Middle
 Kingdom and under the New was on his way to becoming
 a veritable god of gods. Nevertheless, even the high gods
 retain their tribal character. Marduk is primarily lord of
 the Babylonians, Amon of the Egyptians. Amon can be
 lord of Cyprus or Syria only in so far as his ‘son’, Pharaoh,
 conquers the land for him. So no Egyptian or Babylonian
 would have felt the least scruple in saying:
             A thousand Frenchman sent below,
             Praise God from whom all blessings flow.
    Thus till nearly 1200 B.c. Bronze Age civilization survived
 in the alluvial valleys of the Near East, preserving. its
 essential structure throughout political vicissitudes and
 economic changes,
   Meanwhile    new centres of civilization had arisen and
 grown to maturity. In the Far East a literate civilization
 emerged in the alluvial valley of the Yellow River soon
 after the middle of the Second Millennium. The neolithic
 revolution had affected China, where cereals were culti-
 vated and pigs and cattle bred at a still uncertain date.
 Out of this vague barbaric background emerged the great
 city of Anyang, capital of the Shang dynasty, soon after
 1400 B.G. Its setting in the flood plain of a great river is
 essentially like that of Egyptian and Sumerian cities. The
 urban economy it symbolized agrees in general outlines
 with those of earliest Sumer, Egypt, and India as described
 in chapters V and VI. A surplus derived from breeding
 pigs, cattle, sheep, and goats, as further west, together with
 water buffaloes and chickens, and the cultivation of wheat
 and millet, but also of rice, was concentrated in the hands
 of a divine monarch who would be buried with extravagant
 pomp in a wooden chamber at the bottom of a pit sixty-five
 feet square and forty-three feet deep. The surplus supported
 bronze-smiths using the same alloys and techniques as their
 western colleagues, potters using the wheel and other
 civilized craftsmen, together with clerks who had aiready
 devised an ideographic script based on conventional
 pictures. Horse-drawn chariots were used in war.
                                                }
 162          WHAT    HAPPENED        IN HISTORY     '       SO
     In its concrete details Far Eastern civilization differed
 conspicuously from Near Eastern, but the differences are
 no more pronounced than those distinguishing the three
 civilizations of the early Third Millennium from one
 another. Some are obviously due to the utilization of local _
 resources — rice instead of barley, silk instead of cotton or
 flax, for instance. The general agreement can hardly be
 accidental. Only the lack of excavations in the intervening
 areas precludes the demonstration that impulses from the
Near and Middle East had been fertilizing Far Eastern
barbarism. China must have been receiving western tradi-
tions even before 2000 B.c. Conversely, after 1400 she must _
have reacted on the west as a full partner in civilization.
    In the Near East in any case the seeds, dispersed from the ©
original centres, as described in chapter VII, now sprouted
into full-blown civilizations. The Assyrians had learned well
from Sargon of Akkad and started a civilized state on the
Akkadian model. After a further lesson from the kings of
Ur, Assyrian kings tried an empire on their own. The
Assyrians had taken over from the Sumerians and Akka-—
dians the whole equipment of civilization — not only their
techniques   and   armaments,   but   also their script,   their
learning, and their ideology. So they embarked upon
imperialist ventures, conquering an empire west of the
Tigris and organizing it on the approved lines. In the
nineteenth century the city of Tilsha-annim (now Chagar
Bazar), on the Khabur in North Syria, appears as the ‘ great
household’ of Prince Iasman-adad, son of Shamsi-adad I
of Assyria. In the household accounts even clerks seem to
occupy the same dependent position as the smith or the
brewer in Baii’s household at Lagash (p. 95). But the
breeding and training of horses to draw war-chariots was
an important activity on this estate.
  But about 1450 B.c. this western province of the Assyrian
Empire fell into the hands of Aryan (p. 168) chiefs,-who
made it the centre of a new state, Mitanni. These, too,
adopted the old equipment and organization of Sumero-
Akkadian-Babylonian civilization, using not only the
      oP
      CULMINATION OF BRONZE AGE CIVILIZATION             163
cuneiform script, but for diplomatic correspondence even
the Akkadian language.
   On the plateau of Asia Minor, since water for irrigation
was derived from many different springs and torrents, and
supplies of raw material were generally near at hand, the
urban revolution could be postponed as long as the primary
producers could make shift with a neolithic equipment
(p. 146). At best local gods or divine kings may have accu-
mulated small surpluses in a number of independent
‘households’ on a tiny scale. But soon after 2000 B.c. Indo-
European Hittite chiefs (p. 168) began to unite these small
units into a feudal empire. By 1595 they were strong enough
to invade Babylonia and later still ousted the Aryan dynasts
from Mitanni, and even challenged the Egyptians in Syria.
   Naturally the mortal princes who attained such power
attained divinity’too, but only as leaders in a federation of
local gods. In his treaty with pharaoh ‘the sun-god of
Hatti’ still signs also on behalf of ‘the goddess of Arinna’,
‘the god of Kizzwadana’, and so on. But Sargon of Akkad,
who had invaded their future domain in the Third Millen-
nium, was their pattern, and the Assyrian merchants
established there even longer sold them the material and
spiritual equipment of their civilization. The Hittites
borrowed theology, law, poetry, and science as well as
writing materials and characters from Mesopotamia. Still
they modified what they borrowed to suit their own tradi-
tions and local needs.
   On the coasts of Syria many Phoenician settlements as
far north as Ugarit (Ras Shamra opposite Cyprus) now
became cities in the same way as Byblos had early in the
Third Millennium (p. 140). The Phoenicians profited from
both Egyptian and Sumero-Akkadian experience, adopted
Mesopotamian and Nilotic techniques and traditions and
copied the products of both centres. Situated on a narrow
coastal plain, better adapted for fruit trees and vines than
to corn-growing, they could only find on the sea an outlet
for their overflowing populations. Byblos offered a standing
example of the possibilities of maritime trade with the rich
                                   i
                               >

 164         _ WHAT HAPPENED IN HISTORY
 markets on the Nile. Owing to the relatively low cost of
 transport by sea — by rowing a ship could reach the Nile in
 eight days, and the return journey, with a favouring wind, —
 might be accomplished in four — even low-priced goods for
 popular consumption could be profitably sold there. Paint-
 ings in New Kingdom tombs show the Phoenicians from
 their barges bartering trinkets with the peasants of villages
 along the Nile. A much larger proportion of the Phoenician E
 population must have been engaged in industry and com-
 merce than in the predominantly agricultural States of
 Egypt, Babylonia, Assyria, and Hatti.                            :
    At the same time, if the local gods (Baals) and their royal |
 representatives accumulated wealth derived from the soil in
great households, these accumulations were so modest as
not to overshadow the wealth amassed by private trade
and industry so completely as in the other civilizations,
In Phoenician society the middle classes had a chance
to make their demands effective.                                :
   In Crete what is termed the Minoan civilization emerges —
into literacy about 2000 B.c. Even in the Third Millennium —
specialist farming, the exploitation of insular resources like |
                                                                   )
timber and the carrying trade had offered a livelihood to.          |



classes which a neolithic economy could not support (p.
                                                                    |
145). Now    the wealth thus gathered was partly concen- _
trated in the hands of merchant princes who were also
priest-kings. At Knossos, Mallia, Tylissos, Phaestos, and
Hagia Triadha in Central Crete, they built themselves
palaces that were also factories and warehouses like an
Oriental temple or court.
   Specialist craftsmen — potters from Asia using the wheel,
glaziers, and fresco painters — flocked to the palaces to share
this wealth. For its administration the Minoans invented
and simplified a pictographic script. Like the oldest written
documents from Sumer, the surviving remains of Minoan
writing are almost exclusively account tablets, also traced
on clay. Unfortunately they are still undeciphered. Like a
city-governor in Sumer, the Minoan princes financed public
works, but the most conspicuous are harbours and bridges
                                              ears a


     - CULMINATION   OF   BRONZE   AGE   CIVILIZATION   165

 to facilitate trade — the wheeled cart had been introduced
 soon after 2000 B.c.
    The Minoan palace is no doubt the symbol of a great
 household like the divine households of Sumer described on
 p. 95- But magazines and workshops are proportionately
 more conspicuous and occupy a relatively larger area at
 Knossos or Phaestos than in the temples of Erech or Lagash.
 A smaller proportion of their contents and products must
 have been absorbed in supplying the household’s needs;
 the balance must have been used for trade. In other words
 the priest-king’s economic power must to a quite high
 degree have depended on secondary industry and com-
 merce as contrasted with agricultural production.
    Nor was the royal wealth so overwhelming as to over-
 shadow altogether, that earned by private traders and
 craftsmen. Provincial towns and cemeteries, particularly in
 eastern Crete, give an impression of modest prosperity,
 even though they are not dominated by any palace. Gurnia
 in the fourteenth century covered six and a half acres and
 comprised sixty houses, each probably two-storeyed and
 occupying a block about forty by thirty feet. As merchant,
 the priest king was only one among many, although,
 thanks to his subjects’ piety, the best endowed. Even so,
 each ‘divine merchant’ had peers in adjacent palaces.
 Only during the century 1500 to 1400 B.c. does the lord of
 Knossos, the Minos of Greek legend, seem to have succeeded
‘in eliminating his competitors by the methods of Akkadian
‘imperialism; the horse-drawn war chariot appears in Crete
 at this time and figures conspicuously in the Knossian
accounts.
   These peculiarities of the urban economy in Crete reacted
in an interesting manner on Minoan industry and com-
merce. In Crete the specialist potter was not one of the
 craftsmen already differentiated before the local urban
revolution and degraded socially thereby. He arrived in the
island as the honoured exponent of a new technique while
the revolution was still in progress; he was welcomed to
island courts whose rulers were not yet rich enough to



—-
                       ThePTOPEco
                                yee saa
                                    4   ee Ra


166          WHAT    HAPPENED        IN HISTORY
adorn their tables exclusively with vessels of gold and silver.
So, while in the Orient the aesthetic quality of pottery
almost everywhere declined after the revolution, in Crete
the new specialists in the palace workshops turned vessels,
delicate and beautiful and worthy to adorn the tables of
princes. The same good fortune may have rewarded other
craftsmen. The painters who adorned the Minoan palaces
with lovely frescoes had probably been trained in Egyptian
technique and conventions. But by their originality they
may have earned such a reputation that they could find
patrons even among Mesopotamian monarchs. The frescoes
in a great palace built by a powerful king of Mari on the
middle Euphrates in the nineteenth century betray so
strong a Minoan inspiration in design and technique that
they seem to be the works of actual Cretan artists.
   The area of Minoan trade is defined by the distribution
of Minoan pottery. By the eighteenth century at least this
was already reaching Mainland Greece, the Aegean Islands,
Cyprus, the Syrian coasts, and Egypt. At first no doubt the
fine products of the palace potteries may fairly be classed
as luxury articles for the conspicuous consumption of ruling
classes. Such a vase was in fact found in the tomb of an
Egyptian noble under the Middle Kingdom. On the other
hand, pottery in general falls within the class of cheap
popular goods. Judged by the shapes and decoration, even
the products of the palace workshops were substitutes for
more costly stone and metal vessels. Potentially at least the
export of vases points to long-distance trade in cheap goods
for popular consumption.
   Moreover, the pots were hardly exported empty. Huge
oil-jars found in the palace magazines give the impression
that products of specialized farming, such as olive oil,
formed staples of Cretan commerce with the Oriental
civilizations. Popular goods, on the contrary, are not in-
cluded among the surviving imports — Egyptian stone vases,
rare Babylonian cylinder seals, ingots of Cypriote copper.
  Piracy must always have threatened the security of
Cretan commerce. Later Greek tradition credits Minos
oe:    CULMINATION      OF   BRONZE   AGE   CIVILIZATION      167

_with its suppression. But if his ‘empire’ policed the paths
_of the sea as well as eliminating rivals from the island, the
 resultant centralization seems in the end to have weakened
 Minoan economy. After 1400 8.c. Crete became a province
_ of the semi-barbarous Mycenaean culture that had arisen
_ on the Greek mainland (p. 170).
     Beyond and between the new and enlarged provinces of
_ urban civilization the penumbra of Bronze Age barbarism
  likewise expanded. Eastward migrations of peoples as well
  as peaceful trade further diffused some arts of civilization.
  From Greece and Bulgaria across the plateaux of Asia
  Minor and northern Iran certain types of seals and pins
  (with double spiral heads) are scattered along the famous
  route that, until the railway age, has been followed by the
 ‘caravans travelling across Central Asia to China and to
  India. These trade goods hint how ideas and devices from
  the west may have been transmitted even to China to
  fertilize civilization on the Yellow River (p. 162).
    In India the same sort of western objects have been un-
  earthed in slummy, illiterate settlements built on the ruins
 of some old Indus cities such as Chanhu-daro in Sind. Later,
    perhaps about 1200 B.c., ‘literary’ documents that were not
   _yet preserved in writing give vivid glimpses of the arrival in
    India of the Aryan Hindus and of their barbaric culture.
       The hymns of the Rig-Veda, the oldest Hindu sacred
 . book, describe the Aryan tribes scattered about the north-
    west from the Kabul and the Kurrum (western tributaries
    of the Indus) to the head-waters of the Ganges and the
    Jurona. They live predominantly by pastoralism, growing
    some grain, of course, but reckoning wealth in cows and
    horses. The tribes are frequently at war and are led by
    petty chiefs or rajas, fighting from chariots and delighting
| in racing, dicing, and strong drink. They worship natural
    forces personified in their own image and including deities
    worshipped also by the rulers of Mitanni (p. 162). The
    hymns thernselves are really also charms sung to enhance
    the efficacy of sacrifices that were at the same time sympa-
  _ thetic magic rites to secure rain, wealth, and victory.
    The priests who sang them and performed the rites—
enjoyed essentially the status of any highly-skilled craftsman—
under Bronze Age barbarism (p. 170); they were, that is ;
to say, entirely dependent on the generosity of royal patrons, _
but not permanently attached to royal households, since ©
rajas competed for their services. Yet they are the ancestors ‘
of the Brahmans who built up such a reputation as monopo- —
lists of magic and sole intermediaries between gods and
men that they could at length claim to form the highest
caste, superior -even to kings. The rites on which their
livelihood depended were memorized to the minutest detail _
and handed down as secrets in the priestly families. The
words of efficacious hymns were similarly committed to
memory and repeated from generation to generation long—
after their words were becoming unintelligible, and their —
language   was   more   remote   from   current   speech   than
Chaucer’s English is from ours. So as craftsmen the Hindu &
priests devised a method of transmission by sheer retentive
memory that made writing superfluous.                          :
   The language thus transmitted, (Vedic) Sanskrit, is allied te
                                                              ¥:


to Persian, Greek, Latin, the Celtic and Slavonic tongues f
and our own in much the same way as Italian is related to x
Spanish, French, and Portuguese. As these ‘Romance >
languages’ are all derived from Latin, the language of the §
Romans, so, it is inferred, Sanskrit, Greek and the other —
Indo-European languages are descended from an extinct
“parent tongue’, spoken by some people or society now
long dispersed. Because the early Hindus and Persians did —
really call themselves Aryans, this term was adopted by
some nineteenth-century philologists to designate the
speakers of the ‘parent tongue’. It is now applied scientifi- —
cally only to the Hindus, Iranian peoples, and the rulers of —
Mitanni, whose linguistic ancestors spoke closely related
dialects and even worshipped common deities. As used by —
Nazis and anti-Semites generally, the term ‘Aryan’ means
as little as the words ‘Bolshie’ and ‘Red’ in the mouths of ©
crusted Tories.                                              if
   The ‘parent people’ cannot be identified archaeologically, —
 ;,     CULMINATION OF BRONZE AGE CIVILIZATION                 169
- still less by its physical racial type. Its linguistic offspring,
   i.e. peoples who accepted, even if they modified in divergent
    ways, the conventions of the ‘parent tongue’, have already
    been met in Mitanni and Hittite Asia Minor (p. 163);
   many of the European barbarians to be mentioned next also
    must have by this time adopted Indo-European linguistic
    conventions. When their societies are stratified, their rulers’
    habits display a family likeness to those of the Vedic rajas.
       In any case European barbarism was being increasingly
    penetrated by radiations from Oriental civilization during
    the Second Millennium. To the north ‘royal barrows’ in
 _ the Kuban valley richly furnished with manufactures from
    Mesopotamia (axes, spears, cauldrons, gold-work, and
   jewellery) and materials (meerschaum) from Asia Minor
    prove intercourse across the Caucasus between Europe and
_ Hither Asia, and the fertilization thereby of an illiterate
    Pontic Bronze Age in which wealth was concentrated by
    barbarian war chiefs.
       In Mainland Greece the Early Helladic farmers and
    navigators had been replaced or subjugated about 1800 B.c.
    by more war-like farmers, probably Greek-speaking Indo-
_ Europeans. These barbarians added their own contribu-
    tions without extinguishing the agricultural, industrial, and
- commercial traditions of their predecessors. The old town-
    ships were reconstructed; metallurgy and the other crafts
    were still plied, though directed more than heretofore to
    armament manufacture. Professional potters using the
    wheel immigrated from Crete, and perhaps also from Asia
    Minor, starting a new specialized industry.
       Then from 1600 on Greece was inundated with Cretan
    products and techniques. The Helladic villages became the
    citadels of rich war-lords disposing of concentrated wealth.
    By barter or plunder these obtained first Minoan products
    — weapons, jewellery, pottery, and luxury articles. Then
  they persuaded or compelled Minoan craftsmen — smiths,
  armourers, goldsmiths, seal-engravers, fresco-painters, arc-
  hitects and, last of all, clerks — to settle at their courts and
  train native apprentices to turn out rather tasteless copies
 170          WHAT     HAPPENED      IN   HISTORY

 of the imported models in Minoan techniques. Eventually
 the Mainlanders were equipped to annex Crete, too, and —
 the Mainland Mycenaean civilization usurped the dominion '
 of the Minoan throughout the Aegean world.
    It was a semi-barbarous, barely literate, highly militarist
 civilization. The Mycenaean ‘cities’, girt with tremendous
 walls of great unhewn blocks in so-called Cyclopean —
 masonry,   and dominated,by       the war-lord’s palace, are,
 like Troy, little better than glorified castles. At the capital,       ¥


' Mycenae itself, the ramparts enclose only eleven acres: the
  “great hall’ of the palace was 38 ft long by 42 ft wide. Still,
  large cemeteries of family vaults cut in the hillside outside
  the cities’ walls denote a substantially increased population. _
    The princes owed their power and wealth to a monopoly
 of new implements of war — long rapiers of costly bronze,
 huge shields and light horse-drawn war-chariots. The social
 implications of this armament are disclosed by the Greek —
 epic poems ascribed to Homer, the Iliad and the Odyssey. —
 Battles resolve themselves into single combats between ~           4


 richly-armed champions who arrive in chariots. These —
 decide the issue; the infantry are mere spectators. In fact,
 only the few could afford the long blades of bronze, the —
 chariots — marvels of the wainwright’s skill - and the
 highly-trained steeds, so that the masses were militarily —
 worthless and accordingly politically impotent.
    But in Mycenaean Greece the costly war gear was not sup- ©
 plied, asin Egypt and the Asiatic monarchies, by a centralized —
 State to a professional soldiery, but belonged to the princes
 themselves. So the latter are sovereigns or at best owe a vague
 allegiance to the king of Mycenae as overlord whom they
 support as vassals in the ‘Trojan war’ according to the Iliad.
    The surplus wealth thus won with the sword or extorted
 from a subject tenantry was devoted to luxury display rather
 than public works or even the endowment of temples and —
 tombs. But craft products were in demand, andaskilled
 artisan enjoyed a position of freedom and prestige that is
 probably characteristic of Bronze Age barbarism. ‘A sooth-
 sayer, a doctor, a singer, and a craftsman is sure of a welcome




                                                                    Sag
       CULMINATION     OF   BRONZE   AGE   CIVILIZATION      I7I

 everywhere,’ says ‘Homer’ in his Odyssey. Trade was
 essential to supplement piracy in supplying materials for
 armaments and ornaments. So merchants might earn sub-
 stantial profits and doubtless some social standing too, since
 even a war-lord’s wealth in a poor valley could never reach
 overwhelming proportions.
    Mycenaean trade is the continuation of Minoan after
 1400 B.c., and was even more popular in character. My-
 cenaean pottery was exported in masses to Troy, the coasts
 of south-western Asia Minor, Syria, Palestine, and Egypt,
 and westward reached Sicily and southern Italy. Trade was
 followed or preceded by actual migrations of Mycenaean
 Greeks or Mycenaeanized Cretans seeking beyond the sea
 a livelihood that narrow valleys and Bronze Age citadels
 could not supply. Colonies established themselves on Cyprus
 and on the adjacent coasts of Asia. In the island the colonists
 may also have been conquerors. Just opposite on the Syrian
 coast at Ugarit the Mycenaeans appear as prosperous
 merchants, sojourning peaceably in a Phoenician city like
British merchants in Istanbul.
    But Mycenaean trade was orientated largely towards
 barbarian Europe, which thereby was enabled to make
direct contributions to the main cultural pool. Actual
 Mycenaean vases were exported as far afield as Macedonia
 and Sicily (map II). Indirectly Mycenaean trade extended
 much further. Beads of east Mediterranean faience such as
 were fashionable about 1400 B.c. reached southern Eng-
 land, and a dagger manufactured in Mycenaean Greece
_was dug up from a Bronze Age barrow in Cornwall. Un-
doubtedly Cornish tin and Irish gold were brought to
 Greece in return. Indeed actual ornaments made in England
 were worn there. Amber from Jutland (Denmark) was cer-
 tainly traded to Greece and Crete along a well-marked
 route across Central Europe, where the same sort of Medi-
 terranean faience beads were received in exchange. How-
ever indirectly, Ireland and Denmark were now contribut-
 ing positively to the collective experience of humanity,
 pooled in the Near East.
   The Bronze Age barbarisms of western and cent ul
 Europe, described on p. 149, may quite possibly have been
 generated by the trade now first attested. In any case they
 remained unchanged late enough to be quickened by it.
 The barbarian aristocracies in whose graves in southern
 England the imported faience beads were deposited, and
 who in Denmark profited most from the far-flung luxury
 trade in amber, were sociologically and economically the
 counterparts of the Mycenaean chivalry just described,
 only poorer and more provincial. It might be as true to
 say that the ‘heroic age’ of Greece resulted from the trans-
 plantation of such a northern aristocracy to the fringe of
 the rich Minoan world.
    Be that as it may, just before the Second Millennium
 ended improved methods of mining and smelting, allowing
 the exploitation of even deep ores in the Austrian Alps and —
 perhaps on other minefields, superior processes of casting
 and hammering and a reorganization of the metal trade
 to ensure the scrupulous collection and use of scrap had
 materially cheapened bronze, first within the Central
 European economic system, later also in Britain, Denmark,
 Sicily, and Sardinia. Specialized metal tools for carpentry
 and a few other crafts became at last available, as well as
 weapons and ornaments. If the revolution in the metal
 industry did not produce an urban civilization to absorb
 the farmers’ surplus sons, it supplied them with shields and
 swords for renewed onslaughts on the civilized world.
    During the Second Millennium the continuous area of
 civilized life and literacy had extended from the alluvial
 valleys over the greater part of the Near East with an
 outpost far away in China. The tendrils of commerce
‘reached out into the barbarian fringe right to the Atlantic
 and North Sea coasts and the steppes of Central Asia and
 southern Russia. Obvious results were a vast increase in the
human stock, a rising standard of living for part of it, anda
commensurate enlargement of the pool of human experience.
   In spite of wars and dark ages the cities and villages of
the alluvial valleys were at least as populous in 1500 B.¢.
                            i)            eee     Paes   CNR   Ste




      “GULMINATION     OF        BRONZE     AGE   CIVILIZATION       173

    they had been in 2500. The number of cities had been
multiplied many times. The new cities in Assyria, Syria,
 Asia Minor, and Crete, to say nothing of China, were
‘immensely larger than the villages that had preceded them.
Assur, the Assyrian capital, now covered 120 acres, Qatna
in North Syria perhaps more. Even Troy had grown from
/24 to nearly 4 acres. If Mycenaean citadels do not exceed
;11 to 74 (Asine) acres, the great cemeteries of family tombs
round them all imply that a considerable ori a            was
 housed also outside their walls.
  _ Cemeteries in the barbarian fringe illustrate a like growth.
iIn Sicily by the fifteenth century the Bronze Age cemeteries
jconsisted of from 1,000 to 3,000 family vaults as against
#10 to 30 in the Copper Age, though the Bronze Age tombs
tare less crowded with skeletons. On the Hungarian plain
jEarly Bronze Age cemeteries may comprise as many as
}180 graves as against a maximum of 50 in the Copper Age;
jin the Late Bronze Age the numbers rise to 300 or more.
} At least for the middle classes the standard of living rose
too. Of course in imitation of their royal and sacerdotal
jsuperiors much of their wealth went to purchase spiritual
     material goods and services, such as good burial, magic
jrites, slaves, perfumes and jewellery, in which no progressive
jchanges can be detected in subsequent ages. On the other
jhand, in some domains of consumption, such as housing,
jone can detect an advance over barbarism destined to be
jitself outstripped in the Iron Age. A middle-class house in
 )Ur about 1800 B.c. boasted two storeys with several rooms
jin each, grouped about a central court, 16 ft square, and
)measured over all 40 ft by 33 ft. At the Egyptian capital
Jof Tell el-Amarna in the fourteenth century an average
 shouse covered 73 ft by 68 ft.
 | The arrival of new peoples - Amorites, Hittites, Kassites,
 jAryans, Hurrians, Hyksés — in the old centres had enriched
 them with spiritual and material equipment (such as new
‘languages and the ways of thinking these make possible
i[p. 14]), that had been created to deal with other environ-
 iments. With the conversion of barbarism to civilization
174          WHAT HAPPENED         IN HISTORY
ideas and devices evolved in Crete, Mainland Greece, and
Asia Minor   flowed into the common       pool. Indirectly at
least a trickle of foreign materials filtered in from the outer
barbarism of Britain,    the Baltic coasts, Russia,    Central
Asia, and East Africa.                                           '
  Improvements in transport accelerated communications
by sea and land. Under the Middle Kingdom Egyptians
could already build ships up to 204 ft long with a beam of
68 ft and carrying 120 men. Contemporary Cretan ships
probably did not exceed 70 ft in length, but reached 100 ft
by the Mycenaean period. In the right season a voyage
from the Delta ports to Byblos need take only four days’
sail, but the return journey, propelled by oars, took a boat
eight to ten days.
   A caravan on the Syrian steppes travelled at some thirty
miles a day (the trip from Tirga on the Euphrates to Qatna
via Palmyra, some 360 km., for example, took ten days in
the nineteenth century B.C). But the light horse-drawn
chariot had vastly reduced journey-times for those who
could afford it — in practice only the soldiers and officials
of States or great war-chiefs like Homer’s heroes. For the
vehicles had to be constructed of costly imported woods by
highly skilled wainwrights; the horses that drew them, since
their harness, devised originally for broad-shouldered oxen,
half-choked the wretched beasts, needed special breeding
and long training. From the nineteenth century B.c. horse-
training was an important, even literate, profession in
north Syria and chariot-racing a practically useful sport.
The chariot, in fact, being used mainly for war, consolidated
the authority of the States and chiefs who could alone
afford it, as did the knight’s armour in the Middle Ages.
But the relative stability of the Assyrian, Egyptian, and
Hittite Empires in the Second Millennium as contrasted
with earlier empires was due not only to the sole command
of a mobile arm that could be despatched quickly, but also
to the speed it conferred on officials and overseers.
   So the pools of civilization themselves had been merged
into one broad, continuous lake from the Tigris to the Nile



                                                                  S
                                                                  aa
                                                                   a
       CULMINATION     OF   BRONZE   AGE. CIVILIZATION       175

(map II) and the Adriatic, and from the Black Sea coasts to
the Persian Gulf. Within this vast reservoir currents flowed
freely in all directions. In intervals of peace the kings of
Babylon, Assyria, Mitanni, Hatti, and Egypt interchanged
ambassadors    and wives, presents and deities, physicians
_and soothsayers. The foreign office archives of the Egyptians
 and Hittites which have been recovered present a picture
 of the Near East in the fourteenth and thirteenth centuries
 as a veritable ‘concert of powers’ or society of nations quite
 comparable to Europe in the nineteenth and early twentieth
 centuries A.D. As French was then the medium of diplomacy,
 so all the Oriental Empires and their vassal States used the
cuneiform script and Akkadian language for their diplo-
 matic correspondence.
    For since the days of Sargon experts in the cuneiform
 script had been settling in the cities and citadels of Assyria,
Syria, Asia Minor, Phoenicia, and lastly Egypt, and training
native clerks to whom the fruits of Sumerian learning were
thus thrown open. The native lore of new peoples — Hittites,
Hurrians, Aryans, and Cretans — was transcribed and trans-
lated. This large class of literate clerks was assured of a
livelihood. In the temples leisure was guaranteed to the
learned; in fact research was endowed.
   Nevertheless, compared with the brilliant achievements
of the Fourth Millennium and the organization of civiliza-
tion itself, the original discoveries in genuine science and
the technical advances made during the fifteen odd cen-
turies of the full Bronze Age are disappointingly few. Apart
from improvements in transport and armament that have
already been adequately indicated, only four are worthy of
special mention — the discovery of place value and conse-
quent advances in Babylonian mathematics under the
Amorite dynasty of Babylon, the invention of glass in New
Kingdom Egypt, the creation of an alphabetic script in
Phoenicia, and the development of an economic process for
working iron among an unidentified tribe in Armenia.
  This poverty in results is not really surprising when the
basic characters of Bronze Age society as expounded in
 176          WHAT     HAPPENED      IN HISTORY

  Chapter VII and the subsequent modifications explainet L
  on pages 153ff. are recalled. Despite the rise of a middle
  class, learning remained divorced from craftsmanship,
  though it was now more firmly wedded to commerce.
  The union of literacy and trade brought forth perhaps the
  new Babylonian mathematics and certainly the Phoenician
  alphabet. For the rest the tasks set the learned by society re-
  mained unchanged and were still fulfilled along the tradi-
  tional lines laid down from the start and defined on page 133.
     The practical scientist, the craftsman, on the contrary,
- was still handicapped by the high cost of metal tools, while.
 his social position in the older societies was further depressed_
 by the multiplication of slaves captured in imperialist wars.
 In newly civilized and barbarian communities, indeed, a
 craftsman might earn a higher status (pp. 79, 170). That
 was, however, the reward of personal skill. So the desire
 to keep secret the profitable art was added to the imitative
 method of transmission to enhance the conservatism in-
 herent in craftsmanship (p. 79).
    At the same time the kings and nobles on whom craftsmen
 were so largely dependent for orders, raw materials, and even
 equipment were now less than ever interested in devices to
 lighten drudgery and ease the burden of human labour.
 They, and for that matter the middle classes too, could
 command the labour of a growing army of slaves. From
 the time of Sargon, the war-lord, the military conqueror |
 had become the ideal of the ruling classes. To such wealth
 is booty to be taken, not produced, or rather the product
 of the ‘oldest labour-saving device’ — robbery.
    No wonder that in societies thus dominated improve-
 ments in equipment are slow. Among the Bronze Age
 barbarians of Europe, indeed, archaeology does disclose a
 relatively rapid improvement of metal equipment, inaxes|
 as well as fighting weapons. But in barbarian societies|
 to-day, as among Homer’s heroes in Bronze Age Greece,|
 even chiefs have to work with their hands. The more
 exalted kings of the Orient were entirely exempt from
 manual tasks and could even do much of their fighting
                                                              ao7   as"   a4 2   a




       CULMINATION     OF   BRONZE    AGE   CIVILIZATION      177

vicariously. Turning from Europe to Asia or Egypt any
 archaeologist is struck by the extent to which metal tools
 preserve the same form throughout the two thousand years
 of the Oriental Bronze Age. In military equipment there
 were a few more advances. But the most important, the
 light horse chariot, was developed in north Syria, first
 perhaps by the newly civilized Assyrians, later by the
  barbarian Aryan rulers of Mitanni, and was forced upon
  the Egyptians by the Hyksdés. Similarly the rapier was
  invented in Crete and exploited by the Mycenaeans. It
  looks as if the Oriental kings and generals, lacking all
  practical experience in the workshop, simply failed to
appreciate what craftsmanship could do for them.
_ A genuine science of higher mathematics, from which
modern mathematics, through Hellenistic and Arab, largely
 ‘springs, was founded in the temple schools of Mesopotamia,
apparently under the Dynasty of Hammurabi. Its rise would
thus coincide with that little triumph of the middle class
‘consecrated by Hammurabi’s laws. Moreover, many of the
  examples that illustrate it are concerned with the division of
  inheritances, partnerships, and business operations. ‘The new
 ‘mathematics may therefore respond to the social demands of
the middle class. But the fundamental discovery was a by-
  product of the simplification of the script imposed on the
  clerks much earlier by the sheer volume of sacred, govern-
  mental, and private business.
      As a result of the simplification the signs for 1 and for 60
  had come to coincide. During the same period clerks had
  ‘come to accept gin, originally a weight equivalent to one-
   sixtieth of a mina, as standing for 1 /60 in general, just as
 in Latin, uncia, an ounce, came to mean also one-twelfth.
  Moreover, in practice the clerks saved themselves trouble
  by omitting the sign for gin; one unit and eleven gin was
  written simply ¥¢1; From this point the learned went on
 ‘to conventionalize a purely abstract system in which the
  unit symbol, 1, stood for any power of 60, positive or
“negative, i.e., 1, 60, 3,600 ... 1/6, 1/3,600, while a collection
‘of ten such signs, e.g. 10, 600, 1/6, was denoted by the
other cipher <. The Babylonian arithmetician thus foun
himself in possession of a notation based on what we call
‘place value’; the value of a sign is determined solely by its. ‘
position in relation to other signs. And this system was —
applied not only to integers (whole numbers), but also to-i
fractions, precisely as in our own decimal fractions. Only the
absence of signs for zero and the decimal point introduced—
an element of ambiguity that was not very serious inactual
practice.
   So the Babylonian temple scholars had invented a system
that enabled them to operate with fractional quantities that
cannot be represented on the fingers or with counters, and
that without the tedious calculations entailed in the unit
fractions or aliquot parts that their forerunners had been,
and their Egyptian colleagues still were, forced to employ.
This purely technical improvement in the instrument used
in reckoning in fact gave man mastery over — almost — the
whole domain of real numbers.                               i
   Incidentally it eliminated all the difficulties that the
beginner even nowadays — let the reader recall his own’
troubles at school — experiences with division. For division
is nothing but multiplication by the reciprocal of the
divisor (ie. the number that, multiplied by the divisor,—
gives one). As the Sumerians had drawn up multiplication —
tables (p. 109), so now their Babylonian heirs compiled _
tables of reciprocals expressed as sexagesimal fractions. In
order to divide by 12 you looked up the reciprocal of 12;
5 in the sexagesimal notation, and multiplied by that.
   Of course the Babylonian system was imperfect. They |
lacked any - and otill late in the First Millennium. They
had not discovered anything to correspond to our recurring
decimals. Their base, 60, is divisible by a large number of
factors, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 ... so that most reciprocals can     be
 arrested as reasonably short sexagesimal fractions. But in |
the reciprocal tables the spaces for 1/7, 1/11, and so on, are
blank. With such divisors they must still have recourse to
ordinary division and use clumsy unit fractions in the
quotient.
        CULMINATION      OF   BRONZE   AGE   CIVILIZATION     179

    Similarly they had no means of representing or dealing
 with surds such as 4/2 and 4/3. In problems that should
  lead to such quantities they replace the correct method of
  working by others involving processes which give approxi-
  mations to the true result. The ‘rule of signs’ seems to have
  been beyond their comprehension altogether. The ‘negative
  root’ of a quadratic equation is simply ignored.
     Moreover, the Babylonians had discovered empirically by
  actual reckoning some properties of numbers that we should
_ express by algebraic formulae. So they were certainly aware
  of the result we express as (a + 6)" = a? + 2ab + b?, and
  used this result to solve quadratic equations by ‘completing
  the square’ very much as we do. Such properties of num-
  bers, rules of arithmetical grammar as Hogben calls them,
  appeared to the clerks not as revelations of a priori ‘laws’,
  but as results and processes actually found to work. They are
  never expressed in the extant ‘mathematical tablets’ by gen-
  eral formulae. All that survive are ‘examples’ worked out
 and in fact constructed so that they will work out by the
  - methods available; for instance the values for quadratics
     are chosen so that ac + b?/4 is a perfect square.
        Still the Babylonians lacked what we term an algebraic
     notation, using letters with indefinite numerical values in-
     stead of concrete numbers. In solving ‘equations’ they there-
 - fore had recourse to a procedure similar to the ‘false posi-
     tion’ used in medieval arithmetic.
_       Fragmentary tablets prove that the schools were experi-
' menting with geometrical figures — inscribing squares in
  - circles, and so on. What conclusions they drew the tablets
   _ do not say. But by 1800 B.c. the Babylonians had discovered,
     again presumably by actual observation and measurement,
     certain geometrical relations in addition to those rules for
     areas and volumes the application of which is attested much
     earlier. In particular they were perfectly well aware that in
     rectangles the sides of which are in the proportions of 3 to 4
     and 5 to 12, the square on the diagonal is equal to the sum
    ‘of the squares on two adjacent sides. A whole series of
  - examples on a tablet in the British Museum has been built
180          WHAT    HAPPENED     IN   HISTORY

up to illustrate this truth. In fact, learned clerks knew for
nineteen independent cases the result of what is now called oeta
                                                               wie
the ‘Theorem of Pythagoras’. Even if they ‘knew’ this 5
theorem in general, they could not apply it in cases where
the diagonal is not a rational whole number, in a square for
example. In such cases the examples in the tablets are
worked out by methods which we should use to obtain
approximations to the correct result.
   The Babylonian clerks had devised a system of mathe-
matical symbols and methods of working that enabled
them to solve with the requisite accuracy the actual
problems in accountancy, surveying, architecture, and
military engineering that their society had in practice to
face. They drew up series of examples to illustrate the
solution of precisely such problems. In so doing they had
stumbled upon several important properties of numbers
and of space. None of the tablets that survive suggests an
interest in numbers as such or any conception of abstract
empty space! (Some actual examples of Babylonian mathe-
matical texts are quoted in Man Makes Himself.)
   In the Third Millennium the Egyptian, Sumerian, and
Indus citizens had known enough of the chemistry of
glazing to be able to make faience — an opaque paste of
sand coated with a glaze. The chemical discovery involved —
is that alkaline silicates fuse easily like metals, and that
such silicates can be made by heating with silica (i.e. sand),
potash (which is just a product of burning wood), or natron
(which occurs as a mineral in the western desert of Egypt).
Under the New Kingdom Egyptian craftsmen discovered —
a process for making clear glass that could be fused and
cast like metal by heating sand and natron and devised
means for colouring the product. The glass was cast into
rods and reeds which could be moulded while hot and even
built up into vessels on a sand core. It was applied to the
production of imitation precious stones, ‘synthetic jewels’
in fact, to be converted into bangles or vases and then sold
at a modest price to the new middle class. The art was soon
adopted in Phoenicia, where potash took the place of natron.
                                       wt       eh. ee   ee   a   -—
                                            ’




       CULMINATION     OF   BRONZE   AGE    CIVILIZATION               |   181

    If glass manufacture were developed to suit the purses of
 the- small middle-class buyer, a simple alphabetic script
 seems to have been devised to expedite the business of small
 merchants. As pointed out on page 164, the Phoenicians
 trafficked very largely in low-priced popular goods. Such
 traffic involved a number of small retail transactions, all of
 which ought to be recorded. At the same time it earned the
 craftsmen, or at least the merchants, sufficient wealth to
  make them independent of ‘great households’ that would
  of course include professional clerks (p. 156); the merchant
  would have to be his own bookkeeper. This was the social
background of the Phoenician script.
     Its philological background is also noteworthy. In Semitic
 languages like the Phoenician the words are built up out of
  triconsonantal roots (that is bases that can be expressed by
 three consonants) ;vowel changes denote only grammatical
 differences — tenses and cases. Hence for practical inter-
“course where the general context is clear meanings can be
 adequately conveyed by the consonants alone and the vowel
 sounds ignored.
    By about 1500 B.c. the priests and merchants of Ugarit
 had selected twenty-nine of the cuneiform characters used
 by their Babylonian teachers and colleagues and agreed to
 assign to each of these a single phonetic value. They thus
 created a true alphabet, by means of which any word could
 be accurately spelled out without recourse to the cumber-
 some apparatus of ideograms and syllabic signs employed
by earlier scripts.
    Further south in a still nameless Phoenician city a differ-
 ent alphabet was agreed upon, suitable for writing on papy-
 rus, the use of which had been introduced at Byblos by the
Egyptians (hence the Greek word for ‘book’; our Bible is
the book). Twenty-two signs were chosen to denote simple
consonants — vowels were not written. The signs may on
one view be themselves versions of Egyptian hieroglyphs,
or on another theory be derived from non-pictorial cattle-
brands and ownership marks current among Semitic
pastoralists or Mediterranean mariners. In any case the
resultant alphabet is the parent of the Greek,           Etruscan,—
Roman, Aramaic, and South Arabian scripts and their
modern European, Hebrew, Arabic, and Indic derivatives. —
   Thanks to the reduction of the number of characters and ~
the elimination of the complexities introduced by ideograms
and determinatives, reading and writing became as simple
as they are to-day. Literacy ceased to be the mysterious
privilege of a highly-specialized class. The small shop-
keeper or pedlar could easily learn enough at least to sign’
his name and keep accounts. The new idea caught on so
fast that no one can say precisely where it started. It was
in fact an international body of merchants who sanctioned
by use the new conventions; it was their activity that
diffused and popularized the system in the Iron Age.
    It has been repeatedly shown how peculiarities of the
civilizations and barbarian cultures described in the last
four chapters were conditioned by the high cost of the sole
metal used for tools and weapons. The cost in turn was due
 to the comparative rarity of the constituent elements,
 copper and tin. Iron on the other hand is one of the
 commonest elements in the earth’s crust. It can be extracted
 from its ores by the same chemical process as copper and
 other metals — reduction by heating with charcoal. But at
 the temperatures obtainable in antiquity (without a mech-
 anical blast) iron would not melt and reduction would.
 leave only a spongy mass. This had to be purified from
 slag and compacted into a ‘bloom’ by prolonged hammer-
 ing. Even then the metal could not be cast, as copper and
 bronze had been, but must be forged or wrought, i.e., |
 shaped by hammering.
     Even in the Third Millennium a few implements of|
 wrought iron had been used occasionally both in Egypt |
  and Mesopotamia, but neither Nilotic nor Mesopotamian
 smiths   had   devised,   nor   had   any   incentive   to devise,|
 effective and economic methods for producing in bulk iron
 of good quality. A suitable process was apparently first
 invented by a barbarian tribe living among the Armenian
 mountains in what the Hittites called Kizwadana. The
       fe   Ae, BY
       CULMINATION OF BRONZE AGE CIVILIZATION               183
_ Aryan rulers of Mitanni who incorporated the iron workers
in their military monarchy appreciated the value of the
 new metal, but guarded the secret of its production and
 controlled the output in virtue of the normal Statemonopoly
 over the metal trade. The Hittites who succeeded the
 Aryans maintained the policy of secrecy. The Aryan kings
 had sent iron objects as presents to the pharaohs. But when
a pharaoh writes to ask the Hittite king for a supply of
 iron towards the end of the fourteenth century, the latter
 puts “his brother’ off with excuses and sends only a single
dagger. But iron weapons were supplied to the Hittite
army, and barbarian mercenaries serving therein eventually
 learned and divulged the secret of their manufacture.
_   Efficient and economic methods     of iron working made
‘metal cheap at last. In Babylonia under Hammurabi during
the eighteenth century B.c. a shekel of silver would buy 120
‘to 150 shekels of copper or perhaps 144 shekels of tin (in
‘Asia Minor at this date it would purchase 40 shekels of
iron). A thousand years later the silver shekel would bring
in no less than 225 shekels of iron; the price of copper had
also fallen from 150 to 180 to one of silver as a consequence
 of the saving due to the use of cheapiron tools in mining
 and the manufacture of vehicles and vessels.
_ Cheap iron democratized agriculture and industry and
warfare too. Any peasant could afford an iron axe to clear
 fresh land for himself and iron ploughshares wherewith to
break up stony ground. The common artisan could own a
kit of metal tools that made him independent of the house-
holds of kings, gods, or nobles. With iron weapons a com-
moner could meet on more equal terms the Bronze Age
 knight. With them too poor and backward barbarians could
challenge the armies of civilized States whose monopoly of
bronze armaments had made them seem invulnerable.
  _ The last result was the first to be made manifest. The
Bronze Age in the Near East ends in renewed barbarian
inroads which threatened the whole civilized world with
chaos and actually hurled the two latest outposts of civiliza-
tion ~ Greece and Asia Minor — back into illiteracy.
                             IX

             THE     EARLY        IRON     AGE

IMPERIALISM had not eliminated the contradictions of
Bronze Age economy. On the contrary, if it had at first
secured to the imperialist state the requisite supplies, it had
led in the Second Millennium B.c. to conflicts of Empires,
more destructive than the internal conflicts between Meso-
potamian cities that imperialism claims credit for abolishing.
The tribute collected by the empires did not mean the
production of fresh wealth, but quite simply the theft of
wealth from those who had produced it. Such wealth could
not therefore support an indefinitely expanding population.
    Already in the fourteenth century, when tribute was still
pouring into imperial treasuries, symptoms of decay were
becoming manifest. Both the protagonists of civilization,
the Egyptian pharaoh and the Hittite great king, hired
barbarian mercenaries for their contending armies. Pre-
 sumably they were hired to replace a not inconsiderable
 proportion of the native populations — or at least of the
 military classes — that had either been killed off or com-
 pletely debauched byplunder. By such employment barbar-
 ians received a new lesson in civilization. They were apt to
 learn at least ‘civilized’ methods of warfare, urban processes.
of armament manufacture and the secret of iron working.
Then they applied the fruits of their schooling to their
masters with disastrous results to the Hittites and Egyptians. |
   Imperialism could not even mask the contradictions so long|
in the newly-civilized provinces as it had in the older centres.
   Mycenaean society, dominated economically as well as|
politically by the war-lords’ rapiers, chariots, and great
estates, became poorer and poorer during the late four-’
teenth and thirteenth centuries. The grave-goods became
cheap and nasty. Art declined. Egyptian imports, so com-
mon in the early fourteenth century, are missing in the
                  THE EARLY IRON AGE                     185
thirteenth. Mycenaean manufactures are proportionately
rare in Egypt and Syria. Late Mycenaean pottery does
indeed turn up in south-eastern Asia Minor at this date,
but here it may have been brought by warlike colonists. It
would mean that the Mycenaeans were adopting the late
neolithic solution of their population problem (p. 68) and
were trying to dump the surplus overseas on other people’s
land. The Trojan war described in ‘Homer’s’ epics sounds
like a venture in imperialism. But the Mycenaean princelets
lacked the resources needed to imitate the kings of Akkad.
   So the Bronze Age in the Near East ended round about
1200 B.C. in a dark age, blacker and more extensive than
those that opened our last chapter. Not in a single State
alone but over a large part of the civilized world history
itself seems to be interrupted; the written sources dry up,
the archaeological documents are poor and hard to date.
Barbarians from the north wiped out the Mycenaean civili-
zation in Greece. The Hittite Empire foundered. In Baby-
lonia the Kassite dynasty came to an end; barbarian
Aramaeans and Chaldaeans filtered in; for a time Babylonia
became subject to Assyrian over-lords. The pharaohs Mer-
neptah and Rameses repelled the invaders from the Nile.
But soon Libyan mercenaries and Nubians seized the
pharaoh’s throne itself till the Assyrians annexed Egypt too
to their military empire. About the same time in China the
Shang capital was sacked, and the barbarian Chous began
a new empire, organized on more feudal lines.
   Nevertheless the continuity of civilization was not com-
pletely or universally interrupted. The Assyrian State
and its component cities were flourishing. Sumerian and
Akkadian texts were copied and collected for the Assyrian
royal libraries. Astronomical studies were fruitfully pursued
in the observatories attached to Assyrian, as to Babylonian,
temples. In Babylonia itself, as in previous dark ages,
economic and scientific life, like worship, continued in the
cities and temples, albeit impaired by foreign rule and
poverty. Neither the craft lore of artisans nor the business
acumen of merchants, nor yet the traditional learning of
                                    7       iW   aT   eT Aa   ut



              WHAT      HAPPENED        IN HISTORY

 the clerks was dissipated when their cities changed masters.            _
  The same is true of Egypt and of China. Finally the Phoe-
  nician cities weathered the storm, preserving at least the
  standard of civilization they had reached in the fourteenth
  century. They could even exploit and develop such Minoan
  traditions and techniques as had been added to their own
  by the merchant colonists at Ugarit (p. 1 71).
     Even in Greece more came through than might have
  been expected. No doubt the Mycenaean chivalry, like the
  Minoan priest-kings, had been wiped out. Any clerks they
~ had employed lost their employment. The luxury industries —
  of the nobles’ courts consequently became obsolete. Cheap —
  iron swords replaced costly bronze rapiers. What were left —
  of the Mycenaean cities relapsed into almost self-sufficmg —
  villages. But Greece did not revert quite to neolithic bar- —
  barism, nor even to the stage represented by the Helladic
  towns before 1600 B.c.
     The standardized techniques of viticulture and olive- :
  growing described by the poet Hesiod about 800. 8.c.
  cannot be fresh discoveries but must be legacies from the —
  Helladic pioneers of Greek farming. The same poet’s rustic —
  calendar   embodies    the   astronomical      observations      and
  botanical lore accumulated by an Aegean peasantry during
  the Bronze Age. Throughout the dark age pottery, usually
  called Geometric, is made on the wheel, and its technique
  is Mycenaean; only the forms and designs are novel. So
  Mycenaean potters had escaped destruction and taught
  their craft to children and apprentices, handing on to
  classical Greece the appropriate pre-Indo-European names
  for their products. The same must have been true of other
  crafts. Certainly ‘Crete had preserved the secret of the
  purple and had not forgotten metal-working’. The Phoe-
  nicians had indeed temporarily ousted the Greek mariners
  from supremacy even in Aegean waters; incidentally the
  Asiatics taught the Iron Age Greeks their alphabet some-
  where between 1000 and 700 B.c. But the traditions of
   Minoan seamanship were never lost. The Greek ships
  depicted on the early Iron Age geometric vases seem to be
                                                               eh See




                    THE EARLY      IRON AGE                  187
  Bronze Age Mycenaean ships with a ram added for fighting.
  Finally, that sparks of Minoan art gleamed through the
  dark age is evident from Homer’s poems.
    So the Indo-European Greeks of the Iron Age did not
 _have to create miraculously out of sheer barbarism the
  foundations for Classical techniques, sciences, economy, and
  art. The barbarians had not demolished the whole Minoan-
  Mycenaean edifice. In fact, here as everywhere, the inva-
  sions merely gave the final push to fabrics already tottering
  through internal decay. In the most favourable instances,
  particularly in Greece itself, they just swept away top-heavy
  superstructures to make room for more progressive additions
  to a fundamentally healthy building. The substantial
 _ achievements of the Bronze Age were on the whole saved.
_ By 1000 B.c. recovery was beginning. The losses were more
    than made up in the next five centuries.
       In the first five centuries of the Iron Age the continuous
 _ area of civilization, after the temporary contraction at its
_ start, expanded more than it had in the previous fifteen
    centuries of the Bronze Age. By 500 B.c. the zone of literate
    societies, accustomed to urban life and dependent on an
    urban economy, extended continuously from the Atlantic
_ coasts of Spain to the Jaxartes in Central Asia and the
_ Ganges in India, from southern Arabia to the north coasts
    of the Mediterranean and the Black Sea.
       The several portions of this zone were integrated and
 _ interconnected to a degree never before attained. An
    educated Persian or Greek, however vague and inaccurate
    his knowledge of its extremities, could feel himself an
  inhabitant of a humanly populated world — an oikoumene,
    as the Greeks called it — four times as large as an Egyptian
    or Babylonian could have dreamed of a thousand years
    earlier. And in the barbarian fringe on either side, but most
    noticeably among the Celts of western Europe and the
    Scyths of the Eurasiatic steppes, new techniques and
  _ devices were penetrating rapidly and fruitfully.
    The expansion had been effected on the one hand by the
  enlargement and consolidation of Asiatic military empires



bi
188          WHAT   HAPPENED      IN HISTORY

on the Akkadian model, on the other by colonizing activities _
of Phoenicians, Greeks, and Etruscans following Minoan-
Mycenaean traders along the Mediterranean seaways.
   In the Near East the Bronze Age collapse had left, besides
the ruins of Egypt, an enfeebled Babylonia, the Phoenician
cities, and vigorous Assyria, only a debris of partially
barbarized communities that in time reorganized them- —
selves into small-and feeble imitations of the Bronze Age
theocratic states. Of these the Hebrew kingdom in Palestine,
the realm of the Phrygian Midas in western Asia Minor,
and the commercial kingdom of Lydia to the south-east
displayed significant originality. The first stage in the
reduction of these economically interdependent units was
effected with unparalleled brutality by the Assyrians. By
 700 B.c, the Assyrian Empire extended from the Nile and
 the Mediterranean coasts to the mountain countries north
 and east of the Tigris.
    In 610 this empire changed masters, and was divided
 between a renascent Babylonia and the Aryan Medes, who
 added to it their homeland in Iran. But after 540 both
 domains fell into the hands of the equally Aryan Persians,
who subsequently added the rest of Iran, western India,
Egypt, Asia Minor, and the Eurasiatic steppe. By 500 B.c.
the Empire of Darius extended from the Nile and the
Aegean to the Indus and the Jaxartes.
   This unification had doubtless been achieved at frightful
cost in human lives and real wealth. The Assyrian kings in
particular boast how they have massacred, flayed, and
impaled the inhabitants of cities that ‘rebelled against
Assur’ (their tribal god), and have destroyed fruit-trees,
gardens, and canals so that once populous lands are ‘left
 for the asses, the gazelles, and all manner of wild beasts to
 people’ (referring particularly to Elam). Nevertheless,
 political unification had promoted intercourse on an un-
 precedented scale over a wider area than ever before and had
 enormously accelerated the pooling of human knowledge.
    Albeit primarily for the collection of tribute, the As-
 syrians, and still more the Persians, had organized
                    THE EARLY     IRON AGE      °            189
  communications. From Sardis in Asia Minor through Baby-
 lon and Susa to Persepolis in southern Iran the Persians con-
  structed the famous ‘royai road’, equipped with inns and
  relays of horses for the use of official messengers. The
  journey of 1,700 miles from Sardis to Susa could thus be
  accomplished in ninety days. Such facilities for travel en-
  abled even intelligent Greeks of modest means, like the
  historian Herodotus, to visit distant Babylon. The Assyrians
  and their Neo-Babylonian heirs forcibly transported whole
  communities from one end of their empires to the other,
  thus incidentally effecting a very thorough pooling of experi-
_ ence and making their cities eminently cosmopolitan. The
  effects of this transplantation on the Jews are well known.
  Members of subject communities were recruited for service
  in the imperial armies. Under Darius and Xerxes Indian
  chariotry and nomad archers from Central Asiatic steppes
  fought side by side with Greek mercenaries and Syrian levies
  in Egypt and Greece itself. Moreover, when all the plunder-
  ing was done, the imperial power did establish a regime of
  comparative security within its domain and check small wars.
     The unification of Hither Asia and the civilization of its
  backward enclaves was thus effected by the forcible im-
  position of alien rule and of a modified version of the
  government and economy created in the Bronze Age
 monarchies. In the Mediterranean basin, on the contrary,
  civilization was diffused by the plantation of colonies on
_ the coasts from which urban life spread inland.
    The new cities founded by the Phoenicians, the Greeks,
 and the Etruscans were not established, as Sargon’s founda-
 tions in Syria had been, to be provincial collecting posts for
 a surplus to be partly drawn off as tribute to the parent city.
    The new cities were actual overseas settlements of emi-
 grant farmers for whom there was no room in the narrow
 coastal plain of Phoenicia and the still narrower valleys of
 Greece. The colonists sought beyond the seas new lands to
 till, new fishing grounds and bases for piracy and commerce.
 They brought with them the economy and equipment of
 their homeland, though as pioneers they had at first to forgo


:
                                 ry   ;   ad   A   .
                     if   A

            WHAT    HAPPENED     IN HISTORY            |
190                                                             ,
                                                          the j
some of its refinements. But migration by sea, owing to
slow, precarious, and irregular voyages of ancient ships,
                                                                ry




always involved a greater dislocation and disassociation of —
cultural elements than follows upon landwise migrations.
By the voyage itself the component elements get jolted out of —
the rigid frame of custom in which they are embedded.
They can be resorted and reintegrated in new wholes. The
colonial cities in North Africa were far less replicas of the
parent Phoenician states than the new foundations of Sargon
or the kings of Ur in Syria (p. 142) had been. They did not
reproduce in the West the centralized economy and theo- —
cratic polity of the Orient; even Carthage was a republic. —
   The colony was not dependent upon or tributary to the ©
mother city. But it was connected with the latter by
 traditional sentimental ties and found there a natural
market where any surplus of home-grown produce and raw
materials obtained from the barbarian hinterland could be
exchanged for the manufactures of the more highly skilled ©
 artisans who would remain at home in the metropolis. So
 the Phoenicians colonized particularly North Africa and, -
from Carthage, western Sicily, Sardinia, and the coasts of
Spain. The Greeks for their part, having occupied all the
coasts of the Aegean, spread round the Black Sea and west-_
ward to eastern Sicily, southern Italy and Campania, and
thence to Marseilles, thus securing a port in western Europe. —
   Finally the Etruscans or Turseni, a people from Asia
Minor who had learned civilization through mercenary
service in imperial armies, turned their backs on their
eastern home and established themselves as a ruling class
among Indo-European farmers on the western coasts of
Central Italy and across the Apennines as far north as the
modern Bologna. They brutally imposed civilization on
conquered. barbarians, founding small cities as centres of an
urban economy. But some of the conquered, notably the
Romans, like Sargon’s victims in the Third Millennium,
were enabled to expel their alien masters and turn the
weapons of civilization against their oppressors.
   In the Iron Age civilization not only spread over a wider
                     eer    Ley
                     fice


                     THE    EARLY   IRON   AGE                Ig!

  area than in the Bronze Age, it also spread deeper; it was
  more popular. That was because it made use of two ‘ popu-
  lar’ inventions already mentioned — iron and the alphabet —
  to which was soon added a third — coined money. Iron, as
  already explained, first gave the masses, and especially the
  rural population, a real independent share in the benefits of
  civilization. Cheap iron tools abolished or at least reduced
  the dependence of the small producers on State monopolies
  and great household stores. With the new metal implements
  for breaking the ground, clearing it of trees and digging
  drainage channels, the small farmer might earn independ-
  ence by reclaiming for himself a piece of waste; in any case,
  he could produce more. Similarly the efficiency of industry
  was enormously increased. As a result transport costs could
  be reduced; vessels and vehicles were improved or cheap-
  ened. Use of the new metal spread rapidly after 1200 in
  Hither Asia and Greece and thence westward with the
   Phoenicians and Etruscans. On the other hand, it did not
    become common in Egypt till after 650 B.c. How and when
    iron-working spread to India and China is still uncertain.
       The alphabet, as explained on page 182, made literacy
    possible to all classes. By the seventh century common mer-
    cenary soldiers, both Greek and Phoenician, were educated
    enough to be able to scratch their names on Egyptian
   statues. The Phoenicians’ invention had spread rapidly. In
    Mesopotamia, indeed, the old cuneiform script remained
    the normal medium even for private correspondence down
 _ to 500 B.c., and in the temple schools and observatories
 _ continued in regular use till 50 B.c. Even the Persians, like
  _the Hittites a thousand years earlier, used cuneiform signs
   as the basis of a syllabary for transcribing their own Indo-
y European language. In Egypt, too, hieroglyphics and their
   simplified cursive derivatives were current till the beginning
_ of our era. Nevertheless, the alphabetic writing, well estab-
  lished on the coast of Syria by 1100 B.c., was adopted by the
  new States in Southern Arabia and was used in competition
_ with cuneiform by Aramaic merchants in Mesopotamia
  even under the Assyrian Empire. Thence the idea spread to
192         WHAT     HAPPENED     IN   HISTORY

Iran. Finally, before 300 B.c., it had inspired the creation
ofa suitable alphabet for expressing the sounds of the Aryan
languages of India. Westward the Phoenicians took their
alphabet to Carthage and thence to her colonies. Between
1000 and 700 B.c. the Greeks learnt to write it too. They
converted some superfluous signs for peculiarly Semitic
consonants and invented others to express the vowel sounds
that the Semites had ignored (p. 181), but that are indis-
pensable for the unambiguous expression of an Indo-
European language. It was apparently from the Greek
colonists in Italy that the Etruscans and Romans learned
to read and write.             <          ;
Two grave embarrassments to early trade were, firstly,
that at every transaction the quantity of silver representing
the price had to be weighed out — and it was all too easy to
falsify the weights — and, secondly, that the metal paid out —
might be fraudulently debased. Soon after 800 B.c. Assyrian
and Syrian kings began stamping bars of silver, guarantee-
ing the quality of the metal. The second defect of the old
Bronze Age money was thus eliminated. Coins, pieces of
metal of a fixed shape and a standard weight stamped and
guaranteed by the State as to both quality and weight,
eliminated the first too. Greek tradition attributes to
Croesus of Lydia, a frontier kingdom owing its prosperity
to transit trade, the initiation of this practice about 700 B.c.
It immensely simplified all commercial operations, but was
not in itself absolutely revolutionary.
    The earliest Lydian coins were in electron, a natural alloy
of gold and silver, and of relatively high value. The first
Greek silver coins and the gold coinage of Persia were also
 for high denominations. But shortly after 600 B.c. the Greek
 city states of Aegina, Athens, and Corinth began issuing —
small change, copper or small silver coins, with truly revo-
 lutionary consequences. Now it had doubtless been a
 nuisance for the wholesaler to have to travel about with
 scales and weights, bars of metal and sacks of grain; for the
 small retailer it was a crippling handicap. A big landowner
                     THE   EARLY    IRON    AGE                 193
  when he sold his harvest or oxen may have grumbled at
   the bother of weighing out the silver and the sharp practices
  of the purchaser who tried adulterating his silver with lead.
  But how was the small farmer to pay for a new pot, an iron
  ploughshare, or a trinket for his wife? Under a natural
  economy such little men must have generally been done
  when haggling with a travelling pedlar. Again the work-
  man paid in kind had little choice in the disposal of his wages.
      Small change corrected these difficulties. The peasant can
  convert his small surplus of farm produce into an easily
  divisible medium of exchange which he can reconvert into
_ manufactured goods of any kind and quantity. The work-
  man is no longer condemned to eat his wages. The small
  producer or the retailer can exchange his goods for coins,
  which can be added together till substantial values are
  accumulated. So in the long run coinage made accessible to
  small primary producers and artisans an increasing variety
  of the refinements made possible by civilized technology.
  Conversely it made the manufacture of cheap goods for pop-
  ular consumption profitable, and allowed even the small land-
  holder to turn from subsistence agriculture to specialized
  farming — the production, for instance, of olives or oil for sale.
     But if coined money emancipated the small producer
 from one set of masters, it threatened to hand him over to
 another just as money in general had done (p. 158). Usury,
 mortgages and enslaved debtors followed the new medium
 of exchange wherever it was introduced. In the early
Jewish, Greek, and Italian communities that had only
 recently abandoned a natural economy the struggles of
 debtors against creditors dominated the first political con-
 flicts, if they did not, as Engels argues, call forth the State
 itself among the Greeks and the Romans.
    In continental Asia neither the barbarian invasions nor
 the use of iron changed permanently and radically the
 structure of society and the economic organization that had
been established since 2000 B.c. The barbarian war chiefs
generally usurped the sacred thrones of Bronze Age king-
 lets, taking over the existing administrative machinery, but




me
             WHAT HAPPENED        IN HISTORY
restaffing the higher offices from their own retinue. Most _
tried to imitate Sargon’s imperialism, and the Persians 4
                                                               "

                                                               W


eventually succeeded brilliantly.                              2


   In primary production the organization of servile
                                                               |



peasants practising subsistence agriculture as the household
of a great landowner was found as convenient by the new —
tax-gatherers as by the old. The conquerors, notably the
Persians, just replaced the old nobility as lords of such
domains. They thus became an aristocracy ruling serfs and
forgot altogether the communistic forms of land-ownership©
appropriate to their recent condition of barbarism. Owing
to the cheapness of iron such estates could often attain to an
almost neolithic self-sufficiency. To provide the tenantry
with the metal tools that were now necessities, all that was
needed was to purchase a smith in the slave-market and
perhaps to buy him raw iron if no sort of ore were available
on the estate. The surplus requisite was not large, and owing
to the increased efficiency of agriculture could be collected
fromasmaller estate than formerly. The balance was available
to purchase industrial products and imports on the market.
   At the same time land transport was still extravagantly -
costly. It is true, of course, that the roads, built primarily
for administrative and military purposes by the Assyrians |
and the Persians, did simplify travelling. Moreover, for
caravan traffic across the deserts camels and dromedaries-
were now extensively used, though a camel-load is not very
large. Still, only high-priced luxuries could be profitably
carried far, or rather anything thus carried became a luxury.
   With the rural economy and a transport industry thus
constituted, the urban economy supported thereby must
follow the familiar Bronze Age lines. As the number of large
estates was greater, they could support more nobles, and
therefore :a larger middle-class of merchants, craftsmen,
clerks, artists, and even teachers to share in the surplus
collected by the landowners by supplying their wants. At
Nineveh the walls encompassed an area of 1,800 acres —
including parks, gardens, and temples - in the seventh
century. The middle class was also freer in that its members
                                                                      x". a




                         THE   EARLY    IRON   AGE              195

    had a wider market and a greater choice of patrons.
    Accordingly it could live better. A merchant’s two-storeyed
    house in Babylonia covered a hundred feet by eighty-two
  _ feet and boasted eighteen rooms (including a bathroom)
    grouped round a central court. Real wages, too, were
    doubled in Babylonia under the Persian Empire.
           Moreover, the variety of crafts plied, commodities manu-
  factured, and materials imported and used had greatly
  multiplied. In building his new palace at Susa, Darius got
  his cedars from Lebanon via the Euphrates, oaks from
  Gandhara (the upper Indus and Kabul valleys) and Car-
_ mania (Iran), gold from Sardis in Asia Minor, ivory from
 India, Seistan, and Ethiopia, silver and copper (? bronze)
  from Egypt (perhaps really via Egypt from Spain and
_ Britain, as there is neither copper nor silver in Egypt).
  Though the Persian king goes farther afield, he was just
  following the example of Sumerian city-governors in the
_ Third Millennium. So again it was in an equally ancient
  tradition to employ on the work Egyptian, Greek, Lydian,
 - Babylonian, and Median craftsmen, as Darius says he did.
    In fact, as in the Bronze Age, the craftsman went to the
  - market instead of sending his products thither.
     In the Persian Empire of Darius the economic objective
 | of Sargon’s Akkadian imperialism had been realized. All
         the materials needed for the crafts and even the luxuries
   demanded by nobles were obtainable within its bounds.
   Trade and industry had in fact expanded as a result, though
aea)-e
—Cit



_ the position of the peasantry was little if at all bettered, But
   a disproportionate amount of the surplus produced was
   absorbed by the imperial exchequer, and there not used to
   support reproductive works, but stored as bullion or
   squandered on war and futile display. So the absolute
   increase of real wealth was not very great and purchasing
 _ power was still unduly restricted. The centralized imperial
_ system of Persia began to break up as the smaller and still
   more centralized empires of Mesopotamia and Egypt had
   done. In the next period it was absorbed in a European
_ Empire embodying an economic system evolved in Greece.
196          WHAT    HAPPENED      IN   HISTORY

   The possibilities opened up by iron tools, alphabetic
writing, and coined money were more fully realized in
communities that could exploit the cheapness of maritime
transport for commerce, or such as had emerged from bar-
barism directly into an Iron Age civilization unfettered by
too many legacies from the Bronze Age. The Phoenicians
and Etruscans enjoyed the first advantage, the Jews, the
Romans, and the Phrygians the second. Only the Greeks
benefited from both.
   The geography of their poor and mountainous homeland
drove the Greeks to the sea, and they inherited from the
Bronze Age traditions of Minoan-Mycenaean seamanship.
But Mycenaean civilization as an economy in which crafts
functioned had been obliterated. The Dorians and other
invading tribes were frankly barbarians with an appro-
priately communistic system of land tenure. The uncon-
quered provinces had sunk into illiteracy. The Bronze Age
hero’s castle as a nucleus for accumulating surplus wealth
had been dismantled. The city, in so far as it survived to
become the polis, differed from a village only in the presence
of professional potters, smiths, and perhaps a few other
craftsmen. It was almast self-sufficing, for trade had vir-
tually ceased. The multiplication of distinct styles of ceramic
decoration in each district, in contrast to the uniformity
prevailing all over the Aegean in the Mycenaean age, is
symptomatic of parochial isolation, which led also to the
multiplication of distinct dialects.
    Most of the ‘citizens’ must have lived by subsistence
 agriculture and fishing. To find land for its growing popula-
 tion each city tried to steal from its neighbours in neolithic
 fashion. The Dorians of Sparta (who had already won their
 own Laconia by force and reduced its Mycenaean occupants
 to serfdom) thus found allotments for three thousand young
 men at the expense of their Messenian neighbours, but only
 after a prolonged contest and organizing their whole life for
 war in truly totalitarian fashion.
    It was better to emigrate. Land-hungry peasants followed
 piratical raids by permanent settlements on the coasts first
                       THE EARLY IRON AGE                         197
    in Asia Minor, then round the Black Sea and in Thrace and
    Macedonia, in Italy, Eastern Sicily, and even in Cyrenaica
_ in North Africa. But trade and industry soon began to offer
  alternatives to piracy, emigration, and mercenary service in
  Oriental armies to the farmers’ superfluous younger sons.
  For the traditions of Minoan craftsmanship and navigation
  were not dead, and Phoenician visitors gave ocular demon-
  strations of the possibilities of commerce. The new overseas
    colonies, with their barbarian and agricultural hinterlands,
  guaranteed a market (p. 190).
     Even in the eighth century B.c. industry was getting so
_ crowded that the poet Hesiod sings of ‘potter competing
  with potter and carpenter with carpenter’. Early in the
  seventh century the mass production of cheap but remark-
    ably good commodities for the export market was started,
    first apparently in Aegina, which as an island was soon con-
    gested, and at Corinth, commanding seaways to east and
    west alike, shortly thereafter in other coastal cities, including
    Athens, and overseas in Ionia (Asia Minor), and later in the
    western and northern colonies. The best evidence for the
    extent and intensity of Greek trade is supplied, as in the
    Mycenaean age, by the distribution of pottery vases. These
    cheap articles of universal use, exported from various Greek
  cities — Aegina, Corinth, Athens, Rhodes — begin to turn up
  in quantities in graves and city ruins all round the Mediter-
  ranean and the Black Sea and far into the hinterland in
_ Asia Minor, Syria, and Egypt from 700 B.c. till, before 400,
  Greek (mainly Attic) vases reach right to the edge of the
  forest belt north of the South Russian steppes and to the
  Celts of south-western Germany and the Marne Valley in
  North-Eastern France.
     Of course these ceramic exports are only indices of the
  manufacture of and trade in other articles that may have
  been equally popular. And the vases contained the products
  of specialized agriculture, too. By the sixth century even the
  small peasants of Attica (the territory of Athens) could
  switch over from subsistence farming to the specialized
 cultivation of vines and olive trees; thanks to coined small



a
198          “WHAT HAPPENED IN HISTORY                =
change, not only the surplus collected on large estates, but
the exclusive produce of small gardens and vineyards went
to swell the volume of export trade.                           |
    As a consequence the Greek cities became increasingly
dependent on overseas trade for foodstuffs —- not only for
luxuries and supplements to the daily cereal diet, but even
for the basic necessity, corn itself; the latter was brought
from or through the colonial .cities in Macedonia and
Thrace and, above all, round the Black Sea. By 450 B.c.|
Athens provides perhaps the first example of a politicai
unit risking dependence for the staff of life upon distant lands
across the sea in order to concentrate on the production of
goods for which the country and its inhabitants were peculiar- |
ly fitted. By the fourth century it is estimated that the cereals
imported into Attica were four times the home production.
   The venture was successful. As a manufacturing and
mining country and a producer of olive oil Attica supported
three or four times the population she could have fed if
devoted to producing her own food supply; the latest|
estimate of the Athenian population in the fifth century is
of the order of 300,000. Of course Athens was in a rather|
exceptional position as owning at Laurion the richest silver|
mines in the eastern Mediterranean. But other classical|
cities of the Iron Age were immensely larger than their|
Bronze Age forerunners and could compare with the Bronze
Age cities of the Orient, though not with Iron Age capitals
like Nineveh. At Samos, one of the most prosperous cities of
the sixth century, the walls enclose an area of some four
hundred acres, not all built over. Miletus in Ionia as re-
planned in 480 B.c. covered two hundred and twenty-two
acres, of which fifty-two were parks and gardens. In Sicily the|
original colony of Selinus had been confined to an acropolis|
of twenty-one and a half acres, but extension in the sixth|
century gave it an area of over forty-eight acres. Megara |
Hyblaea in the same island straggled over one hundred and|
fifty acres. Syracuse was still larger. Moreover, every
Greek city enjoyed amenities foreign to the Orient — an agora
or market square used for public assemblies, government
                   ‘THE EARLY       IRON    AGE
                                                             7D
   offices, a theatre, a gymnasium, and a fountain supply-
  ing a constant stream of water to a basin. A large private
: house at Olynthos covered eighty-five feet by fifty-six feet,
_while a block fifty-six feet square contained a house and three
 shops, each measuring sixteen feet by fourteen and a half feet.
    The manufactures that helped to pay for the imported
_foodstuffs were, like the olives and wines, mainly produced
by small but independent working proprietors. Archacolo-
gists have identified from their trade-marks no less than a
 hundred different makers of Attic pottery in the sixth and
  fifth centuries. Nevertheless, they were producing en masse
  and for the market. Accordingly several workers might be
   ollected in a single workshop and different operations
“might be divided’ among them. In other words, classical
 Greece exhibits the germs of a factory system with special-
 ization of labour — but hardly on a larger scale than is
illustrated by the workshops of Egyptian mortuary estates
Miepicted in Old Kingdom tombs (p. 122), or attached to a
Sumerian temple (p. 95).
i In the ceramic industry, for example,a vase in Munich
shows a pottery employing four throwers, a painter, and a
Beicicesnain |in addition to the owner. At first the master
_potter was also the painter of the vases. Later vase-painting
became a distinct branch of the craft. At Athens the firm
esHischylos published works of three different painters who
each signed     their   own   products.    Conversely   we   know
 ‘painters who worked in three or even five different ‘fac-
tories’.. These artists’ pictures are now displayed in places of
honour in European and American museums as master-
pieces of classical beauty; judging by their names they were
in most cases either slaves or enfranchized slaves (freedmen)
‘andiin no case ‘citizens of Athens’. This factory system, of
course, was adopted in other industries too. At the end of
‘the fifth century the father of Demosthenes, the most
 amous Attic orator, owned a bedstead workshop, employ-
ing twenty slaves, and an arms factory with thirty-two. No
 ess than a hundred and twenty artisans worked in the
shield factory of a certain Kephalos.
200          WHAT    HAPPENED     IN HISTORY                  q
   Greek industry provided citizens with many amenities
and refinements — and the modern world with objects of |
great beauty. It secured for the cities supplies of food and
real wealth. But it did not in practice offer an effective and
expanding outlet for the overflowing rural population. In-
stead, as the cities grew rich from industry — and less
legitimate pursuits — they invested their wealth in slaves
and turned over to these craftsmanship and all sorts of
manual labour. The typical industrialist in a rich city of the
fifth century like Athens was no longer even a working
craftsman assisted by slaves, but a capitalist like Kephalos,
living on.the produce of his slaves.
    The number of slaves and their réle in production must
not be exaggerated. The number of Athenian slaves in the
fifth century has been put as high as 365,000, four times the |
citizen population. But Gomme’s recent estimate of 115,000
is more probable. Even that is a third of the total population —
on the same author’s calculations. Still there were plenty of -
free craftsmen. Free citizens as well as resident aliens and —
slaves worked on piecework contracts for the Athenian
State, at fluting temple columns, for instance. The silver |
mines at Laurion had been developed first by free labour, |
and there were still free miners in the fifth century, though |
 the majority were slaves. On the other hand, slaves held |
 official positions as policemen and in even more responsible
 posts. Nor did the competition of slave labour reduce wages
 to a subsistence level. On the contrary, working at a
 minimum wage of two obols a day an Athenian day
 labourer in the fifth century would earn in a hundred and
 fifty days enough to provide the subsistence minimum of
 food and clothing for the whole year. But a century later
 real wages fell catastrophically.                              {
    Still slavery did impede the expansion of industry. It !
 restricted the home market, since slave producers, receiving |t
little more than their bare keep, could not purchase their |
own products. It made industry appear degrading (ban- j
ausic). So even successful industrialists instead of putting
their profits back into industry invested them in the more
                    THE   EARLY     IRON   AGE                201

  reputable channels of farming and money-lending. On the
  other hand, the manufacturer in so far as he was producing
  not for local consumption but for a Mediterranean market
  was very much at the mercy of the merchant who bought
  his products and through his personal knowledge of foreign
  demands could make the larger profit. And just as in the
  Oriental Bronze Age (p. 158) merchants themselves as well
  as producers were liable to become indebted to financiers
  who collected the largest profits as interest.        ,
     Finally the Greek ‘industrial cities’ were not only cleft
  internally into contending classes, but were also opposed to
  one another as autonomous States continually dissipating
  real wealth in internecine wars that benefited only the
' slave-dealers. It is this state of perpetual internecine war-
  fare, itself duc partly to the class struggle (in as much as
 _ slavery prevented the productive employment of surplus
    population) and in turn aggravating it (by replenishing the
    slave-market), that appears in history as the occasion for the
   ruin of the classical economy and the collapse of the polity
    it supported.
       Barbarians, entering civilization in the Iron Age, even
    when they lacked the outlet of sea-borne commerce, were
    not inexorably doomed to servitude in great households.
_ Under its new money economy and with its cheap tools
    they could become small proprietors, especially where a
    diversity of soils favoured specialized farming more than did
    the alluvia of river valleys.
       In Italy the conquering Etruscan landlords had sup-
    ported, from their surplus luxury and armament industries,
   mining and reproductive engineering works. Their irriga-
    tion and drainage channels show what could be done with
    iron tools towards the reclamation of stony land. But the
   Romans, when they had expelled their Etruscan overlords,
 the Tarquins, found themselves civilized farmers, blessed
 with money, mortgages, and debt-slavery, but with no outlet
 in an exporting industry. The dangers of their situation are
 revealed by the historian Livy, who records famines in the
 yeats 490, 477, 459, 453, 440, 411, and 392 B.c.
   In the sequel they alan          two industries — usury and
war — even more successfully than the Assyrians. The bigger—
usurers became noble landlords and imitated the Phoeni- |
cians of Carthage in farming their large estates with slave —
labour which war provided. The evicted smallholders had —
the privilege of dying in glorious battles or, if they survived,
were granted new allotments in a colony (colonia) on con-
quered territory.
   In the barbarian fringe iron tools opened up virgin land
to cultivation and armed fresh war-bands for conquest.
From Central Europe indeed, even in the later Bronze Age,
cultivators, provided, by the innovations mentioned on
page 172, with cheaper bronze equipment, had been spread- ©ant
ing in all directions with the aid of ploughs and broadswords. —
At length mixed farming based on plough agriculture began —
to replace the regime of pastoralism combined with scratch      *

agriculture (hoe-cultivation), even in southern England; the -+2
old aristocracies perished about 1100 B.c. But trade, even to ¥ +
                                                                it

the Mediterranean world, was intensified and extended; i
amber, for instance, was traded southward through Upper i
Italy ante the old Bronze Age route (p. 171) cou
the Dark Age. Conversely the secret of iron working was |
diffused northward, mainly by the same route through A.
Upper Italy, to regions rich in iron ore and fuel too.
   North of the Alps, the first Iron Age, termed theHallstatt
period after a cemetery in Upper Austria, began about
750 B.c. In the British Isles, however, where local ores of
copper and tin kept the older metal cheap, a Bronze Age
lasted longer — in England till 500, in Scotland till 250,
in Ireland even later. With iron tools the farmer could clear
forested land and the population grew fast with the enlarged
food supply; Hallstatt cemeteries contain over 1,000 graves
in Upper Austria. Still, this very growth intensified the
competition for land (farther accentuated perhaps by a
general deterioration of the climate and therefore warfare).
   With their iron tools Hallstatt farmers fortified hilltops
with deep ditches and stupendous ramparts of timber and
stone or earth.to serve as tribal refuges. War-chiefs rose to



                                                            yn i
                                                          FP     yet




                     THE   EARLY   IRON   AGE              203

  affluence. Some acquired improved war chariots from the
 _Etruscans to consolidate their power like Mycenaean her-
_ oes; other tribes learned to ride from the Scythians and be-
 came knights. And so Greek traders from Marseilles found
  them. The wily Greeks found a key to unlock barbarian
  wealth — wine — the same charm as white traders use upon
  Negroes and Redskins. In Iron Age European settlements
  Greek wine-jars take the place of the Tsar’s vodka-flasks in
_a Siberian encampment or gin-bottles in an African kraal.
 _A later Greek writer, Diodorus, describes how cheaply the
  Celts sold the captives to get wine, ‘exchanging a servant
  for a drink’.
   But if the Greeks thus secured slaves — and of course tin,
-amber, and forest products too — they likewise armed and
incited fresh and fiercer war-bands to invade the civilized
world, In the Second Iron Age or La Téne period beginning
 after 450 B.c., Celtic warriors sacked Rome, ravaged North
 Greece, and carved themselves out a kingdom, Galatia, in
_ Asia Minor.
     In the meantime nomads, breeding horses both for milk-
  ing and for riding, spread all over the Eurasiatic steppes.
  They worried the Chou state in China, raided Asia Minor,
  and even threatened Assyria. In South Russia such nomads,
_as Scyths, subjugated a Bronze Age peasantry and estab-
  lished feudal kingdoms, collecting a large surplus of grain
  and other produce from their subjects. With this they sup-
ported blacksmiths, goldsmiths, armourers, and other native
  craftsmen; they purchased gold from Transylvania and the
  Altai, and forest products from beyond the steppes, but also
 Greek wines and manufactures from the colonies on the
 Black Sea coasts.
   The swiftly-moving nomads must have been important
agents in diffusing ideas between the Far East and the
‘West. They may have taught both the Assyrians and
Europeans the military value of cavalry. Perhaps they intro-
duced trousers to the Celts. But they no more succeeded
 in creating a civilized State than did their Hallstatt neigh-
_bours farther West.



aS
                            x

GOVERNMENT, RELIGION AND SCIENCE
         IN THE IRON AGE

Tue economic changes of the Iron Age naturally found
political expression. In the Orient indeed the Iron Age”
inherited the monarchical traditions of the Bronze Age.
Assyria, Babylonia, and Egypt were just continuations of
Bronze Age States and preserved divine kingship with
minor modifications, as they preserved so much of the old
economy. The new kingdoms like Israel, Lydia, Phrygia, and
Armenia (Urartu) tried to imitate them. The Medes and
Persians took over the imperial machines that. they had
conquered, though they improved them in details. The
Chous created a feudal monarchy rather like the Egyptian
Middle Kingdom.
   In Mediterranean Europe, on the contrary, theocratic _
monarchy on the Oriental pattern had never become firmly _
entrenched, even in Crete. The Mycenaean kinglets in |
Greece were ruined before the barbarian invaders arrived _
(p. 184). Admittedly the conquerors themselves had acknow-
ledged patriarchal monarchs and war-chiefs. But when
peace returned they, ruling over a small and poor territory, |
could not aspire to the pomp of an Oriental court, and could |
not maintain their positions above the richer landholders
among their vassals. For with iron weapons these were no
longer dependent on royal arsenals, but could arm them- |
selves and even equip pirate vessels to win as privateers |
booty for themselves and their clients. So monarchy with- |
ered away or was reduced to a purely ritual office in most
 Greek States and also in Italy and the Phoenician colonies.
    The typical Greek State and many Etruscan and Phoeni- |
cian States too were becoming republics before the end of |
 the Dark Age; magistrates elected for a year took over
 executive power, while general policy was determined by a
                                          awe       ee




         GOVERNMENT,        RELIGION    AND     SCIENCE         205
 ‘council’ of elders (senate) and an assembly of leading
 families or clans. When barbarian kinship organization had .
 broken down and a money economy had made land a
 commodity privately owned, the clan chief became the big
landlord; the machinery of government fell into the hands
 of an hereditary landed gentry or aristocracy (rule of the
 ‘best’). It was used to protect the creditor against the
 debtor and the landlord against the tenant and share-
 farmer with such effect that Attica was becoming de-
 populated and general strikes were provoked at Rome.
    But in commercial and industrial cities the landed aristo-
-cracy was forced, not without a struggle, to share its power
with a new plutocracy. Turned into cash the proceeds of
industry were no Jéss potent than rents from land, and the
‘profits of trade appeared no less honourable than pirates’
 booty. First perhaps in Ionia, then in Peninsular Greece, the
‘new merchant class successfully challenged the prerogatives
of the landed gentry. The qualifications for executive office,
‘seats on the council and assembly votes were reckoned in
‘money as well as, or instead of, in areas of land owned.
-Aristocracy gave place to oligarchy.
_ In their struggles the middle-class often sought allies
among the poor — small freeholders in debt, tenants and
share-farmers,   even   landless artisans and labourers.       The
development of tactics appropriate to Iron Age armament
had given even these military value. Victory no longer
depended upon the prowess of chariotry, the preserve of the
‘ich landowner, but on the valour of an infantry recruited
from yeoman farmers. Moreover, at sea — and in Greece
‘sea-power was decisive — even a labourer, too poor to afford
body armour, could serve his city in the fleet at an oar. In
fact he’ could claim with justice and some hope of success a
vote in the election of magistrates and in the legislative
‘assembly. The concession of such claims would transform
 the State into what the Greeks called democracy (rule by the
Brie).
 The conflict between the several classes often broke out
into open violence — stasis. It gave, moreover,          ambitious
individuals, generally men who had grown rich in com-
merce or manufacture or in the control of mines and
manipulation of currency, the chance to make themselves
dictators with the support of one of the contending parties.
Such were termed tyrants — a pre-Indo-European word |
appropriate to a despot of the Oriental type. And in fact,|
like these, tyrants did often protect the weak against op-
pression by the strong (p. 160), and expend much of their
private wealth on reproductive public works and the
beautification of their cities, and encourage the develop- |
ment of new industries. But they never became divine kings, |
and seldom founded dynasties. Most were expelled by oli-
garchic or democratic revolutions.                              ;
    In Athens — Athens means not only the city but the whole
of Attica, a district larger and more diversified than the
territory of most Greek cities — after the expulsion of the |
local tyrants, democracy was made completely effective.
Industry was put on an equal footing with commerce and |
farming. The old clans were deprived of political influence. |
Property qualifications for magistracies were abolished, and |
most offices were filled by lot instead of by election. Every/
citizen was expected to attend assemblies and to sit on|
juries. To make this effectively possible, assemblymen and
jurors as well as magistrates and councillors were paid, ash
 we should say, ‘for time lost’. Democracy was not only
 politically conceded but also economically established.
     It worked. In the latter part of the fifth century country-|
 men did in fact attend the assembly and vote on questianey
 of general policy. The leaders, who had at first been mainly)
 landed gentlemen, were now often craftsmen or merchants|
 ~a tanner, a lamp-maker, a manufacturer of musical instru-
 ments. The democratic State provided for its citizens free
 dramas and public buildings. The cost of these services, as
 also of the navy, was defrayed partly by the richer citizens
 no doubt under pressure from ‘public opinion’, but noth
 under the compulsion of confiscatory taxation. The con-
  tracts for public works were divided up into small items fo 1
 which any competent citizen or alien might compete.              |
          (      ,   i)


              GOVERNMENT,     RELIGION     AND   SCIENCE        207

         Fifth-century Athens thus provides the first adequately
    documented example of a thorough-going popular govern-
    ment. Its popular character must not be exaggerated. In the
    first place women had no place in public life. The wives of
    citizens were almost as completely secluded as women in
_ Mohammedan countries to-day, and at law were in a worse
  _ position than their Assyrian and Babylonian sisters. Second-
_ly, citizenship was now a hereditary privilege from which
    resident aliens were rigorously excluded. Yet on Gomme’s
_ estimate these included a tenth of the total population and
comprised most of the craftsmen and manufacturers.
    Finally industry was based on slavery; even the small
i farmer generally owned a slave or two, and the majority of
fthe employees in mines and factories and even the policemen
 _ were slaves. Though citizens did work on their farms, ply
    crafts, take on small contracts for public works, work as
    wage-labourers for fellow-citizens and even in mines, they
      ecured leisure for politics and culture largely at the expense
    of their wives, of aliens who had no share in the government,
    and of slaves who had no rights whatever.
     _ Moreover, the revenues of Athens which paid magistrates,
fyjurors, and assemblymen were swollen by two exceptional
sources. The richest silver-mines in the Aegean lay in Attica
K
    at Laurion; exploited mainly by slaves under local con-
tractors, they yielded a rich harvest of royalties to the State.
“Secondly, Athens was an imperial city, nourished by the
_tribute of subjects. It is true that the Athenian Empire began
  as a league of free cities against Persia. The tribute was a
    ‘substitute for the ships that the allies had originally
    equipped and manned for the common defence. But after
¢450 B.c. the allies felt themselves subjects and tried to rebel;
‘theimperial people were diverting some of their contribu-
 tions to the adornment of Athens and their own support.
   Thus the Athenian ‘people’ was in a sense only an
  cial large and diversified ruling class. The appear-
“ance of economic democracy had been achieved not so much
 by an even distribution of the wealth it produced as by
    using. the proceeds of exploitation to relieve the poverty of
208           WHAT    HAPPENED      IN   HISTORY

its poor sections. When external supplies were cut off by.
the loss of the empire, the conflict of poor and rich broke
out again in violence. In the sequel Athens lost her full
autonomy and returned to a moderate oligarchy with
foreign support in the late fourth century.
   Rome, on the contrary, illustrates the growth of oligarchy.
On the expulsion of the Etruscan kings, the organs of
government - the magistrates (consuls) and the council
(senate) — fell into the hands of an ‘aristocracy’, the patricians,
owing their power not only to landed wealth but also to the
status of their ancestors as military conquerors. Like the
Greek aristocrats, they used these organs against the plebs,
who included both artisans and small farmers and also
some members of defeated clans who had been enriched
by the money economy. In the sequel the plebs by ‘seces-
sion’ — a sort of general strike — won not only safeguards for
debtors and the right to intermarry with patricians and so
obtain a share in their estates, but also certain political
privileges — votes and magistracies.
   In practice only large landholders and to a minor degree
successful moneylenders profited by these concessions. The
small farmers were ruined by compulsory service in con-
tinuous wars, and so forced to relinquish their holdings to
their richer neighbours. Effective government and the inter-
pretation of law were monopolized by the Senate which
was now composed of ex-magistrates. While all citizens
were entitled to vote in the election of magistrates, the
voting was managed in such a way that the rich landowners
with their dependents could control the election, while the
expenses of office-holders were so heavy that only the rich
could support them. Finally religious offices were reserved |
to the old families and could be used to invalidate any incon- |
venient decisions by the people; for public business could |
be transacted only when hereditary officials had declared
the omens auspicious in accordance with a system of prog- |
nostication which they had learned from Mesopotamia
through the Etruscans. (The Etruscans, for instance, had |
introduced the Babylonian method of divination from the }
            GOVERNMENT,      RELIGION     AND    SCIENCE          209

livers of sacrificial victims which they had themselves
 learned in Asia Minor, probably through the Hittites.)
    Under Senatorial government Rome would rise in three
 centuries from a modest country township to an imperial
 capital whose military power dominated the whole Italian
 Peninsula, Sicily, Spain, North Africa, and even Greece.
 But the yeoman farmers whose arms had won this power
 would have lost their lands which would be absorbed by
 the great landowners and worked - scientifically — by
 slaves. The tribute from the conquered lands would enrich
only the Senatorial oligarchy and a new middle class of
 usurers,    tax-farmers,   and   contractors,   while   hordes     of
 captives would compete in the labour market with the dis-
 possessed peasantry and native artisans.
                                  *

  The social ferment of the Iron Age began to dissolve the
  established ideologies that corporations of anonymous
  priests and clerks had wrought into dogmatic theologies in
  the Bronze Age. Even in the old Oriental States as divine
  kings were dethroned and empires broken up by barbarians,
  conceptions of an empire of gods in imitation of earthly
  empires must have been shaken. Though the Babylonian
  priesthoods celebrated the traditional cults more zealously
- than ever, the old Sumerian idea of Fate (p. 136) seems to
   have come to the fore again.
      Still more among the new barbarian peoples in contact
   with civilization and under the corrosive influence of money
   did ideologies reflecting the old tribal structure of society
   disintegrate.
     Cheap iron tools and weapons had offered release from
  complete dependence on the group to individuals who were
   neither divine kings nor war-chiefs, and were dissolving
   society into units as discrete as the coins into which social
   wealth was now divisible. Alphabetic writing opened the
   doors of learning to all without initiation through the con-
   servative discipline of priestly seminaries or the schools of
   totalitarian States. The task of reconstructing society’s
              WHAT    HAPPENED      IN HISTORY
spiritual equipment therefore fell on individuals unfettered
by dependence on perpetual corporations with their con-
servative traditions.
   All over the civilized world, but above all in societies that
 had recently emerged from tribal barbarism, men were
 venturing to seek new solutions to the questions posed by
 the old order’s dissolution, and to seek them no longer
 through traditional channels and established institutions.
 Prophets dared to receive direct revelations from the deity —
 that collective soul substance of barbarians that had com-
 prehended and transcended all the members ofa tribe.
 Philosophers appealed to the ‘reason’ innate as they sup-
 posed in all their fellows — which also is in a sense just the
 collective experience of society transmitted and interpreted in
 accordance with commonly-accepted principles. Particularly
 in the sixth century did pioneers who dared to receive personal
 ‘revelations’ find popular support, or patrons on which to
found new religions; bold reasoners found sufficient numbers
reasoning like themselves to form schools of philosophy. ''
    In China, Lao-tse and Confucius are supposed then to '
have taught a rational morality, founding Taoism and|
Confucianism in the sixth century. In India, Gautama the
Buddha reputedly ‘attained enlightenment’ shortly before||
500 B.c. He was certainly not a member of the priestly ||
caste, the Brahmans, but allegedly the son of a small raja. :
He preached salvation as escape from the wheel of births
and deaths into an indefinable state of nirvana. The doctrine
of the wheel, the theory of the transmigration and rein-
carnation of souls, he took from the Brahmanic theologians.
But the means of escape were no longer sacrificial bribes|
and magical ceremonies, but moral virtues, notably
obedience to parents, respect for all living creatures, and
truthfulness. By the conversion of the Maurya emperor,
Asoka (273-231 B.c.), Buddhism was to become a rich
established church with all the trappings of sacerdotalism
and magic ritual. But it did bring forth monasticism, and|
its missionary zeal was one of the most potent instruments |
in diffusing civilization in Central and Eastern Asia.           |
             GOVERNMENT,      RELIGION    AND SCIENCE         211
       Zarathushtra (Zoroaster), who lived somewhere in
     Eastern Iran some time between   1000 and 500 B.c., believed
     himself called by Ahura Wasda (Ormuzd) to purify
     Iranian religion from polytheism, devil-worship, magic, and
_ritualism. So the old tribal gods (the devds of the Vedic
     Aryans) become in his hymns evil spirits, the commercial
     sacrifice is condemned, the will of the one god sustains the
     cosmic order — the idea of cosmic order itself may be the
     fruit of the Babylonians’ astronomical observations (reveal-
     ing uniformities in the movements of the heavenly bodies)
     fertilized by their notions of society as governed by known
_ and established laws that had been current since the time of
      Hammurabi. As champion of ‘the cattle-tending husband-
      man’ against the’ nomads, Zarathushtra may be said to
    _ appeal to the Iranian peasant masses. But his success was
      apparently due to the patronage of a great landed noble-
      man, Vistaspa, and his teachings became the creed of a rich
      State church with a new priesthood and fresh ritualism, if
     not under Darius, at least under the Arsacid kings after
      50 B.C.
         The Hebrew prophets again — Amos, Hosea, Isaiah, and
      their successors — relied on revelations. But they moralized
  the barbaric tribal god of the patriarchs, Yahveh, and
  denounced polytheism, idolatry, and magic. Their Yahveh
_ had no need of the flesh of goats and the blood of bulls
  offered as bribes. ‘What doth the Lord require of thee but
  to do justly and to love mercy and to walk humbly with thy
  God?’ At the same time the prophetic movement reflects
  a reaction of a free peasantry against the economic and
  political absolutism of kings who from Solomon on were
  trying to ape Egyptian and Assyrian monarchs.
     The prophets thus spiritualized old gods and moralized
_ existing cults. The deity became personal, but ina spiritual
  sense incapable of being confined in carvings of wood and
  stone, however skilful and ornate. He is no longer just one
     among   many   gods with whom     he contends on behalf of,
     and with the aid of, his tribal worshippers, like Amon-Ra,
i    Marduk, or the old Yahveh. He is exclusive. God of gods;



ety
 212          WHAT     HAPPENED      IN   HISTORY

 potentially at least he is God of all men, not only of Assyrians |
 or Egyptians (p. 161).
    An element of coun            magic, indeed, survives, in as
 much as even the prophetic religions promise the devotee
 rewards in this world or the next. But these rewards are no
 longer to be obtained by compulsive magical rites; the
 deities’ favour is not to be wooed by draughts of beer as in
 Sumer, or of intoxicating soma as in Vedic India. The way
 to salvation is to act morally ~ to do justly, to speak the
truth, in general to behave towards one’s fellows in the way
most societies, even barbarian and Bronze Age, recognize
as right.                                                        ;
    But of course any doctrine that promises salvation as the
reward for righteousness must also threaten damnation as.
the penalty for evil doing. In the inspired vision of the
prophet the negative sanction is overshadowed by the
positive message. But as the religions become more and
more institutionalized and sacerdotalized, the sufferings of
the damned are dwelt on with increasing gusto. So, like the
Egyptian papyri of the Second Millennium (p. 157), later
Buddhist and Zoroastrian scriptures and paintings give
lively descriptions of hells and their torments.
   Finally, as the one God is now maker of all men, mankind
becomes potentially one society. It is no longer to his fellow-
tribesmen or his fellow-citizens alone that the God-fearing
righteous man owes justice, truth, and mercy, but, if not to
all men, at least to a community of the faithful that should
embrace all men, irrespective of race or political allegiance.
‘These fruitful ideas are certainly implicit in the teachings of
Gautama, Zarathushtra, Amos and the rest. They became
explicit in Buddhism, Mithraism, and other religions after
300 B.c. The idea of humanity as a single society, all of
whose members owe one another common moral obliga-
tions, is an ideological counterpart of an international
economy based on the interchange of commodities between
all its parts, such as became effectively manifest in the
second phase of the Iron Age.
   In Greece during the Bronze Age minstrels who had been
              GOVERNMENT,        RELIGION    AND    SCIENCE      213

      welcome at the heroes’ courts, instead of priestly corpora-
      tions, had defined a theology depicting the gods in the like-
      ness of their warlike patrons, acknowledging the suzerainty
      of Olympian Zeus as did the turbulent war-lords that of the
      King of Mycenae. In the Iron Age the appropriate com-
      mercial sacrifices or bribes were still publicly offered to the
      Olympian gods, and temples were still built for them by the
      cities. But when the Mycenaean castles were vacated by
 _ their mortal     models,   the Homeric    “gods left the earthly
      Olympus and vanished into the sky. Nature, dispeopled of
      gods, was left free for Science’ on the one hand, for the
      vaguer magic forces ‘controlled’ by the old peasantry and
      the new barbarian tribes on the other.
         From the old magic rites were begotten ‘mystery relig-
      ions’ — the cult of Dionysus or Bacchus, the god of wine,
      imported from barbaric Thrace, Orphism, the Eleusinian
      mysteries — and mythical philosophies, including those of
      Pythagoras and Plato, all appealing to individuals as such
      rather than to society as an organized whole. Mystery
      religions provided an ideology for the masses — the dis-
      possessed peasantry, the miners and even the slaves —
      promising them salvation, spiritual balm for their material
      and economic woes. Bacchus offered union with the deity
      through divine frenzy, ‘Orpheus,’ like Buddha, release from
      the wheel of births and deaths (p. 210), Eleusis immortality.
      But the paths to salvation were mainly magic rituals —
      initiations and purifications taken straight from totemism —
      dramatic fertility rites of rustic barbarians such as had
      procured immortality first to pharaoh and then to all
      Egyptians who could pay for it (pp. 137, 157). Naturally
      the impure, the uninitiated, were threatened with hell. The
      Orphics contrasted gloomy Tartarus with the Elysian fields
      to which the initiates travelled after death. By the fifth
      century the fear of hell was a potent factor in Greek life,
      though scarcely alluded to in classical literature. From the
      Italian and Sicilian colonies the doctrine spread to the
      Etruscans, whose tombs are sometimes adorned with pic-
      tures of the tortures of the damned. But the aim of the



“—s
  214          WHAT HAPPENED IN HISTORY
 mysteries was not ‘to teach their votaries a body of dogmas,
 but to put them in a certain emotional state’.               4,
    The philosophical mystics for their part appealed to a
 more sophisticated clientéle with a subtler magic. Pythag-
 oras of Samos (flourished about 530 B.c.), for instance, for
 escape from the wheel of life prescribed, in addition to tabus
 and rites taken straight from barbarism, civilized sciences
 and art; his disciples formed brotherhoods that are more
 akin to barbarians’ secret societies and the Orphics’ church
 than to scientific schools; the same is true of the Brahmanic
 philosophical schools of Iron Age India. But the Pythag-
 oreans, regarding the contemplative life as the greatest
 purification, incidentally studied arithmetic, geometry, and
   astronomy as a means thereto, not without practical results.
   In the meantime other philosophies, originating in Ionia,
  had been leading more directly to Natural Science.
     The founders of what is termed Natural Philosophy—
_ Thales (?625-540) and Anaximander (2600-530) of Miletus,
  Herakleitos (?550-475) of Ephesus— were in fact primarily
  concerned with the social questions that commercial con- |
  tact with the Orient and the new currency had made urgent |
  in Ionia. At first at least philosophers were no more con-
  cerned with an abstract ‘nature’ unrelated to human society _
  than the theologians of Sumer and Egypt. ‘The principal.
  object of Greek speculation,’ according to Cornford, ‘is not
  external nature as revealed by the senses, but a representa- |
  tion of reality as a supra-sensible extended substance which
  is at first both alive and divine.’ ... ‘Its aim is to create a
  new tool, a conceptual model of reality,’ just as the aim of
  the Sumerian lists may have been (p. 136). The model was,
  as in Mesopotamia, provided by the order of society, but
  of a society emerging into Iron Age, not Bronze Age, |
  civilization. The Greek name for the order of nature, cosmos,
  is derived from a root that in the earlier Greek of Homer |
  is applied to the marshalling of clans for war and the
  settlement of tribes on the land.
     The Iron Age, in fact, presented the problems of society
  n a new light, and the agents and the instruments for their
  olution were different. The morality and the cosmogony
of the Bronze Age Orient had been the collective specula-
‘tions of corporations of priests or temple households;
‘Brahmanical philosophy in India, too, was elucubrated by
a priestly caste. Greek philosophy of the Iron Age was the
personal speculation of individuals emancipated from com-
plete dependence on the group by iron tools and coined
 money.
    In Iron Age philosophy — in India as well as in Gre -
the problem of the individual and society, the One and the
Many, occupied the forefront. It had, indeed, begun to
appear on the horizon when the first magician emerged
from the horde in the Old Stone Age, and: was clearly
‘discernible in the Bronze Age when divine kings and war-
lords acquired individuality and ‘souls’. But it fully dawned
only in the Iron Age society of pirate captains, merchant
shipowners, currency jugglers, and tyrants.
_ So Bronze Age speculation had taken Nature as a whole,
_as society was a whole, manifestly united in dependence on
the divine monarch, and as the temple estate was a whole
collectively exploited in the interests of the household and
its divine head. But Iron Age philosophy broke nature too
into parts, as the community was’ divided into individuals
and the city’s territory into private holdings and estates. In
 Ionia Anaximander already explained qualitative differ-
 ences as due to ‘thickening and thinning’, i.e. as quantita-
tive like the differences in political status based on the
property qualifications of citizens (p. 205). Finally between
500 and 420 B.c. the atomists, Leukippos (of Miletus) and
Demokritos (of Abdera), set out to resolve external nature
‘into discrete indivisible bits or particles (atoms), just as the
“new currency resolved wealth into discontinuous particles —
coins, Thus they created the atomic theory that proved
‘such a superb instrument of discovery in modern chemistry
_and physics.
_   What was really distinctive in Greek speculation was that
216          WHAT    HAPPENED     IN HISTORY                5
the philosophers    appealed again and again not to the
wisdom of the ancients or divine revelations, but to facts of
common experience, and the practice of the crafts. (Their
Hindu contemporaries were hampered by inheriting from
the Bronze Age the sacred hymns of the Veda (p. 168) and
ritual manuals verbally remembered.)
   The natural philosphers diligently observed natural
phenomena and systematized their observations. Anaxi-
mander outlined a vague idea of organic evolution based
upon accurate observations of the habits of fishes and
animals. Xenophanes (of Colophon, ? 565-475 B.c.) ob-
served and correctly explained fossils. Moreover, they
applied measurement to their observations, if only to a
limited extent, more than their Bronze Age precursors; did
not coins enable Greek society to measure even rank more
accurately than the unminted money of the Bronze Age? |
By measuring the chords of the lyre Pythagoras (or
one of his disciples) not only laid the foundation for the |
theory of music, but also was led to discover the mathe- |
matical properties of what we call harmonic progressions. |
   But the Greek philosophers did not have to rely exclu- |
sively on their own observations; they were admittedly
acquainted with the genuine achievements of Babylonian |
and Egyptian science. In arithmetic, geometry, and astron-
omy Greek science built on foundations laid on the Nile |
and the Euphrates. Thales, the first natural philosopher,
was reputedly halfa Phoenician, and is said to have studied
geometry in Egypt. Pythagoras too is reputed to hae
learned his geometry in Egypt.
   He and his disciples certainly pursued the study of
mathematics, albeit often for mystical and magical ends.
Pythagoras seems to have thought that the ‘nature’ of |
things was somehow expressible in numbers, much as the |
Sumerians may have supposed that a thing’s ‘nature’ could
be grasped with its name; after all, in contemporary Greece
a man’s function in society and so his ‘nature’ was officially
determined by the number of coins he owned. At the same
time the constant and uniform properties of number
                           —_—        -2
              reo   Te           77
      8   —   ‘       Yr
     o—                                              :           ©


              GOVERNMENT,                   RELIGION      AND   SCIENCE        217

  appeared to reveal a permanent and changeless Order in
   which men might find refuge at a time when the structure
_ of society was manifestly in a state of flux.
      In any case, many interesting and curious properties of
   numbers were discovered. These discoveries seemed to
   reveal magical properties, and the numbers possessing them
   were given fanciful names like ‘amicable numbers’ by the
   Pythagoreans. But even these, to say nothing of progressions
 and the like, have turned out to be helpful in the modern
 theory of probability.
    But the Greeks could not advance very far in pure arith-
metic owing to clumsy systems of numeral notation. For
 the practical business of accountancy they used the count-
 ing-board, or abacus — a device probably invented by the
 Phoenicians and still employed in Russia and Oriental
 countries to-day. But neither the abacus nor the notations
 devised to record results obtained thereon lend themselves
 to higher mathematics;                    for fractions, for instance, the Greeks
  were confined to aliquot parts like the Egyptians (p. 119).
  They overcame the obstacle by using geometry. And geo-
  metry, like pure number, seemed to reveal a permanent
  and changeless order.
      The Greek geometers generalized truths familiar to their
  Oriental predecessors. For instance, Pythagoras may have
_ learned from Egyptian architects (the ancient writers speak
  of cord-knotters, harpedonaptat) the trick of constructing an
  accurate right-angle with the aid of a cord divided in the
  proportions 3, 4 and 5, or 5, 12 and 13; it was demonstrably
  used by the Brahmans of India for constructing altars a
  little, if at all, later. With this would go the converse fact,
  familiar to the Babylonians in the Second Millennium (p.
  179), that in a right-angled triangle whose sides are in these
  proportions the square on the side opposite the right angle
  (the hypotenuse) is equal to the sum of the squares on the
  two sides containing it. Then Pythagoras is credited with
  having established by the sort of construction still used in
  school geometries that in any right-angled triangle the
  square on the hypotenuse is equal to the sum of the squares




Pe
 probably erroneously, the Theorem of Pythagoras.        .   a
   In fact the Greek geometers by ‘pure geometry’, i.e. by
laboratory experiments, by tracing out figures in the sand
or with strings, and by cutting up globes and cubes and
cones, did find out constant properties common to any
triangle or other figure that they could construct. (The
‘proof’ ofa theorem begins, e.g. ‘Let ABC be any triangle...’
and then directs you to try out certain constructions'on it.)
Hence they inferred that these properties held good of all
triangles or other figures. So by induction they generalized
observations, many of which must have been familiar to
Babylonians and Egyptians, and discovered new geometri-
cal properties of the same kind.                              q
    With their aid the Greeks were enabled to obtain approxi- _
 mations to surds and other irrationals (e.g. 4/2) and to solve |
 quadratic equations that had defeated the Babylonians.
 They found, too, that the stars did appear to trace out in
 the sky figures that men could describe in the laboratory |
with compasses, and that applications of geometrical rules
would help them to locate planets in the heavens and ships _
at sea and to divide sundials more accurately. With the aid
of geometrical figures engineers could plan a tunnel to
convey water a third of a mile under a mountain, as at |
Samos in the sixth century.                                   -,
    It did not therefore matter so much that the foregoing
discoveries had been made in pursuit of magical and
mystical ends. Yet the baleful effects of their origin still
persist. The Greek philosophers thought that the ‘universal’
truths of mathematics revealed to them an immutable and
eternal reality behind the changing panorama of historical
appearances, that geometry would provide a model of
timeless Nature as a Sumerian temple or Egyptian pyramid
had. Some, indeed, like Plato, inferred that the truths of
geometry were not inferences from experimental facts -
from figures that men drew and constructed — but ‘mem-
ories’ of the properties of ideal triangles apprehended by
reason. Upon this confusion was based the theory of a |
         GOVERNMENT,       RELIGION     AND   SCIENCE      219

  uprasensible eternal world of ideas independent of obser-
vation that has haunted idealist philosophy ever since. But
even experimental scientists to-day, despite Einstein and
 Darwin, seem loath to abandon the search for an eternal
 changeless unhistorical reality of which pure mathematics
 could be the model.
    Astronomy the Greeks, like other farmers, had to study
 first for the regulation of the calendar. Even before 700 B.c.
 Hesiod’s poem, Works and Days, illustrates the role of the
‘stars as guides to agricultural operations and the early
 transmission in literary form of this rural lore. But the
 Greeks were perforce a sea-faring people. Lacking a corn-
pass, they had to rely on the stars to steer by. They had
 therefore a very practical incentive to observe them >
accurately and, moreover, opportunities to note phenomena
 that a priest, permanently stationed in the same aE
 would lack.
   For instance, a sailor would notice that as he sailed boule
the pole star came nearer and nearer the horizon. By
 measuring its altitude (as an angle) he could get a good idea
as to how far he had progressed on his voyage across the
Mediterranean.
    In their study of the stars the Greeks doubtless benefited
also from the results collected by the Babylonians and
Egyptians. By the Second Millennium the Babylonians had
compiled a great catalogue of stars. Copies of it found a
 place in the Royal Library of the Hittite capital in Central
Asia Minor, so that knowledge of its contents had spread
 well towards the Aegean before 1200 B.c. After 1100 the list
 had been revised in Assyria, while after 800 the Babylonian
 texts begin to give the stars’ positions and heliacal settings
on a system like our. ‘equatorial co-ordinates’. Moreover,
 from 747 B.c. the Babylonians had begun to reckon years
 from a fixed conventional point, as we do ‘from the Birth
 of Christ’, and to date events from the ‘Era of Nabonassar’.
 Hitherto celestial as well as terrestrial events had been
 dated at best to ‘the nth year of King N’.
_ With the data thus collected the Babylonian astronomers
220           WHAT     HAPPENED      IN   HISTORY

were able to calculate in advance the relative positions of
the sun and moon and of the planets; in other words, they
could predict when eclipses were to be expected. Now
Thales is ‘reported (by a tradition going back to Herodotus
in the early fifth century) to have foretold an eclipse of the
sun, almost certainly that of 585 .c. His prediction cannot
have been based on his own observations alone, so he presum-
ably based his deductions on data derived from Mesopotamia.
   His success does not, of course, mean that either he or his
teachers understood the ‘cause’ of eclipses. That was clearly
stated by Anaxagoras (of Klazomenai, ? 500-430 B.c.) a
century later. The explanation seems to have been due to a
purely Greek development in which the new geometry was
bodily applied to accurately measured and recorded obser- :
vations. Some Greeks had freed themselves from traditional
superstitions sufficiently to treat the heavenly bodies as
objects to be measured and weighed instead of (or as well
as) the vehicles of a deity or symbols of a supernatural |
Fate. Nevertheless, about 450 B.c. Anaxagoras was con-
demned for impiety in democratic Athens, and in 413 an
Athenian general postponed fora montha vital military opera-
tion because an eclipse of the moon occurred as an evil omen! |
   At the same time scientific astronomy was preparing the|
way for a mathematical geography. With the immense|
enlargement of the civilized world and the intensification|
of intercourse throughout it, men of the Iron Age needed
more than ever to know about the planet on which they
lived.   Conquerors,   generals,   merchants,   and   mariners
wanted to know not only what sort of people and lands
they might conquer or trade with, but also how to teach|
them and how far off they were. Assyrian and Pera
officials drew up itineraries giving roads and distances. |
The pharaohs of a temporarily revived Egypt sent out|
exploring expeditions: one crew rounded the Cape of Good
Hope and were astonished to find the sun on the right as|
they sailed westward ~ a report that the credulous Herodo-
tus refused to believe !
   Much of this information thus gathered remained locked
:            GOVERNMENT,      RELIGION    AND   SCIENCE       221
     up in the confidential archives of Oriental monarchies or
   as the trade secrets of private merchants or individual cities.
 _ But the new class of travelling Greek philosophers picked up
   scraps here and there and added to them their own obser-
   vations. They could sell such knowledge to a wide circle
   anxious to take advantage of the new facilities for travel,
   business, or even pleasure. Anaximander is reported to have
_made the first Greek map. Some even wrote down their
_ information for the benefit of the new reading public. The
 _ results were both descriptive works and also scientific trea-
_ tises in which the foundations of a mathematical geography
_ were laid with the aid of astronomy and spherical geometry.
_ The Iron Age improvements in the applied sciences due
_ to the cheaper metal tools and the need of new classes are
_ too numerous even to mention. They did not as yet involve
_new methods of transmission. Despite the alphabet, craft-
_ lore in general was not committed to writing and so did
   not become fully scientific. Athenian potters’ traditions, for
   example, still taught them to fear the demon who cracked
_ pots in the kiln and to mount on it a Gorgon mask to scare
   him away! The illiteracy of craftsmanship (craftsmen could
   sign their names all right) is presumably due to old-fashioned
   contempt for the mechanic arts. The exceptions prove this.
      The craft-lore of the medicine-man, like that of the
   magician, had been committed to writing even in the
   Bronze Age and continued to be transmitted in the Iron
   Age. In the Oriental schools this scholastic tradition all too
   faithfully preserved the magical theory of disease as due to
   possession by evil spirits. The Assyrians added only a few
   new spells and drugs for their expulsion’    to the Sumerian
   and Babylonian recipes. In Greece, too, there were healing
   gods, like Aesculapius, who wrought miraculous cures in
   their temples. But outside the temples there grew up a
 school of private physicians who discarded the magical
  ‘paraphernalia of the medicine man, but not his drugs, and
 _relied on manipulative and chemical remedies.
     Judged by the extant writings beginning with Hippocrates
     (of Chios, ? 460-350 B.c.), the Greek medical tradition was

if



fis
222          WHAT     HAPPENED      IN   HISTORY

characterized by freedom from demonology and by an i
accuracy and objectivity in the observation and recording
of symptoms quite foreign to Assyria and Egypt. Even 7
before 500 B.c. Greek medicine had gained such a reputa-_
tion that Darius summoned to his court a Greek physiclagy
who cured his queen.
   Agriculture again was a reputable pursuit in the Iron
Age, and treatises on scientific farming were written both
in Greek and in Phoenician. Even before 700 B.c. Hesiod
was putting into verse a farmer’s almanac replete with
maxims for the application of practical botany, geology, and _
zoology. Thereafter migration overseas and the switch over
to specialized farming broke down the routines of agri-
culture and made experimentation compulsory. A Phoe-
nician or a Greek, transplanted to Italy or North Africa,
could hardly help noticing the effect of the new soils and
climates upon the seeds, cuttings and young animals he
took with him. Experience showed that a vine-stock from
Lebanon produced different grapes on the slopes of Vesu- —
vius or the plain of the Rhone valley. Comparison and selec- _
tion of soils and stock were inevitable. Moreover, new plants”
and animals were introduced, as well as new methods, as part |
of the general diffusion already described on page 197; thus.
the Persians introduced lucerne into the Mediterranean
when they invaded Greece in 490. Conversely they them-
selves learned to cultivate rice after their conquest of India.
   The collation of such experimental results and the forma-
tion ofa written, and therefore abstract and fluid, tradition of
agricultural science may have been prompted by a demand
for manuals on the part of large landowners; handbooks for
“gentlemen farmers’ existed among the Carthaginians.
   But with the data collected for practical purposes by
farmers and physicians the new leisured class of natural
philosophers in Greece were enabled to lay the foundations
for modern descriptive botany, geology, and zoology. Their
work differs from the Sumerian lists firstly in containing
accurate descriptions instead of bare names, and secondly
in drawing upon the observations of a much wider circle



                                                                   E
                                                                   se
          GOVERNMENT,        RELIGION    AND   SCIENCE        223
_ of educated persons. Their classifications too are more
  ‘scientific’ in that they are no longer based upon similarities
  of conventional names or written signs but upon real and
  often significant similarities in the actual plants, minerals,
      or animals classified. The results can best be judged from
      the lectures of Aristotle who died in 321 B.c.
         In Aristotle culminate in a sense all the philosophical
     -and scientific tendencies of the Classical period. A man of
      comprehensive interests and encyclopaedic erudition, he
  _ lectured on the theory of knowledge, logic, ethics, politics,
      psychology, mathematics, astronomy, geography, botany,
 _ zoology, anatomy, chemistry, physics, and meteorology.
      The vast Aristotelian corpus consists of notes of these
      lectures, edited by the author or his pupils, and treatises
      of disputed authenticity. As a pioneer in formal logic,
   _ positive psychology, comparative anatomy, and systematic
      biology his contributions to later science are invaluable.
         Inevitably Aristotle went wrong — sometimes stupidly
      wrong — for instance, in claiming that the heavenly bodies
      are incorruptible and that the sun goes round the earth,
     in denying the sexuality of plants, accepting spontaneous
     generation and locating the intelligence in the heart. It is
     his misfortune and ours that his authority grew so great
_ among his Hellenistic successors that his theories were
_ sometimes preferred to observed facts. By the Middle Ages
     Aristotle’s system with all its blemishes was virtually in-
     corporated in the sacred canon of the Catholic Church.
= The       schoolmen appealed to Aristotle rather than to ex-
     perience; the Church condemned the heliocentric system
_ of Copernicus as contrary to Aristotle’s teaching that the
_Church had accepted. A champion of oligarchy and a
   defender of slavery, Aristotle appears as the mouthpiece
 _ of the class from which his patrons and pupils were recruited
   and as the victim of the contradictions in the economy of the
 _ City-state which were all too apparent by his day.
      Compared with the stagnation of science in the Bronze
   Age, in spite of the endowment of research institutes in
_ temples, the progress achieved in Greece between 600 and

’
 224          WHAT    HAPPENED      IN   HISTORY                  ¥
                                                                  e)
                                                                  i
450 B.G. is amazing. It was moreover due not to clerks and
priests assured of leisure by rich States or Churches, but
to private individuals living either by their own industry
or on the generosity of patrons and disciples.
   Nevertheless, at least after 500, this superb effort of pure
science did not, as the comparable efflorescence of modern
theory did after a.p. 1600, find expression in technical
inventions that not only enriched human life and guaran-
teed the workable truth of the theories but also provided
instruments for fresh discoveries. On the contrary, except in
the domains of agriculture and military engineering,
natural philosophy became increasingly divorced from
practical life as the Greek cities grew richer, wealth more
 concentrated and slaves more numerous.
     The wealthy slave-owners and landlords wis welcomed
 to their banquets the natural philosophers and on whose
 patronage the latter had to rely, did not want labour-saving
 devices and despised craftsmanship as degrading (banausic)
 and servile. The pursuit of abstract knowledge for its own
 sake or as the ‘greatest purification’ became a consolation |
 to the rich slave-owner who was relieved by his slaves of |
 any need to exert himself productively and was yet jostled
out of his employment in running the State by the vulgar
 mechanics in the Athenian assembly or by the equally |
 vulgar tyrants of other cities.
     Then the private merchant, loyal citizen of one of several
 competing States, would hesitate to disclose the geographi-
 cal and astronomical observations he had made to any
 cosmopolitan scientist who might betray his secrets to
 enemies and rivals. Moreover, slavery made a real science
 of man and so scientific history impossible. To justify the
 institution Aristotle propounded the doctrine of the ‘natural
 slave’. It means in effect that a man of any race except the
 Greek found the highest expression of which he was capable
 in serving the kindly Greek as an intelligent instrument.
 The Semites and Egyptians who had created civilization,
 the Celts, the Teutons, and the Jews who were to recreate
 it, were thus summarily labelled and dismissed.
                                       ae   een   ean   eee




          GOVERNMENT,         RELIGION      AND   SCIENCE       225

         Finally Farrington has argued that the freedom of
 _ thought and teaching was deliberately restricted in the
 _ interests of the propertied classes and by their influence in
      the State. Certainly the criticisms of the natural philo-
      sophers assailed the religious and superstitious pillars of the
  _ established order. That could be tolerated while the eco-
      nomic system was expanding so that an absolute increase
 _ in wealth hid the inequalities in its distribution. But after
  _ 450 the market was no longer expanding at the old rate;
_ the profits of usury and slave-holding on the one hand, the
     _ruination of small farmers through war and the congestion
   _ of the labour market on the other, were revealing nakedly
      the contrast between rich and poor. Disturbances occurred
      already in several cities. In the fourth century demands for
      the abolition of debts and a redivision of the land became
      widespread and chronic.
         In these circumstances philosophers of the right recog-
      nized the value of superstitious supports for the existing
 : order. Plato frankly recommends teaching the citizens ‘a
   noble lie’. Later Polybius commends the Roman aristocracy
 _ for having done so successfully. ‘The foundation of Roman
      greatness is,’ he asserts, ‘superstition. This has been intro-
      duced into every aspect of their private and public life with
      every artifice to awe the imagination. For the masses in
      every State are unstable, full of lawless desires, irrational
 _ anger, and violent passion. All that can be done is to hold
_ them in check by fears of the unseen and similar shams.
      It was not for nothing but of deliberate design that the
      men of yore introduced to the masses notions about God
      and views on the after-life.’ And Farrington can in fact point
      to the condemnation of Anaxagoras for ‘impiety’ and later of
      Socrates for ‘corrupting the youth’ as concrete examples of
      intolerance of criticism of precisely those notions and views.
   _     In any case the development of Classical Greek science
      was in fact limited by the peculiar social and economic
- conditions of the classical polis. The same limitations may
     have affected Classical art.
         Throughout the Bronze Age the conventions established
 226          WHAT    HAPPENED     IN HISTORY

 as canons in che Third Millennium (p. 139) had remained
 fixed; only new technical processes had been introduced
 and styles had been modified. Even in the Iron Age Orient ;
 the venerable and sanctified traditions of the past dominated—
 the taste of customers drawn from essentially the same social —
 classes, albeit of different ‘races’, as before, though new —
 media — glazed bricks and tiles, for instance — might now —
 be effectively employed.                                     {
   The Greeks, abandoning the stiff barbaric styles of thed ;
Geometric age about 700 B.c., began to copy the approved i
models of Oriental art as Ee           as the Phoenicians 4
had done in the Second Millennium, but always preserving ©
something of that balance and restraint that distinguished—
the Geometric style. And then they broke away from the
 old conventions, as the Classical economy expanded, and |
 with its expansion the market constituted by appreciative |
 buyers deepened.
    The sculptor and the painter were no longer dependent”
 on the patronage of priestly corporations and despots’—
 courts. Their most profitable and most honourable duty—
 was therefore no longer to turn out idols of a pattern
 approved by sacerdotal tradition as divinely sanctioned and—
magically effective. Portraits of divine kings, stillfulfilling
 a magic function (p. 138) no longer set a standard for the |
 delineation of the human form. Sculptors were commis- —
sioned by cities or private individuals to execute statues of—
athletes and warriors or of deceased relatives none of
whom made any pretence at divinity any more than the —
statues themselves worked magic. They were thus free to
abandon sacred conventions and depict what they saw.
And incidentally the frequent gymnastic contests gave them
opportunities of seeing the human form naked which were|
less common in the Orient.
   ‘Thus Greek artists were the first, since the nameless
masters who had worked in prehistoric India (p. 128),
to present the human figure in a naturalistic manner; they
were allowed to treat even the gods in the same spirit. So
by the fifth century the Greeks had established canons of
            GOVERNMENT,       RELIGION AND SCIENCE =. 227
    beauty in portraiture at least that are still generally
    accepted.
       Architects too in translating into the lovely marbles of
    their homeland the wooden structures of their barbaric
    ancestors were very likely inspired by Egyptian and Asiatic
    models. But they created architectural forms that, however
    depressing they may seem when copied in dirty stone under
    a grey northern sky, in Mediterranean sunlight - are still
    things of ineffable beauty even when in ruins.
       Similarly in literature epics dealing with the warlike
    deeds of gods and kings had been recited in Asiatic .and
    Egyptian courts; magic dramas were performed in Bronze
    Age temples; the barbarian ancestors of the Indo-Europeans
    composed chants in metric verse. But out of the epic lays
    sung by minstrels at Mycenaean heroes’ courts some Iron
    Age ‘Homer’ created epics that not only describe incidents
    and scenes, but also reveal the personalities of human
    characters   for the delectation   of Ionian   aristocrats   and
 plutocrats. The choral ode accompanied by music and
 dance was created for the country gentry and the com-
 mercial tyrants of the sixth century. Finally, for the demo-
cratic citizens choral ode and epic recitation were combined
 for public performance as dramas that were no longer
 magical. The literary conventions thus perfected have been
 models not only to later Europeans, but to the Persians
 and Arabs and perhaps Indians too.
    But the most original creative period of Greek art was over
 before 400 B.c. Decadence sets in precisely at the point when
 economic expansion had slowed down, the general level of
  prosperity was declining, and real wages were falling, though
 individual fortunes were bigger than ever and the number
 of slaves relative to the total population had increased.
    Now to us classical Greek sculpture is represented not by
 statues of gods carved by the most celebrated masters
 (these are lost), but by tombstones and similar works turned
out by humbler artists for patrons of more modest means.
Greek painting is not known by renowned artists’ pictures
 in temples and public buildings — for these have perished —


{
—
228           WHAT    HAPPENED     IN   HISTORY           at

but by the designs on vases manufactured in mass in fac-
tories for popular consumption and executed by craftsmen
who were seldom citizens and sometimes slaves (p. 199).
After 500, as the number of slaves increased, the social and
economic status of such executants had declined, as had
 that of other craftsmen. Aristotle in the fourth century
 mentions the profession of a musician (flute-player) as-
 typically degrading (banausic).
    The fatal outcome of contradictions in the political and
 economic structure of the world of Greek poleis was fully
 exposed after 400 B.c. ‘The social and economic life of the |
 fourth century,’ according to Rostovtzeff, ‘was marked. by
 two dominant features — the lapse of the mass of the
population into proletarianism, and closely connected
therewith the growth of unemployment, and secondly a
shortage of foodstuffs.’
    Many small peasants were being driven off the land by
prolonged military service in continual wars, by the actual
devastation of their farms by hostile armies and by the debts’
these circumstances forced them to incur and prevented
them from repaying. Industry offered no outlet to such as
these. For the small craftsman could not compete with the
slave-manned factory (p. 199). The internal market for
industrial goods contracted; for usury and slave-owning
concentrated wealth into fewer and fewer hands. The
external market contracted too; for in true Bronze Age
fashion industry exported itself instead of its products. For
example, not only in Italy but also in the colonies on the
Black Sea local potteries, presumably staffed in the first
instance with emigrant craftsmen, were successfully imita-
ting for the local market vases that had formerly been
imported from Athens. The emigration of the ceramic
industry is just an index of what was happening in other
domains. By reducing the export market it of course made
it increasingly difficult to cover the cost of imported food-
stuffs, like the wheat from the Black Sea.
   So in the fourth century there was no outlet for the over-
flowing and dispossessed rural population save to sell their
                   a



           GOVERNMENT,       RELIGION     AND     SCIENCE      229

  _ bodies as mercenaries to the King of Persia or other
_ ‘barbarians’ or to take to piracy and brigandage; one
_ pretender to the Persian throne alone hired without diffi-
_ culty   10,000   Greek   mercenaries,   while   pirates   became
  _ bolder and more numerous, aggravating (by increasing the
    slave-supply) the foregoing evils. No wonder that violent
    social struggles became endemic in most cities. Such were
    the consequences on the one hand of the economic con-
 _ tradictions exposed on page 200, on the other of the paro-
    chialism of the City-States that split Greece into tiny units,
    each clinging to local autonomy with suicidal fanaticism.
       All Greeks were indeed conscious of a common Hellenism.
    They spoke dialects of a common language hardly suffi-
    ciently divergent/ to prevent mutual understanding alto-
    gether. All acknowledged a common pantheon of Olympic
_ gods, despite local differences in cult. They even partici-
 _ pated in pan-Hellenic festivals like the Olympic games.
    In fact most Hellenic cities had joined forces to oppose
    aggression by non-Hellenic powers like the Persians and
    Carthaginians, though even in old Greece there were cities
    that supported Darius and Xerxes. But otherwise each city
    fought with its neighbours almost continuously — first to be
    able to maintain the ideal of self-sufficiency by stealing
    other people’s land, later to win a political or commercial
    hegemony.
       No doubt passionate devotion to the polis provided a
 _ conscious motive for self-sacrificing moral action such as a
    barbarian tribe did not need and an Oriental State could
    not evoke. It inspired its citizens to deliberate valour,
    triumphant art, and noble generosity. But in practice it
    squandered the man-power of Greece, dissipated its wealth,
    brought Greeks to the slave-market to reduce the status of
  free craftsmen and in the end forfeited the autonomy of
  the poleis themselves. Such local patriotism in fact sums up
  the ethical ideal of the Classical moral philosophers like
  Plato and Aristotle. It could not provide an ideology
  compatible with an economic system based inexorably on
  international trade on at least a Mediterranean scale.
                             XI                               e



THE    CLIMAX       OF ANCIENT          CIVILIZATION          a


                                                              ¥


In the three centuries beginning in 330 B.c., the frontiers of ©
civilization were further enlarged until a continuous zone —
of literate States extended from the Atlantic to the Pacific. —
The new economy, hitherto realized only in the eastern —
Mediterranean, came to dominate Atlantic Europe and —
Hither Asia, and at last found political expression for the —
unity it created in the Roman Empire. This result was
achieved in two main stages.
   In the first the Greeks themselves, under the leadership off
Alexander of Macedon, took over the whole Persian Empire
as a going concern, extending the polis economy right to the ©
Indus and the Jaxartes. At the same time the Syracusans ~
established a ‘smaller Greek Empire in the west (under —
Hiero) while the Romans were uniting Italy on Greek
rather than Oriental lines and enlarging the sphere of the
new economy at the expense of the Phoenicians of Carthage. —
In the second stage the Romans, having conquered the ~
Greeks in Italy and Sicily, annexed the Carthaginian i
Empire and slowly swallowed Old Greece and its new
appanages in the East, brought barbarian Europe by force—
of arms into the Mediterranean economic system. In the —
meantime a large part of India had been united, albeit for —
only a century, in the Maurya Empire, while the Chinese
Empire advanced its frontiers to the Tarim basin. ~
   The conquests of Alexander opened up Asia to Greek —
trade and Greek colonization, thus temporarily relieving
the economic crisis sketched on page 229. They made Egypt -
and Hither Asia a province of the cultural and economic —
system of Hellas. Throughout this new province asingle
dialect of the Greek language was everywhere understood,
so that ideas could and did circulate freely. Unity of
currency, new roads, improved harbours and lighthouses,
          THE CLIMAX OF ANCIENT CIVILIZATION                   231
   and larger ships facilitated intercourse and trade. The
Bee stical and monetary unity created by Alexander did not
_ indeed survive him. After his death in 321 his overseas
 empire became the prize in a prolonged contest between
  rival generals and was eventually decomposed into from
_ three to five major monarchies.
      Egypt fell to the Ptolemies who at first held also the coasts
  of Palestine, southern Syria, and Cyprus. Asia became the
  kingdom of the Seleucids; they rapidly lost their eastern
   provinces to the Indian Mauryas, independent Hellenistic
Nikings, and eventually     the Iranian Parthians, but after 200
wvacquired Palestine and Syria in compensation. Minor Greek
_ kingdoms arose in Bactria (eastern Iran), and eventually
   recovered parts of India too for Hellenism, while native
  -dynasts in Asia Minor, notably the Attalids of Pergamon,
_ successfully imitated these Greek models. Finally the cities
of peninsular and insular Greece         mostly recovered     their
 cherished autonomy, which meant for them the privilege of
_fighting with and enslaving their neighbours and rivals. This
_ political disintegration did not, however, obliterate the
cultural unity created by Alexander.
_ The annexation of the Persian Empire had meant not just
_ achange of monarchs, but the opening up of a new world to
 Greek colonization. Alexander himself began founding in
  his new domain military colonies for his veterans and cities
_ of Greek type. His successors founded many more. The new
_ poleis all enjoyed at least municipal self-government and
   civic institutions of classical type. The Hellenistic cities of
:the East, like contemporary foundations in Old Greece and
 the West, were endowed with the amenities indispensable
  to the classical polis - market-place, theatre, official build-
 ings, schools, fountains. Most new foundations were scienti-
"fically laid out on the grid system. All were adorned with
  oe and works of art. Few were larger than their
  classical models. Priene covered only 52 acres, Pergamon,
  though the capital of a kingdom, not more than 222. At
_Heraklea on Latmos the fortified area covered 245 acres in
 295 B.c., and was reduced to 148 ten years later, while the
pe a SST    ER eee    Te iesve



    232              WHAT HAPPENED         IN HISTORY
    walls of Demetrias in Thessaly enclosed 645 acres. But by
    100 B.c., Alexandria, the capital of Egypt, occupied 2,200 |
    acres, while the population of Seleucia on the Tigris is said’
    to have numbered 600,000. The component houses, how-
    ever, were commodious. Even at Priene, a small and pre-
    dominantly agricultural city, the built-up area was divided
    into blocks of 155 by 116 feet, each normally containing
    four to eight two-storeyed houses; only a few richer dwell- |
    ings measured as much as 65 by 60 or even 100 by 52 feet,
    and boasted on the ground floor eight to ten rooms round|
    a pillared court or peristyle.
       These poleis in the Orient were inhabited by Greek or
    Hellenized   officials,   bankers,   merchants,   craftsmen,   and|
    farmers plying arts and crafts in the Greek fashion and
    worshipping Greek gods. On the other hand, the old
    Oriental cities with the native commerce and industry,
    religion and science, laws and institutions that animated
    them were not suppressed. Alexander himself had planned
    to rebuild the great temple of Marduk at Babylon, and his!
    successors actually endowed similar buildings in Erech and|
    other cities. So the old Sumerian cults were still celebrated|
    in the Babylonian temples, which continued to function also|
    as observatories and research institutes. In Egypt the}
    Ptolemies showed themselves no less solicitous for the}
    temples and their priesthoods.                                        |
      Naturally the Hellenistic kings stepped into the niches in|
    the Oriental pantheon previously occupied by the king o |
    Babylon and the pharaoh of Egypt. At their death or even|
    during their lives they were deified. By the titles they
    assume, Benefactor (Euergetés), Saviour (S6tér), they lay
    claim to the same ideological role as their Bronze Age
    precursors who, as ‘the Good God’, ‘The Waterer of}
    Babylon’, advertised their real services in promoting repro-}
    ductive public works and protecting the weak from}
    oppression by the strong. ‘Monarchy,’ as Glotz says,|
    ‘appeared a necessity to hold together the opposing classes, |
    to govern the relation between different races and to define
    the rights and place of each.’
                                         ee.   ee, PPeer    ee

                                   *}                      Wa

         THE   CLIMAX    OF   ANCIENT   CIVILIZATION             233

  _ The Hellenistic monarchs carried on the traditions of
     eir remote precursors in developing the resources of their
   ingdoms, but now with the experience of Iron Age Greece
  behind them. In Egypt the Ptolemies revived the ancient
  doctrine of Pharaoh’s eminent domain over the Nile valley
   und its resources. Egypt was once more the ‘king’s house-
    old’ (ozkos), its territory his ‘estate’ (chora), the prime
minister his ‘steward’ (dioikétés). Its whole economic life
    as scientifically planned on strictly totalitarian lines to
     ake the country self-sufficing.
     The land, apart from estates belonging to temples or
    ranted to royal favourites and to soldiers, was cultivated
    r the king and under strict supervision by ‘king’s peasants’.
 These were ‘free’ tenants, but bound by minutely-defined
     ntracts as to what they should plant, and obliged to use
    ed provided by the State and to deliver to royal store-
houses a high proportion, probably at least a half, of the
   eld, as well as to maintain canals and dykes and perform
   her specified services. The productivity of the land was
    hanced by the introduction of superior varieties of plants
 and animals (seed corn from Syria and Greece, fig-trees
 from Asia Minor, vines from the Greek Islands, sheep from
    ia Minor and Arabia, pigs from Sicily), by the supply of
efficient iron agricultural implements to replace the wooden
equipment that had survived scarcely changed from the days
 of Menes, and by the installation of irrigation machines like
 the Archimedean screw. |
    Mines and quarries were exploited by criminals and
‘slaves for the profit of the State. Secondary industry was
 conducted by private firms under licence, by monopolies, or
 most often in State factories manned once more by ‘king’s
 peasants’ working as free wage-earners under contract, but
 bound to remain at work during the stipulated period.
‘Here too Greek techniques and methods of organization
 were grafted on to native traditions, and the output of each
 branch was regulated in accordance with the Plan.
 _ The ambitious edifice was supervised by a hierarchy of
‘officials and inspectors and controllers. The higher ranks in
234          WHAT     HAPPENED
                             IN HISTORY             |
this bureaucracy were staffed, at first exclusively, always
mainly, by Greeks; the minor officials must have been.
recruited from the old clerical class, but would of course have


                                                                  |
to learn Greek. As an additional check the Ptolemies farmed
out the various taxes to underwriters who paid down a lump
sum in advance, recouping themselves from the collection, _
but not Danone doing the collecting— for that there ee
permanent officials.
   No such grandiose experiments in planned economy were
attempted elsewhere, and more play was left to the initiativewiY
                                                             S
                                                             er
of landowners, industrialists, and merchants, though the
Hellenistic monarchs    claimed   a substantial   share in the
proceeds and the autonomous cities a more modest slice.        _
  Specialized farms producing for the market were spread
by the Greek colonists right to Russian Turkestan and India.
In Sicily and the Carthaginian domains large estates worked
by slaves or serfs were run on scientific capitalist lines, pro-
fitably if brutally. The same methods were adopted by
Roman landlords in Italy. They tended to correct the
balance between crops and livestock that is so hard to main-
tain on small peasant holdings but is yet necessary to
preserve the soil. Under these conditions the experiments in
acclimatization that had begun empirically in the preceding:
epoch were tried out on a larger scale and more deliberately.
Cotton, apricots and citron, geese and buffaloes were intro-
duced into European Greece, sesame and improved stocks
of horses, asses and swine from Europe into Asia as far as’
India, lucerne, oriental fruit trees, melons and beets and
barnyard fowls from Greece into Italy.                         ‘i
   At least, in so far as sea or river transport was available,
each natural region could concentrate on raising what was
best suited to the local soil and climate, exporting the sur-
plus, and receiving in exchange       a variety of foods and
materials that could hardly be produced at home. In the
third century all the Greek cities were frankly dependent on
imported corn, and even Rome had sometimes to supple-
ment Italian supplies from Egypt. Egypt now imported
olive oil, salt fish, pickled pork, honey, cheese, dried figs,
           THE    CLIMAX   OF ANCIENT     CIVILIZATION        235
     nuts, and melons. The distribution of Rhodian jars (which
     archaeologists happen to have studied) as far afield as Susa
     in Elam, Erech and Seleucia in Mesopotamia, north Syria,
   the north coasts of the Black Sea and the Lower Danube,
_4,Carthage, Italy, and Sicily is one archaeological index of the
  Brport of oil and wine from Greece.
      Secondary industries developed along the Classical lines.
"Specialization was further advanced — in Delos, for instance,
 _thejoiner who fits a door does not set up the doorposts, and
_stonemasons do not sharpen their own tools. As a productive
_unit the small factory or workshop employing ten or twenty
   hands as described on page 199 was more typical than in the
   previous period. Such factories might be attached to the
_ larger landed estates as they had been in the Bronze Age, to
   temples or to palaces. The kings of Pergamon in particular
_ owned large factories for parchment and textiles, manned
_by masses of slaves. Workers were not normally collected
_into factories to make use of machinery, or even to facilitate
_the co-operation between specialist craftsmen performing
different operations, but simply for convenience in
supervision.
f To this there is at least one exception. The development
_ of the milling industry in Hellenistic times was revolution-
  ary in two ways. Since the neolithic revolution each house-
  hold had had to convert its grain into flour for itself, even
though it had long abandoned its neolithic self-sufficiency.
_After 330 monuments and literature disclose special milling
Vfestablishments, often attached to bakeries. And in them the
  grains were no longer ground by hand by pushing the
“rubber up and down a saddle quern (p. 58), but in rotary
mills driven by donkeys or, after 100 B.c., sometimes by
_water-power. This new industry not only began to alleviate
domestic drudgery, but also initiated the first extension in
the employment of non-human motive-power since the
_Copper Age and the first fresh application of rotary motion
“since the potter’s wheel. At the same time baking and milling
"are just instances of a number of new branches of industry
 that were now specialized to cater for the needs of the masses.

Ms,
i.
236          WHAT    HAPPENED      IN   HISTORY

    Trade was simplified by the political unification of large
 areas, monetary reforms, improvements in shipping, the
 construction of lighthouses and harbours and road-building.
 Alexander established for his whole empire a unitary cur-
 rency based on the Attic standard on which the Roman
 denarius was also based. His policy was followed by his
 successors, except for the Ptolemies, who adopted the
 Phoenician standard for the Egyptian coinage. Meanwhile
 the Roman denarius spread in the west at the expense of
 Carthaginian and other currencies and competed success-
 fully with the Greek coinage of the east. Moreover, the
 money economy finally ousted a natural economy from
 many strongholds where barter had persisted throughout |
 the first Iron Age, spreading, for example, even among the
 Celts north of the Alps.                                     b
    Ships were larger and faster. We even read ofa ship of |
 4,200 tons burden, built for Hiero of Syracuse. Though she |
 was not a success, she gives a hint of what Hellenistic ship-
 builders could do. Rigging and steering gear were also’
improved, and captains now ventured to sail direct instead |
of hugging the coast more frequently than in earlier cen-
turies. A veritable new era in navigation was initiated by |
the construction of lighthouses, inaugurated under Alex- |
ander by the Pharos of Alexandria, where a tower over 480
feet high was erected, in the lantern of which burned afire |
of resinous wood. Improvements in ports were scarcely less|
important. Here again Alexandria led the way, but later
contributions by the Romans — hydraulic cement, the coffer
dam, pile-driving in deep water — were momentous.
   Despite these improvements, the journey from Rhodes to
Alexandria still took four days, as in Classical times. You
might get from Alexandria to Sicily in six or seven days, but |
the voyage thither from the port of Rome (Pozzuoli or |
Ostia) normally occupied twenty to twenty-seven days. In
fact it took longer to cross the Mediterranean than it now
does to cross the Atlantic, and the chance of reaching your
destination was immeasurably less; for the risks from ship-
wreck and still more pirates were really grave. Outside the
        THE   CLIMAX    OF   ANCIENT   CIVILIZATION       237

  Mediterranean traffic was still slower. A journey by sea
   and river from the Indus to Seleucia on the Tigris could be
specomplished in forty days. Till the trick of using the mon-
  -soons was discovered, four to six months might be consumed
 on the long sail of 2,760 miles from Berenice, on the
  _Egyptian coast of the Red Sea, to peninsular India.
      Land transport was also expedited. The caravan routes
   in Asia were more or less policed and equipped with khans
 and post stations by the Hellenistic monarchs, the Arabian
States, or the merchant companies themselves. The Persian
road system was extended and improved by the Seleucids.
  Profiting from their example, the Romans, as they united
Italy under their leadership, began to bind their domains
;
itogether with military roads. As pioneers of communications
 in a temperate zone, they were forced to face problems that
do not arise in the arid lands east of the Mediterranean.
Dust may be unpleasant, but it does not paralyse traffic;
 “mud does. In Hither Asia rain falls in sufficient quantities
“to bog the roads for only brief seasons every year. In
northern Italy rain and therefore mud may impede transit
_at almost any time and for long spells. The Roman engineers
 solved the problem thus created magnificently. Their roads
are feats that have not been surpassed till the nineteenth
century. According to Ptolemy, for instance, the roads
radiating from Rome had been so graded that ‘a wagon
could take the load ofa barge’.
 _ Nonetheless, land traffic was slow and costly. It took
fifteen days for a messenger to get from Seleucia on the
 Tigris to the coast of Syria, and at the beginning of our era
 twenty-seven to thirty-four days from Rome to Britain. The
 journey from Rome to Naples might occupy three to five
 days — a train does it in as many hours. For bulky or heavy
goods land transport was almost prohibitively costly. In the
“second century Cato, a celebrated Roman statesman and
 ‘writer on scientific agriculture, bought an oil press at
Pompeii for 384 sesterces. To transport it from the town to
his farm, a distance of about seventy miles, cost him 280
sesterces!



.
a
238          WHAT HAPPENED IN HISTORY                        1
   Under such circumstances it is not surprising that in-|
dustry often migrated to its market instead of sending its’
products thither. Pottery again illustrates the tendency.
After 330 B.c. the ceramic industries of Athens and the)
Greek islands found new export markets in Alexander’s|
empire and recovered old markets by offering new wares.
Before and shortly after 300 vases in the new style decorated
with patterns in relief made in a mould were imported in
large quantities into Alexandria, Europus in north Syria
and all the ports of Syria, Palestine, and Asia Minor, as well!|
as to South Russia and Italy. Soon after 300, however, local|
potteries, often at least manned by immigrant craftsmen,|
began making imitations which soon closed the Egyptian.|
Asiatic, and Russian markets      to Old Greece. After 200)
potters trained in the new tradition settled round Calles in}
Italy to supply the Roman market. In the same way glass- |
workers migrated from the ancient centres of that industry!
in Syria and set up glass-houses in Italy after 100 B.c.
  Nevertheless, the volume of trade was greater than ever,|
both within the Mediterranean world with its Hellenistic!
extensions into Africa and Asia and beyond its borders. Of
course commerce handled largely ‘luxuries’. Still, the large-|
scale importation of foodstuffs, alluded to on page 234, and|
the exportation of pottery just mentioned will suffice to}
suggest how extensively a variety of popular consumption
goods were transported over considerable distances— from)
the Crimea to Athens and from Egypt to Rome, for instance. |
Again, raw materials, such as tin, can hardly be called q
luxuries, yet after 300 B.c. Cornish tin was being regularly)
shipped across France to Marseilles on the Mediterranean. |
Moreover, many exotic luxuries were becoming necessities.)
Arabian frankincense was regarded as an essential for)
public worship and actually cost five shillings a pound in|
Old Greece.                                                 a
  So caravans and flotillas brought to the Mediterranean|
world perfumes, spices, drugs, ivory, and jewels from Central
Africa, Arabia, and India; gold, furs, or forest products from
Siberia and Central Russia; amber from the Baltic; metals
             THE   CLIMAX   OF   ANCIENT    CIVILIZATION        239

_ from the British Isles and Spain. After 114 B.c. a dozen
- caravans     a year loaded     with silks crossed   the deserts of
- Central Asia from China to Russian Turkestan, whence the
  fashionable stuff was sent to Seleucia, Antioch, Alexandria,
_    and Rome. A citizen of Rhodes, Alexandria, or Syracuse
     could be familiar with elephants, monkeys, parrots, cotton,
     silk, tortoiseshell, furs, myrrh, pepper, ebony, coral, amber,
      and lapis lazuli.
        Thus materials and manufactures were diffused. Persons
    _ were diffused, too. Slavery in its Hellenistic-Roman devel-
     opment brought to the great international mart on Delos
     victims from Britain and Ethiopia, South Russia and
     Morocco, Iran and Spain, Greeks, Jews, Armenians,
    Germans, Negroes, Arabs, to be redistributed to Seleucia,
     Antioch, Alexandria, Carthage, Rome, Athens, or Pergamon
     — human cattle indeed, but comprising highly educated
     doctors, scientists, artists, clerks, and craftsmen as well as
      prostitutes and labourers. As in the Bronze Age Orient,
      merchants not only travelled about, but needed permanent
      offices and agencies in foreign cities. In every port and
      capital alien colonies were established, Jews being ubiquit-
      ous. We read of an Indian merchant resident in Egypt and
      actually holding a priesthood there. A guild of Syrian
      merchants maintained a regular hostel on Delos, providing
      lodgings, stock-rooms, a council chamber and a chapel. A
      contract survives between a Massiliote and a Spartan who
      were partners on a trading voyage to Ethiopia. Free labour,
      too, was as mobile as ever. An Italiote bronze-worker trans-
      ferred his business from Luciania to Rhodes, while a silk
      manufacturer from Antioch died in Naples.
         The migrants, slave and free, brought with them to their
      new homes the fashions, techniques and cults of their native
      countries, and established shrines where the deities of their
      nation or city were worshipped with appropriate rites on
      foreign soil. Their spontaneous efforts were supplemented
      by the proselytizing of Asoka, the recently-converted
      emperor of India, who sent missionaries to the courts of
      Egypt, Syria, and Macedonia. Finally the standing armies
240          WHAT    HAPPENED     IN   HISTORY

maintained by the Hellenistic kingdoms, Syracuse, Carth- _
age, and Rome were not only consumers of industrial and —ta
rural produce, but also agents for training barbarian mer- |
cenaries in civilized ways and familiarizing farmers’ sons —
with foreign lands.                                         a
   So Oriental and Mediterranean civilizations, having _
fused, were joined by commerce and diplomacy to other |
civilizations in the east and to the old barbarisms of the
north and south.                                           i
     In the Far East the feudal anarchy into which the Chou
empire had relapsed was at length suppressed by Shih
Huang Ti (246-210 B.c.), a prince of the Ch‘in state. This
conqueror is credited with establishing the centralized rule
by the Son of Heaven and a bureaucracy recruited not by
birth, but by examination;     the subjects of examination
were theology and polite literature, without those, con-
cessions to science and modern languages that have been
extorted from the Oxford mandarins in Britain. The
frontiers of Chinese civilization were advanced into the
tropical forests of the south and against the nomads of the -
arid north. Built as a defence against the latter, the Great |
Wall, 1,500 miles long and fifteen to thirty feet high, dwarfs |
the Great Pyramid,    Hadrian’s Wall, and Radio City as |
the largest alteration in the world’s surface effected by |
man.
  Then in 115 B.c., under the Han Dynasty, the Chinese
army occupied, albeit only temporarily, the Tarim basin.
At length the civilizations of the Far East and the Near East
were in contact directly, no longer through intermediaries.
Glass beads of the type fashionable in the Mediterranean
during the fourth and third centuries had already found
their way to China and had been imitated in home-made
glass containing barium; Chinese silk had reached India
before Alexander. After 115 the silk caravans, equipped by
the Empire, travelled on roads protected by blockhouses and
police. From their Chinese neighbours the Greeks of Bactria
learned of a new element — nickel; like the Chinese, they
used an alloy of it with copper for their coinage. The
                   al             i
       ;      Spa            OF ANCIENT CIVILIZATION            241
     nese for their part acquired vines, lucerne, anda          eee
     eed of horses that ‘sweated blood’.
_ In barbarian Europe preparations were made for the
 ¢civilization that was to be imposed by Rome. The Scythians
 in south Russia had already come under the influence of
 colonial Greek civilization, which was now reinforced by
  that of Hellenistic Bactria on their kinsmen further east.
 The Celts in Central and western Europe were reached by
Etruscan traders and Greeks from Marseilles (p. 203), and
 bartered slaves, metals, and forest products for wine and
 manufactured luxuries.
    Their rural economy, growing wheat and barley on small
 square fields tilled with a light plough, and breeding cattle,
yielded a small surplus which was concentrated to some
extent by numerous petty chiefs and nobles. These kept up
the life of a Bronze Age chivalry, still fighting from chariots
 ike Homer’s heroes. Their clients, scattered in lone stead-
  ings and small villages, used iron tools, but could otherwise be
 -self-sufficing; their surplus younger sons sought fresh land for
_ farms at the expense of their neighbours in neolithic fashion.
 _ As internecine       warfare was   therefore endemic,    the La
Tene       Celts fortified   hill-tops even   more   strongly   and


their cattle during a war. Others were permanently in-
hhabited, but even these were economically just villages
occupied by farmers living in squalid one-roomed round
  quts without any appreciable admixture of artisans, shop-
keepers, and merchants. As late as the first century A.D., for
  nstance, iron equipment was not brought from such fenced
     ee: but the metal was smelted and forged on a tiny
scale in farms and hamlets, even though these might be in
  ight of a permanently-inhabited hill fort.
    Only chiefs disposed of sufficient real wealth to be able to
 support specialist craftsmen such as wainwrights and artists
in metal or potters using the wheel. These experts probably
242         WHAT     HAPPENED      IN HISTORY      |           1
naturalistic Greek patterns and converting them into com-
plicated geometric designs.
   With such an economy and a growing population the
Celts inevitably overflowed. Ambitious war lords led the
younger sons of their tenantry in quest of land and booty. —
In the fourth century Celts had flooded across the Alpine
passes, occupied the Po Valley, and sacked Rome herself in
390 B.c. So in the third other waves spread down the
Danube valley to the Balkans, devastated Macedonia and
northern Greece, and established a barbarian kingdom in
Asia Minor — Galatia. Other Celtic bands turned westward.
They laid hands on the metalliferous regions of north-
western Spain, Brittany, and the tin-lodes of Cornwall, thus
securing materials both for their own needs and to barter
for wine with the Greeks. And part of the tribe called Parisii —
moved from the chalk-lands of the Marne across the sea to
the Yorkshire Wolds, while the rest settled on the Seine to
leave their name in Paris.
   Farther north the Germans, though they too had acquired ©
from the Celts the secret of iron working, remained in bar-_
barism. But they did apparently invent a system of tillage
appropriate to the heavy clay lands of the north European
forests — deep cultivation with a heavy plough drawn by
eight oxen and equipped with mould-board and coulter to
turn over the sod instead of just scratching the soil as the
Mediterranean and Celtic ploughs did. This new technique
and equipment unlocked fresh sources of food, which in
their turn stimulated a growth of population. Among bar-
barians that meant territorial expansion. A great horde of
migrants with wives and household belongings — the Cimbri
(from Denmark, the Cimbrian Peninsula) and the Teu-.
tones — invaded Celtic France, only to be annihilated by the
Romans in Italy in 101 B.c. Filtering across the Rhine,
Germanic colonists introduced the new rural economy to
the Celts of Belgium and north-eastern France and formed
a mixed nation, the Belgae— Celtic in speech, but Germanic
in appearance (according to Caesar) and in burial rites
(according to archaeologists). Some of these occupied south-
                                                   “Hee            =




  A: THE    CLIMAX    OF   ANCIENT     CIVILIZATION         243

       England about 75 B.c., and for the first time
  ened to the plough the richest soil in Britain. By 50
    and was even exporting corn to France.
      ) the economy of barbarian Europe throughout the La
  ne phase of the Iron Age was still dominated by sub-
    ence farming, supplemented by a minimal development

    uxuries, not different in kind from that which had been
    ucted ever since the beginning of the Bronze Age. This
     economy, as far as it went, was in fact well adapted to
   onditions of the temperate zone of woodland. Emphasis
   rightly laid on pastoralism, especially on cattle-breed-
   and that to such,an extent that Classical writers some-


        ack of winter made it necessary to eat too many of
       calves. Lacking industry and a diversity of crops, this
        arian economy could not support a really sedentary,
il less an expanding, population. Endemic warfare kept
   wn     numbers all too effectively till the Roman legions
        duced urban life and peace.
         e channels of intercourse just surveyed thus diverted
       the Hellenistic cities traditions and discoveries accumu-
         by diverse societies in varied environments. From this
      at pool of human experience the natural philosophy of
  ssical Greece united with Babylonian and Egyptian
   iplines could distil a truly international science which
      not remain pure-theory. The Hellenistic scientists —
    y were Greeks only in name and culture — were no
     r dependent on the patronage of the parochial
    ‘geoisie of a polis nor confined ina theological seminary.
    arch was encouraged and endowed by the heads of
     rful States, eager to develop the resources of new
       ns.
    lexander himself was a pupil of Aristotle. His army was
   mpanied by surveyors and observers to map out the
    try and note its resources. His fleet was expressly sent
9 explore the Arabian Sea. These traditions were worthily
mia ined by his successors in pee and Asia w              {
Phoenicians of Carthage performed similar work in
Atlantic. Ptolemy I of Egypt in particular fostered ieatnion|
The Museum that he founded at Alexandria functioned as
University with the accent on research. All the Hellenistic
kings and their officers indeed saw chances of political and
commercial profit from applications of systematized know-
ledge more clearly than had the small factory owners and
petty traders of any city state.
   If private merchants were chary of disclosing trade
secrets, the captains of royal fleets felt no such scruples.
Ministers of State and capitalist farmers were developing
kingdoms and estates as practical experiments in botany
and zoology, genetics and geology. Continuous warfare,
conducted now by standing armies, permitted changes iin
tactics and strategy. In particular sustained sieges became
feasible and demanded new weapons of attack and defence.
   At the same time the cosmopolitan populations of the
great Hellenistic metropoles were likely to be more tolerant,
if no less superstitious, than the Athenian people that had
expelled Anaxagoras (p. 225). As pointed out already, the
foreigners in each city brought with them and celebrated
there their own native cults. With these religions and their
officiants spread new brands of magic and philosophy — a
motley horde of quacks, astrologers, alchemists, and oracle-
mongers — competing with traditional beliefs and legitimate
sciences. Polytheism could easily find room both for new
gods and new rites. All were tolerated with equanimity both
by the States and by the less tolerant masses. Even Asoka,
who with the zeal of a new convert was establishing
Buddhism in India, professed and enjoined toleration to
other creeds. Only Judaism remained exclusive; only
Yahveh would accept no partner. The State of the Macca-
bees gave the first practical demonstration of religious
intolerance and spiritual totalitarianism.
   The proliferation of often ridiculous cults, the motley
pantheons of polyglot deities, the dissemination of magic
rituals and pseudo-sciences do not necessarily imply an

                                                        i
                                                       aa
       THE CLIMAX        OF ANCIENT       CIVILIZATION         245
   olute increase in superstition; they were but indications
   f the free interchange of ideas. They broke the absolute
     thority of old-established priesthoods and left sensible
      n free to discuss practical science without interference
    ther from sacerdotal interests or mob fanaticism.
  _ At the same time the ancient temple research institutes in
    abylonia were still functioning. Mathematical texts and
     ronomical observations were written down in cuneiform
as late as 20 B.c. Greeks from the west frequented these
  cient seats of learning and would then take the title
     ihaldaean’ as an equivalent to our Ph.D. Alexander’s con-
       st, in fact, inaugurated two centuries of fruitful collabor-
  ition between Babylonian and Greek scientists, by which
the substantial achievements of the Bronze Age Orient were
 conserved for transmission to the modern world.         So close,
  deed, was this collaboration that we cannot now always
  cide which party was in the lead; it is an open question
   ether the Babylonian Kidannu or the Greek Hipparchus
  st recognized the phenomenon termed the precession of the
 quinoxes.
 _ To Alexandrian science the Orient contributed Babylon-
 an mathematical processes, examples and all, and astro-
   mical data. With the latter the Babylonian system of
 exagesimal fractions (p. 178) was transmitted to the West,
 nd that in an improved form; for the Babylonian mathe-
 naticians by the third century had at last agreed upon a
 ign for zero. The Alexandrians at first used the sexagesimal
 lotation for tables of angular measurements, presumably
 hemselves borrowed from Babylonia; but by the second
  ntury A.D. the device was used in preference to the clumsy
   quot parts of Egypt and Classical Greece for other
 uotients, approximations to square roots and to 7. ‘The_
idea of a zero sign in the form of an o (for ouden, nothing) -
was adopted too, but only in connexion with sexagesimal
 actions.
 So through its adoption by the Hellenistic mathema-
 icians the most ingenious contribution of the Bronze Age
tothe mastery of numbers was preserved, transmitted to the
246          WHAT    HAPPENED     IN   HISTORY

Arabs, and then brought back to Europe to come to fruition
in our decimal notation in A.D. 1585. But of course the
Greeks, in adapting sexagesimal fractions to their alphabetic
notation, sacrificed their greatest charm - place value.
WeTtysscwccID became py. ve’ Ky” (103° 55° 23”). By the
Roman period Greek mathematicians were using distinct-
ively Babylonian methods for the solution of quadratic
equations (e.g. multiplying both sides by a instead of divi-
ding as we generally do). They must even have adopted
Babylonian examples. At least one example in an early
medieval arithmetic book, the Liber Abaci of Leonard of
Pisa, based upon Arabic, and so eventually Hellenistic,
material, copies almost verbatim a problem set out in two
cuneiform tablets, one early Babylonian and the other
Hellenistic in age.
   Still the greatest achievements in pure mathematics
during the Hellenistic age were developments of the classical
Greek geometric methods. Euclid (? 323-285 B.c.) not only
systematized theoretical geometry and expanded previous
work on curvilinear spaces, but also made practical use of
it in the theory of optics. About the same time Aristarchus
of Samos began to use what we term trigonometrical ratios.
A generation later Apollonius at Alexandria developed that
branch of higher mathematics known as conic sections. The
name itself reveals how these figures of ‘pure geometry’ are
derived from actual man-made objects; the curves it studies
‘theoretically’ include the parabola that the projectiles of
the Hellenistic artillery followed and the hyperbolas traced
by the shadow on contemporary sundials.
   At Syracuse Archimedes (287-212) laid the mathe-
matical foundations of mechanics, on the basis of empirical
  rinciples already verified in practice. Such achievements
take us into a realm beyond the comprehension of the
ordinary man, but they had practical results in yielding good
approximations to ratios, ~ and other ‘irrationals’. In
an age which was using water-wheels, mapping the earth
and measuring the sun an accurate evaluation of
7 was more essential than in the Bronze Age, when
        THE   CLIMAX     OF   ANCIENT   CIVILIZATION        247

 the issue had been the circumference of a well or a cart-
   heel; in constructing a water-wheel 10 ft. 6 in. in diameter
    ke that found at Athens, the Babylonian value of 3 might
   ell cause trouble.
     Even more fruitful were the collaboration between Greek
   od Babylonian astronomers and the co-operation of ob-
“servers in different countries. After the more speculative
adventures of the Ionians the Hellenistic astronomers boldly
 set out to measure the earth by strictly scientific methods.
From    observations   on the sun’s altitude   at the summer
 solstice made respectively at Syene on the Tropic of Cancer
 and at Alexandria, Eratosthenes (Director of the Museum
 from 240 to 200) calculated the globe’s circumference as
  52,000 stades, probably 24,662 miles, and if so, only 4 per
 cent out! Later Poseidonius, apparently from observations

    Rhodes respectively, reached the figure of 180,000 stades.
     nluckily the later pundits of Alexandria accepted this
       aller figure and handed it on to their Arab successors.
      Still bolder, the astronomers proceeded to measure the
     vine Sun and Moon by perfectly rational methods. Aris-
_tarchus devised two ingenious and perfectly correct methods,
   which, however, were not practicable with the instruments
 at his disposal. Owing to unavoidable errors of observation,
he made the sun’s diameter only between six and seven
 times that of the earth and its distance twenty times that of
  the moon. More than a century later Hipparchus of Alex-
      dria, using other methods, deduced that the moon’s
   listance was between sixty-seven and seventy-eight times
     e earth’s radius and its diameter about one-third of the
   arth’s. He put the sun some 13,000 radii away from the
   sarth. Though not much more than half the true distance,
‘such figures were a shattering blow to common sense and
 thheology alike. So equipped with instruments of its own
   levising, man’s mind burst the bounds of terrestrial space
   nd launched out on a voyage into the limitless inane
   ot on the wings of fanciful speculation, but guided by
   mectly practical geometry. The fruits were not delusive
 248             WHAT     HAPPENED       IN
 superstitions, but maps that generals and merchants  ee
use.                                                     .
    An even more subversive theory was in sight. The eo) |
of concentric spheres, revolving round the earth, pro-—
pounded to explain the movements of the heavenly bodies
as plotted by the Babylonians and classical Greeks, was —
proving increasingly difficult to reconcile with accumulating _
observations. To escape the impasse Aristarchus advanced
the revolutionary theory that looks so patently absurd that
the earth itself and the planets really revolve around the
sun. Seleucus, the Babylonian, shortly after 200 B.c.,
espoused the same heliocentric hypothesis.                  °
   Unfortunately, it was not only contrary to common sense, _
but ran up against perfectly genuine theoretical and obser-
vational difficulties. Hipparchus rejected the hypothesis on —
the quite reasonable scientific ground that he could not
observe the parallax of a fixed star from the opposite poles —
of the earth’s orbit round the sun — a phenomenon that only ©
a high-power telescope can in fact disclose. So he returned—
to the geocentric view, embellishing it with a theory of
epicycles. It became then the ‘party line’ on which all sub-
sequent Hellenistic astronomers and their Arab successors’
worked and which was embodied in the sacred dogma of
the medieval Church. But Aristarchus was never quite for-
gotten, and Copernicus, with very little fresh observational :
data, reverted to him— and was condemned for heresy!
   Such epoch-making astronomical achievements were
possible in the Hellenistic age not because ‘a spirit of|
inquiry’ was abroad, nor because men had leisure to pursue~
the contemplative life as the greatest purification, but |
because, in spite of all conflicts of political loyalty, men
using a common language were co-operating all over the
enlarged world; for they pre-supposed observations on
 star-transits   and    declinations   in different   cities and   the|
 communication of the results. They were not inspired by
 mere curiosity, however divine, nor only by the vain hope
 of foretelling the destinies ofmortals, but by the urgent need
 of finding one’s way about an expanding world. Their

                                                                      i
              CLIMAX OF ANCIENT CIVILIZATION                  249
    v    }
    ilts,were not only to liberate humanity from the bonds
    pace and the terrors of solar myths, but also to define the
      of the inhabited globe and to guide armies, merchant
  ips and caravans on unprecedented journeys.
   ‘or astronomy was applied to geography. Once Eratos-
     es had fixed the value of a degree, angular measure-
     ts on the elevation of the Pole Star and on meridian
    sits gave a much more accurate idea of distances north °
  idsouth than any calculations from marching or sailing
  nes. By correlating such observations the positions of
  aces could be plotted onaterrestrial sphere divided up,
     the sky, into parallels of latitude, numbered 0 to go to
    cate the angular distance from the Equator. Latitude
    ‘means ‘width’, and so the word reveals how the system
       ted with sailors’ observations in crossing the long
     editerranean.
      fo find astronomically how far one had progressed west-
      d, sailing along the Mediterranean, one’s longitude in fact,
     isnot so easy. Longitude expresses the difference between
     al sundial times. With a modern accurate chronometer
   is easy enough to compare your local noon, the moment
   en the sun crosses the meridian above you, and ‘Green-
      h time’, and so fix your position, an hour being equal to
         The ancients had only sundials and water-clocks.
        ce only a celestial event, independent of the earth’s
     inal rotation on its axis, an eclipse or an occultation,
    rmitted the comparison of local times. As early as 331
      . the times of an eclipse seen at Arbela in Syria and at
       thage had been recorded and compared. Hipparchus
     d the idea of fixing the longitudes of various places by
    -operative observations on the relevant phenomena. By
       second century A.D. his idea had borne such fruit that
Ptolemy was able to construct a skeleton map of the globe
      a frame of astronomically fixed latitudes and longitudes,
such as has been used ever since.
     Unfortunately cardinal errors were accepted and re-
peated again and again till they acquired the authority of
 facts’. For instance, Eratosthenes had taken as his meridian
 250           WHAT    HAPPENED      IN   HISTORY           oma   |

 a line. through Alexandria, Rhodes, Troy, Byzantium, andi
 the mouth of the Dnieper, a line that is anything bu
 straight. Yet it remained the basis of all subsequent ancien A
 maps.                                                            |
     Theoretical   advances   in  biological  science  were  less}
  dramatic. The substantial achievements of Hellenistic
  botany and zoology are to be found in the agricultural
  experiments of the Ptolemies and of the Romans. Bun
  Crateuas, physician to the king of Pontus (120-63 B.c.)|
  introduced a fruitful innovation in method when he illus
  trated his herbal with realistic pictures of the plants he waa
- describing and classifying. In physiology and anatomy
 Herophilus and Erasistratos of Alexandria made important
 discoveries between 300 and 275 by dissecting humay
 bodies. In a later age when men were devoting all theig
 ingenuity to torturing their slaves and theological oppo}
 nents, these Alexandrian physicians were accused, part
 ticularly by the Christian fathers Tertullian and Augustine}
 of practising vivisection on condemned criminals. There if
 some evidence for the existence of a public medical servicd
 in Egypt, rather less in the Seleucid kingdom and Pergamon
 but its benefits were probably confined to the Greek citizens
 and the army; the natives were left to their fate. Of effective
 measures against epidemics, such as campaigns against fleas|
 lice, and mosquitoes, we hear nothing, while human excre
 ment was still regarded as the best manure.                     )
    Hellenistic science was not divorced from the practical
 life of the producer, as Bronze Age learning and Natura
 Philosophy after 450 had been. The two centuries beginning
 in 330 B.c. brought forth a crop of mechanical invention:
 that cannot be paralleled in any comparable period till |
 A.D. 1600.                                    i             mf
    Besides laying and experimentally testing the mathelf
 matical bases of pure mechanics, Archimedes of Syracus¢)
 showed how the principle of specific gravity could bq
 utilized in daily life; in fact he stumbled upon the principl¢}
 itself in trying to unmask a fraud practised upon his patron}
 by a goldsmith who had adulterated the metal entrusted te
                 Rete ARN pee
                           CMPT et neRr nt UR Fr
                  wy   }   at




     }    THE   CLIMAX          OF   ANCIENT   CIVILIZATION    251

     him. For an earlier tyrant of Syracuse his forerunners
     designed engines of destruction far more potent than the
     slings, bows, wheeled towers, and battering rams that
     formed the strongest items in the Assyrians’ equipment,
     despite that nation’s preoccupation with wars and sieges.
     The propulsive force in the new artillery was provided by
     torsion and levers, and they could hurl missiles weighing
     sixty pounds for 200 yards.
         Archimedes not only studied the geometrical properties
     of the screw, but also applied the results to the construction
   _ ofa machine for raising water. This was made of wood, gave
    a lift of from six to twelve feet, and was generally driven by
     human motive-power — a man working a treadmill. Greater
     lifts were subsequently effected by buckets attached to an
     endless chain on a rotating drum. Irrigating machines of
     the latter type seem to be referred to in Egyptian papyri of
     the second century B.c.
         Finally Ktesibios, who probably lived at Alexandria in
     the third century, invented a perfectly good pump equipped
     with valves and cylinders and pistons and embodying the
     same pneumatic principle as old-fashioned hand-pumps.
     Funnily enough there is no evidence for its use during our
     period for raising water — perhaps owing to the unsuitability
_ of lead pipes, the cost of bronze ones, and ignorance of cast-
_ iron. A similar fate befell a number of ingenious pneumatic
     and hydraulic devices described by Hero of Alexandria, a
     writer whose date cannot be fixed within four centuries.
 _      The significance of the use of rotary motion in corn-mills
  and of the application thereto of water-power was em-
__phasized on page 235. Now it must be insisted that these
_ water-mills were complicated machines involving the inser-
  tion of gears, both to convert horizontal into rotary motion
  and to increase power by reducing speed. They were, of
_ course, made of wood, as was mill machinery as late as the
_ eighteenth century A.p. Gear-wheels, this time of metal,
_ were also employed in a water-clock described by Hero
_ which forms the starting point for all subsequent develop-
_ ments in clockwork mechanisms and chronometers.
(p. Be     was probably invented in oe during tk
century B.c., and had momentous consequences. It s
likely, too, that distillation was practised in Alexar
before the beginning of our era. Retorts are described i
treatises on alchemy that can hardly be later than a.p.
But just when alcohol opened a new chapter in the hist
of pee is still unknown, The use of lime mortar v


    he indestructible cement made by mixing lime wi
volcanic ash (first found near Puteoli and hence still called
“pozzolana’) which would set even under water.
   Hydrostatics were effectively applied to the supply
water to cities, notably at Pergamon, in the second cent
and also at Rome. There an aqueduct constructed in
B.C. flowed underground for no less than ten miles through
tunnels the construction of which was a remarkable feat
surveying and levelling. But though the syphon was p
fectly familiar to the Alexandrians, as Hero’s book sho
the Roman engineers never applied it to large-scale u
takings (of course their lead pipes could not stand
pressure). They preferred to build those superb viaduc
that still survive to testify to their mastery of the arch a
other architectural devices inherited from the Bronze A
Orient.
   Strangely enough, as it seems to us, mechanicaliinventi 1
found little application in practice — save in warfare.
during the Hellenistic age. In that period water-power was        —
not apparently applied in any industry save corn-milli
Even water-mills for corn were still so rare at the beginning
of our era that geographers mention them specially as‘
curiosities. Antipater of Salonica bitter), sang in the first
century B.C.:                                                   Re




  ‘Mill girls touch the quern no more; for Demeter hath bidden the
     Nymphs perform your work.                                   fa
   They rush on to the top of a wheel and make its axle turn.’
             PERRY
        ae   THE CLIMAX | OF ANCI
                              |
                                  ENT CIVILIZATION               253
   BRp, utlandlords and capitalists preferred to invest their profits
  in living instruments rather than costly machines of wood;
_ slaves were cheap.
    _ Similarly the pneumatic and hydraulic devices of
 rKtesibios and his successors were not demonstrably applied
     © draining mines or watering gardens. What Hero des-
        ribes are eo    ee      automata,   parlour toys to divert
  penests at a rich man’s banquet and temple furniture to
   mystify the credulous.
y a The failure to exploit productively the inventions offered
   by science was a consequence of the structure of Hellenistic
     ociety and of contradictions in its economy. These reacted
    on theory too. The most original and creative activity, the
    epoch-making discoveries and the great constructive hypo-
       eses all fall within the later fourth and third centuries —
       ecisely the period when the economic system was expand-
 ing triumphantly. Though the lines of research then laid
 adown were fruitfully pursued subsequently, the output of
  Egenuinely novel ideas virtually ceased after 200 B.c.; the
  compilation of data from records began to take the place
  of fresh observation and experimentation (Strabo and sub-
i "sequent geographers, for instance, are constantly repeating
     he reports of Alexander’s observers and third-century
   ambassadors, adding relatively little later information). But
 _ by 200 economic contradictions were becoming manifest in
_ an arrest of the market’s expansion externally, and a slowly
    rowing impoverishment internally.
     ‘The system described in this chapter undoubtedly yielded
 _a genuine increase of real wealth. But an excessive propor-
  tion of the yield was concentrated in the treasuries of a few
  kings; most of the balance was annexed by Greek and other
  ruling castes; very little was left to the ‘natives’ who tilled
_ the     soil and less to the slaves who manned the factories and
 _ mines.
      The planned economy established in Egypt by the
  -Ptolemies was planned to produce revenue for the king just
 _as much as the pharaoh’s systems under the Old and New
  Kingdoms had been. Inasmuch as it was more scientific, it
254          WHAT    HAPPENED      IN   HISTORY   |    :      ei

increased Egypt’s prosperity; even the natives benefited in
securing better tools, perhaps a more varied diet, on paper >
a freer legal status. But it added to the old antinomy i
between nobles and peasants a new contrast between Greek _
rulers and native subjects. Perhaps the natives preferred the
old rulers ‘who had been their compatriots, who spoke their _
own language and had the same religion and mode of life’ j

                                                              |:
to the ‘bureaucratic machine in which foreigners played—
the most important part, foreigners who regarded them-
selves as far superior to the natives, who did not speak their
language and had no intention of learning it’. This sugges-   |
tion of Rostovtzeff’s is borne out by the letter of a literate
Egyptian who writes bitterly about being ‘despised because -
I am a barbarian’, and the readiness of the peasantry to
support the native priests in revolt against the conquerors.
   The machine produced revenue all right. Ptolemy II
enjoyed an income of 14,800 talents, and even his father’s
prime minister had secured a rake-off of 6,000. But, how-
ever excellent the intentions of the rulers may have been, —
the machine soon became oppressive. The Rosetta Stone,
inscribed in 196 B.c. with a decree in Greek and Egyptian |
which first gave the clue to the decipherment of hierogly-
phics, implies ‘pressure of taxes, rapid accumulations of
arrears and concomitant confiscations, prisons full of—
criminals and debtors, public and private, many fugitives
scattered all over the country and living by robbery, com-—
pulsion applied in every sphere of life’. The decree in
question was designed to remedy this situation, but like —
equally humane decrees by later Ptolemies was frustrated
by the administrative officials. For complaints in Hellenistic
papyri prove that corruption and extortion were as rampant
in the civil service then as they had been under the New
Kingdom (p. 159).                                              ,
   The natives had one recognized remedy — the strike; they
left their work and retreated en masse to the asylum of a
temple till intolerable grievances were remedied. They
resorted to it so frequently that many later contracts include
a clause binding the tenant not to strike. The natural results
  One complainant writes that his village had shrunk from
   140 to 40 souls. Such were the results of a planned economy
   run in the interests of a governing class — even from the
__ biological standpoint the reverse of progressive.
     In the Greek cities the principal beneficiaries from the
  new opportunities afforded by Alexander’s conquests were
  the bourgeoisie. Its composition may be defined with
 -Rostovtzeff as: landowners whose land was tilled by tenants,
_hired hands or slaves; tenant farmers employing the labour
_ of the latter classes; owners of workshops, directing their
_ employees, slaves or freemen; owners or tenants of shops or
_ ships and warehouses; money-lenders and slave-hirers. To
4 such belong the nice houses we have admired at Priene
  _ (p. 232) for instance.
_      All over Greece, as also in Italy, the number of peasants
_ who worked their own land was declining to make room for
_ capitalist farms. After 300 B.c. contracts for temple building
 (at Delos) were not taken by independent craftsmen who
_ performed small jobs themselves as in the fifth century, but
_ were let to contractors in the modern sense who supplied
    labour, free or servile.
       The profits of the bourgeoisie were — at first — large. The
 _ Alexandrian Zeno left a fortune of 2,000 talents, while the
  _ richest man in Athens before Alexander’s day had possessed
 ~ only 160. On the other hand as compared with fifth-century
_ Athens, real wages fell. On Delos a skilled artisan made at
 _ best four obols per day per annum and an unskilled worker
_ only two obols, though the price of wheat had doubled, wine
    had gone up two and a half times, and rents nearly five
    times. Rich citizens were certainly generous in helping their .
_ cities with gifts or loans — loans from private citizens to the
_ State are a common     feature in Hellenistic finance — and
contributed handsomely to the adornment of the city and
_ the upkeep of schools and other public institutions. Yet the
concentration of purchasing power restricted the internal
 market for popular goods.
middle class. But soon the migration of industry (p
narrowed the export market once more. The ravages of w.
debt, and the competition of slave-manned factories |

proletariat. Demands for the cancellation of debts auen
redistribution of land broke out in open civil war in Spa
and other States of Old Greece. But everywhere th
bourgeoisie stubbornly and successfully resisted reform
sometimes with the aid of Rome.                                        :

as the outcome of tendencies outlined on page 208. But th              2
loot from imperialist wars and an expanding market int                 |
barbarian west staved off the crisis. Two efforts at a resett          :
ment of peasants on the lands of great estates initiated by            |
the Gracchi in 131 and 121 B.c. were defeated by the
Senatorial oligarchy, at the cost of concessions to the new            |
middle class of contractors, tax-farmers and usurers an                |
doles of free corn to the urban proletariat.                     |
    Finally Alexander’s expeditions, the wars between|
successors and between the still autonomous city states,
intensified activity of pirates, inroads by barbarian Celts,:
Roman imperialism enormously augmented the slave supply
till industry and agriculture i in Hellenistic times were really
run by slave labour except in Egypt. Of course only inmines
and quarries were slaves systematically and rapidly worked
to death. Most were allowed opportunities of earning mon:
for themselves; many might hope to buy their freed
(when they were too old to work!). Materially even »
slaves on a capitalist farm lived better than most barbar nm
peasants; Cato provided the slaves on his estate with sheets,
blankets, mattresses, and pillows, and the slave-quarters on
excavated farms compare favourably with the Celts’ round
huts. Many professional men — clerks, doctors, tutors,
factory managers, and farm bailiffs — the equivalent of our



                                                              ‘ood %
                                                                 CEs tet

                                                          257
        c-coated Swe           — .were actually oe like
     ourers and artisans, particularly but not exclusively in
  the Roman Empire. As slaves of kings and ministers, these
    might rise to positions of responsibility and amass large
       rtunes, holding slaves themselves.
     _ Hence slavery hardly created a class conscious of a solid-
      rity of interests against its exploiters. Rather did it cut
    across the division of the free population into bourgeoisie
   and proletariat. Yet slave revolts did actually occur and
_ assume serious proportions for the first time in history after
  134 B.c. in Attica, Macedonia, Delos, Sicily, Italy, and
 _ Pergamon. The rebels were often joined by small peasants
    and tenants and even by ‘free’ proletarians. But all these
 __ efforts were brutally suppressed in the end by the armies of
 _ Rome and other States.
       _ Incidentally the institution of slavery impeded the pro-
     - clamation of an ideology appropriate to the international
        economy that was already de facto in existence. Nevertheless,
  - some Hellenistic philosophies did begin to transcend the
        narrow bounds of the polzs and even the time-honoured con-
_ trast between Greek and Barbarian, and present the concep-
  _ tion of the unity of the human race adumbrated by Alexan-
_ der himselfafter his victory over his country’s traditional foes.
     _ Zeno, a Phoenician from Cyprus who lectured in Athens
        in the Stoa — hence the name Stoics applied to his school —
f dreamed of one great Polis where all were citizens and
__ members one of another, bound together by their own will-
_ ing consent or, as he put it, love. Zeno accordingly de-
      “nounced slavery as unnatural, but he regarded it, like sick-
        ness and other material ills, as an rreievatib external
        accident over which the wise man could triumph in his
 _ spiritual power; the wise man, though he serve in slavery, is
        yet a king, though he be a pauper, possesses all things. Such
        a doctrine was too sophisticated to be a rallying cry for the
  _ oppressed masses but might soothe the consciences of the
 _ bourgeoisie. The later Stoics in fact, doubtless as a con-
 _ cession to rich patrons, revived Aristotle’s doctrine of the
   a
        ‘natural slave’ (p. 224).
258          WHAT     HAPPENED IN HISTORY
   Religion too, though not of course the official cults of the-
States, began to reflect, ina striving after one god, the world|
unity realized in the economic sphere. Astrology, themost |
widespread cult of the age, was on its theological side a_
catholic version of the old Sumerian doctrine of Fate as a |
power superior to all tribal, civic, and national deities. But
it was amoral and in practice purely magical. Other |
religions, celebrated by unofficial congregations, did incul-
cate a morality that recognized no distinctions of race or
civil status. One quotation must suffice.
   The ordinances of a private shrine to Agdistis at Phila-
delphia in Asia Minor read: ‘ Let men and women, slave and
free, coming into this shrine swear by all the gods that they
will not deliberately plan any evil guile or baleful poison |
against any man or woman; that they will neither turn to
nor recommend to others nor have a hand .in love-charms,
abortives or contraceptives or doing robbery or murder;
that they will steal nothing but be well-disposed towards
this house.’ Of course such cults were not concerned with |
reforming abuses in earthly society, but with securing ad-
mission to an imaginary society where such abuses did not
exist. Still, admission thereto is obtainable by moral action
and open equally to slave and free.                           |
   But if philosophy and religion could avoid the inipeda “
ments of slavery, the institution continued to obstruct the
progress of science (p. 253) by making labour-saving
machinery unprofitable, and contributed to the impoverish-
ment of all producers by keeping down the purchasing
power of the internal market. For by 200 the failure of the
classical economy even in its amended version was in fact
becoming apparent. At least in Old Greece the results of
this failure could already be measured by purely biological -
standards. The population was actually declining. Citizens,
rich and poor alike, were deliberately restricting their
families by abortion and infanticide. And slaves had no
chance to rear large families.
   But the purely economic factors in’ this catastrophe
were reinforced, and in the literary record are quite
      economic system itself. The Hellenistic world, through-
   t which language and culture were so nearly uniform, was
  lit up into three or more major kingdoms and a varying
       ber of city-states and confederacies. All these units
    ight one another continually with senseless ferocity. ‘ Bar-
     ian’ States — Parthia, Armenia, Arabia, Rome, Carthage
— joined eagerly in the mélée. Engrossed in self-destructive
        the States allowed or even encouraged pirates and
   ober bands to nest in the disputed frontier zones. The
      tiplication of these parasites was only a symbol of social
      rders which denied an adequate livelihood to peaceable
      ants and artisans and extolled violence and slaughter
  the name of patriotism as the highest expressions of manly


  'The conflict between these economically futile political
entities was at length terminated in the most brutal manner >
    Rome. Having made herself head of an Italic alliance
   90-264 8B.c.), and annexed first the foreign domains of
     thage (Sicily, 241, Spain, 201) and then the city and her
     can domains (146), Rome proceeded to absorb Mace-
   nia, the Greek city-states, and the Hellenistic kingdoms
in Asia Minor, Syria, and finally Egypt.
                            Tre i ec
   THE     DECLINE         AND     FALL      OF    TH
                   ANCIENT       WORLD

Conquest by Rome brought to the war-scarred Mi i
ranean world peace, but not at first prosperity. Qui et
reverse. The original kernel of the Roman domains,|
peoples and cities of Italy, had been organized as a n,
of allies; eventually after 88 B.c, all Italians were ad
to Roman citizenship. The annexed territories overs
the contrary were treated as estates to be exploit
tribute like the conquests of an Oriental monarcl
Babylonian, Assyrian, and Persian kings seldom quite for
that their revenues depended in the last resort upon
prosperity of their subjects. They generally saw to
their governors acted accordingly. The elected magis
sent out for a year as governors by Republican Rome, 1
 not thus cramped.
    The Senate, composed of time-expired governors, did| No
aspire to be hailed as ‘Saviour’ or ‘Benefactor’ by i sub
jects. Laws against extortion were indeed enacted. But   aft
 121 a governor, if impeached, would be tried beforea

rank to the exploitation of the Provinces by tax-fa:
usury, and concessions. At the same time election co
secured only by bribes to ‘ the Roman People’. The gove
had to make three fortunes out of his Province — one to




in an unparalleled exploitation that completed the
poverishment of the Hellenistic world.
    In the last century of the Republic Senators and capital}
ists amassed vast fortunes: Pompey was worth 11,000
talents, Crassus   7,500, the Stoic Brutus who murdered|
                          oar       oer   RM    ee
                                           a “aaa     a      r   ah
                            BES r ites    it
                                >

  a joo
      LINot AND FALL        OF THE ANCIENT           WORLD            261



     it mean thatthe Hobie Romans            ea lead of the
     ut (as Heichelheim points out) that there was less loot
     ket; depredations and mismanagement had destroyed
    uch of the accumulated wealth. In any case these
        es had been acquired, not as the rewards for organ-
    x industry and commerce, but as the plunder of war
 d the proceeds of extortion, usury, and financial manipu-
     n.
      Rome itself empire enriched only a relatively small
 8. Debts and conscription had driven from the land a
 ‘ge proportion of the peasantry; their small holdings were
 placed by capitalist farms worked by slaves. (These were
   always very large; Cato’s ideal in the second century
   ; a farm of some 60 to 150 acres, worked by 13 to 16
  ves.) The dispossessed peasantry could find no rebabilita-
        1 industrial employment; for the urban working class
    were being impoverished and socially degraded by the
     petition of slaves who were poured upon the market by
 ch imperialist war. The imperial city contained within
  + the material for civil war, just as inflammable as what
  ught alight in some Hellenistic cities.
     his situation helped Julius Caesar, after he had added to
     Empire the Celtic lands to the Rhine and the Channel,
  seize supreme power like a Greek tyrant. Two years later
    was murdered in the name of liberty. But after twelve
   ore years of civil war, his grand-nephew, Augustus Caesar,
    ame in fact emperor, though called only princeps (first
   izen). Julius was duly deified, and in the east Augustus
      pted divine honours in his own lifetime, thus proclaim-
      himself the spiritual successor of the Ptolemies and
   leucids and their Babylonian, Sumerian, and Pharaonic
forerunners. But he was now monarch of a single State
 sxtending from the Euphrates, the Black Sea, the Danube,
   d the Rhine to the Atlantic, and from the North Sea to
the Sahara and the Arabian desert. As thus completed the
Roman Empire is the best instance of a geographical area
                                                                ws2.
                                                                a
                                                                  i
262           WHAT    HAPPENED     IN   HISTORY                 *



large enough to be completely self-sufficing that enjoyed
a common culture as well as political unity.                q|
   Julius and Augustus put an end to the worst excesses of
Senatorial governors. They gave the Empire a reasonably
efficient and honest administration. Above all they gave it
peace. For nearly two hundred and fifty years the great unit|
enjoyed internal peace to a degree never hitherto enjoyed |
by so large an area. After the victory of Augustus the Roman
Peace was seriously disturbed internally only in the terrible:
year A.D. 68, when ‘a secret of empire was divulged that|
emperors could be made elsewhere than at Rome’, and|
three provincial armies warred in Italy to win for their|
generals the imperial dignity. Even external peace was not|
long nor deeply troubled by remote local wars that added |
to the Empire Britain (A.D. 50-80), Transylvania and
Rumania (as it was in 1938), Armenia, and parts ofMeso-
potamia.                                                    a
  The immediate result was a revival of prosperity and, a
least in the new western provinces, an increase of popula. |
tion. All over the new provinces in Gaul (France and
Belgium), Germany (the Rhine valley), and Britannia \
(England), as well as in Spain and North Africa cities of the |
Graeco-Roman pattern were established. In size Roman |
cities were quite like Greek poleis. As laid out in A.D. 100, |
Timgad in North Africa covered only some 3o acres; Caer- |
went in South Wales measured 44 acres, and Herculaneum,
near Naples, had not outgrown 26. Pompeii and many |
similar towns occupied 150 to 160 acres. Even at Naples
itself the walled area did not exceed 250, and Cirencester,
in England, was about the same size. But Roman London |
was already 300 acres, Capua 440, and Autun, in France, |
490, while New Carthage reached 1,200 acres, Alexandria
2,275, and Rome by the third century 3,060.                    )
   In themselves these figures do not imply any substantial |
increase of population. To-day the sixty-four closely built-up |
acres of St Malo house only 7,262 souls, and the ancient
cities were hardly more densely populated. The significant |
fact is the addition of a number of such cities in formerly |
         DECLINE   AND   FALL       OF   THE   ANCIENT   WORLD   263

   barbarian lands to those of Italy and the Hellenistic east.
 _ All but the smallest exceed in area the hill-top forts and
    villages in which Celts had lived in La Téne Britain, and all
   were far more closely built over. As the capital of a Belgic
_kingdom Colchester is disclosed by excavation as a dis-
_ orderly huddle of squalid huts. As a provincial city its
_ successor appears as a well planned array of commodious
   dwellings.
_. For all Roman cities, like the Hellenistic poleis, enjoyed
_ the amenities of a public water supply, now often laid on to
 _ every block, handsome public buildings, baths, theatres,
 - colonnades, market halls, and assembly places adorned with
_ statues and fountains. The private dwellings were tasteful
 - and commodious. In a provincial watering place like
 _ Pompeii with at most 30,000 inhabitants archaeologists have
- uncovered street upon street of mansions with mosaic pave-
 - ments, frescoed walls, colonnaded courts, glazed windows,
_ running water, bathrooms and latrines.
_ A good middle-class house with a terrace garden might
  occupy a block 108 ft square, the main reception room being
_ 48 ft long. More sumptuous houses with a colonnaded
   central court are of the order of 200 ft by 40 ft. These,
_ though very numerous, are doubtless the dwellings of the
_ bourgeoisie as defined on page 255, and occupied a space
_ disproportionate to the numerical strength of that class.
_ The larger body of small retailers, artisans, and labourers
_ would live in flimsier houses of one or two rooms or, in the
   larger cities, in tenements that might run up to 60 ft in
_ height. Still a baker’s house (two-storeyed) at Pompeii with
 _ the ovens and four donkey-mills on the ground floor forms
   a block go ft long and nearly 60 ft wide. At Caistor by
 - Norwich in distant Britain, houses adjacent to potters’ kilns,
  and so presumably occupied by master potters, are resplen-
 _ dent with tessellated pavements.
 _    Moreover, Roman cities like the Hellenistic polezs enjoyed
 _ municipal self-government. Election posters discovered at
   Pompeii show how keen the competition for magistracies was
   before the eruption of Vesuvius overwhelmed the city. Rich
                                \
 264          WHAT HAPPENED
- citizens were as public-spirited as inC
  istic world, and delighted to adorn their c
  buildings and to finance gladiatorial shows and c
 tainments for the benefit of their fellow-citizens.
    Rostovtzeff once called the new cities ‘hives of dr
 but they were also hives of industry and trade. The han
 crafts pursued in them supplied not only the citizens ;
 rural population of the vicinity with manufactured g
 but also barbarians far beyond the frontiers of the Emr
 Bronze casseroles made in Capua for instance have turr
 up in Scotland, Denmark, Sweden, Hungary, and R:
 Artisans and industrialists from Italy and the Helle
 east migrated westward and established factories in the
 provinces. Fine red-glazed moulded ware in the Helleni
 tradition was produced now by potteries established —
 France, ‘Germany’, and even at Colchester in En
 Syrians established glass-houses in the Rhine Valley
 northern France; an ‘artist in glass of African natior
 and a citizen of Carthage’ has left a tombstone at Lyon
   oe
     Trade circulated
                :
                       freely throughout the Empire. ene
 cities were united by a network of superb roads. Harbou
 were everywhere improved or constructed, and the sea’
 were now free from pirates. Pottery manufactured in
 has been found in Asia Minor, Palestine, Cyprus,
 North Africa, Spain, and Southern Russia; the prod
 the factories in France reached North Africa and Egy
 well as Spain, Italy, and Sicily.
    But the Empire, though self-sufficing, was not a
 economic system. The barbarians of the north sup
 slaves, amber, furs, and other materials.      In return
 acquired wines, pottery (mostly from French and Rher
 kilns), metal-ware, glass vessels, and coins, which are d
 all over Germany to East Prussia, Sweden, Denmark
 Norway, as well as in the distant isles north of Scot
 Trade routes radiating from the Black Sea ports distril
 similar commodities across the south Russian steppes to the
 forest belt beyond.                                       ey,
    Regular caravans of camels brought spices, aromatics,
                                                                       er

              Sree Pisce
           |DECLINE       en
                    AND FALL
            mts and jewels across the deserts from southern Arabia
            Mesopotamia. Their western termini, Petra, Jerash,
         bek, Palmyra, and Dura-Europos, became rich and
     rosperous entirely as a result of this traffic. Under Roman
     uspices direct sea trade between Egypt and India was
       ensified, partly cutting out the Arabs who controlled the
 caravan traffic.
 _ From Egyptian ports like Arsinoe and Berenice the India-
        *n sailed down the Red Sea, and then at first coasted
           g southern Arabia, across the mouth of the Persian
 Gulf and so coastwise to the Indus delta. But at least after
    . D. 50 they began to exploit the discovery of a Greek sea
           ain, Hippalos, that the monsoons provided a reliable
         ans of transit direct across the ocean to peninsular India,
        ormously economizing time. The south-west monsoon in
         gust provided both the motive power for the crossing and
         uide as reliable as a compass, which was still unknown.
        1enorth-east monsoon in January ensured the return
          age.
  rt
          yy using the monsoons the 2,760 miles from Berenice
  mL ht be covered in less than six months, the return voyage
 P    oy




           d be accomplished within ninety days. In fact, by leav-
‘ing Italy with the corn-ships in May, and taking Nile boat
and caravan from Alexandria to the Red Sea, you might be
back in Rome again in just over a year. A regular fleet was
engaged in the traffic, and we read of a boat 180 ft long,
45 ft wide and 44 ft deep.
      The fleet brought to the Roman market not only Indian
goods but also Chinese products carried so far overland or
by sea in Indian and Chinese bottoms. The imports were
mostly ‘luxuries’ - dancing girls, parrots, ebony, ivory,
pearls and precious stones, spices and perfumes from India,
 silks and drugs from China — but some,.such as pepper,
were becoming necessities to quite large circles.
      Owing to the limitations of transport and to the structure
  of Middle and Far Eastern societies these imports could not
 be paid for in the products of mass manufactures or agricul-
‘ture. High-class textiles, glass and metal ware, parchment
266           WHAT    HAPPENED       IN HISTORY

and papyrus and such substances as eorall were in ie;
exported eastwards from the Empire. But the balance
trade between Rome and India was adverse, and the defic
was made up by exporting coin— and good gold coin at tha
Roman aurei still turn up in numbers all over India and have
been found as far away as Ceylon and China. From the
falling ratio of silver to copper and to gold it has been calcu-
lated that two-thirds of the stocks of gold and half the silver
in the Empire had crossed its frontiers, mostly eastwards, by
the fourth century A.D. (Under Augustus the ratio of copper
to silver was as 1 to 60, of silver to gold 1 to 12; after 300 the
respective ratios are I to 125 and 1 to 14 or 18. )             2;
   Finally, Graeco-Roman agricultural science was fruitfully
applied to the undeveloped soil of the western provinces, as
of North Africa. All over France, the Rhine valley, and
Southern England Romans and provincials established
capitalist farms. On them Mediterranean techniques were
applied, vines and other new plants cultivated and acclima-
tized. The farm buildings, the so-called villas, afford a
pleasing contrast to the squalid and untidy steadings ofthe
La Tene Celts, such as we know on the English Downs. Even
the slaves’ quarters are more hygienic than the hovels of|
contemporary native villagers. ‘The owners’ apartments are
adorned with mosaic pavements. To meet the unaccus-
tomed rigours of a northern winter, Italian proprietors even
installed an ingenious system of central heating.            ms, |
   The Roman Empire formed a unique reservoir for the
pooling of human experience. The intensity of commercial |
intercourse between all its scattered parts and with civilized
and barbarian worlds beyond its frontiers has already been
indicated. Besides traders, craftsmen, and slaves, civil ser-
vants and military officers were continually travelling to the
remotest outposts of the Empire. The huge standing army
needed to guard the long frontiers against barbarism with-
out was a great educative force. Soldiers were recruited in
every part of the Empire, but the normal practice was to
send them to serve away from their home country. Finally
ambassadors and missionaries came from the East to Rome, |
                                             Sie seer    ey



         ere
          t    Py

      _ DECLINE AND FALL OF THE ANCIENT WORLD                   267
      d conversely Marcus Aurelius is said to have sent an
    mbassy to China.
 ___ In the scientific arrangement of the vast mass of informa-
   tion thus made available hardly any progress was made. No
  original creative hypothesis for reducing to order a number
      scattered facts was advanced. Not a single major inven-
_ tion was suggested by all the data accumulated. Despite the
_existence of a large leisured class of cultivated and even
_ learned men, Imperial Rome made no significant contribu-
 _ tion to pure science. Rich amateurs like Seneca and Pliny,
_ with the aid of an army of Greek clerks, compiled volumin-
   ous encyclopaedias of natural knowledge. Though a number
  _of true and novel observations were therein recorded, their
 _ arrangement is astonishingly unsystematic, and the critical
_ judgement of Aristotle is conspicuously absent. While Pliny
_ rejects magic verbally, his credulity is deplorable. Only in
 _ Alexandria was the tradition of Hellenistic science still
- active, but subject to the limitations mentioned on page 253.
_      In applied science, too, the advances made under the
_ Empire are disappointing in comparison with the resources
_ available. Roman architects and engineers applied and am-
_plified processes and techniques inherited from the Hellen-
 _ istic world and Republican Italy without any revolutionary
  ‘innovations. Medical studies were encouraged and sup-
 _ ported by the Emperors, and military hospitals were admir-
_ ably organized, but the results were hardly novel. Even in
 the highly respectable domain of agriculture the writers of
   the Empire have little to add to Cato. It may be questioned
   whether the Romans and their provincial disciples appre-
    ciated the difficulties of applying a system of farming evolved
 in the Mediterranean to the very different soils and climates
of temperate France and Atlantic England, whether in fact
 the villas were so scientific after all.
    If the sciences did not profit much from the facilities for
intercourse offered by the Empire, religions did. Slaves,
. emigrant artisans, merchants, and soldiers carried with them
  every variety of Oriental cult, not only to the capital but
    to the     uttermost   bounds   of the Roman     world.   Altars
  Germany. Of the many sects and rites thus diffi
 and Christianity were alone destined to have a p     x
 world significance. Judaism was too nationalistic to
-M™many converts outside those accruing to it by kt
 Christianity, on the other hand, provided the truly|
national ideology that a world economy had long demar
   Christianity began as a small Jewish sect whose mem
saw in Jesus the Messiah of the Scriptures and expected h
immediate return to set up the Kingdom on earth. B
Jesus’ doctrine of love and His life, at once an example o
 and object for, such love, combined with the promi
 salvation and resurrection, gave the faith an in
 broader appeal. After the journeys of Paul the religio
 spread rapidly, if at first principally among slaves        ;
 proletarians. As their one God, like Yahveh, would tolerate
 no other deity, least of all the divine Emperor, to sh:        Le
worship due to Him, the Christians, like the Jews,
persecuted by a State that would still tolerate any
provided only that loyalty to its deified head were p
proclaimed by conformity to the prescribed ritu
love for the Master inspired them to suffer and to di
an ideal with an unprecedented fortitude. In the end th
won not only toleration but also endowment from t
State — but only when that State needed an ideological
support to reinforce its failing powers.               ee
   In the meantime Christianity had acquired a priesth
a sacred book, and several theologies. The first disciples
their immediate followers had no need of an organizatior
an elaborate ritual or a philosophical formulation of the
faith; they expected the Messiah hourly. But when
second coming was found to be delayed, adjustments
became inevitable. Leaders were forthcoming to orga
the brethren’s meetings, to conduct their devotions and
proselytize the heathen. The very growth of the Chur
and above all the pressure of persecution made organiz
tion imperative. The Church evolved a hierarchy, modell 2 |
                                                        el

                                                            t
     lif and sayings a,eeemust            6 Rave been recorded.
   lected and edited and combined with writings attributed
 tOthe apostles, these came to form a canon to which the
 b ilk of the Hebrew Scriptures was prefixed. Missionaries
       thus equipped with a sacred book to compete with
    hose of the Jews, the Zoroastrians, and the Orphics.
       To defend and explain their faith before imperial officials
    nd the middle classes, the leaders were obliged to formu-
   ate in terms of analytic reasoning the emotional content of
        igious experience. They inevitably used the terminology
        Greek philosophy and Aristotelian logic, helped out by
           ences to approved or tolerated and familiar Classical
      id Oriental doctrines. The inherent difficulties of the task
         vitably provoked controversies which would split the
        urch into sects, each branding as heretics all its oppo-
 nents, as soon as the pressure of persecution relaxed. At
   che same time a tincture of dogmas derived from Judaism,
      eo-Platonism, and other heterogeneous sources was in-
      sed into the simple teachings of Jesus. In fact, the scientific
    iythology of the Jewish book of Genesis, Greek science as
 expounded by Aristotle, and even the geocentric astronomy
           ipparchus became incorporated in the tenets of the
            successful sect.
           the same way ritual was enriched by borrowings from
           ceremonial of mystery cults and the vestments of
    riest-kings, while converts were conciliated by the adop-
   tion as saints, martyrs or virgins of local heroes and mother-
f ddesses of neolithic antecedents. Increasing emphasis
 came to be laid on the negative sanctions for piety and
 morality, implicit in the teachings of Jesus as in any other
doctrine of salvation. If Christianity as a religion of love
.surpassed all others in stimulating positive virtue, it came
Beto match the Egyptian, Zoroastrian, Orphic, and Buddhist
faiths in deterring from evil by terrifying descriptions of
 hell.
    Finally, with their hopes and fears focused upon the
 coming Kingdom and the life beyond the grave, the early
             WHAT    HAPPENED      IN   HISTORY

Christians accepted the social order as they found it h
except in so far as it conflicted with their ritual duties.    In
the Kingdom there would be no distinction between slave
and free, but here slavery was an established institution, ,
and theslave must submit himself to his master.
   Nevertheless the Christian conception of the Brotherhoo
of Man and its command, ‘Love thy neighbour as thyself ,
provided a motive for moral action more universal             |
loyalty to tribe or polis, and yet more potent than Stoic
philosophy or Roman law. But for the moment the new
religion, like older cults, made life significant and livable
for the masses to whom the resources of the Empire an.
the fruits of natural science offered no prospects in thislifer
It spread through the middle and upper classes precisely
in the measure that these too were forcibly convinced of       ‘



the vanity of earthly hopes by the growing impoverishment _
of the economic system. And this disillusionment was ne
long delayed.
   The multiplication and beautification of cities and aed
lively bustle of commerce that we have described give an |
impression of limitless prosperity. Yet the Empire had =
removed the contradictions of Hellenistic economy. Rome
had not released any new productive forces and did not
materially extend the use of those already available in the
Hellenistic age. Not even the structure of industry ie
radically reformed. ‘The step from the “manufactory” to
the factory and the machine as the fundamental means of
production was not made.’
   No doubt the size of the productive unit was increaenl
For example, the ceramic industry of Arretium (Arezzo in >
Tuscany) was organized on a larger scale than the same
industry in Athens five centuries earlier, Out of twenty-five —
potteries operating there between 25 B.c. and A.D. 25, two
employed more than 30 artists who ‘signed’ their products, ©
ten had from Io to 14 artists and only six so few as 7 to 10.
The largest firm that in the fifty years sold vases signed by
58 artists must have had at least a hundred slaves engaged
at any one time in the less skilled operations. So in the
    le Pe we read even at Pompeii of a workshop
    loying 25 weavers.
       multiplication of employees under unitary manage-
    nt does not, however, imply any greater specialization
    Jabour than we have already encountered in classical
 Athens and Corinth. Still less was it dictated by any sort
of mechanization. Water-mills, for instance, were hardly
commoner in the first century after our era than in the
last century before it. The ‘aristocratic’ tradition, inherited
from the Republic, discoutaged the investment of capital
in industry. A Senator was forbidden by law to engage in
trade. Even more than in classical Greece ‘agriculture and
to a lesser extent commerce were the only “respectable”
  ccupations; thesphere of industry was left to freedmen and
others of humble birth’ and slender means. The new rich
accordingly hastened to invest in land like the freedman,
‘Trimalchio, in the famous satire of Petronius. Having made
   fortune in shipping and money-lending in the days of
   ero, he proceeds to buy up estates and farms. At best sucha
   pitalist might buy slaves to man a workshop, but he would
 not even fulfil what economists call the entrepreneur function
‘since the works would be managed by a freedman oralessee.
 _ Hence we find at Pompeii forty little bakeries with mills,
 like the one described on page 263, and about twenty fullers’
 shops to cater for the needs of the 30,000 inhabitants of this
 little town. Soin the ceramic industry at Lezoux in Southern
 France, which after a.p. 70 took the place of Arretium in
s1 pplying the western market, eight distinct firms are
 known by their trade marks.
   The real increase of wealth attested in the early days of
 the Empire was the result of the superficial expansion of
civilization and the suspension of attritional warfare. But
‘the expansion of urban civilization was a system of
  exploitation which organized the resources of the newly
conquered lands and concentrated them i= the hands of a
minority of capitalists and business men.’ In other words,
the market for goods was made wider, but not deeper. “The
 purchasing power of the very large lower class was still
i dedved from the middle ne upper
  Army,’ as in Hellenistic times.
    On the land the position of the peasantry
  proved and probably deteriorated in the old e

 Me gosleling the ieaundity of refuges:in Lecnoies (
 In Celtic lands like Britain the natives lived in t
 squalor and cultivated. their lands by the same in
 means as before their annexation to the Empire.

 workers was kept down by the competition of dace
 Admittedly slaves did not oust free workers from
 ment. Of the artisans mentioned in inscriptions of |
 and second centuries, 27 per cent were free-born.
 cent freedmen Ca             slaves), and only ve



 with tombstones or offices in religious clubs — pea
 those that our inscriptions mainly refer — so tha
 figures do not give actual proportions of the e
 population. Nevertheless even in a brickworks th


 of Arretium before A.D. 25, out of 132 known work
 were slaves. But in the ceramic industry of France a
 Rhine valley the employment of slaves is not thus
 In inscriptions from Dijon woodworkers, smiths, ando t
 craftsmen are called ‘dependents’ (clzentes), not slaves.   —
   It must again be recalled that slaves Were ie


men were Shen aires and Caesar’s slaves wtene
fulfil the functions of ministers of State. Some auth
assert that wages actually rose till a.p. 200. Be that a:
 may, the share of the industrial worker in the produce «
 his labour was very small.
             ed, very low. “The men of antiquity, if they did
        e in opulence, had few needs. They lived mainly on
       en bread, olives, and figs, consuming relatively little
      and wine, in miserably furnished rooms, heated only
        ee -and lit with oil lamps.’ Most men apparently

      d at raising it.
        ce the internal market was as restricted as it had been
       Hellenistic and Classical worlds. But now the external




     itical disturbances feannieded to mask the results of
    elyeconomicforces, Undisturbed we can observe the

 cy, since 450 B.C,
a   appear first as cai shadows on the bright surface



    an expansion of the manufacturers of Italy and Greece,
   itby migration of craftsmen to France, Germany, and
     ain. Down to A.D. 25 the better-class pottery used in the
     t had been exported from Arretium. Thereafter crafts-
      , expert in its manufacture,       migrate first to South
      ance, then to the north and Germany, finally even to
    ritain to set up potteries there to supply the local markets.
       e case of the glass industry, already cited, illustrates the
same process.
y.. The result was a reduction of inter-provincial trade, par-
 ticularly in cheap consumption goods. Each province tended
    o become an economic unit that supplied its own needs as
   far as its natural resources would allow. That was not the
      msequence of any chauvinistic demands for self-sufficiency
      ch as have inspired the tariff policies of Australia and
  Canada. It resulted rather from the deficiencies of the
  transport system already explained. Not even the splendid
274           WHAT    HAPPENED       IN HISTORY   |
Roman roads had made the carriage of bulky good
land really cheap. So ‘Rome, which imported every
from the provinces, never reimbursed them except
money from their taxes.’                              \
   Still graver was the tendency of capitalist farms to g
into self-sufficing ‘households’ of the old Oriental patt
In the days of Cato only minor repairs were done at tL
farm; for major operations the local smith would be called
in. Glothes for the slaves, burned bricks, and metal war
were bought in town. Under Augustus only very large an
remote estates maintained specialist craftsmen. But a
A.D. 50 Pliny assumes that on every estate there are weave
fullers, smiths, carpenters, and so on.
   Then the capitalist farms, scientifically run, albeit wi
slave labour, and producing for the market, began to
replaced by, or combined with, estates exploited by de
dent tenants or share-farmers practising subsistence a
culture. The villa began to turn into the manor as fai
in medieval Europe. This meant the replacement of sla
cultivators and herdsmen not by free peasants such as_
formed the backbone of classical Greece and early It
but by tenants dependent on the landlord for seed
equipment and paying rent often in kind and servi
well — an old Oriental system already encountered r
than once. The system offered the new bourgeoisie
opportunity to ‘make fortunes out of unspecialized a
culture by absentee landlords’. It was definitely a step b
towards the Oriental economy of the Bronze Age, indet
towards neolithic self-sufficiency.
   The specialized farmer, large or small, relied on urban
industry to supply the needs of himself, his family, or his |
slaves. The new type of tenant could cover a larger pro-
portion of his needs by household industries. The Jandlords
maintained on their estates small-scale smithies, potteries,
tile-works, and brick-kilns worked by their slaves or the
compulsory labour of their tenants. Only luxury products
like glassware and exotic materials had to be bought in town.
   The inevitable rue was the decline of urban industries
        cess can be measured by the actual contraction of urban
      eas. After A.D. 275 Autun had shrunk from nearly five

    cities in France after A.D. 300 exceed sixty acres. Bordeaux
      down to fifty-six, Nantes, Rouen, and Troyes to thirty-
    nine. In Britain, too, the decline of city life is no less clear
    in the last quarter of the third century. At Verulamium
    (St Albans) the town walls were partly in ruins and the
 theatre fell into disuse. At Wroxeter the town centre was
   burned and not rebuilt. These facts symbolize the ruin of
    1e smaller bourgeoisie at least as a corollary of the ‘ex-
     citation of the primary producer.
      Now, as Rostovtzeff says, ‘the advance made in the Greek
      d Hellenistic periods i in the sphere of industry was due to
      constant increase in the demand for goods. After 125
     e market for industry was limited to the cities and country
     stricts of the empire. The future of industry depended on
    eir purchasing power. And while the buying capacity of
_ the city bourgeoisie was large their numbers were limited,
Eeand the city proletariat grew steadily poorer. The material
   velfare of the country population improved very slowly if
       all.” ‘When the limits of the ovkowmene were reached,
 industry should have exploited the internal market more
  actively and should have extended its scope to include the
 _lower classes. This would, however, have required a modi-
  fiction of the social structure of the Empire’ (Cambridge
_ Ancient History, xiii, 252).
_     Having    failed   to stimulate   proletarian   and   peasant
demand by advertising and to make it effective by a
 redistribution of purchasing power, the middle class of
 factory owners, merchants, and shopkeepers, who had reaped
such benefits from the Roman peace, now found themselves
doomed         to proletarianism, too. No wonder they began
restricting their families like their forerunners in Hellenistic
 Greece. Only the great landlords escaped, and that by a
‘reversion to neolithic self-sufficiency.
   By A.D. 250 all semblance of prosperity had vanished.
276           WHAT HAP
 The bankruptcy of the Romas
 exposed. It was proclaimed to the
 in fertility that is notorious in all classes 0:
 of the later Empire. Economically, as well as sci
 classical civilization was dead a hundred and fifty
 before barbarian invaders from Germany finally disr
 the political unity of the Empire and formally initiat
 Dark Age in Europe.                                    :



 a heroic if vain attempt to rescue the machinery of ci
 tion by reviving a regime of Oriental centralization,
miscalled State Socialism. A more arene term




 population naturally reacted on the State itself. A
 standing army was essential to defend the vast empir
 the prolific starvelings of the Germanic north an
 envious nomads of the eastern and southern stepp
 army had to be equipped and paid, and its cost incr
 as the emperors were forced to hire barbarian merc

 Administration and the collection of revenue req
 large and costly civil service. ‘The emperors spent va:
 on public works that were either really reproducti

 quite wasteful luxuries. While the economic systen
 expanding it could easily stand the strain, but as
 proached the limits set forth above, a discrepancy betw
 revenue and expenditure became noticeable.
    Nero already began to cover his deficit by debasing
 currency. The drainage of bullion to the east to pay for
 luxuries imported for the plutocracy (p. 265) further er
 barrassed the Treasury. In the third century the deficit w
 swelled by civil wars in which the armies were turned fro
                                                      Dot eee    ee
                                                  ’         et   i   .   ot   x




       g ‘to. the expenses they traditionally entailed and
      ause magistrates were made responsible for the pay-
     mnt of their city’s taxes. So magistracies were made
     npulsory on all who, in the eyes of the State, could
     ord them.
   Then compulsion was applied to industry and commerce
       The guilds of craftsmen and merchants, originally free
   ss ciations for religious and social ends, became organs of
    e State for ensuring a supply of artisans or ships. To
    sure the maintenance of public services the employees of
      mint,   the State arsenals,   the State   textile factories
   here were seventeen in the west alone), the public post,
        water supplies, and similar utilities were bound to their
          yment, often branded, and allowed to marry only
    to the families of fellow-workers. One was no longer free
       dopt or ply a craft, but compelled by law to follow it.
     afts in fact became castes. All were brought under
       itary discipline, which applied also to corporations of
       owners, teamsters, and others            ete      services
    fected with a public interest’.

_    more> favoured provincial towns were thus maintained. At
"Rome there were 956 public baths and free shows were
 given on 175 days a year! The citizens now received the
   ee corn, distributed to them since the days of the Gracchi,
   lready ground to flour for them; water-mills became
- common in Rome after 300. Prices were fixed throughout
the Empire by edict as by Babylonian kings, but wages
_ were fixed too, and that not minimum but maximum wages
 as in the Bronze Age — for there was a real shortage of
_labour.
_ Finally the primary producers were reduced to the status
peasants’ in Egypt oe           Nien Tiberiusten
right to strike, leaving banditry or beggary the sole       reso
of an oppressed tenant; in the third century the typi
questions put to an oracle were: ‘Am I to become a beggar ?
‘Shall I fly?’ ‘Will my flight be stopped?’ After 300 the:
system was applied to Europe, primarily as a fiscal meas
to make sure that the cultivator did not escape his poll tz
In 332 Constantine, the first Christian emperor, made »
attachment of the share-farmer (colonus) to the manor.
forceable at law. In 371 the Emperor Valerian wrote: “
do not deem that coloni are free to leave the land to w
their condition and birth attach them. If they do, let th
be brought back, put in chains and punished.’ The ten
has become aserf.                                          ‘
   But by favouritism and corruption the landlords o
great estates escaped the pressure of the machine. Thi
they might be compelled to provide contingents for t
army from their tenantry, they were often able to prot
these against the exactions of tax-gatherers and the rest          of
the swarm of officials. So ruined freeholders and urban
workers sought refuge under the patronage of great         lar
owners. These feudal lords were already on the wa
vindicating for themselves a political independence c
sponding to their economic self-sufficiency and so preparitn
the disruption that was consummated by barbarian w
bands in the fifth century.
  Finally, asthe ideological expression of the totalitari

‘Master and God’ (dominus ac deus). Only Christiani
an exclusive monotheism effectively organized in a
versal and independent church, offered for a time a spir
refuge against absorption in the Nazional-Sozialist State.
The conversion of Constantine is generally hailed as the
final victory of the new faith. It may equally be “oe
as the triumph of totalitarianism.
   The Church no doubt won not only tolerance and relief
from persecution, but also wealth and the right to eae:
                                                                    ae




                                                              j
                      ‘ee       rit            tN   Tar
             mA   Bre       a              a                  as
         :    J   Lee aTeay,          ey                  ¥


        DECLINE AND FALL OF THE ANCIENT WORLD                                              279


bu the i) become the ‘Orthodox and Apostolic Emperor’,
His rule was an earthly counterpart and representative of
  he Sovereignty of the Divine Word. In the ‘Sacred Palace’
     ; Istanbul     the ‘Divine                                Household’   abode   and issued
     Celestial Commands’;                             even         the annual   tax assessment
   wasknown as the ‘Divine Delegation’.
er Tt seems as if humanity has reverted from the Greek Iron
Age back to the Oriental Bronze Age. The atmosphere of
Byzantium is’ more like that of Babylon or Ur than of
 Athens or Alexandria. Nor could the relapse to Oriental
centralization and despotism save even the physical unity
of the Empire. /Germanic hordes overran the western
7 rovinces and “sacked even Rome itself. (The capital had
_been removed to Byzantium (Istanbul) under Constantine.)
AD pepod of barbarism submerged all the new acquisitions
rt




     re nuinerous, they are still citizens of a world infinitely
  rider than any Sumerian dreamed of, however much its
frontiers may have contracted since Augustus. Water-power
_now drives the mills that slaves had once pushed. There is
   ore than a verbal difference between an ‘Orthodox and
    ostolic Emperor’ and ‘the divine Naram-Sin, the mighty,
god of Agadé’. The former acknowledges himself servant of
a God who is Father of all men, not only of Akkadians. His
 universal dominion needs no extension by military victories.
      In reality the cultural capital accumulated in the long
_ ages here surveyed was no more annihilated in the collapse
 _ of the Roman Empire than smalier accumulations had been
  in the lesser catastrophes that interrupted and terminated
  the Bronze Age (pp. 150, 153, 185, 186). Of course,.as then,
“many refinements, noble and beautiful, were swept away.
But for the most part these had been designed for and
 ments that had       el thease         10
 gressive and that had become firmly«
 genuinely popular footing by the aia
 classes were conserved, even if temporarily fossilized.
    So in the Eastern Mediterranean city life, with
 implications, still continued.   Most crafts were st
  with all the technical skill and equipment evolved
- Classical and Hellenistic times. Farms were still w
  scientifically to produce for the market. Barter d
  entirely oust the money economy, nor did self-suffici
  paralyse trade completely. Writing was not forg

 texts were studiously copied and preserved. Greek m:
 was practised in public hospitals with the en
 Church.

 comparably graver. But ies a reaction towa
 aT      GL barbarized Europe did not’ ae




 alluvial valley, but of a vast round oe Howeunli
 they were by the deterioration of the roads and the ¢
 that infested them, pilgrims, missionaries, and me chi
 could and did travel about a continent. The new al
 crafts introduced under the Empire were not exting


 all through the Dark Ages. Water-wheels were       u
 feudal estates and by 700 were at work even in En;


 in Egypt and Mesopotamia to their confluence in
 Hellenistic Mediterranean. With the collapse of the Ro
         - stream seems to be obstructed and lost. But
        y of writing this book itself refutes that supposi-
    ould be fora sequel to show how the current flowed



  fhe one hand, the body of Classical theory and
   istic technology was preserved in a staté of suspended
  tion at Byzantium and Alexandria in the sterilizing
 sphere of a theocratic State. It began to revive in the
  tolerant atmosphere of Sassanian Iran (in the Uni-
   of Jundishapair, 530-580) and then under the
ifsof Baghdad (750-900), when the temporal conquests
     i realizing /again the unity of a large area of the
 ited world, recreated an era of peace and prosperity.
  : the old internal contradictions had destroyed the
     ty and disrupted the polity of the Arabic world,
     the establishment of the Orthodox Faith about




a respect for precise conventional divisions of time and
    es for their determination (clocks), a demand for



   al medicine and scientific agriculture. Many crafts-
  survived as indicated; old Mediterranean towns were
laced by new cathedral cities.
  e rural economy of Europe did not revert to that of
 re-Roman Celts. No doubt even more than in the late
282

Admittedly feral famines were re               1
relieved by the distribution of a world surplu
the feudal estates did permit of the estab
of farming really suited to the temperate |
Serfdom for the first time converted its half-r
 cultivators into really sedentary farmers. And the lo
 water-mills provided examples of the rational exploi
 of resources with which our Continent is excep
blessed.                     }
    These hints must suffice. Progress is real if discont
 The upward curve resolves itself into a series of trough
crests. But in those domains that Coe as el


 precursor.

                          THE   END




                           MAPS
      THE EXTENT     OF THE CIVILIZED     WORLD ABO
             2500,    1500,   500 AND   100 B.G.—
 In these the reader sees the areas of literate urban
                                                    ci
 tion (horizontally hatched) grow from three little-
 map 1 to a vast lake embracing the whole Medi
 basin and extending continuously to India, where
 joins on to a western bay of a second lake - in G
 map 4. Maps 2 and 3 indicate (by vertical hate
 the remarkable growth of trade from Greece betwe
 and 500B.c. ~                               >    :
                             LYISIO



                  Z?Anwaxa




                                      0052
                                       DG
                  ope



                             L44SId
                    31349




                                      vonezying
                                           Iogy
s
29,               eHeW


Uj9y
jequapury
 \e




                                      seedy
                                         40

            JASVI1
            . 6
              WINaIWIv~
           VINASSES




           Sr
           =n
           =




ANVLLIYS
     111 dVW




fo
vorezyiAlg
seady
OOF
0-8
Iogy
                                                                                             o     —   iS                     en

                                                                              ae ify   ny




                                                                 INDEX
                    3                16, 104, 133, 221                    Election of magistrates, 204, 206, 208,
                        Pg           2-5; 70, 161, 222,                      260, 263
                3, 266,              281-2                                Epics, 142, 170, 227
             25, 118, 181-2, 186, 191-2, 209                              Experimental science, 218, 222, 234, 244,
      ure, 138, 227, 267, 281                                                249-50
      0    Buildings, Houses, Temples
    Villages and Cities, 54-5, 59-60,                                     Factories, 94-5, 199, 207, 228, 235, 270
             125,       146,    165, 170,           173,       194-5,     Faience, 115, 126, 164, 171, 180
    231-2,              262-3,275                                         Fate, 136, 220, 258
   tic. See Mathematics                                    :             Fishing, 3% 38, 39, 43, 46, 52, 53, 89, 114,
   » 32,            40-1,      42-3,         101,    126,        131,
   ), 163-4, 166, 184, 241-2, 281                                            123, 126, 130, 131, 140, 145, 189,
                                                                          Fortifications,   55, 59, 67, 93,        117, 240,
    246, 251                                                                 241
   , 162, 167-8, 177, 183, 188, 211                                       Fortunes, 227, 254, 255-6, 260-1
    2, 14d                                                                Fractions, 106, 119, 177, 178, 217, 245-6
 hOMmy, 33, 110,                 I19g, 133,          153, 214,            Fruit trees, 70, 89, 147, 163. See also
    ‘45-9                                                                    Olives, Vines
   e Intoxicants
                                                                         Geography, 220-1, 246-9
         Ships, 84, 90, 97, 114, 117, 126,                               Geometry. See Mathematics             '
               186-7, 231, 265                                           Glass, 156, 175, 180, 238, 252, 264, 280
     ‘Arrows, 38, 52
                                                                         Glazing. See Faience
 ry and corruption, 159-60, 254, 260,                                    Gods, 73, 88, 94-5, 116-18, 128, 136,
   72; 73) 74, QI, 116, 125                                                 197-8, 152, 160, 161, 163, 209-13, 225,
                                                                            267, 268            ‘
  andindustrialrate                             77, 96, 102,
   22, 126, 131-2, 144-5, 146, 149-50,                                   Granaries, 53, 54, 58, 94, 127, 130
 aah 170,                     172,     182-3,        186,        195,.
                                                                         Harbours, 164, 230, 236, 264
     sizes of, 73-4, 91-2, 116, 117,                                     Harness, 80, 81, 83, 174
   40, 170, 173, 195, 199, 232, 263                                      Hell, 157, 212, 213, 269
      » 15, 34-5, 39-40, 64, 114, 116,                                   Hieroglyphic writing, 116, 118, 133, 181,
             » 161, 170, 172, 173                                           Ig
                                                                         Horses, 72, 82, 83,.154, 161, 162, 203
        , 108-9, 120, 135, 186, 219                                      Households, great, 95-6, 121-2, 132, 143,
  (for transport),                     83, 194, 264-5                       155-6, 158, 162, 163, 164, 165, 183, 201,
ots, 83, 152, 154, 161, 162, 165, 170,                                      233, 27.
         203, 241                                                        Houses, 38, 54, 56, 72, 127, 131, 165, 173,
       66, 86-7, 88, 146-7, 167, 241                                        195, 199, 232, 263
     fanization, 45-6, 66, 68, 78-9,                                     Hunting, 23-4, 37, 43, 48, 52, 53, 54, 61,
    14, 115-16, 130-1, 145-6, 206                                           62, 114
      on in society, 68, 88, 98-9, 116,
             » 200-1, 207-8, 224-5, 233-4,                               {mmortality, 114, 121, 137-8, 148, 153,
                                                                            157, 213, 268
  ication, 13,3 107, 134, 136, 222-3                                     Imperialism, 141, 142, 151, 152, 154, 162,
      d sun 1a. Is, 108, 153, 218, 246,                                     165, 184, 187-8, 193-4, 207, 230, 231,
             » 281                                                          259, 261
        25, 192-3, 201, 209, 215, 236,                                   Indo-Europeans, 85, 163, 168-9, 186, 187
             ) 27                                                        Inflation, 159, 276-7
   S - Bronze, Metallurgy                                                Intercourse between societies, 22, 23, 32,
    9, 126, 234                                                             39, 60-1, 67, 96-8, 115, 169, 174-5, 187,
                             77-9;   85, 86, 95,                IOI,        239-40, 245, 266-7, 281
                5, 146, 151, 156, 164,                                   Intoxicants, 58, 59, 167, 203, 213, 252, 273
   6 , 170, 176, 186, 195-7, 203, 206,                                   Irrigation, 70, 89-90, 113, 114, 146, 158.
  229, 232, 241-2, 255, 263, 264, 272,                                      163, 201, 233
                                                                         Tron, 175, 182-3, 190-1, 201, 202, 204, 205

                                                                         Journey times, 164, 174, 189, 236-7, 265
                                                                         Judgement of souls, 137-8, 157
     » 151, 153, 185, 202, 276, 280
   ee Usury
  acy, 205-8                                                             Kings, divine, 65, 87, too,        113,    116-17,
  aries, 107, 134                                                           132, 157, 160-1, 163, 164, 165, 176, 204,
ion ofculture, 21-2, 61-3, 67-8,                                78-9,      215, 232, 261, 268-9, 278-9
  97-8, 162, 167, 171, 182, 188-9,
  208-9, 210-11, 232-3, 238, 239,                                        Land tenure, 46, 66, 94, 120-1, 155, 196,
                                                                           209, 215
 ence oftraditions, 18-19, 20-1, 31-2,                                   Language, 11-12, 20-1, 168-9, 173, 181
  62-3                                                                   Law, 152, 156-7, 158, 163, 204-5, 208, 211
as, ritual, 40, 65, 100-1, 227                                           Lighthouses, 230, 236
288                                           INDEX

                                                     Seals, 72-3, 74, 75, 87, 91, 140, 145.
                                                                                                                                                 ‘
Machines, 38, 39, 250-1            :
Magic, 17, 35, 40-1, 45-6, 63, 64-5, 78-9,             166-7                                                             oh                 int
  87-8, 116-17, 121, 128, 135,           167-8,      Secret societies, 87, 92, 121, 214                                                     ai
  2Q1I-12, 267                 7                     Self-sufficiency,        39, 60, 68, 74, 79, 124, ut
Mathematics,   1o8-10, 118-19,           127-8,        145-6, 194-5, 196, 229, 241, 273-4, 278
  133-4, 136, 177-9, 180, 214, 216-17, 218,          Serfdom,     25,     123,       156,         194,        196,     233, i
  245-7                                                234, 274, 278, 281 ©                                                                  ay
Measures, standardized, 107-8, 119, 216              Silk, 162, 240, 265                                                                         iM
Medicine, 119, 133-4, 221-2, 250, 267                Slavery, 25, 88, 95, 97, 143, 155, 158,
Merchants, 24, 62, 96, 111, 126-7, 132,                 176,    194,     199,        200,        207,         209,     213, ~
  140-I, 143, I5I-2, 155, 158, 171, 182,               223, 224, 227, 233, 234, 235, 239;
  194, 201, 206, 280                                   256-7, 261, 270, 272                                                             B
Metallurgy, 73, 75-7, 114, 126, 161, 172.            Sledges, 44, 81
  182-3                                              Small change, 25, 192-3, 197-8
Middle Class, 25, 143, 153-5, 156-7, 164,            Specialization, 17, 24-5, 41, 57-8, 60, 61,
  176, 194, 205, 209, 255, 275                          77, 95,        116,     122,        125-6,            199, 235; —
Migration, 22, 67, 147, 167, 169, ry is                271                                                                                  ¢
   185-6, 189-90, 196-7, 231, 239-40, 254.           Spinning      and        weaving,            50, 59-60, 95,
  273                                                   122, 125-6                                                                     ae
Milk, 49, 83, 203                                    Statues, 40, 64, 138, 226                                                         op
Mills, corn, 53, 235, 263, 271. See also             Stock-breeding, 24, 49, 52, 55, 59, 66, 81,
   Querns                                               95, 114, 125,          140, 161, 167, 203, 222,
Mining, 61, 117, 144-5,       148 149, 172,             233, 241, 243                                                         “Muy
   198, 207, 233                                     Streets, 53, 59-60, 127, 263                                             sop
Money, 110-11, 122, 127, 132, 143, 155-6,            Strikes, 208, 254, 272, 278
   158, 192, 193, 201, 280                           Surplus of food (wealth), 24-5, 41, 60, 69,
Morality, 137-8, 157, 210-12, 215, 229,                78, 90, 92, 98-9, 101, 114, 120, 131,
  258, 269                                              140, 144-5, 149, 156, 157-8, 161, 164,
Mortgages, 158-9, 193, 201-2                            169-70, 203                                                            ‘
Music, 42, 139, 216                                  Symbols, 12-14, 40-1                                                          :
Mystery religions, 213, 269
Numerals, 93, 105-6, 118-9, 127, 177-8;              Temples,      74, 87-8, 90-3, 94-5, 140, 142,
   217, 246-7                                           143, 232                                                         fy
                                                     Tin. See Bronze                           i
Oligarchy, 205, 209, 223                             Totemism, 45, 87, 98, 114, 116, 128, 213,
Olives, 140-1, 145, 147, 166, 193, 197               Trade,     395      60-1,       72;         73>     745     79;    84
Piracy, 146, 147, 166-7, 171, 196-7, 204,               90,     96-7,         102,     I12,            114-15,         126,
   205, 229, 236                                        140-1, 145-6, 147-8,   151-2, 163-4, f
Plough, 80-1, 95, 202, 242                              165, 166, 167, 171, 196-7, 201, 202,
 Population, 29-30, 43, 44-5, 59, 66, 92,               234, 235, 236, 238-9, 264-5, 266, 273,
    123, 125, 130, 144-5, 147, 172-3, 198,              200                                                                        ”
   200, 202, 231-2, 242, 258, 262, 275-6              Transport,        97,     125,       131-2,            140-1,    152,                  —
 Pottery, 49-50, 54, 56, 63, 72, 85-6, 122,              174, 194, 234, 236, 237, 238-9, 273-4
   165-6, 186, 197, 199, 221, 235, 238,               Usury, 158-9, 193, 201,                      202,        209, 225,
   263-4, 270
 Prices, 159, 183, 238, 277                              228, 255, 256, 260
 Property, 46, 72. See also Land         tenure,
    Money, Slavery                                    Vehicles, wheeled,                   74,         82,     95,     126,
 Pythagoras’ theorem, 179, 180, 217, 218                 161, 162, 165.                See         also         Chariots,
                                                        Sledges
 Quadratic equations, 179, 218, 246                   Vine, 70, 145, 147, 163, 197, 222
 Querns, 53, 54, 58, 61, 235
 Religion, 41-2, 91-3, 121, 128, 135, 137-8,          Wages, 94-5, 110, 160, 193, 200, 227,
    160-1, 167-8, 210-12,     225, 239-40,              233, 255, 272, 277
   244-5, 258, 267-70, 278-9                          War,     67-8, 80, 88, 99-100, IOI, II2,
 Retail trade, 126, 155-6, 164-5, 180-1,                115-16, 117-18, 141-2, 150, 154-5,
    192-3                                                169-70, 184, 201, 202, 203, 225, 242,
 Rice, 57, 161, 162, 222                                 243, 251, 256, 259
 Riding, 83, 203                                      Water-mills, 246-7, 251, 271, 277, 280
 Roads, 189, 194, 230, 237, 264                       Wheel, the Potter’s, 72, 75, 85, 86, 91
 Rotary motion, 39, 50, 235, 251. See                    122, 125-6, 146-7, 161, 164, 169, 186
    also Wheel                                        Women, position of, 48, 49, 50, 58,
 Sacred books, 167, 216, 268                             59, 60, 63, 66, 80, 81, 86, 95, 207
                                                      Writing, 51, 87, 93, 103-6, 107, 112, 116,
 Sacrifices, 41-2, 210-11, 213                           118, 127-8, 132, 133, 141, 143, 162-3,
 Sails, 84, 115                                          164, 177, 280. See also Alphabet,
 Science, 33, 50, 58, 63, 77, 103, I19, 128,            Cuneiform, Hieroglyphic
      129,191,   132-3, 163, 213, 243, 244,
    245, 258, 267, 281                                Yeast, 58
 Schools, 41, 106-7, 118, 134,         151,   177;
    179, 186, 209, 221, 231                           Zero sign, 245
            - THE ANCIENT
        CIVILIZATIONS OF PERU
                   J. Alden Mason

                        A395




 ce peditions have made excavations and published
their reports, Regions archaeologically unknown
 hitherto have yielded their secrets, and far more is
    own of all of them. Especially is this true of the
 cultures that preceded the Inca whom Pizarro found




 os a summary of our present iowledoe and
 emt of view regarding the development and nature
                  Drummond Young, Edinburgh

Professor
        V. Gordon Childe, D.Litt., D.Sc., F.S.A., F.B.A.,
was born in Sydney, Australia, in April 1892. He is a
graduate of Sydney and Oxford Universities, and from
1919 to 1920 he held the post of Private Secretary to
the Premier of New South Wales.
   In 1927 he was appointed the first Abercromby
Professor of Prehistoric Archaeology in the University
of Edinburgh, and directed numerous excavations in
Scotland and Northern Ireland, but notably at the
wonderfully preserved Stone Age village at Skara Brae
in Orkney. From 1946 to 1956 he was Professor of Pre-
historic Archaeology and Director of the Institute of
Archaeology in the University of London.
   Among the sixty-odd distinguished scientists and
men of letters invited from all over the world to
address the Conference of Arts and Scienc           ved
by Harvard University to celebrate its
in 1936, Childe was selected to represen
archaeology and was awarded the honora
Doctor of Letters, while the University of
conferred upon him an honorary Doctorat
in 1937. He was visiting Professor at the U
California during the summer session of 19
1940 was elected a Fellow of the British Aca
own University of Sydney awarded him an
Litt.D. in 1957.
   Professor Childe is the author of several well
books which include The Dawn of European Civi
The Most Ancient East, The Prehistory of Scotlan
Makes Himself, Prehistoric Communities        in the
Isles, and Social Evolution.
