Patterns in Prehistory:
  Humankind’s First
 Three Million Years,
     Fifth Edition



     Robert F. Wenke
   Deborah J. Olszewski




OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
Patterns in Prehistory:
Humankind’s First Three
Million Years
Patterns in Prehistory
Humankind’s First Three Million Years


Fifth Edition




Robert J. Wenke
University of Washington


Deborah I. Olszewski
University of Pennsylvania




New York  Oxford
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
2007
Oxford University Press, Inc., publishes works that further Oxford University’s
objective of excellence in research, scholarship, and education.

Oxford New York
Auckland Cape Town Dar es Salaam Hong Kong Karachi
Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Nairobi
New Delhi Shanghai Taipei Toronto

With ofﬁces in
Argentina Austria Brazil Chile Czech Republic France Greece
Guatemala Hungary Italy Japan Poland Portugal Singapore
South Korea Switzerland Thailand Turkey Ukraine Vietnam

Copyright © 2007 by Oxford University Press, Inc.

Published by Oxford University Press, Inc.
198 Madison Avenue, New York, New York 10016
http://www.oup.com

Oxford is a registered trademark of Oxford University Press

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
without the prior permission of Oxford University Press.



Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Wenke, Robert J.
  Patterns in prehistory: humankind’s ﬁrst three million years / Robert J. Wenke,
Deborah I. Olszewski. — 5th ed.
       p. cm.
  Includes bibliographical references and index.
  ISBN-13: 978-0-19-516928-7
  ISBN-10: 0-19-516928-X (pbk.)
    1. Prehistoric peoples. 2. Archaeology. I. Olszewski, Deborah. II. Title.
  GN740.W46 2007
  930.1—dc22
                                                                      2005058961

Printing number: 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

Printed in the United States of America
on acid-free paper
For David, Ilene, Lorence, Dennis, and Judy, with much gratitude
Robert J. Wenke


For Dr. Elizabeth Ann Morris, my ﬁrst archaeology professor and the
inspiration for my professional career
Deborah I. Olszewski
This page intentionally left blank
                             Contents


   Preface   xii

Chapter 1: Prehistory, History, and Archaeology                1
       What Are Archaeologists Looking For? (The Meaning of the Past)    2
       Archaeology as the Reconstruction of Extinct Cultures and Their
       Histories   5
       Archaeology as a Body of Theories and Methods for Explaining
       the Past   11
       A Short History of Attempts to Understand the Past     12
       Summary and Conclusions       32

Chapter 2: Fundamentals of Archaeology              41
       Archaeologists and the Practice of Archaeology     41
       The Basic Data of the Past    43
       Analyses of the Past   57
       Dating the Past    65
       Summary and Conclusions        72

Chapter 3: The Origins of Culture          83
       The Problem of Cultural Origins     83
       The Nature of Culture 84
       The Ecological Context of Cultural Origins    97
       Models of Cultural Origins    115
       Summary and Conclusions       122

Chapter 4: The Origins of Homo sapiens sapiens                 132
       Human Evolution and Radiation: 1.8? million to Circa 300,000
       Years Ago 133




                                     vii
viii   CONTENTS


              Homo sapiens: Models of Origins     145
              The Middle to Upper Paleolithic Period 157
              Human Colonization of the World: Circa 30,000 –10,000
              Years Ago 172
              Summary and Conclusions      179

       Chapter 5: The First Americans           194
              Routes for the Initial Colonization of the Americas    196
              Evidence for the First Americans     207
              Early Paleoindian Economies       217
              Summary and Conclusions         222

       Chapter 6: The Origins of Agriculture           228
              Agriculture, Domestication, and Sedentary Communities     231
              Hypotheses About the Origins of Domestication, Agriculture, and
              Sedentary Communities       235
              Early Domestication and Agriculture: The Post-Paleolithic
              Background      243
              The Origins of Domestication, Agriculture, and Sedentary Communities
              in Southwest Asia     246
              Other Old World Domesticates      260
              Agricultural Origins in the New World    262
              Summary and Conclusions       269

       Chapter 7: The Evolution of Complex Societies                279
              Social Complexity and Human Values         284
              Traditional Sociocultural Typologies    286
              Contemporary Approaches to Sociocultural Typology 290
              The Archaeology of Complex Societies        292
              Explaining the Evolution of Civilizations: The Search for Causes     298
              Summary and Conclusions       316

       Chapter 8: Origins of Complex Societies in Southwest Asia                  324
              The Ecological Setting    325
              Fundamentals of the Southwest Asian Archaeological Record          328
              The Neolithic Origins of Southwest Asian Civilization 329
              Initial Cultural Complexity 334
                                                                     CONTENTS   ix


      Early States: The Uruk and Jemdet Nasr Periods   341
      The Early Dynastic Period 349
      Southwest Asia After 2350 b.c. 356
      Summary and Conclusions       358

Chapter 9: The Origins of Complex Societies in Egypt           368
      The Ecological Setting   370
      Early Egyptian Agriculture 373
      The Predynastic Period 375
      The Archaic, Old Kingdom, and First Intermediate Periods    377
      The Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Periods       384
      The New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Periods       385
      Ancient Egyptian Art and Thought 389
      Egyptian Writing and Literature 391
      Who Were the Ancient Egyptians?     395
      Summary and Conclusions       396

Chapter 10: The Evolution of Complex Societies in the
Indus Valley 405
      The Ecological Setting  407
      The Neolithic Background to South Asian Cultural Complexity       409
      The Neolithic–Urban Transition 411
      Early Harappan Culture 412
      Mature Harappan Civilization 415
      The Decline of Harappan Civilization 422
      Summary and Conclusions      424

Chapter 11: The Evolution of Complex Societies in China              432
      The Ecological Setting    434
      Early Farmers 435
      Regional Neolithic Developments in North China    437
      Early Complex Chinese Societies   440
      Erh-li-t’ou Culture 443
      Shang Civilization and Its Contemporaries  445
      Early Imperial China     449
      Summary and Conclusions       451
x   CONTENTS


    Chapter 12: Later Complex Societies of the Old World             456
           Temperate Europe 458
           A Brief Overview of Other Later Old World Complex Societies       468
           Colonization of the Western Paciﬁc Islands  471
           Summary and Conclusions       475

    Chapter 13: The Evolution of Complex Societies
    in Mesoamerica 481
           The Ecological Setting  484
           Early Mesoamerican Farming      485
           The Archaeological Record of Early Complex Mesoamerican
           Societies    486
           The Archaeological Record of Mesoamerican States in the Valleys
           of Mexico and Oaxaca    496
           The Maya 501
           Postclassic Mesoamerica    516
           The Spanish Conquest     523
           Summary and Conclusions      523

    Chapter 14: The Evolution of Complex Societies in Andean
    South America    533
           The Ecological Setting    536
           Early Hunters and Gatherers     537
           The Agricultural Basis of Andean Civilization 538
           The First Complex Societies in Andean South America     539
           The Early Horizon 546
           The Early Intermediate Period: Early States    549
           The Middle Horizon: Competing States        552
           The Late Intermediate Period: Early Empires     554
           The Late Horizon: The Imperial Transformation 554
           The European Conquest       557
           Summary and Conclusions       558

    Chapter 15: Early Cultural Complexity in North America               565
           The Ecological Setting  568
           The North American East    569
           The North American Southwest    583
           Summary and Conclusions     594
                                              CONTENTS   xi


Chapter 16: Prehistory in Perspective   601
      Our Intellectual Heritage 601
      Lessons of Prehistory 606
      The Future of Archaeology 609

   Art Credits 611
   Index 615
                                      Preface


We ﬁnd ourselves in a bewildering world. We
want to make sense of what we see around us
and to ask: What is the nature of the universe?
What is our place in it and where did it and we
come from? Why is it the way it is?
Stephen W. Hawking1


Our journey into the past several million years of human prehistory and early history—
beginning about the time of the ﬁrst appearance of stone tools and extending to the recent
past—is an endeavor to see more clearly and to understand ourselves, modern human
beings (Homo sapiens sapiens). Ours is a story of “ﬁts and starts,” of human ancestors and
of societies that shed light on natural and cultural experiments, both those that succeeded
and those that failed. The key, of course, is diversity, a characteristic of both modern
humans and our ancestors before us.


APPROACHES TO PREHISTORY

The story of prehistory and early history is the story of all of us living today. Across the vast
bounds of time and space, archaeology reveals glimpses into the variety of behaviors and
adaptations of countless and nameless individuals and groups. When we reach the period
of our earliest recorded history, we can put names to some of these individuals and groups,
but others remain more obscure. It is thus the goal of archaeology to integrate evidence—
stone tools, pottery sherds, animal bones, plant remains, and a myriad of other data—with
theory to reconstruct the many behaviors that formed the archaeological record of hunter-
gatherers, farmers, pastoralists, and members of early complex societies.
     Theoretical approaches differ considerably within archaeology today, and this edition
of Patterns in Prehistory offers examples of how these different approaches affect the
interpretation of the data of the archaeological record. The overall strategy of this edition,
however, is to present archaeological interpretation in the context of the scientiﬁc method.
Interpretations of data using a particular theoretical approach, for example, can be
contrasted with interpretations offered by a differing theoretical approach. In doing so,
we can examine which of the explanations is currently better supported and how one or




                                              xii
                                                                                      PREFACE     xiii


both of these explanations can be reﬁned once a comparison is made. Scientiﬁc research,
after all, is fundamentally a method of proposing explanations, testing them, and then
revising the explanations so that the ﬁt between data and theory becomes closer over time.
That is the intention of this edition: to facilitate students’ understanding of this approach
to explanation and interpretation and the lively debates that result.


ORGANIZATION OF THE BOOK

The ﬁfth edition of Patterns in Prehistory begins with background on the development and
contributions of theories and archaeological methods. Next we introduce readers to the
wide diversity of past societies through the use of several broad themes. These provide
both numerous examples—some similar and some different—of the evidence and the
interpretations that are used to arrive at a better understanding of our past and its relevance
to us.


Themes
The themes that form the backbone of the organization of this edition are:
    • Intellectual background: discusses the ideas and theories that have contributed to
      archaeological approaches to an understanding of the past
    • Archaeological methods and techniques: describes the types of evidence collected by
      archaeologists, how these data are analyzed, and the technology used
    • Culture: examines issues surrounding how culture develops and related models, the
      evidence for early culture, comparisons with nonhuman primates, and the archae-
      ological record for early human ancestors
    • Emergence of anatomically modern humans: presents information on human
      ancestors in the genus Homo, their migration into Eurasia, models for the origins of
      anatomically modern humans, and the colonization of the world outside of Africa,
      including the Americas, by modern humans
    • Food-producing economies: discusses models for the origins of agriculture in the
      Old and New Worlds, with examples from Southwest Asia, Egypt, China,
      Mesoamerica, Andean South America, and North America
    • Complex societies, civilizations, and states: examines models for the origins of com-
      plex societies, civilizations, and states, with examples from Southwest Asia, Egypt,
      the Indus Valley, China, Mesoamerica, Andean South America, temperate Europe,
      and North America


Arrangement of Chapters
Chapters from the previous edition of Patterns in Prehistory have undergone considerable
reorganization. To help readers, we have introduced more, and more standardized,
headings within chapters to serve as signposts through the text; we have repositioned data
and discussions to create better ﬂow of thought and readability; and we have introduced
timelines in each chapter to provide a better comparative context.
xiv   PREFACE


           Those chapters dealing with the intellectual heritage, archaeological methods and
      techniques, and the origins of culture (Chapters 1–3) of necessity have topical outlines that
      differ substantially from one chapter to the next. Chapter 1 examines the body of scientiﬁc
      thought and intellectual background that underlie theories used to explain the past.
      Chapter 2 deals with topics concerning how archaeologists gather information and analyze
      data. Chapter 3 presents theoretical background to understanding the appearance of
      culture, as well as examines the archaeological record of the earliest human ancestors.
           The next two chapters (Chapters 4 and 5) continue the theme of the archaeological
      record of earlier prehistory. Chapter 4 examines models and data used to interpret early
      human ancestors, delves into the issues surrounding the origins of anatomically modern
      humans—us—and follows early humans as they colonize the Old World. Chapter 5
      continues the colonization theme through discussion of the initial peopling of the New
      World and the adaptations of these early settlers.
           An interlude is provided in the next two chapters (Chapters 6 and 7), as these stress
      theoretical background to two intriguing research problems. Chapter 6 examines the
      origins of agriculture and food-producing economies in the Old and New Worlds. Chapter
      7, on the other hand, discusses the origins of complex societies in both the Old and New
      Worlds.
           Chapters dealing with case studies of the development of complex societies (Chapters
      8–15) examine, with slight deviation for the subject matter treated in Chapters 12 (later
      Old World complex societies) and 15 (early cultural complexity in North America):
          • Timeline
          • The ecological context
          • The archaeological background for agriculture and early farming societies
          • The archaeology of the major periods in the development of complex societies, civ-
            ilizations, and states, as well as theoretical perspectives
          • The role of art, religion, and writing systems in these societies
          • The collapse, demise, disappearance, or transformation of early complex societies,
            civilizations, and states
          • A summary and conclusions section
      Finally, Chapter 16 provides an epilogue.


      NEW TO THIS EDITION

      In updating Patterns in Prehistory, we have drawn on Rob Wenke’s revisions for the new
      edition, insightful comments from reviewers, and Deb Olszewski’s expertise and research
      experience in the Middle East, American Southwest, and earlier periods of prehistory, as
      well as Deb’s experience teaching with previous editions of Patterns in Prehistory. New
      materials for this ﬁfth edition include:
          • Expansion of graphic presentations, including 70 percent more photos and illustra-
            tions throughout the book, timelines added to all relevant chapters (Chapters 3–8
            and 12), existing timelines updated (Chapters 9–11 and 13–15), and an overview
            timeline added to illustrate the temporal framework for the textbook.
                                                                                     PREFACE    xv


    • Facilitation of comprehension through reorganization of chapters to standardize
      presentation of information, streamlining of text, updating of chapter bibliographies
      and endnotes, and use of current spellings of names for places, cultures, objects,
      and people
    • Updating of chapter information, including addition of material on technology such
      as Geographic Information System, global positioning system, and total stations
      (Chapter 2); discussion of biomechanical studies that model bipedalism in early
      human ancestors (Chapter 3); examination of site taphonomy in the context of
      recent revisions to interpretations of cultural activities at sites (Chapters 2, 3, and
      4); the latest discoveries of fossils of human ancestors (Chapters 3 and 4); addition
      of the Paciﬁc coast-hopping hypothesis and the Atlantic route idea for the initial
      peopling of the Americas (Chapter 5); consideration of the role of genetics in the
      interpretation of the origins of anatomically modern humans (Chapter 4), the
      colonization of the Americas (Chapter 5), and the spread of food-producing
      economies (Chapter 6); revision of information on local ecological contexts for the
      origins of agriculture (Chapters 6 and 10) and the origins of complex societies
      (Chapters 7 and 8); improved discussion of the Chinese Neolithic (Chapter 11);
      enhanced treatment of Iron Age Europe (Chapter 12); addition of recent ideas about
      the “collapse” of the Classic Maya (Chapter 13); corrected description of the
      European Conquest of Andean South America (Chapter 14); and expanded dis-
      cussion of Chaco Canyon and interpretations of its signiﬁcance in the American
      Southwest (Chapter 15).


FEATURES AND BENEFITS

The ﬁfth edition of Patterns in Prehistory has retained the popular features and beneﬁts that
characterized its earlier editions, as well as added others that facilitate comprehension:
    • Readability, accessibility, breadth, and humor; in-depth coverage of major complex
      societies, civilizations, and states with discussions that integrate theory and data
      for the reader; literary quotes that personalize the text; and discussion of major
      transitions in human prehistory, as well as colonization events, that examines the
      processes involved in the development of human culture, human behavior, and
      socioeconomic adaptations
    • Chapter timelines that provide overviews to help the reader place events in context;
      examples of scholarly debates and varying interpretations that exemplify how
      theory and method are integrated to derive interpretations and how interpretations
      are revised over time; an augmented visual component that enhances reader com-
      prehension of topics; and updated chapter bibliographies and endnotes that provide
      additional resources for students and instructors


NOTE ON DATES

Dates for archaeological sites, fossil human ancestors, origins of agriculture, and so
forth are given in this edition in three forms. These are “years ago,” corresponding to
xvi   PREFACE


      uncalibrated years before the present (b.p.), and “b.c.,” corresponding to uncalibrated
      years before Christ. The difference between the two time scales is 1,950 years, which
      represents a.d. 1950, the benchmark date conventionally used in radiocarbon dating as
      the zero point for calculating radiocarbon ages (see Chapter 2). Thus, for example, a date
      of 10,000 b.c. can be roughly translated as 11,950 years ago. Dates given in this edition for
      “a.d.” are often known calendric dates because they can be determined from cross-
      references to written documents from several of the early civilizations and states or have
      been calibrated.
           As discussed in Chapter 2, conventional radiocarbon dates are known to ﬂuctuate in
      accuracy for certain time periods. Researchers have been able to compensate for some of
      these ﬂuctuations by using calibration (correction) curves. The original basis for calibration
      was founded on dendrochronology (tree rings; see Chapter 2), which can be used to
      calibrate dates in the period from 0 to 12,400 cal B.P.2 Recent technical advances, especially
      use of data from marine records, currently allows the calibration of terrestrial radiocarbon
      dates in the period from 12,400 to 26,000 cal B.P.3
           Several scholars working on archaeological materials from various parts of the world
      have published new calibrated sequences of dates for their regions (for example, see
      Chapter 5). These, however, do not always provide calibrated dates for individual sites, so
      that integrating the new calibrated sequences with the previously reported uncalibrated
      dates for some sites is not always straightforward. To promote clarity and minimal
      confusion about dates, this edition of Patterns in Prehistory continues to use the years ago
      and b.c. uncalibrated dates.



      ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

      This edition of Patterns in Prehistory would not exist without the dedication and hard work
      of Jan Beatty and Karen Shapiro at Oxford University Press. We thank them for their
      editing, support, insights, and the production of this edition. To have been brought to Jan’s
      attention as the person to work on this edition, however, was through the efforts of Harold
      Dibble, to whom I owe an enormous debt of gratitude. The detailed comments provided
      by Professors Thomas Charlton (University of Iowa), Terence N. D’Altroy (Columbia
      University), Ronald Hicks (Ball State University), Kenneth G. Hirth (Pennsylvania State
      University), Laura J. Levi (University of Texas at San Antonio), Michael Malpass (Ithaca
      College), John Rick (Stanford University), Ralph M. Rowlett (University of Missouri –
      Columbia), Robert Santley (University of New Mexico), Andrew Sherratt (Shefﬁeld
      University), Mark Tveskov (Southern Orgeon University), Rita Wright (New York
      University), and Paul Zimansky (Boston University) are also much appreciated, as they
      corrected various details both large and small, offered clarity of thought, and pointed the
      way to improved discussions.
           Archaeologists often say that it is possible to know how another archaeologist will think
      about or interpret the past if they know his or her “kinship.” They mean, of course, those
      professors with whom one studied, because like students everywhere, our perspectives
      partly reﬂect those of our teachers. Of the many professors I could mention, I will limit
      myself to two. As an undergraduate major in anthropology at Colorado State University, I
                                                                                                           PREFACE      xvii


was greatly inﬂuenced by Liz Morris. In the small and serendipitous world of archaeology,
our association did not end there. We have remained friends over several decades, with one
of my greatest surprises being when I found out that the Paleolithic stone artifact collections
from the site of Warwasi, Iran—that I studied in the late 1980s—were from an excavation
project in which Liz participated in 1960! During my graduate days at the University of
Arizona, I was a student of Art Jelinek’s, and thus explains my mainly Old World (and
Paleolithic) focus. To Art, I owe insights into the nature of stone tool studies, exposure to
Bordian systematics, and a penchant to see if explanations can be turned on their heads and
reexamined.
     Intellectual kinship involves not only those with whom we studied, but also lively
interactions with friends and colleagues in the discipline over the years. In this regard, I
would like to thank Patty Anderson, Mike and Margaret Barton, Ofer Bar-Yosef, Mark
Baumler, Mary Bernard, Walt Birkby, Phil Chase, Anna Belfer-Cohen, J. Simon Bruder,
Geof Clark, Nancy Coinman, Jason Cooper, Harold and Lee Dibble, John Dockall, Dave
Doyel, Hans-Georg Gebel, Naama Goren-Inbar, Nigel Goring-Morris, Leslie Hartzell,
Zeidan Kafaﬁ, Kathy Kamp, Daphne Katrinides, Ian Kuijt, Cathy Lebo, Susan Lebo, Helen
Leidemann, Heidi Lennstrom, Shannon McPherron, Andrew Moore, Dani Nadel,
Maysoon al-Nahar, Mike Neeley, Gordon Nishida, Jane Peterson, Leslie Quintero, Gary
Rollefson, Barb Roth, Utsav Schurmans, Alan Simmons, Peggy Trachte, John Whittaker,
and Phil Wilke. This is, of course, only a partial list, and I also thank the rest of you who
are not mentioned here by name. Finally, but not least, I extend thanks to countless
students in my classes over the years for their refreshing perspectives and to the people of
Jordan and Egypt, countries in which I have been fortunate enough to do the majority of
my research.
      My Old World research has been funded by the National Science Foundation, the
Leakey Foundation, the National Geographic Society, the Wenner-Gren Foundation for
Anthropology, the Fulbright Program, the University of Pennsylvania Museum of
Archaeology and Anthropology, the American Philosophical Society, and the Joukowsky
Family Foundation, and I am grateful to them for the research opportunities that resulted.
In the New World, I have worked on a number of projects funded through Cultural
Resource Management auspices, including some of the most memorable sites and regions
of the American Southwest. Cultural Resource Management funding also provided me with
opportunities to study the pre-Contact prehistory of Hawai’i.

Deborah I. Olszewski


NOTES
1. A Brief History of Time: From the Big Bang to Black Holes, 1988, p. 171. New York: Bantam Books.
2. http://calib.qub.ac.uk/calib/; The use of B.P. in caps is generally understood to refer to calibrated dates, while
   the use of b.p. in lowercase refers to uncalibrated dates.
3. http://calib.qub.ac.uk/calib/; it is becoming common to refer to calibrated dates using the designation of “cal
   B.P.” or “cal B.C.”
         TODAY
                                                                      PREHISTORY, HISTORY, AND ARCHAEOLOGY             xviii
A.D. 1500s   Spanish arrival in the Americas


A.D. 1476    Beginning of the Inka empire in South America


A.D. 1150    Beginning of the Aztec state in Mexico


A.D. 1000    Beginning of Hohokam, Ancestral Pueblo and Mogollon
             complex society in the North American Southwest                        6500 B.C.    Origins of agriculture in Asia
  A.D. 800   Beginning of Mississippian complex society in the
             North American Southeast                                               7500 B.C.    Origins of agriculture in Africa
  A.D. 600   Initial date for colonization of Hawai’i
                                                                                    8000 B.C.    Origins of agriculture in Mesoamerica
  A.D. 600   Appearance of Wari and Tiwanaku states
             in South America                                                       8500 B.C.    Origins of agriculture in the Middle East
  A.D. 300   Beginning of Classic Maya civilization in
             Mesoamerica                                                 20–15,000 years ago     Beginning of colonization of the
    A.D. 1   Beginning of the Teotihuacán state in the Valley                                    Americas by Paleoindians
             of Mexico and Moche civilization in South America               32,000 years ago    Neandertals become extinct
   15 B.C.   Roman conquest of Europe
                                                                             40,000 years ago    Modern humans begin to colonize
  475 B.C.   Beginning of La Tène complex society in Europe                                      Europe; explosion of art and symbolism
                                                                             60,000 years ago    Beginning of colonization of Australia
  800 B.C.   Beginning of Halstatt complex society in Europe                                     by modern humans
                                                                           100,000 years ago     Early modern humans begin to radiate
 1000 B.C.   Beginning of Mycenaean civilization in the Aegean                                   out of Africa to the Middle East and Asia
                                                                           160,000 years ago     Early modern humans (Homo sapiens)
 1300 B.C.   Appearance of Olmec complex society in Mesoamerica                                  appear in Africa
                                                                           230,000 years ago     Neandertals (Homo neanderthalensis)
 1500 B.C.   Beginning of spread of Lapita Complex in the Pacific                                appear in Western Eurasia
                                                                         1.7 million years ago   Homo erectus grade begins to migrate
 1600 B.C.   Appearance of Shang civilization in China                                           out of Africa to Eurasia
                                                                         2.5 million years ago   Genus Homo appears in Africa
 2000 B.C.   Appearance of Minoan civilization in the Aegean
                                                                         2.6 million years ago   First stone tools appear in Africa
 2000 B.C.   Origins of agriculture in Eastern North America
                                                                           3 million years ago   Beginning of radiation of Australopiths
 3100 B.C.   Beginning of Egyptian civilization                                                  in Africa
                                                                           5 million years ago   Australopith hominins appear in Africa
 3200 B.C.   Beginning of Harappan civilization in the Indus Valley


 3600 B.C.   Beginning of Mesopotamian civilization in
             the Middle East
 5700 B.C.   Origins of agriculture in South America


 6000 B.C.   Agriculture begins to spread into Europe
             from the Middle East
1
Prehistory, History, and Archaeology

History is philosophy teaching by examples.
Dionysius of Halicarnassus (c. 40 b.c.)

History is bunk.
Henry Ford




T        he archaeologist-adventurers of ﬁlm and ﬁction never seem too concerned about
         what they are looking for or why they want it. “It” is usually something like a curse-
protected pharaoh’s tomb treasures or the biblical Ark of the Covenant—something
intrinsically interesting and protected by enough snakes, traps, or villains to require a
romantic hero for its discovery.
     In this prosaic age it will come as no surprise to the reader that contemporary archaeo-
logy differs considerably from these ﬁctional versions, as this book will make clear. Yet, in
a sense, archaeology is in fact a uniquely interesting science. And certainly its origins are
in rather romantic bygone eras. In the early 1800s, for example, the Italian adventurer
Giovanni Belzoni looted dozens of ancient Egyptian tombs in Thebes (near modern Luxor)
and sold their riches in Europe. Belzoni crept and crawled through miles of tunnels in the
stinking, dusty air of these crypts, smashing hundreds of mummies as he went:
     [Al]though, fortunately I am destitute of the sense of smelling, I could taste that the
     mummies were rather unpleasant to swallow. After the exertion of entering into such
     a place, through a passage of . . . perhaps six hundred yards, nearly overcome, I sought a
     resting place. . . . [B]ut when my weight bore on the body of an Egyptian, it crushed like a
     band-box. . . . I sank altogether among the broken mummies, with a crash of bones, rags,
     and wooden cases. . . . [E]very step I took I crushed a mummy. . . . I could not pass without
     putting my face in contact with that of some decayed Egyptian; but as the passage inclined
     downwards, my own weight helped me on: however, I could not avoid being covered with
     bones, legs, arms, and heads rolling from above. . . . The purpose of my researches was to
     rob the Egyptians of their papyri.1
Even the more scholarly of the early archaeologists, if not so candidly larcenous as Belzoni,
at least had a clear simple vision of what it was they were after and a rather romantic reason
for their quest. In 1876, for example, the German Heinrich Schliemann, his imagination
ﬁred by his schoolboy readings of Homer (in the original Greek), ravaged the archaeo-
logical site of Hissarlik, in western Turkey, looking for the home of the heroes of the Trojan

                                                  1
             2       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                       War, as chronicled in The Iliad.
                                                                                       Schliemann’s notebooks show
                                                                                       that he made careful records of
                                                                                       his ﬁnds and that he even had
                                                                                       a primitive sense of analytical
                                                                                       methods of archaeological
                                                                                       excavation. He was ecstatic
                                                                                       when he found gold masks
                                                                                       afﬁxed to decayed bodies in a
                                                                                       cemetery at Hissarlik and
                                                                                       concluded that these were the
                                                                                       Trojan warriors. When he
                                                                                       died, many years later, he was
                                                                                       still happily unaware that what
                                                                                       he had thought were the
                                                                                       remains of Troy were probably
                                                                                       of an altogether different era,
FIGURE 1.1 In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, archaeology was often
more like organized looting of antiquities than scientiﬁc research. Here, workmen      and that he may have hacked
at a site near Les Eyzies, France, destroy a Paleolithic site while looking for nicely right through the settlement
fashioned stone tools.                                                                 occupied during the presumed
                                                                                       period of the Trojan War.
                             The archaeology of today is signiﬁcantly different from that of these nineteenth-
                       century practitioners. If a professional archaeologist today were to excavate, for example,
                       the parts of Troy that Schliemann left, she or he would make a detailed map so that
                       everything found could be located to exact three-dimensional coordinates. And the actual
                       excavations would require many more years than Schliemann spent, so that technical
                       specialists could analyze pottery, animal and plant remains, architecture, and every other
                       kind of ﬁnd.
                             The most profound difference between the archaeology of Belzoni’s and Schliemann’s
                       times and that of the present, however, is in research objectives: Almost all early
                       archaeologists were looking for speciﬁc things (Figure 1.1). They seem to have had little
                       sense of the importance of their ﬁnds except as curious and valuable relics of bygone ages.
                       Most contemporary archaeologists, on the other hand, try to look beyond the objects they
                       ﬁnd to seek a more profound understanding of the past—and of ourselves in relation to
                       the past.


                     WHAT ARE ARCHAEOLOGISTS LOOKING FOR?
                     (THE MEANING OF THE PAST)

                     Archaeology is about Facts; if you want the
                     Truth, go next-door to the Philosophy
                     Department!
                     Professor Indiana Jones (dialogue from the ﬁlm
                     Indiana Jones)2
                                                      PREHISTORY, HISTORY, AND ARCHAEOLOGY         3


Most archaeologists spend years gathering small bits of stone, bone, and pottery that would
not arrest the attention of a museum-goer for more than a few seconds; they then spend
much of the rest of their lives in Hamlet-like reﬂection, asking themselves an endless and
largely unanswered series of questions, such as: “What does all this stuff mean?” “What do
these things tell me about what happened in the past and why it happened?” “What is the
point of investigating the past?” “What can I hope to know about the people who made
these things?” “Are there causal factors that we can identify that explain the course and
nature of human history?” “Does the past have any relevance for our own lives?” “What
does the past mean?”
     This concern with the meaning of the past is one of the most difﬁcult concepts for the
non-archaeologist to understand about contemporary professional archaeology—and for
many people it shatters an illusion that archaeology is just the pleasant pursuit of interesting
relics in exotic locales. Most non-archaeologists, unsurprisingly, would be much more
interested in, for example, viewing the gold masks that Schliemann found at Troy than in
listening to professional archaeologists debate the inferred socioeconomic and political
organization of the ﬁrst millennium b.c. town at Tepe Hissarlik, where these masks were
found. And yet it is just such debates, not the gold masks, that involve the kinds of questions
central to contemporary archaeology.
     Yet no one can comprehend what contemporary archaeology—or this book—is all
about until one understands this relentless search for not just the artifacts of the past, but
the patterns and meaning of our past. Most archaeologists are not just trying to answer
speciﬁc questions, such as what our hominin ancestors ﬁrst used stone tools for, or why
the Neandertals disappeared, or how the ancient Egyptians built pyramids. In every
archaeological excavation or research project many speciﬁc questions such as these are at
issue, but the context of this research often involves the more abstract goals of trying to
understand the factors that have determined the course of human history and the nature
of our cultures, and thus not only to see patterns in the past but also to understand why
those patterns appeared—and to explain in some sense the great variability in the world’s
long history of cultures.
     It may seem odd that archaeologists even consider the possibility that something
apparently so chaotic as human history may have some underlying pattern or meaning or
explanation. How could a history that can be so radically affected by a single person like
Adolph Hitler, or a blind yet potent natural process such as the end of the last Ice Age, ever
be “explained” in general terms? But scholars throughout the ages have sought just such an
explanation. The questions they have asked in this regard are many, difﬁcult, and important
for understanding ourselves and humanity: Is there some factor, for example, that explains
why we seem to have evolved in the direction of ever greater brain size while our primate
relatives, such as the chimpanzee, and all other animals seem to have retained relatively
tiny brain-to-body size ratios? Why, after humans had lived for about two and a half million
years as simple hunter-foragers, did some of our ancestors “suddenly” become farmers
soon after about 10,000 years ago, and not just in the Old World but “independently” in
the New World as well and at about the same time? Why were all ancient civilizations
strictly organized in terms of social classes instead of according to the democratic ideals
espoused by many philosophers over the millennia? Why does warfare seem to have been
so common in history when there are such apparent advantages to cooperation and peace?
Why did large cities appear in ancient civilizations in Mexico, China, Pakistan,
             4        PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                         Mesopotamia, and elsewhere but not in aboriginal Australia, North America, England, or
                         Hawaii? Does the archaeological record of the world indicate that human “races” differ in
                         innate abilities and that cultures vary in their “accomplishments”? Do economic forces
                         really “drive” history, as Karl Marx argued,3 so that we can understand forms of religions
                         and governments merely as by-products of these basic economic dynamics, or do great
                         ideas and powerful individuals decide the course of history? Does “the past” really exist in
                         some analyzable form and sense, or is what we call the past just our evanescent
                         and unanalyzable imaginings about something irretrievably lost? Does the past tell us
                         anything of interest about where we are going, about our future, and do we have any control
                         over our future, or are we just “leaves on the stream” of time and circumstance?
                              Libraries around the world are ﬁlled with books that represent several millennia of
                         attempts to answer these and related questions. Many complex theories of history have been
                         propounded, but none has been shown to be a complete and powerful explanation of the
                         human past. Reasonable people might suspect that, if these questions about the meaning
                         and explanation of the past have not yielded powerful answers in all these millennia of
                         study, then perhaps we are asking the wrong questions or perhaps the questions we are
                         asking have no real answers. This book, in fact, is largely an attempt to chronicle part of
                         the world’s past and then review attempts to answer these many questions about the
                         meaning of the past.
                              The very idea that we can aspire to understand and explain why history has turned out
                         the way it has is one of the most hotly debated and complex issues in contemporary
                                                                                       archaeology. British archaeo-
                                                                                       logists Michael Shanks and
                                                                                       Christopher Tilley, for example,
                                                                                       argue that the human past
                                                                                       can never be analyzed in terms
                                                                                       of an empirical science that
                                                                                       “explains” history, in the sense
                                                                                       of answering in a scientiﬁc
                                                                                       fashion the kinds of questions
                                                                                       just posed about why history
                                                                                       has turned out the way it has.4
                                                                                       They argue ﬁrst that the material
                                                                                       remains of the past are just
                                                                                       another “text,” and thus, like
                                                                                       any novel, the past can be
                                                                                       understood differently by dif-
                                                                                       ferent people and also that every
                                                                                       “reader” of every text, includ-
                                                                                       ing the archaeologist who reads
                                                                                       the archaeological record, is
FIGURE 1.2 This sixteenth-century engraving of Florida Indians exempliﬁes
ethnocentrism, or interpreting other cultures in one’s own terms. The four women       so bound by his or her own
on the right are highly reminiscent of Italian Renaissance renderings of Venus and the cultural biases and forms that
Three Muses. Many European scholars of the last three centuries were ethnocentric      there can be no such thing as
in their analyses of ancient non-European cultures—most of which they assumed          an objective or deﬁnitive under-
had incompletely evolved to the high level of European civilization.                   standing of the past (Figure 1.2).
                                                     PREHISTORY, HISTORY, AND ARCHAEOLOGY         5


      Other scholars argue that the past can be analyzed scientiﬁcally and that with the future
development of powerful theories, archaeology can be as much a science as geology,
paleontology, or biology.5
      Although we frequently shall return to these issues in this book, one thing seems
clear—the primary problem in answering questions about the meaning of the past is not a
lack of evidence. All over the world, museum shelves groan under the weight of ceramic
pots, stone tools, and the broken skulls of our ancestors. Archaeologists have excavated
everything from the ﬁrst known human camps of two and a half million years ago to early
twentieth-century Manhattan. And every year, archaeologists in the thousands spread out
across the globe to excavate more remains of the past, and they then provide the results of
their research to their colleagues and the world in the form of hundreds of thousands of
books, articles, and lectures.
      In the rest of this book, we will review thousands of these studies, but before wading
into this sea of facts and ﬁgures, the reader should join archaeologists in musing on the
point of all this sifting through the garbage of the past. These are complex issues, and to
begin to analyze them it is necessary to consider the basic logical structure of archaeology
as it traditionally has been practiced and some examples of archaeological analyses.


ARCHAEOLOGY AS THE RECONSTRUCTION OF EXTINCT
CULTURES AND THEIR HISTORIES

The past is another country. They do things
differently there.
L. P. Hartley6

Whether one views the past and the world’s archaeological record as the product of a
meaningless jumble of accidental events and concatenations of unrelated human decisions
or as an explainable, even predictable developmental pattern, most scholars begin to try to
understand the past by trying to reconstruct and describe it.
     Reconstructions of the past are usually based on the principle known to the Romans
as ex ungue leonem, literally, “from the claw, the lion,” or the notion that from a part we
can know the whole through the processes of analogy and inference. If one looks closely,
for example, at the dinosaurs on display in various museums one can see that some of them
comprise a very small amount of fossilized bone and a very much greater amount of plastic
that has been inserted hopefully in place of the missing parts. And as scholars ﬁnd new
fossils, it is quite common, even today after centuries of research, for them to change the
dinosaur reconstructions on exhibits to reﬂect new ideas about the arrangements of bones.
     When we look at attempts to reconstruct entire cultures, not just bones, the principles
are the same as in dinosaur reconstructions: We use the preserved parts to infer missing
elements, based on our knowledge and speculations. In some situations the inferences one
must make seem so obviously accurate and the evidence available seems so comprehensive
that our interpretations seem particularly compelling. Archaeologists, for example, have
carefully studied the remains found in the tomb of Egypt’s Tutankhamun (Figures 1.3 and
1.4), and through a process of scientiﬁc analysis and inference we seemingly can know a lot
             6       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                     about this pharaoh and his culture. Studies of his teeth,7 for example, indicate
                                     his genetic relationship to his relatives, some of whose mummiﬁed bodies have
                                     also been found; analyses of the food and wine with which his tomb was
                                     supplied appear to reﬂect both what he ate in this life and apparently hoped
                                     to eat in the next; analyses of the chariots, furniture, and jewelry reﬂect the
                                     arts and crafts of his age; and studies of the inscriptions on his tomb’s walls
                                     and in contemporary documents offer descriptions of his religious beliefs and
                                     life-history.
                                          What makes reconstructions such as that of Tutankhamun’s life and
                                     times so vivid is not just the impressive preservation of objects; rather, it is
                                     that by analogy with our own lives we seem to understand so much about him.
                                     Most people of our own era, for example, still commit their dead to the earth
                                     with religious invocations offered in hope of some future resurrection. Even
                                     the thoughtful selection, in Tut’s tomb, of dry and sweet wines from an
                                     impressive diversity of vineyards and vintages, all carefully labeled by estate,
                                     year, and chief vintner, seems so utterly human and part of the same fabric as
                                     our own lives.8
                                          Reconstructions such as these, by means of analogy and inference based
                                     on our own lives and knowledge of history, offer satisfying accounts of the past
                                     in terms of our own experiences, and for many people they constitute all or
                                     most of what we can hope to learn about the past. We think we “know”
                                     Tutankhamun in a very real and personal sense. And for many people the
                                     “pleasures of ruins” they experience when they read about these recon-
                                     structions and interpretations require no great theoretical justiﬁcation. Dull,
                                     indeed, would be the person insensitive to such pleasures. We do not know,
                                     and can never know, what really went on in Tutankhamun’s mind, but by
                                     considering his tomb contents most of us think we can know a lot about his
                                     diet, the technology of his times, his place in the royal bureaucracy, and so on.
FIGURE 1.3 The contents of                But are our analyses necessarily limited to these speculative recon-
Tutankhamun’s tomb provided          structions of Tutankhamun’s life and times, or can we go further in attempting
a vivid picture of many aspects
                                     to understand Tutankhamun? We might, for example, consider him to have
of ancient Egyptian life.
                                     been just one example of the class-based state societies that existed all over the
                                     ancient world. Rich ancient tombs like Tutankhamun’s have been found in
                       China, Peru, Mexico, Iraq, and many other places. Thus Tutankhamun is part of a historical
                       pattern in which all of the more complex “civilizations” of antiquity and today have been
                       and continue to be organized on the basis of wealth and social classes. And thus,
                       Tutankhamun brings us back to the most basic and important questions of historical
                       analysis, such as: Why did these societies, Old and New World alike, all—largely
                       independently—evolve social systems based on inherited privilege and wealth, in which the
                       great mass of humanity labored mainly for the beneﬁt of a small elite class?
                            By asking these grand questions about the past we need not sacriﬁce the pleasures and
                       rewards of simply trying to reconstruct past times and cultures and their peoples’ lives—
                       people for whom we can feel a great deal of kinship and even sympathy. But even
                       reconstructions of cultures that we know a great deal about raise important questions about
                       archaeological inferences and about the “point” of such reconstructions. On about August
                       24, a.d. 79, for example, a group of people in an Italian coastal town concluded a funeral
                                                  PREHISTORY, HISTORY, AND ARCHAEOLOGY         7


service for a friend by sitting
down to a banquet. We can
only wonder about what was
said at the meal, but we know
what food they ate, how they
were dressed, and where they
sat, because this town was
Pompeii, and at some point in
the banquet, poison gases from
the eruption of the volcano of
Vesuvius killed them all. They
and their fellow citizens, and
their neighbors in Hercul-
aneum, were preserved in the
midst of their daily activities
(Figure 1.5). A half-cooked
suckling pig, bread, and other
foods were found in ovens;
money was left near half-eaten
meals in restaurants; wax tablets
and papyri lay on library tables;
bodies of townspeople were
found curled over the children
they were trying to protect; and
in one case a woman’s skeleton
was found scattered over the
ﬂoor of a room ﬁlled with
volcanic ash, near the intact
skeleton of a dog chained to a
stake—suggesting that the dog
slowly starved and eventually
ate the body of its mistress.9
     Written language aids
greatly in “ﬂeshing out” cultural
reconstructions. Herculaneum’s       FIGURE 1.4 The entrance to the “Treasury” of Pharaoh Tutankhamun’s tomb.
daily life was described in great    The cloaked statue is a representation of Anubis, Lord of the West.
detail in surviving documents;
we even have grafﬁti on brothel walls describing the charms of particular prostitutes and
other opinions common to such venues. In fact, Pompeii’s and Herculaneum’s destruction
was recorded by people who took boats out to sea to watch it.
     Whether an archaeologist is trying to reconstruct Pompeii or a two-million-year-old
camp of early hominins in Africa, the intention is the same: Just as an ethnographer
describes the daily life of the people he or she lives with and is studying, an archaeologist,
substituting analogy and inference for direct observation, uses ancient objects to
reconstruct as much as possible about the diet, technology, residences, burial practices, and
beliefs—in short, the lifeways and cultures—of ancient peoples.
             8        PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                              Compared to the riot of
                                                                                         full life evident to the ethno-
                                                                                         grapher, even analyses of towns
                                                                                         like Pompeii may seem a pale
                                                                                         and cold investigation into the
                                                                                         dry stalks and stems of dead
                                                                                         cultures. But the last several dec-
                                                                                         ades have seen major advances
                                                                                         in the techniques of cultural
                                                                                         reconstructionism (reviewed
                                                                                         in chapter 2). An impressive
                                                                                         array of electron microscopes,
                                                                                         satellite imagery, chemical ana-
                                                                                         lyses, elaborate mathematical
                                                                                         models, sophisticated com-
                                                                                         puters, and other techniques
                                                                                         are available to help the arch-
                                                                                         aeologist make ever more per-
                                                                                         suasive inferences about the
FIGURE 1.5 The eruption of Mount Vesuvius preserved Pompeii at a single                  past.
moment in time. This is a rare occurrence that stands in contrast to how most                 But despite these many
archaeological sites are formed.                                                         improvements, cultural recon-
                                                                                         structions often include a large
                        measure of speculation, particularly when dealing with extremely ancient societies, whose
                        artifacts and lifeways may have no historical analogs and thus may require even more than
                        the liberal amounts of imagination that inferences about more recent societies involve. And
                        the possibilities for cultural reconstructions are essentially inﬁnite: One can always excavate
                        another site and ﬁll in one more tiny bit of knowledge. Once the thrill of discovery has worn
                        off, most archaeologists begin to wonder just how important it is to know, for example,
                        whether this or that group ate more salmon than reindeer, or vice versa.
                             And of course there is really no way ever to conﬁrm—to be certain—about one’s
                        reconstructions. The reconstruction of the dog at Herculaneum eating the body of his
                        mistress may seem compelling, but one can imagine alternative interpretations; and
                        reconstructions of less well-preserved and earlier sites are much less persuasive than those
                        concocted about the living dead of Pompeii and Herculaneum. In short, one can make up
                        extremely convincing stories about what happened at some ancient place, or what some
                        ancient artifacts were used for, but we’ll never be able to conﬁrm such inferences
                        conclusively—at least not in the way an astronomer’s understanding of celestial mechanics
                        is conﬁrmed by the exact prediction of eclipses.
                             In this same context consider, for example, the remains of crocodiles we (Wenke)
                        found while excavating in Egypt in 1981.10 We discovered that one area that had been a few
                        hundred meters from the shoreline of a lake in the late ﬁfth millennium b.c. contained
                        many crocodile bones but no crocodile skulls or teeth. Evidence indicated that this area was
                        probably the site of a temporary camp, occupied in spring and fall, where people came to
                        ﬁsh and hunt migratory birds. One evening, after a long day’s ﬁeld work, and inspired by
                        one, perhaps two, “Stella” beers, we evolved the plausible notion that the ancient Egyptians
                        were hunting these crocodiles for some unspeakable culinary purpose and, to aid in
                                                      PREHISTORY, HISTORY, AND ARCHAEOLOGY         9


transporting the “edible” parts of their kills back to camp, they gutted the animals, cut off
their heads and discarded them to rot on the shore, and then brought the rest of the carcass
back to the site. Therefore, we conjectured, we had found no head bones in our excavations,
just cut-up body bones.
     Now, we could go back and “test” this hypothesis by excavating other sites to see if the
same pattern is found elsewhere on the lake shore, or by checking the crocodile body bones
carefully for cut marks, or in any number of other plausible ways. We could also generalize
this speciﬁc idea and test some hypotheses about general cultural processes, such as the
notion that hunters and gatherers tended to transport the shortest distance those animal
parts with the least meat on them. Or we could generalize still further and test the notion
that people tend to avoid work as much as possible.
     A crucial problem with cultural reconstructions such as these is equiﬁnality: One can
imagine many different alternative explanations for our ﬁnding few crocodile head parts at
this site, and very different factors and combinations of factors could produce extremely
similar archaeological records; and in the end all that one could do is show that one
hypothesis is more probable than the others. And such hypotheses would really only be
particularly interesting in the context of some theory about ancient cultures—some set of
generalized principles about the factors that determine the course of cultures in general,
including our rag-tag bunch of ancient Egyptian crocodile hunters.
     Thus, archaeological reconstructions of ancient cultures are probably as close to that
staple of science ﬁction, “time travel,” as humans are likely to achieve, and it is the powerful
impulse to travel in time, at least cerebrally, that motivates many archaeologists. An
archaeologist, given one and only one such time-travel opportunity, would probably have a
difﬁcult time choosing among so many interesting times and places. One could go, for
example, to Africa’s Olduvai Gorge about 1.7 million years ago to see how our early
hominin ancestors made a living (a problem to which much of chapter 3 is devoted); or to
France at about 50,000 years ago to document the relationship of Neandertals and our more
direct human ancestors (see chapter 4); or to Egypt to determine once and for all how the
pyramids were built (chapter 9); or to Pakistan’s Indus Valley 4,000 years ago to learn what
is contained in the thousands of Harappan written documents—one of the world’s
undeciphered scripts (chapter 10); or perhaps to London of the later nineteenth century,
just to share a pitcher of beer with Charles Darwin or Karl Marx or another of the founding
fathers of modern historical sciences.
     But the important point here is that even if one could go back in time and study an
extinct culture as its people lived it, one is still faced with the limits of cultural recon-
struction and left with great questions of why—why was that culture of that form, and how
did it evolve from previous human adaptations?


Time, Causality, and Culture History
Very few things happen at the right time and
the rest do not happen at all. The conscientious
historian will correct these defects.
Attributed to Mark Twain, Herodotus, and others

Attempts to reconstruct the past may be “static” in the sense that in studying the long-dead
citizens of Pompeii we may be interested only in how they lived on the day they were all killed.
10   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


     But most attempts to analyze the past involve some sense of sequence, usually in the form of
     cultural changes over time. Reconstructing ancient cultures and putting them into chrono-
     logical sequences are usually complementary parts of any archaeological research project.
           The sense of time as inﬁnitely stretching behind and ahead of us, as we ourselves ﬂow
     along the stream of time, is very ancient. An accurate recognition of the awesome time-
     scale of the past, however, is relatively recent. Today nearly every educated person knows
     and accepts that our human ancestry extends back millions of years and that our
     civilizations have slowly evolved over thousands of years. But this sense of our place in time
     is really quite new. The recognition—or at least the widespread acceptance—of the idea that
     we, and our world, have been here for millions of years is only about a century old. Until the
     nineteenth century, most Western people accepted the biblical implication that the world
     was about 6,000 years old and that almost from the very beginning our ancestors had lived
     in towns, engaged in agriculture, and organized themselves in great states and empires. But
     nineteenth-century excavations deep below the ground levels of many European cities
     revealed the bones of animals long extinct, such as mammoths and cave bears—and amidst
     many of these bones were stone tools. By the early twentieth century the great antiquity of
     humankind was evident, and today almost all knowledgeable scientists accept that our
     earliest hominin, tool-using ancestors lived about two and a half million years ago.
           This idea of reconstructing the histories of cultures works well when one is dealing with,
     say, the Roman Empire, where there are written records and the evidence of thousands of
     cities. But how do you write culture histories of prehistoric people who left no written
     records and of whom we have little more than the occasional skeleton and crude ﬂint tools?
           The main method of culture history is to make large collections of artifacts (the stone
     tools, pots, and everything else made or deposited by people) from each site (their houses,
     graves, or workplaces) and then make a lot of brave inferences about the cultural
     relationships among the people who made these pots, stone tools, or whatever.
           Much culture history has been done on simple comparisons of artifacts. My associates
     and I (Wenke), for example, once walked the plains of southwestern Iran for ﬁve months,
     collecting bags of broken pottery from the thousands of ancient villages and towns to be
     found there. Most of these old settlements are now just mounds of decomposed mud bricks
     and garbage and are littered with thousands of scraps of broken pottery and stone. Through
     various dating methods (chapter 2), we knew the styles of pottery that were in use in
     different ancient periods in this part of the world. To the experienced analyst, for example,
     a fragment of a Sasanian (c. a.d. 225–640) clay pot is utterly different from a Late Uruk
     (c. 3200 b.c.) ceramic fragment (though both are impressively ugly). Each day we counted
     up the numbers of different types of pottery styles collected from each site. Sites that had
     very similar kinds of pottery were assumed to have been occupied at about the same time
     and to have interacted socially or economically; those with markedly different pottery styles
     were assumed to have been occupied at different times. On this basis, settlement maps
     for several successive periods of occupation in this area were inferred and a 3,000-year
     culture history reconstructed, complete with estimates of changes in population density,
     irrigation systems, possible wars, probable economic collapses—in other words, a rich,
     even emotionally moving, history of people known almost exclusively from 4,134 bags of
     pottery bits.
           Such culture history “works” in the sense that through using these methods, we now
     know roughly what kinds of cultures inhabited most of the world during most of the past.
                                                      PREHISTORY, HISTORY, AND ARCHAEOLOGY     11


When we are dealing with the relatively slow change of styles in early stone tools, however,
even with the help of modern chemical dating techniques we usually can form only rough
categorizations of time into periods hundreds of thousands of years long.
     It is unfortunate but probably inescapable that culture histories were often done in
such a way that all the world’s cultures were arranged like a giant ladder, leading to the
pinnacle of Western societies. Because American and western European cultures of
the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries were technologically the most “advanced,” the
archaeological record has often been viewed in terms of the way in which modern Western
humans evolved from the ﬁrst culture-bearing animals. Thus, cultural historical
“explanations” of, for example, the appearance of agriculture and urban communities have
tended to assume that these developments were the “natural” and inevitable products of
prehistoric peoples who, like many Westerners, were constantly trying to improve their
standard of living, and did so through technological development.
     Such reconstructions of culture histories are prone to many problems. No histories,
for example, are purely descriptive or entirely atheoretical. There cannot be an absolutely
neutral and value-free history, particularly an archaeological “history,” where interpret-
ations frequently soar far beyond the evidence.


ARCHAEOLOGY AS A BODY OF THEORIES AND METHODS
FOR EXPLAINING THE PAST

I shall certainly admit a system as empirical
and scientiﬁc only if it is capable of being tested
by experience. These considerations suggest that
not the veriﬁability but the falsiﬁability of
a system is to be taken as a criterion of
demarcation. . . . It must be possible for an
empirical scientiﬁc system to be refuted by
experience.
Karl Popper11

Simply arranging archaeological sites in time and making inferences about the extinct
societies that created them does not “explain” the past. But can we explain the past? What
would we be trying to explain, and how? Take, for example, something as apparently simple
as the origins of agriculture—a topic discussed in detail in chapter 6. After two and a half
million years as hunter-foragers, about 10,000 years ago our ancestors began to domesticate
plants and cultivate them. Farming did not appear in one place and then spread to the rest
of the world; it developed in many different places at about the same time, in both the Old
World and the New, and involved thousands of species, from yaks to cats, leeks to beets.
Surely, one would think, with patient archaeological research one should be able to ﬁnd the
causes of agricultural origins—perhaps a combination of, for example, increasing human
population densities, climate changes after the end of the last Ice Age, and improvements
in technology. Evidence of such changes might be sought to show that they caused
agriculture to occur—that they explain in effect why agriculture appeared in Southwest
Asia about 10,000 years ago, and not 20,000 or 5,000 years ago, and why it was practiced
12   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


     ﬁrst in Southwest Asia, and only much later in southwestern North America. And if we
     could explain agricultural origins in this fashion, it seems plausible that we might formulate
     similar explanations for the origins of writing, cities, warfare, state religions, and so on. And
     having constructed such explanations, one would think, we might be able to bring them
     together in a set of general propositions about people and history.
          For centuries some scholars have worked on the premise that we can do more than just
     describe the past: We can understand it in terms of general principles—general principles
     to be formulated by some future Darwin of the historical sciences. After all, unlike
     ethnographers, who are limited to the study of societies as they exist today or existed in the
     recent past, archaeologists can study change over the long term, over the three million years
     of our history. It is this great time depth that is the primary resource and database of
     archaeology, for if it is ever possible to see the patterns in human history, and to deﬁne the
     determinants, it will likely require that we study the whole sweep of the human past in all
     its variety. When asked in the 1960s for his opinion about the overall historical impact of
     the French Revolution (almost 200 years earlier), Mao Zedong is reported to have said, “It’s
     too early to tell.” We expect major cultural dynamics to be long term. But we now have a
     vast and detailed knowledge about millions of years of the human past, and surely, one
     might assume, some major changes should be explainable.
          In fact, however, as we will see in detail, there is nothing simple, nothing obvious about
     such attempts to explain the past. Archaeology is currently in the midst of a great identity
     crisis concerning such issues as whether or not we will ever be able to explain the past in
     these terms, and what “explanation” is. Physicist Steven Wolfram, for example, has recently
     argued that there are no simple cause-and-effect explanations of such phenomena as
     ancient civilizations.12 Instead, he argues, complex systems that have a determinable time-
     span and an evolutionary trajectory can best be understood as algorithms. Many
     archaeologists have lost interest in older ideas of “explanation” and have focused instead
     on how we should interpret the past. These ideas will be considered at length throughout
     this book, but they are best understood in the context of their history.


     A SHORT HISTORY OF ATTEMPTS TO UNDERSTAND
     THE PAST

     It’s about love, death, torture, inﬁnity. It’s a
     comedy.
     Woody Allen


     A hundred thousand lemmings can’t be wrong.
     Anonymous

     The reader anxious to get to the blood, sex, and pyramids of prehistory may at this point
     recoil from a plunge into the philosophy of science and history, but it is simply impossible
     to understand what contemporary archaeologists are doing and why without a brief
     excursion into Western intellectual history. What contemporary archaeologists think
     about world history and how they go about interpreting it are inextricably linked to
                                                    PREHISTORY, HISTORY, AND ARCHAEOLOGY         13


epistemological (i.e., studies of how we know and the nature and limits of our knowledge)
traditions many centuries old. And beyond the relevance of these ideas to archaeology, the
student will ﬁnd that the ideas reviewed in this section permeate all of the humanities and
social sciences in Western intellectual traditions.
      The world’s literature is littered with attempts to understand our place in the cosmos
and make sense of our past. Ancient Near Eastern literature, especially as reﬂected in the
comparatively late and derivative form of the Old Testament, envisioned a static, created
world in which great changes came about through divine intercession, and where the
ultimate explanation of events was in terms of God’s will—which we see “as in a glass,
darkly.” For the devout Christian, Muslim, and many others as well, even if we could see
the divine design of history more clearly, we would see that it is predestined, beyond the
realm of human initiative. If one truly believes that the course of the world’s events and
history is an unintelligible expression of Divine Will, then history becomes simple post hoc
description, not analysis—for analysis implies the search for knowable, testable causes.
      As far as we know, the ancient Greeks were the ﬁrst people to think profoundly (or
perhaps they were simply the ﬁrst to record their thoughts) about the problem of cause and
effect in a supposedly divinely directed world. “We are all Greeks,” it has been said, because
so much of modern Western thought is ultimately traceable to ancient Greece. Some
scholars feel that the Greeks were more deeply in debt to other cultures than we commonly
suppose,13 but in many ways it seems as if the Greeks simply thought about the world
differently from their predecessors. Herodotus, for example, was the ﬁrst, as far as we know,
to travel widely and compile extensive descriptions of the people, cultures, and places of
his world in a way that was analytical. In the ﬁfth century b.c., for example, Herodotus
visited Egypt and became intrigued by the question of why the Nile ﬂooded each and every
spring. He asked Egyptian scholars everywhere he went and found that the Nile rose and
fell according to the will of the gods. Herodotus then preceded to analyze several reasonable
alternative possibilities—all of them wrong—but all expressed mainly in terms of wind,
rain, sun, and oceanic patterns, in other words, in terms of natural causes. In short,
Herodotus analyzed, he did not just ascribe the Nile’s ﬂood to the inscrutable will of the
gods. Similarly, in his late fourth-century b.c. history of the Peloponnesian War,
Thucydides tried to explain how the struggle began. He described the personalities
involved, the strategies of the warring powers, and the economic realities of the time. In
short, by arranging the events and circumstances preceding the war in what he thought was
a causal chain, he did what any modern historian would do in trying to explain the events
of the past. Archaeologically based culture histories are founded precisely on this logic.
Egyptians, Sumerians, and many others recorded aspects of their histories, but their
surviving records do not treat the world or history in the same analytical fashion that the
Greeks did. It is a mark of how culturally Greek most of us are that what Thucydides did
seems so normal and natural to us as hardly to deserve comment. But in truth this sort of
real-world explanation of the course of history seems to have been widely used ﬁrst by the
Greeks and became common in many other cultures only recently.14
      Another central tenet of modern archaeology with Greek roots is evolution.
Evolutionary theory was ﬁrst clearly stated by Charles Darwin, and the ancient Greeks had
only a vague sense of this idea. But already by the ﬁfth century b.c. the Athenian scholar
Empedocles had formulated a version of the principle of natural selection. And other Greek
scholars developed rudimentary sciences of geomorphology and biology that contained
            14       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                     glimpses of the fact that the world is very ancient and that
                                                     plants and animals have changed over time.
                                                          These ideas of evolution and scientiﬁc analysis, however,
                                                     were in some contrast to a concept much more central to the
                                                     ancient Greek view of the world, the notion of the Great Chain
                                                     of Being, or the Scala Naturae, which is founded on Greek ideas
                                                     about the nature of God and “perfection.” Greek philosophers
                                                     found it inconceivable that the world they knew could have
                                                     arisen by chance, because there seemed to be such a precise
                                                     design in its every part. The intricate interdependence among
                                                     plants and animals, the regularity of the seasons—the whole
                                                     natural world—exhibited to them proof of the existence of a
                                                     Supreme Intelligence; they therefore deﬁned God as the
                                                     perfect being who created and controls the world. The Greeks’
                                                     conception of perfection, however, had a somewhat different
                                                     connotation than it does for us, for they understood it to be in
                                                     essence wholeness, or completeness (a concept vividly evident,
                                                     for example, in classical Greek statues) (Figure 1.6).
                                                          Aristotle, in particular, formulated the idea of the world
FIGURE 1.6 The ancient Greek view of the             as a Great  Chain of Being, perfect in its completeness (Figure
world was that it reﬂected the “perfection” of the   1.7). He   concluded     that the natural world was rationally
gods in its symmetry and wholeness—attributes        ordered   according   to  what he charmingly called “powers of
reﬂected in their art, as in this bronze ﬁgure from  soul,” representing   different levels within the perfectly whole
a Greek shipwreck of about 460 b.c.                  universe. Thus, a horse is higher than a sunﬂower because a
                                                     horse can think, after a fashion, and a man is higher than a
                         horse because he can reason and apprehend God. Early European scholars were greatly
                         inﬂuenced by the concept of the Great Chain of Being. They thought it impossible that there
                         should be “missing links” in the chain or that any parts of the chain should cease to exist.
                         God, being perfect, could not create an imperfect, that is, incomplete, universe; nor could
                         His sustaining powers allow a whole level of this perfection to vanish. This notion was
                         still at the very core of European culture when the English poet Alexander Pope
                         (a.d. 1688–1744) wrote:
                          Vast chain of being! which from God began
                          Natures aethereal, human, angel, man,
                          Beast, bird, ﬁsh, insect, what no eye can see,
                          No glass can reach; from Inﬁnite to thee,
                          From thee to nothing.—On superior pow’rs
                          Were we to press, inferior might on ours;
                          Or in the full creation leave a void,
                          Where, one step broken, the great scale’s destroy’d—
                          From Nature’s chain whatever link you strike,
                          Tenth, or ten thousandth, breaks the chain alike.
                     The idea of this Great Chain of Being pervades Western literature and science and continues
                     well into our own time. It remains, for example, a major element in arguments by those
                     who lead the repeated crusades to have the biblical story of Creation installed in American
                                                      PREHISTORY, HISTORY, AND ARCHAEOLOGY            15


elementary education as a worthy alternative to
evolution.
     The concept of the Great Chain of Being,
however, is impossible to reconcile with evolu-
tionary theories and the discoveries of modern
archaeology. And it is not simply a matter of the
great antiquity of the human past, which has been
revealed in the past century. For if God had
created and sustained every bacterium, every
sparrow, every Neandertal, how could it had
happened that thousands of species had come into
existence, ﬂourished, only eventually to vanish?
How could humans possibly have evolved from
lower primate species and lived for millions of
years as “subhuman” races now long since extinct?
     It is easy to understand the attractiveness of
the idea of the Great Chain. It placed humanity,
the masterwork of the Creator, “but little lower
than the angels.” Furthermore, it “explained” why
we are here and why the world seems so marvel-
ously and intricately integrated and designed:
God designed the world in every detail for His
purposes and placed humankind in a position of
stewardship over His creation. Yet in many ways,
the last 200 years of Western philosophy have
been a long struggle to come to terms with a
gradual and profound loss of faith in the validity
of the notion of the Great Chain of Being as
evidence for the Argument from Design, as it came      FIGURE 1.7 The Great Chain of Being placed humanity just
to be known in Western thought. This Argument          lower than angels in a static view of the relationship between
                                                       all living species.
from Design is the conviction that the intricacies
and perfections of the world prove that humanity
and history are under divine control—that such a perfectly ordered and operating universe
necessarily implies the existence of a creator and sustainer. This conclusion still has great
power in the world, in both the Christian West and the Islamic East, for example, but it has
been under assault for centuries.


The Enlightenment
Not until the “Enlightenment” of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries were the
intellectual foundations of modern archaeology securely established. Then, primarily in the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, the scientiﬁc method was combined with determinism,
materialism, and evolutionism to try to explain the world and history.
      There can be no absolute deﬁnition of the scientiﬁc method, for rather than a method
it is a state of mind along with a few assumptions. The key ideas are that most, if not all,
things and events can be understood in terms of identiﬁable, measurable, physical forces,
16   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


     and that the best way to identify and measure these forces is to conceive ideas and then
     expose them to rejection through scientiﬁc experimentation or data analysis.
          Although this sounds to most people like nothing more than common sense, history
     shows that it is a rather late and rare perception of the world. For most ancients and for
     many moderns, the world swarms with phenomena and forces that can never be
     understood by science; to them, in fact, precisely those aspects of human existence that
     cannot be scientiﬁcally understood or explained, such as why we are here and the nature
     and destination of the human soul, are the most important.
          But, building on Greek ideas, seventeenth- and eighteenth-century scholars observed
     natural, social, and historical phenomena, devised hypotheses about their causes, and then
     tested these ideas by dropping balls from the tops of buildings (Galileo), ﬂying kites in
     lightning storms (Franklin), and so on. What was scientiﬁcally essential in these analyses
     was that the ideas be exposed to falsiﬁcation or contradiction by some sort of experimenta-
     tion or alternative interpretation, that, above all, the explanation of something be
     considered not absolute, eternal truth, but just the best current hypothesis, subject to
     correction in the light of new research.
          The materialist and determinist elements in this kind of science were the assumptions
     that the phenomena of this world—including historical and cultural phenomena—had
     some ultimate causation, that is, were in some way determined by knowable, measurable,
     material factors such as population growth, genetic mutation, infections, or gravity. If one
     accepted this view of the world, then one should look for explanations in the causal
     relationships and processes governing the attributes of phenomena, not in human decisions
     or divine agency. The evolutionary component was the notion that over time there had
     been and would continue to be an increase in complexity in the biological, historical, and
     political world—an ancient notion.
          There is no necessary conﬂict between these ideas of Western science and religion. Few
     of the scholars of the Enlightenment were avowed atheists. Benjamin Franklin did
     important scientiﬁc research in the eighteenth century, but he was largely serious when he
     said that “wine is a continuing proof that God loves us very much and wants us to be happy.”
     Thomas Jefferson, one of the most versatile intellects of the eighteenth and early nineteenth
     centuries, believed in God—as did many of his contemporaries—as a kind of a Great Clock-
     Maker, who set the universe in motion but does not often intrude upon its operation.
     Jefferson in fact “scientiﬁcally” edited the Bible to what he considered its essential and
     useful message, deleting everything he considered mythical and obscure, and produced The
     Jefferson Bible, a pamphlet of about forty-eight pages.
          The Enlightenment scholars made brilliant advances in determining the physical
     mechanics of the universe and they avidly looked for the mechanics of human history, but
     most found no conﬂict between their science and their belief that God created these
     mechanics and set them into operation.
          The Enlightenment was more than the crucible of modern science; it was in many ways
     the period in which the social perspective of the West ﬁrst formed, particularly with regard
     to the notion of progress and conceptions of material culture. By the end of the eighteenth
     century, science had shown that the natural world was understandable in terms of the
     elegant (i.e., comprehensive yet reduced to the simplest possible terms) ideas of mathematics
     and physics. One result was that scholars everywhere began to apply the scientiﬁc method
     to the understanding of human history and the problem of cultural origins. For example,
                                                      PREHISTORY, HISTORY, AND ARCHAEOLOGY         17


the Marquis de Condorcet (1743–1794), a French philosopher, proposed a series of uni-
versal laws he thought governed the history of human social organizations, and he went so
far as to use his analysis to try to predict the future of the world.
     Such direct applications of the physical science model to history might seem strange,
but one must understand the eighteenth-century mind. “Common sense” tells us that
history and culture are far too complex to explain in terms of simple mathematical laws,
but common sense also tells us that we walk about on a ﬂat earth, around which revolves
the sun. The scholars of the Enlightenment had only recently been shown how treacherous
common sense was and how the mysteries of the universe were being reduced to the
commonplaces of science. Meanwhile, all around them great advances in the biological and
historical sciences were being made.
     In France, Georges Cuvier (1769–1832) undertook an extensive analysis of fossilized
bones and concluded that hundreds of animal species had become extinct and that there
seemed to be an evolutionary trajectory to the biological world. The French naturalist Jean
Lamarck (1744–1829) published various arguments that the world was much older than
the 6,000 years described in the Bible, and he arranged the biological world in a sequence,
from human beings to the smallest invertebrates, in a way similar to later evolutionary
schemes.
     Scientiﬁc archaeology based on evolutionary and materialist assumptions was also
emerging in the late eighteenth century, when P. F. Suhm published in 1776 a History of
Denmark, Norway, and Holstein, based on the recognition that in many parts of Europe
ancient people ﬁrst made tools of stone, then of bronze, and ﬁnally of iron. This Three-Age
System was ﬁrst clearly stated and then developed by the Danish archaeologist Christian
Thomsen in 1836 and by J. Worsae (1821–1885).15 But its origins are much earlier.
Lucretius (c. 98–55 b.c.), the great Roman scholar, wrote that “The earliest weapons were
the hands, nails, and teeth; then came stones, and clubs. These were followed by iron
and bronze, but bronze came ﬁrst, the use of iron not being known until later.” And as
K. C. Chang has noted,16 a near-contemporary of Lucretius, the Chinese scholar Yuan
K’ang, stated essentially the same idea.17


Nineteenth-Century Evolutionism, Materialism, and
Determinism
Excavations for the London Underground Railroad in the mid-1800s produced many
curious ﬁnds, among them the bones of animals that sorely troubled the scientists of the
time. Great elephant-like animals, standing13 feet high at the shoulder, had left their
skeletons amidst those of gigantic cave bears and many other animals that no longer lived
in Britain—or anywhere else in the world. “Animals dead before the Noachian deluge,” some
concluded. But others sought scientiﬁc explanations. In England in the 1830s, William
“Strata” Smith and Charles Lyell, among others, attempted to show that the earth was
formed through the action of slow geological processes—processes still in effect. Lyell’s
contributions were particularly important because the dawning realization of the earth’s
great age had led some scientists and clergy to a belief in a series of “catastrophes,” the last
of which was Noah’s Flood. Adherents of this position saw the fossil animal bones deep in
the earth’s strata as evidence that God had “destroyed” the world at various times with ﬂoods.
18   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


          In 1848 John Stuart Mill published an evolutionary analysis of history that postulated
     a sequence of six stages: (1) hunting, (2) pastoralism, (3) Asiatic (by which he meant the
     great irrigation civilizations of China and the Middle East), (4) Greco-Roman, (5) feudal,
     and (6) capitalist. He complemented this classiﬁcation with an extensive analysis of the
     economic factors determining these stages.
          At about the same time Mill was writing, another Englishman, Herbert Spencer,
     applied the concepts of “natural selection” to human societies some years before Darwin
     applied them to the biological world, though his constructs were quite different from those
     eventually arising out of Darwinian thought.
          Spencer was much inﬂuenced by Thomas Malthus, who in 1798 had noted that human
     societies—and indeed all biological species—tended to reproduce in numbers far faster
     than they increased the available food supply. For human groups, he postulated, this meant
     a life of struggle in which many were on the edge of starvation and more “primitive”
     societies lost out in the struggle for survival to the more “advanced” cultures. Spencer
     believed that eventually natural selection would produce a perfect society:
          Progress therefore, is not an accident, but a necessity. Instead of civilization being artifact,
          it is part of nature; all of a piece with the development of the embryo or the unfolding of a
          ﬂower. The modiﬁcations mankind have undergone, and are still undergoing, result from
          a law underlying the whole organic creation; and provided the human race continues, and
          the constitution of things remains the same, those modiﬁcations must end in completeness.
          . . . So surely must the things we call evil and immorality disappear; so surely must man
          become perfect.18

     Spencer’s ideas permeated archaeological analyses of early civilizations and social forms,
     but they are now largely abandoned, for various reasons (see chapter 7). Some scholars
     consider Spencer to have been a racist whose notions of progress have misled a century of
     social science. But Spencer was a brilliant analyst, and he was operating on assumptions
     that seemed eminently reasonable in the nineteenth century: that history is subject to natural
     laws, that we can know these laws, and that—as Spencer’s whole life experience showed
     him—applications of science to human affairs could only lead to progress. Thomas Huxley
     read a draft of Spencer’s Principles of Biology (1864), and he and others convinced Spencer
     that “progress” was the wrong concept to apply to biological evolution, so Spencer used
     “persistence”; but in his ideas about human history he simply could not escape the notion
     that what history principally showed was “progress.”19

     CHARLES DARWIN
     How very stupid not to have thought of that.
     T. H. Huxley (referring to Darwin’s ideas about
     evolution)20

     On a warm Saturday afternoon in June 1860, about a thousand people gathered in Oxford,
     England, to witness a debate on Charles Darwin’s (Figure 1.8) theory of biological
     evolution. For years Darwin had studied the animals and plants of South America, and he
     had formulated ideas about “descent with modiﬁcation.” But for various reasons he was
     reluctant to publish his views. Only when he knew that others were about to publish similar
     evolutionary analyses did he advance his opinion that for centuries the biological sciences
                                                           PREHISTORY, HISTORY, AND ARCHAEOLOGY                 19


had been in error concerning the origins and nature of
biological species. Before Darwin, most scholars had assumed
that all varieties of plants and animals were the direct product
of God’s creative might, and humankind itself was viewed as a
special act of creation. In fact, as noted earlier, long before
Darwin and continuing through his age and into our own, the
Argument from Design, the idea that the intricacy, complex-
ity, and interdependency of the universe point unmistakably
to the existence of a Divine Creator, has been one of the major
intellectual currents in Western civilization—and in other
cultures as well.
      But Darwin’s research all but eliminated from educated
Western thought the Argument from Design. On his travels
through South America, Darwin had been particularly
impressed by the great diversity of plant and animal life in the
Galapagos Archipelago, near Ecuador. There he found islands
geologically similar and within sight of one another, but
                                                                             FIGURE 1.8 Charles Darwin (1809–1882)
nevertheless inhabited by signiﬁcantly different species of                  altered forever human conceptions of the dynam-
plants and animals. Why should there be such diversity in such               ics of the physical world and the nature of history.
a small area?

    It was evident (after some reﬂection) that such facts as these could only be explained on
    the supposition that species gradually become modiﬁed; and the subject haunted me. But
    it was equally evident that neither the action of the surrounding conditions, nor the will of
    the organism . . . could account for the innumerable cases in which organisms of every kind
    are beautifully adapted to their habits of life—for instance . . . a tree-frog to climb trees, or
    a seed for dispersal by hooks or plumes. I had always been much struck by such adaptations,
    and until these could be explained it seemed to me almost useless to endeavor to prove by
    indirect evidence that species had been modiﬁed.21

Darwin knew of course that for millennia farmers had used selective breeding to improve
their animals in speciﬁc ways, such as increased milk production in cows. But these changes
were the result of purposeful intervention in these animals’ breeding patterns. How could
such selection come about in the natural world?
      Darwin was inﬂuenced by Malthus’s idea of population and Adam Smith’s concepts
of economic competition, and he was much impressed with the importance of competition
in all spheres of life: “Being well prepared to appreciate the struggle for existence which
everywhere goes on from long-continued observation of the habits of animals and plants,
it at once struck me that under these circumstances favorable variations would tend to be
preserved and unfavorable ones to be destroyed.”
      With these observations and simple conclusions, Darwin provided the world with
answers to a whole range of perplexing questions. Why was there such variety in the
biological world? Because so many different environments were inhabited for so many
millions of years, which allowed natural selection to shape biological populations to these
varied environments. Why did animals and plants change over time? Because their
environments had changed and some individuals were better equipped to survive and pass
on their personal characteristics.
20   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


          Darwin knew nothing about the genetic mechanisms we now recognize as the agencies
     through which biological diversity arises and on which natural selection operates, and he
     believed that characteristics acquired by an organism in its lifetime could be passed on to
     its offspring. We now know this to be a misconception. We also know that Darwin was
     deeply in debt intellectually to other scientists.22 Moreover, great debates currently rage in
     theoretical biology about the mechanisms of evolution. Some scholars believe, for example,
     that existing biological systems, whether they be organisms, populations, or species,
     “constrain” the possible directions of evolutionary change in a way that cannot be
     accounted for in classical Darwinian ideas about natural selection.23 But all this does not
     detract from his great contribution.
          Darwin put in motion an intellectual revolution that has continued to the present and
     has battered the very foundations of Western ideas about the nature of God, humanity, and
     history. Through logic and evidence, Darwin and his contemporaries showed there had
     been millions of years in which the world had been dominated by reptiles, eons in which
     there were no people. Thus he forced people to wonder how God could be gloriﬁed by
     countless generations of snakes and lizards and dinosaurs breeding, ﬁghting, and dying in
     primeval swamps, and why they should consider humanity a special act of creation if
     people, too, developed from earlier, simpler forms, from ancestors who were no more
     imaginative, intelligent, creative, or religious than any other animal.
          As noted earlier, it is important to recognize that there is no necessary conﬂict of these
     ideas with Christianity or other religions; indeed, many founders of Western science
     remained true believers until their deaths. They simply assumed that God used the natural
     processes of the world to work out His Divine and Unknowable Plan. Thus the Austrian
     monk Gregor Mendel (a.d. 1822–1884) could serenely work out the genetic basis of
     biological evolution and still die untroubled in his faith. And Darwin thought that through
     evolutionary processes people would eventually become altruistic and profoundly civilized,
     and he himself said that he had “never been an atheist in the sense of denying the existence
     of God” (although he professed a rather muddled agnosticism).24
          But the great mass of people were shocked and troubled by the implications of
     evolutionary theory. Evolutionary biology is now the only generally accepted theory of
     biology, and few scientists doubt its essential validity. But in that room at Oxford in 1860,
     Darwin and his advocate, Thomas Huxley, were reviled and ridiculed (Figure 1.9). This
     hostility characterized reaction to Darwinian ideas well into our own times, and it is not at
     all surprising that this should be so. In a sense, Darwin completed Galileo’s revolution.
     Galileo showed that the earth was just one among an inconceivable number of celestial
     bodies, without apparent special claim to centrality; Darwin showed that today’s human
     being is one of many related life-forms and is always a “transitional form,” constantly
     changing, with no apparent claim to centrality in the universe.
          As Stephen Jay Gould points out, however, evolutionary theory makes no pretense of
     explaining the ultimate nature or purpose of human existence—if it is humanly possible,
     at all, ever to answer such questions. Evolutionary theory simply supplies powerful
     explanations of change over time in human biology and society—leaving the problem of
     ultimate causation to some other forms of inquiry or to faith.
          But to understand the vehemence and loathing in the initial reaction to evolutionary
     theory and its persistent controversial status, one must recognize that evolutionary theory
     goes beyond simply calling into question the argument that the design of the universe
                                                 PREHISTORY, HISTORY, AND ARCHAEOLOGY         21


necessarily proves the existence of a divine
creator and sustainer. The important point
here is that the impact of evolutionary
theory on how we view our universe and
our past, present, and future has been
profound and continues to reverberate
through science and culture, and it calls
into question some of the most cherished
and ancient notions about human morality
and worth.
      It is important to note in this context,
however, that evolutionary theory cannot
prove that the Argument from Design is
wrong. It simply provides an alternative
explanation of how the biological and cul-
tural history of earth might have happened.
And as powerful as evolutionary, material-
ist, and determinist theories have been in
shaping our world, they will probably
never eradicate nonscientiﬁc “knowl-
edge.” One of novelist G. García Márquez’s
characters says, “I don’t believe in God
but I’m afraid of Him,” and we can ﬁnd
vestiges of the same thought throughout
modern cultures.
      One reason for this is that from some
perspectives the evolution of life is so
extraordinarily improbable. If the earth’s
orbit had been 5 percent closer to the sun,    FIGURE 1.9 Many nineteenth-century cartoonists were amused by
for example, the earth would have been         the idea of biological evolution.
far too hot for life to evolve; if the earth
were 1 percent farther out, all the water on the planet would be locked in glacial ice. It is
easy to understand why many people through the ages have concluded that the earth was
designed for humans. Some scientists accept that the complex chemicals constituting the
self-replicating compounds necessary for biological life could have evolved by random
processes, but consider the few-billion-year history of organic earth life to be too short for
this to be a probable occurrence. Hence, some hypothesize that the earth passed through a
space cloud of organic molecules, from which we are all descended.
      But such subtle points were unknown to people of Darwin’s age. Darwin and other
evolutionists had posed cosmic questions and had provided compelling answers. Their
arguments and research showed that not just biological species, but cities, ships, pyramids,
farms, religions, parliaments—all things cultural—had evolved out of earlier, simpler
forms; they implied that we have no special claim to centrality or exemption from the
processes of the universe. And, perhaps most important, Darwin’s ideas made it reasonable
to ask whether or not there were principles with which to understand our cultural as well
as our physical evolution.
22   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


          It is important to recognize that Darwinian theory is more than just an abstraction
     about how the biological universe acquired its present form. In its application to cultures
     and history, Darwinian theory is profoundly political. When it was ﬁrst widely accepted, in
     the late nineteenth century, some people justiﬁed rampant Western colonialism and
     exploitation in terms of the “survival of the ﬁttest,” implying that it was somehow natural
     and right that “higher” social systems control, coerce, and replace “primitive” ones.
          Darwin was in some senses a “gradualist,” who saw evolution operating at a constant
     rate, ﬁnely sifting through variations, perpetuating some, extirpating others. Biologists
     Niles Eldridge and Stephen Jay Gould countered the gradualist vision of evolutionary
     processes with a concept of “punctuated equilibrium,” or periods of rapid change inter-
     spersed with long periods of much slower change. Here, too, the possible applications of
     these ideas are not just to biology. Evolutionists such as Eldridge and Gould, for example,
     have argued that gradualism has been used implicitly by some to justify a slow, gradual pace
     of social reform.
          As we shall see, Darwinian principles are simply indispensable to understanding the
     subjects of chapters 3, 4, and 5 of this book. They are the only scientiﬁc basis we have for
     trying to understand how we evolved out of early nonhuman hominins and how we
     converted plants and animals into the power sources on which our societies have been
     based.
          Much less clear, however, is the extent to which Darwin can help us understand the
     origins of civilizations and the basic dynamics of human history and society.

     HISTORICAL MATERIALISM
     [The purpose of critical materialism is] to help
     men out of their self-made prison of
     uncomprehending economic determinism.
     Alfred Schmidt25

     Schmidt’s observation is, if true, perhaps the most powerful justiﬁcation one could make
     of the contemporary importance of archaeology and historical analysis. Marxists and other
     determinists conclude that slavery, poverty, violence, and other ills of the world through
     history have been the result of economic determinants that have never been fully
     understood. They suggest that if these determinants can be analyzed and applied, then these
     ills will eventually disappear.
           Archaeological analyses of the past have been greatly inﬂuenced by various notions
     about “determinism.” Determinism, as applied to human history and culture, is the
     imprecise collective term for the idea that what happened in history was (partly, or largely,
     or entirely) the result of determining factors that are outside “free will” or the inﬂuences
     of divinities.
           Although statues of Lenin and Marx have recently and literally been consigned to the
     “dustbin of history” in much of the world, along with the sociopolitical systems purportedly
     based on their philosophies, it does not necessarily follow that Marxist methods of
     historical analysis are entirely worthless. Even archaeologists who consider Marxism a
     bankrupt political ideology are in debt to Marxian thought in many of its elements of
     materialist determinism. Marxism, or at least materialist notions, are a “natural” for
     archaeology because archaeologists spend their lives amidst heaps of materials—the houses,
                                                       PREHISTORY, HISTORY, AND ARCHAEOLOGY              23


stone tools, storage bins, pots, weapons, irrigation canals,
and other items that constitute the technology of a
central Marxian concept of the “means of production.”
      An early anthropological expression of evolutionary
and materialist ideas that had considerable impact on
studies of the past was the work of Lewis Henry Morgan
(1818–1881), who divided history into a series of stages
on the basis of initial uses of ﬁre, bow and arrow, pottery,
domesticated animals, writing, and so on. Karl Marx
(1818–1883) (Figure 1.10) was inﬂuenced by Morgan
and other earlier evolutionists, but the full impact of
nineteenth-century evolutionism was achieved only
when it was combined with Marx’s ideas about material-
ist determinism.
     Certainly one of the most diverse—not to say
solipsistic—associations of all time is that group of
individuals who have tried to explain what Marx meant.
People have killed each other in disputes over Marxian
interpretations, and neo-Marxist variants on the basic
Marxian ideology are so diverse as to defy summariza-
tion. The student with a sense of humor and a good
German dictionary is invited to read Marx’s original
description of the all-important “modes of production”
and “relations of production,” and then to follow the
exegesis of these terms into the contemporary era.
Scholars of every inclination, from Platonic idealism to
existentialism, have claimed inspiration from Marxist
theory.
     But what has all this got to do with archaeology?         FIGURE 1.10 Karl Marx (1818–1883) profoundly
Precisely this: Some of the most inﬂuential archaeologists     inﬂuenced anthropology and archaeology by revealing
                                                               the links between the economic basis of societies and
of our century have used Marxian ideas in their analyses.26
                                                               their political institutions, social structures, and other
Often these forms of Marxism are quite different from          cultural characteristics.
what Karl Marx himself professed, but they are derived
from nineteenth-century ideas about historical material-
ism and determinism.
     As we will see in chapter 7, Marx argued that much of human history could be
understood on the basis of an analysis of how a society produces and distributes its wealth.
He attempted to show that everything—wars, social classes, poverty, parliaments, religion,
art—could be explained if one examined the technology, economy, and environment of a
given society and the social relations people establish in relation to these economic and
environmental factors. In recent years there have been numerous reworkings of Marxian
theory, and the most recent archaeological expressions of these ideas stress the social
relations that people enter into in producing and consuming goods. These, rather than just
the blunt forces of climate, crops, and technology, are seen by Marxist archaeologists as the
determinant factors of history. An important point of departure for some, more tradi-
tional, Marxists is that historical analyses must be comparative. They “contend that a
24   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


     comprehensive view of all ancient societies, seen in relation to each other, will reveal gen-
     eral outlines of a regularity in the historical development of humanity”27; they assume that
     ancient human societies practiced an initial primitive communism, followed by the
     inevitable appropriation of surpluses in early agricultural communities, and the subsequent
     formation of “class society [by] strictly logical laws.” They conclude that analysis of the
     forces that resulted “in the stratiﬁcation of society into antagonistic classes” provides “the
     key for our understanding of the course of the subsequent history of ancient society,” and
     that “all Marxist historians adhere to the concept that, in the ﬁnal analysis, the relations of
     production are determined by the level of development of the means of production.”
          In contemporary Marxist archaeology28 many of these assumptions and ideas are being
     debated. Contemporary Marxist archaeologists differ greatly in their perspectives, but
     many of them consider social conﬂict as major determinants of cultural change; they also
     are trying to create a “human-centered” view of the past, in which people are not just passive,
     reacting elements whose actions and beliefs are not simple products of external economic
     and environmental forces, but instead are themselves the agents of social dynamics and
     cultural changes.29
          We will consider contemporary expressions of Marxist ideas in archaeology more
     fully in chapter 7. It is sufﬁcient here to note that materialist determinism in various forms
     and philosophies has had a long and profound inﬂuence on archaeology. Moreover,
     Marxist ideas retain great potency in contemporary archaeology, especially among the
     post-processualists.

     EARLY TWENTIETH-CENTURY ARCHAEOLOGY
     To sum up: 1. The cosmos is a gigantic ﬂy-
     wheel making 10,000 revolutions a minute. 2.
     Man is a sick ﬂy taking a dizzy ride on it. 3.
     Religion is the theory that the wheel was
     designed and set spinning to give him the ride.
     H. L. Mencken30

     From the mid-nineteenth century to the beginnings of the twentieth, archaeology entered
     a remarkable era of Discovery and Decipherment31—this was the period in which Egyptian
     hieroglyphs and Mesopotamian cuneiform were ﬁrst deciphered and major archaeological
     excavations were undertaken everywhere. In 1922 Lord Carnarvon and Howard Carter
     opened the tomb of Pharaoh Tutankhamun in Egypt and in the same year Sir John Marshall
     began excavating the great Harappan civilization in the Indus Valley; in 1926 Sir Leonard
     Woolley discovered the Royal Tombs of Ur in Mesopotamia; and all over the world at this
     time other marvelous archaeological discoveries were being made.
          Archaeology made great progress in this era, but it was also a time in which archaeology
     was dominated by Europeans and Americans in an ethnocentric and imperialist way that
     even today gives the discipline a negative image in many parts of the world. The French
     and British in particular, but all Western nations to some extent, looted the antiquities
     of other lands, especially Greece, Turkey, Egypt, Iraq, and Iran. European governments
     collaborated with archaeologists to extract antiquities concessions from weak governments.
     When the British and French controlled Egypt, they always made one of their own citizens
     the director of the Egyptian antiquities service. Archaeologists, in turn, sometimes acted as
     spies for their governments.32
                                                    PREHISTORY, HISTORY, AND ARCHAEOLOGY         25


     World War I with its horrible carnage, the Depression of the 1930s, and the other
dismal events of this era disillusioned many intellectuals and caused them to doubt any
notion of human social evolution—at least in the sense of a world growing more rational
and moral, of progress in any sense. The ﬁrst half of the twentieth century saw an age of
existentialism and in many senses a rejection of rationalism. Darwinian notions of struggle
and godlessness, the irrationality of world wars, all these destroyed for many people the last
vestiges of the Argument from Design and resulted in a profound sense of cosmic isolation.
     The philosophical currents of the early twentieth century produced in archaeology a
largely nontheoretical discipline in which most scholars contented themselves with patient
accumulation of artifacts and a minimum of interpretation. This period was the “Golden
Age” of cultural reconstruction and culture history. In the United States the federal
government invested considerable sums in archaeological investigations, in part as a way
to employ people during the Depression. It was widely assumed that progress in explaining
prehistoric cultural developments would be made only when much more archaeological
evidence had been accumulated and the “facts be allowed to speak for themselves.” Even
by the 1930s, however, there was a growing frustration with the idea of an archaeology
limited just to an endless series of inferences about how ancient people lived and how they
were related culturally. And many scholars, such as the Marxist archaeologist V. Gordon
Childe, continued to work on a science of history.33
     One of the earliest and most inﬂuential attempts to move archaeology beyond simple
data collection and description was Julian Steward’s 1949 classic article, “Cultural Causality
and Law: A Trial Formulation of Early Civilization.”34 Steward tried to relate worldwide
similarities in the evolution of cities, writing, warfare, urbanism, and so on, to basic
determinants of ecology, technology, and demography.

ARCHAEOLOGY 1960–1996
Every decoding is another encoding.35

The New Archaeology After about 1960 there was a major revival of the idea of
archaeology as a historical “science.” In the 1960s some archaeologists tried to introduce
into archaeology the logical methods they saw in physics and chemistry, on the premise
that even if archaeology could not be entirely the same kind of science as these “natural
sciences,” they could at least use the same kinds of logic for analysis.36
     Why would physics and these other sciences be so attractive as models for archaeo-
logists, to the extent that archaeologists were accused of “physics envy”? Primarily because
physics and the other natural sciences offer powerful explanations. Natural scientists use a
limited number of principles, such as the principles of relativity, thermodynamics, and so
on, and powerful mathematical formulations to explain much of the workings of the
physical universe. We know what causes eclipses, thermonuclear explosions, malaria, and
other natural processes to the extent that we can control these forces and make televisions,
nuclear reactors, and genetically engineered plants and animals.
     Attempts to understand the human past in terms of principles like those of physics
have a long history in Western culture. Archaeologists have wanted to know what caused
the ﬁrst vaguely human animals to use stone tools, what factors drove these early hominins
into the northern temperate latitudes, why people changed from hunting-gathering to
agriculture, what forces impelled people to establish cities, develop written languages, wage
international wars—in short, why history has turned out the way it has.
26   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


          One of the most inﬂuential scholars in the attempt to make archaeology a powerful
     science has been Lewis Binford. While a student at the University of Michigan, Binford
     was impressed by anthropologist Leslie White’s evolutionary, materialistic vision of
     anthropology.37 In an inﬂuential and programmatic series of papers Binford argued that
     archaeologists should turn their attention from endless excavations and attempts to
     reconstruct ancient cultures and culture histories and concentrate instead on the study
     of general cultural processes. Binford particularly stressed the importance of problem
     orientation and testing hypotheses. He argued, for example, that the initial appearance of
     agricultural economies independently in different areas of the world was the result of
     climate changes, population growth, and various cultural adaptations of peoples in certain
     environments. He then related a wide range of archaeological data to his hypothesis in an
     effort to explain why agriculture appeared when and where it did.
          Binford and many others sought to make archaeology an objective, empirical science
     in which hypotheses about all forms of cultural variability could be tested. This New
     Archaeology (also called processual archaeology) includes many diverse perspectives,
     methods, and ideas, but there are some common elements.38 First, many archaeologists
     believe that mathematics can play a powerful role in archaeological analyses. Mathematical
     analyses of many different types have been applied to archaeological data, and some of
     these will be reviewed in later chapters. Second, almost all attempts to make archaeology
     a science have assumed that this would be an evolutionary science—at least in the sense
     that important differences between cultures represent development from simple to
     complex. The application of Darwinian ideas of evolution to human societies has
     in many ways just begun, and some archaeologists see great potential in this approach.
     Third, the New Archaeology also has stressed cultural ecology, in the sense that it looks
     for the causes of major cultural changes primarily in factors like climate changes, varia-
     bility in the agricultural productivity of different environments, technological changes,
     and demographic factors. But most of the archaeologists of this era assumed that ancient
     cultures were complex integrated systems—that is, the patterns of cause and effect are
     complexly interrelated and are rarely unidirectional. Thus, if one were to consider why
     people in ancient Iraq ﬁrst began cultivating plants, one would expect that the answer
     would involve many different factors, such as changes in population densities, climate
     ﬂuctuations, evolving technologies, the genetic properties of certain plant genera, and
     so on. Human societies are assumed to have regulating mechanisms that promote the
     group’s adaptation. Most human societies, for example, have developed means of birth
     control to regulate their population-to-resources balance; the intensity with which
     birth control is practiced can change as the resources change. To some extent then, the
     systems view of cultures is that they are self-regulating entities, open to inﬂuences from
     their environments. Explanations based on this model are often functional expla-
     nations: Just as a biologist might account for the evolution of the mammalian heart as a
     way to circulate blood, an archaeologist might account for the rise of state religions in all
     early civilizations by the functional beneﬁts of a low-cost, ideological mechanism like
     religion to organize and control the mass of the population for military and economic
     purposes.
          The goal of reformulating archaeology as a mathematical, evolutionary, ecological
     science for analyzing extinct complex cultural systems remains a strong theme in
     contemporary archaeology, but there has been a widespread loss of faith in the possibility
                                                     PREHISTORY, HISTORY, AND ARCHAEOLOGY         27


of a “physics of history.” Most archaeologists recognize that human history is in some ways
fundamentally different from some of the material phenomena of the world, such as atoms.
For one thing, human history is the product of natural selection in a way that does not seem
true of the history of galaxies and subatomic particles (this point is discussed in later
chapters). The human past by deﬁnition is a speciﬁc sequence in time and through a parti-
cular space—the planet earth—while the principles of physics and chemistry are applicable
(at least theoretically) to all times and places. That the volume of a gas is determined by its
pressure and temperature is assumed to be true now and forever, here and in the farthest
reaches of the universe.
     But biology, population genetics, ecology—these and other life sciences deal with a his-
torical sequence of life-forms in a particular place, earth. Yet these are powerful mathemat-
ical explanatory disciplines, and some archaeologists continue the quest to formulate a
science of archaeology that is similar to these disciplines. Unlike the natural sciences,
however, there is no “theory” that unites and focuses the research of the many practitioners
of archaeology in the same way that evolutionary theory and population genetics unite
biologists and thermodynamics unites physicists. Some scholars, nonetheless, see the
potential for a unifying theory for archaeology in Darwinian evolutionary theory, and we
will consider this approach in more detail in chapter 7.


POST-PROCESSUAL ARCHAEOLOGY
Il n’y a pas hors-texte. [There is nothing outside
of the text.]
Jacques Derrida.39


For the subjective idealism of scientistic
archaeology we substitute a view of the
discipline [of archaeology] as an
hermeneutically informed dialectical science of
past and present unremittingly embracing and
attempting to understand the polyvalent
qualities of the socially constructed world of the
past and the world in which we live.
Michael Shanks and Christopher Tilley40


As these quotations illustrate, post-processual approaches to archaeology can be difﬁcult
to describe and understand. Indeed, it is one of the tenets of post-processualism that any
attempt to summarize and capture the essence of the approach is doomed because there is
no single approach, no uniﬁed perspective. The reader might wonder what all this theorizing
has to do with the bones and stones of our ancient past: The point here is that many
archaeologists say this theorizing has nothing to do with the study of our past, while,
conversely, many post-processual archaeologists think it has everything to do with the
study of the past.
     The origins of post-processualism were described by Ian Hodder as an attempt to
overcome perceived shortcomings in processual archaeology.41 These include that pro-
cessualists neglect the inﬂuence of culture, that they concentrate on norms rather than
28   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


     individuals, and that they rarely attempt to incorporte the ideas used by societies to struc-
     ture how material culture ﬁts into a society’s world-view.
          The post-processualists have found many different frameworks, but none that are
     “scientiﬁc” in the classical Western sense of that term. Most post-processualists believe that
     the search for an empirical science of artifacts is in essence a search for a unicorn, that
     archaeology can use a few scientiﬁc methods, such as radiocarbon dating, but that it will
     always be a humanistic enterprise and a fundamentally interpretive exercise, not an
     observational one.
          The major ﬂaw the post-processualists discern in the processualists is the assumption
     that archaeology can be a neutral, value-free, empirical science of artifacts. Young, for
     example, expresses this difference of opinion as, on the one hand, those who think that
     “history is what happened in the past,” as opposed to the post-processualist notion that
     history “is what a living society does with the past.”
          Bruce Trigger,42 drawing on the works of philosopher Larry Lauden, has identiﬁed and
     analyzed four main tenets of post-processualism in American and British archaeology. The
     ﬁrst is the proposition that “no one perceives the world objectively: what we perceive, and
     even more what we interpret what we perceive, is inﬂuenced, either to some degree or
     entirely, by what we believe.” A second related premise is what Trigger characterizes as the
     assumption that “sensory data or observational evidence is rarely capable of refuting
     strongly held beliefs.” A third premise involves “holism”—the idea that “in order to under-
     stand any part of a system or issue we must ﬁrst understand the whole.” The fourth premise
     is the principle that “science is a social activity. This implies that science is only one source
     of knowledge among many, including common sense, religious beliefs, and perhaps even
     delusions.”
          As Trigger notes in his analysis, all of these premises are at least somewhat true, and
     few archaeologists would reject them totally. Contemporary disputes in archaeology
     revolve around the extent to which these premises are true and their implications for
     archaeological method and theory.
          The abstract philosophical points that Trigger discusses are perhaps best illustrated by
     the work of British archaeologists Michael Shanks and Christopher Tilley.43 Shanks and
     Tilley, drawing on the ideas of Derrida, Foucault, 44 and others, have argued that, just as one
     cannot assign a deﬁnitive single meaning to a text, one cannot make an empirically veriﬁ-
     able and deﬁnitive interpretation of the archaeological record. We create the past, they argue,
     and our interpretations of the past are limited by, and arise out of, our own cultural context.
          This may seem an obvious point, that archaeologists’ interpretations of the past are in
     part a function of their own sociocultural context. Archaeologists regularly report temples,
     social stratiﬁcation, intensiﬁed storage, social class, warfare, states, and other “things” that
     do not, technically, exist. Our own culture determines to some extent what we make of the
     past. We can dig up people, sort through their feces, measure their bodies, sift their garbage
     for their food remains, translate their writings, measure their buildings, and do all kinds of
     scientiﬁc things to them, but in the end what we make of them will have a lot to do with
     our own lives and personalities.
          Indeed, just as some ethnographers have concluded that human life and society have
     “only meanings rather than causes,” some archaeologists think that the emphasis of
     archaeology should be on assessing the meaning of the past for ourselves, rather than on
     futile attempts to understand the causes of the patterns and trajectory of the human past.
                                                         PREHISTORY, HISTORY, AND ARCHAEOLOGY        29


    These post-processual forms of archaeological theory have had somewhat less
inﬂuence in the United States than in Britain and Scandinavia, but the issues they raise have
become prominent in theoretical circles everywhere. Indeed, some elements of post-
processual archaeology derive from the post-modernist perspective that can now be found
in many academic disciplines, such as literary criticism, architecture, and sociology. Exactly
what post-modernism is in anthropology and archaeology is difﬁcult to deﬁne.45 As
archaeologist Ian Hodder wrote:
    It is thoroughly engrossing for an archaeologist, a student of cultural change, to be living
    through the apparent “birth” of a new cultural style. Yet it is surprising how difﬁcult it is
    to deﬁne and understand what is happening. The more I try to tie down post-modernism,
    the less coherent it seems. . . . [T]he growth of the style seems bigger than any individual’s
    attempt to characterize it. Ultimately it engulfs any attempt to ﬁx it.46
Whatever else they have in common, post-processual archaeologists view archaeology as
profoundly political. Archaeologist Mark Leone, for example, in his archaeological inter-
pretations of the early history of Annapolis, Maryland, discusses how his archaeological
work there has involved contemporary African Americans and how his interpretations of
the archaeological data from that city do not necessarily match those of the African
Americans. Of this experience he writes:
    American archaeologists have only just begun to accept the constructivist view of
    knowledge, which implies that data are not neutral. . . . We are not at all accustomed to
    negotiating truth values with nonarchaeologists who are affected by our work. However,
    such negotiating does not debase archaeology. . . . The eventual result will be a much richer
    archaeology. It will produce not a single interpretation of data, but many interpretations;
    not one uniformly useful literature, but many incommensurable literatures.47
The post-processual perspective raises many important issues and poses some signiﬁcant
problems. For example, if “science” cannot be applied to the archaeological record to
evaluate competing claims to the truth, and if there can be many equally “true” readings of
any text, then it would seem that one would have to accept that Native Americans who
believe that the New World archaeological record shows that they originated in North
America, not Asia, have a claim to the truth equal to that of the majority of archaeologists
who believe that Native Americans ﬁrst came to the New World between 10,000 and
20,000 years ago.
     Are these equally valid ideas? Some post-modernists and post-processualists reject this
absolute relativism, but if “positivist” ideas about scientiﬁc evaluation are inapplicable to
archaeology, as some of these scholars believe, there can be no “correct” or most probably
accurate reading of the past.
     What archaeologists do may not be “science” in the classical sense of that term, but
many archaeologists reject the idea that all readings of the past are equally valid in terms
of their accuracy with regard to what actually happened in the past. All of the terms in the
previous sentence are “loaded” in a sense. “Correct” does not necessarily have to be in
relation to whether Native Americans originated in North America or not. Correctness,
validity, and accuracy can be understood here to mean that they are both culturally
constructed beliefs about the past.
     In general, there seems little post-modernists and post-processualists agree on except,
perhaps, their belief that archaeologists who think they are doing “science” are mistaken.
30   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


     Agency and Landscape Archaeology One expression of the frustration many con-
     temporary archaeologists feel with traditional processualist archaeology is the immense
     growth of interest in such topics as “agency,” and the use of this concept in such applica-
     tions as Landscape Archaeology. These concepts are part of the post-processual movement
     in archaeology—although they need not entail a complete rejection of more traditional
     processual approaches.
          The archaeological landscape in its simplest conception is the physical background and
     ﬁeld on which ancient peoples lived and left their stones, bones, pots, houses, and so on.
     In contemporary archaeology, however, the notion of archaeological landscape goes
     beyond that sense, to emphasize the social and symbolic ways in which ancient peoples
     invested their worlds with meaning.48 As Knapp and Ashmore note, “landscape is an entity
     that exists by virtue of its being perceived, experienced, and contextualized by people.”49 As
     an example, consider Egyptologist Janet Richard’s analyses of landscapes in the Nile Valley.
     Richards notes that the ancient Egyptians used an area of the site of Abydos as a royal
     cemetery for many generations. She suggests that this location can be explained by the fact
     that it is in a dramatic setting, on the border between the two environments the Egyptians
     recognized as their world, the desert and the cultivated lands—Kemet and Deshret. She
     concludes that by intentionally positioning the cemetery in this area, they were reinforcing
     the ideology of the pharaoh as the uniﬁer of Egypt. And in so doing they created a political
     arena that fostered the conservative ideology of ancient Egypt.
          Many similar examples could be offered. Great tombs, temples, and other monuments
     often seem to have been placed, for example, with regard to their visibility. The implication
     is that these constructions were intended to remind the people living around them of the
     social interaction between people, the power of the state, and the ideologies of their
     societies. People of the early farming communities of the Neolithic in Europe, for example,
     built tombs, such as dolmens and passage graves. Although these were not necessarily
     highly visible in the landscape, they were intimately linked to daily activities in the
     settlements. Christopher Tilley proposes that these grave monuments were multilayered
     symbols “read” by the Neolithic people who constructed them.50 The meaning of the tombs
     thus depends on the context in which they were perceived—tombs are markers for
     important landscape features such as the transition from a ﬂat plain (low) to a mountain
     (high), or they can be seen as referents to ancestors and the past history of groups living in
     the area.
          The notion of agency may seem obvious: It is the recognition that people are the agents
     of cultural construction and cultural change. The world’s archaeological record was created
     by the perceptions and activities of billions of people. To many archaeologists we cannot
     interpret the past by considering people as just constants in equations driven by ecology,
     environment, and technology. These are simply constraining factors; we must also consider
     how people intentionally shaped their cultural worlds. In the American Southwest, for
     example, Feinman, Lightfoot, and Upham have suggested that people living in pithouse
     communities had two major choices in sociopolitical organization.51 In some settlements,
     people adopted a corporate-oriented strategy that focused on rituals, ceremonies, and
     storage shared by the entire community, with few differences between households. People
     living in other pithouse settlements chose a network-oriented strategy that emphasized social
     differences between households through elaboration of architecture and accumulation of
     surpluses.
                                                    PREHISTORY, HISTORY, AND ARCHAEOLOGY         31


Sex and Gender in Archaeology Another example of how contemporary archaeo-
logy has developed from its traditional forms involves the ideas of sex and gender. One of
the most evident impacts of post-processualism in contemporary archaeology is the grow-
ing interest in gender and in what some have called feminist archaeology. Concepts and
discussions of gender and sex long predate the current interest in these subjects, of course,
and not all discussions of this topic are part of post-processualism. As we shall see in chap-
ter 3, for example, a pivotal concept in most hypotheses about how the ﬁrst hominins
evolved involves the relationship of males and females in economic and other behavior;
and in later prehistory scholars have studied everything from the “goddess” female ﬁgurines
of Neolithic Europe to the status of women in ancient Egypt. But contemporary feminist
archaeological studies from the post-processual perspective diverge from these traditional
studies in several ways. Biological sex is a relatively simple and useful dichotomy (although
there are, of course, ambiguities), and a trained archaeologist can determine the sex of a
well-preserved skeleton with considerable reliability. The exaggerated sexual characteristics
of Pleistocene female ﬁgurines leave no doubt as to the sexual and reproductive capabili-
ties of the person or idea represented. But gender is a cultural construct and not so easily
deﬁned. The terms “lesbian,” “homosexual,” and “bisexual” roughly ﬁt sexual practices,
but perceptions of these genders differ radically in different societies. Even more abstract
are the long-term historical dynamics that have shaped perceptions of gender and the
processes of interactions of different genders and sexes.
     Perhaps the most important element in post-processualist expressions of feminist
archaeology involves the rejection of some forms of empiricism. Traditional archaeology
long neglected many aspects of sex and gender because it appeared difﬁcult to relate the
bones and stones of the archaeological record to gender or sex. In excavating an Egyptian
archaeological site, for example, one ﬁnds what looks like the remains of villages. There are
mudbrick walls, ﬂoors of compacted sand ﬁlled with the bits and pieces of daily life, such
as fragments of burnt bone and wheat, small bits of pottery, and so on, and there are also
things that look like hearths, latrines, animal pens, and a thousand other remnants of a
5,000-year-old residence. Reasonable archaeological analyses can estimate when people
lived here, what foods they ate, what tools they used, whom they traded products with, how
big the community was, how they buried their dead, and many other aspects of the culture
of which these people were a part. Inferring the gender of the people who used particular
artifacts and the relationship of males and females in this extinct community could begin
with generalizations made from the many ancient Egyptian paintings and texts, which
indicate that men and women did very different kinds of work. Other resources that might
help decipher gender-related tasks in this ancient society could potentially be found in
ethnohistoric or ethnoarchaeological studies of life in Egyptian villages of the recent past.
Such interpretations, however, might be regarded by a processual archaeologist as mere
speculation that is on a lot less secure ground than estimates of diet based on recovered
archaeological materials.52
     Whatever the evidentiary basis of gender in the archaeological record, this topic carries
with it some complex political and social implications. An enormous amount of evidence
from archaeology, ethnography, and history shows that throughout the past women have
been primary producers of much of the goods and services of all societies (Figure 1.11 ).
Even in societies such as the Eskimo, where hunting is the primary source of food, women
provide labor in the form of child care, food preparation, hide-processing, and many other
           32       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                activities. In agricultural societies throughout history women
                                                have also provided much of the material wealth and available
                                                services in these societies, in the form of the toil of farming;
                                                the production of pottery, textile, and other craft goods; child
                                                care. and a thousand other activities. 53 Yet it also seems
                                                undeniable that throughout history these goods and services
                                                have often been appropriated by men outside the basic family
                                                unit, men who had the power to consume and redistribute
                                                this wealth. How does one explain this asymmetry, and is
                                                an attempt to explain it in terms of societal efﬁciency or bio-
                                                logical factors necessarily an attempt to justify it? And if we
                                                write a world prehistory and history that concentrates on the
                                                people of power, the pharaohs, priests, and other male poten-
                                                tates, do we necessarily ignore and devalue the contribution
                                                of women?
                                                     These are important issues in contemporary archaeology,
                                                and whatever the ultimate long-term impact of post-processual
                                                ideas about archaeology as a political act and statement,
                                                considerations of gender have raised topics well worth
                                                contemplation.54 Like all cultural elements, constructions of
FIGURE 1.11 Both today and in the past,         gender in societies, and their variations over time and place,
women have made substantial contributions to    cannot be treated in isolation. Gender roles can only be
subsistence, goods, and services in society.    understood in relation to such other societal elements as social
                                                stratiﬁcation, marriage and kinship systems, inheritance
                                                patterns, rituals, and so on.



                    SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

                    So, where do we—and archaeology and world prehistory—go from here, in the midst of
                    these contrasting ideas about the nature of inquiries into the past? What can we know about
                    the past, and how should we go about knowing it?
                         As we have seen, answers have ranged from the notion that history is God’s plan and
                    ultimately unknowable to the idea that history can be the subject of scientiﬁc methods of
                    analysis and ultimately can be explained in terms of general principles. Contemporary
                    archaeologists include those who are working on complex computer models designed to
                    extract historical processes, others who are trying to produce humanistic interpretations of
                    ancient cultures, and others who believe they can’t really scientiﬁcally “know” any thing
                    about the past but are using it for contemporary political purposes.
                          In the face of these competing ideas about how the past should be analyzed, inter-
                    preted, and understood, many archaeologists have an eclectic position: They use ideas from
                    many different sources and theoretical perspectives, on the assumption that a synthesis of
                    this kind represents our best research strategy.
                         A good defense of an eclectic theoretical approach to archaeology is that offered by
                    Bruce Trigger, in his recent calls for a “holistic” archaeology. Trigger notes:
                                                          PREHISTORY, HISTORY, AND ARCHAEOLOGY        33


     I have argued that the future of archaeology lies not in replacing the ecological determinism
     of processual archaeology with the historical particularism that currently appears to be
     attracting many postprocessual archaeologists, but rather in effecting a synthesis of these
     seemingly opposed positions. The synthesis I have proposed involves trying to investigate
     as many of the factors that constrain human behavior as possible. These include not only
     the external factors championed by the processualists but also the cultural traditions
     without which human existence would be impossible.55

     Ian Hodder too has argued56 that there is no necessary conﬂict between processual
and post-processual archaeology. He suggests that processual archaeology has made the
essential contribution of demonstrating the constraints that ecology, demography, and
technology have on societies; post-processualism, on the other hand, offers a way to include
in archaeological interpretations such elements as ideas, gender roles, power relations,
ritual, and so on.
     The approach taken in this book is a “holistic” one in this same sense. It is a blend of
many different perspectives and analyses. It must be remembered, however, that the various
kinds of “knowledge” that are provided are not all fundamentally the same. A statistical
comparison of stone tools from European sites of 20,000 years ago can produce a different
kind of knowledge by different methods from that of an interpretation of the symbols these
people painted on cave walls and engraved on stones and bones (although post-processualists
might see these as fundamentally similar at some levels). Yet each can give us at least a sense
that we understand the past better, in a way, and each can be an interesting and instructive
exercise. An underlying assumption and premise of this book is that an archaeological
inquiry into the past can be usefully and productively done in the form of “science,” and
that all interpretations of the past are not necessarily equally valid.57


Who Owns the Past?
Who controls the past controls the future; who
controls the present controls the past.
George Orwell58

In contemporary archaeology the vast majority of ﬁeld work and publication is done by
Western European and American archaeologists. Some of these scholars have begun to
question their “right” to interpret the pasts of so many different cultures and peoples
around the world.
     If one takes the view that archaeology is a science, then one could at least argue that,
like biology, chemistry, demography, and any other science, what matters is the quality of
the science, not the ethnic or cultural identity of the person doing the analyses. Given the
various intellectual trends in post-processual archaeology (as reviewed earlier), however,
the reader will not be surprised to know that many archaeologists think that it is unethical
to “appropriate” the pasts of others. Randall McGuire, for example, in reviewing the
archaeology of North America, suggests:
     The time has come for archaeologists to reunite their object of study, the Indian past, with
     its descendants, and to ask about the needs of Indian people and address those needs. . . .
     [This will require] that all archaeologists initiate a process of dialogue with Indian peoples
     that will alter our perceptions of the past, how we deal with living Native Americans, . . .
34   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


          and how we present our results to each other and the general public. . . . Most
          fundamentally, archaeologists need to recognize the contradictions between inclusion and
          exclusion and uniformity and diversity that are at the core of our national heritage. . . .
          Social evolutionists and material-culture analysts have failed to address these
          contradictions, the former by relegating Indian people to lower stages of evolution and the
          latter by refusing to acknowledge that artifacts from the past have power in the present
          because they present the image of a known past while their interpretation remains inﬁnitely
          malleable.59

     Such calls to political action and socially constructed interpretations will probably have
     limited impact on the many archaeologists who are trying to study topics such as the date,
     routes, and adaptations of the ﬁrst human occupations of the New World; the possible role
     of people in the extinction of mammoths and other large animals the New World; the
     processes by which maize agriculture was established in North America; and the hundreds
     of other research topics that dominate professional North American archaeology today. It
     should be noted, however, that an increasing number of North American archaeologists
     are establishing working relationships with Native Americans and that these collaborations
     have led to interesting alternative hypotheses about the past, many of which can be
     scientiﬁcally evaluated.60


     BIBLIOGRAPHY
     Adams, A. B. 1969. Eternal Quest. New York: Putnam.
     Alexander, R. D. 1987. The Biology of Moral Systems. Hawthorne, NY: Aldine de Gruyter.
     Anschuetz, K. F., R. H. Wilshusen, and C. I. Scheick. 2001. “An Archaeology of Landscapes: Perspectives and
                  Directions.” Journal of Archaeological Research 9(2):157–211.
     Ashmore, W., and A. B. Knapp. 1999. Archaeologies of Landscape: Contemporary Perspectives. Malden, MA:
                  Blackwell.
     Bamforth, D., and J. C. Spaulding. 1982. “Human Behavior, Explanation, Archaeology, History, and Science.”
                  Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 1(2):179–194.
     Barzun, J. 2000. From Dawn to Decadence: 500 Years of Western Cultural Life, 1500 to the Present. New York:
                  HarperCollins.
     Bernal, M. 1987. Black Athena: The Afroasiatic Roots of Classical Civilization, Vol 1: The Fabrication of Ancient
                  Greece. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
     Bevan, A. H. 2002/2004. “GIS, Archaeological Survey, and Landscape Archaeology on the Island of Kythera,
                  Greece.” Journal of Field Archaeology 29(1–2):123–138.
     Betzig, L. L. 1986. Despotism and Differential Reproduction: A Darwinian View of History. Hawthorne, NY: Aldine
                  de Gruyter.
     Binford, L. R. 1968. “Archaeological Perspectives.” In New Perspectives in Archaeology, ed. Sally R. Binford and
                  L. R. Binford. Chicago: Aldine.
     ———. 1981. Bones: Ancient Men and Modern Myths. New York: Academic Press.
     Bintliff, J. 1986. “Archaeology at the Interface: An Historical Perspective.” In Archaeology at the Interface, ed.
                  J. L. Bintliff and C. F. Gaffney. Oxford: BAR International Series 300.
     ———. 1993. “Why Indiana Jones Is Smarter Than the Post-Processualists.” Norwegian Archaeological Review
                  26(2):91–100.
     Brooks, D. R., and E. O. Wiley. 1988. Evolution as Entropy: Toward a Uniﬁed Theory of Biology, 2nd ed. Chicago:
                  University of Chicago Press.
     Brown, M., and J. Cave. 1989. A Touch of Genius: The Life of T. E. Lawrence. New York: Paragon House.
     Brumﬁel, E. M. 1994a. “Distinguished Lecture in Archaeology: Breaking and Entering the Ecosystem.” American
                  Anthropologist 94(3):551–567.
     ———. 1994b. “A Review of Prehistory of the Americas (by S. J. Fiedel, 1992, Cambridge: Cambridge University
                  Press).” Norwegian Archaeological Review 27(2):132–134.
     Butzer, K. W. 1982. Archaeology as Human Ecology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
     Ceram, C. W. 1967. Gods, Graves, and Scholars. New York: Knopf.
     Chang, K. C. 1988. The Archaeology of Ancient China. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
                                                                 PREHISTORY, HISTORY, AND ARCHAEOLOGY                  35


Childe, V. G. 1936. Man Makes Himself. London: Watts.
Claassen, C. P., and R. A. Joyce, eds. 1997. Women in Prehistory: North America and Mesoamerica. Philadelphia:
             University of Pennsylvania Press.
Clifford, J., and G. Marcus, eds. 1986. Writing Culture. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Cohen, G. A. 1978. Karl Marx’s Theory of History. A Defense. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Coles, B., & J. Coles. 1986. Sweet Track to Glastonbury: The Somerset Levels in Prehistory. London and New York:
             Thames and Hudson.
Conkey, M. W., and J. M. Gero. 1991. “Tensions, Pluralities, and Engendering Archaeology: An Introduction to
             Women and Prehistory.” In Engendering Archaeology, ed. J. M. Gero and M. W. Conkey. Oxford:
             Blackwell.
Daniel, G. 1967. The Origins and Growth of Archaeology. Baltimore: Penguin.
Daniel, G. E., and C. Chippendale, eds. 1989. The Pastmasters. London and New York: Thames and Hudson.
Derrida, J. 1976. Of Grammatology. Trans. G. C. Spivak. Baltimore: John Hopkins University Press.
———. 1978. Writing and Difference. Trans. A. Bass. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Desmond, A. 1982. Archetypes and Ancestors. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Desmond, A., and J. Moore. 1991. Darwin. New York: Warner.
Diakonov, I., ed. 1969. Ancient Mesopotamia. Moscow: Nauka.
———., ed. 1991. Early Antiquity. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Dobres, M., and J. E. Robb. 2000. Agency in Archaeology. New York: Routledge.
Dongoske, K., M. Aldenderfer, and K. Doehner, eds. 2000. Working Together: Native Americans and Archaeologists.
             Washington, DC: The SAA Press.
Dunnell, R. C. 1980. “Evolution Theory and Archaeology.” In Advances in Archaeological Method and Theory,
             Vol. 3, ed. M. B. Schiffer. New York: Academic Press.
———. 1982. “Science, Social Science, and Common Sense: The Agonizing Dilemma of Modern Archaeology.”
             Journal of Anthropological Research 38:1–25.
———. 1986. “Methodological Issues in Americanist Artifact Classiﬁcation.” Advances in Archaeological Method
             and Theory 9:147–207.
Durham, W. H. 1990. “Advances in Evolutionary Culture Theory.” Annual Review of Anthropology 19:187–242.
Earle, T. K., and R. W. Preucel. 1987. “Processual Archaeology and the Radical Critique.” Current Anthropology
             28(4):501–538.
Easterbrook, G. 1988. “Are We Alone?” Atlantic, August 1988, pp. 25–38.
Eiseley, L. 1946. The Immense Journey. New York: Time.
———. 1979. Darwin and the Mysterious Mr. X. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Faubion, J. D. 1993. “History in Anthropology.” Annual Review of Anthropology 22:35–54.
Feder, K. L. 1990. Frauds, Myths, and Mysteries: Science and Pseudo-Science in Archaeology. Mountain View, CA:
             Mayﬁeld.
Feinman, G. M., K. G. Lightfoot, and S. Upham. 2000. “Political Hierarchies and Organizational Strategies in the
             Puebloan Southwest.” American Antiquity 65(3):449 – 470.
Feyerabend, P. 1993. Against Method, 3rd ed. New York: Verso.
Flannery, K. V. 1973. “Archaeology with a Capital ‘S.’ ” In Research and Theory in Current Archaeology, ed.
             C. L. Redman. New York: Wiley.
Foley, D. 1990. Learning from Capitalist Culture. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Foucault, M. 1979. Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison. New York: Random House.
———. 1986. The Foucault Reader. Ed. P. Rabinow. Harmondsworth, England: Penguin.
Frayer, D. W., M. Wolpoff, A. G. Thorne, F. H. Smith, and G. G. Pope. 1993. “Theories of Modern Human Origins:
             The Paleontological Test.” American Anthropologist 95:14 –50.
Friedman, J. 1992. “The Past in the Future: History and the Politics of Identity.” American Anthropologist
             95(4):837–859.
Friedman, J., and M. J. Rowlands. 1977. The Evolution of Social Systems. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Gamble, C. 1994. Timewalkers: The Prehistory of Global Colonization. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Gathercole, P., and D. Lowenthal, eds. 1994. The Politics of the Past. New York: Routledge.
Gellner, E. 1992. Post-Modernism, Reason, and Religion. New York: Routledge.
Gero, J. M., and M. W. Conkey. 1991. Engendering Archaeology. Oxford: Blackwell.
Gosden, C. 1994. Social Being and Time. Oxford: Blackwell.
Gould, R. A. 1995. Recovering the Past. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
———, ed. 1978. Explorations in Ethno-Archaeology. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
Gould, R. A., and P. J. Watson. 1982. “A Dialogue on the Meaning and Use of Analogy in Ethnoarchaeological
             Reasoning.” Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 1:355–381.
Gould, S. J. 1977. Ever Since Darwin. New York: Norton.
———. 1988. “Kropotkin Was No Crackpot.” Natural History 97(7):12–21.
———. 1989. Wonderful Life. New York: W. W. Norton.
36   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


     Gould, S. J., and N. Eldredge. 1977. “Punctuated Equilibria: The Tempo and Mode of Evolution Reconsidered.”
                  Paleobiology 3:115–151.
     Graber, R. B. 1994. A Scientiﬁc Model of Social and Cultural Evolution. Lanham, MD: University Press of America.
     Graslund, B. 1987. The Birth of Prehistoric Chronology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
     Grayson, D. K. 1983. The Establishment of Human Antiquity. New York: Academic Press.
     Haberman, J. 1970. “Toward a Theory of Communicative Competence.” Inquiry 13(4):360 –376.
     ———. 1979. Communication and the Evolution of Society. Boston: Beacon Press.
     ———. 1985. “The Theory of Communicative Action.” In Reason and the Rationalization of Society, Vol. 1.
                  Boston: Beacon Press.
     Harris, J. E., and K. R. Weeks. 1973. X-Raying the Pharaohs. New York: Scribner’s.
     Harris, M. 1968. The Rise of Anthropological Theory. New York: Crowell.
     ———. 1979. Cultural Materialism. New York: Random House.
     Harrold, F. B., and R. A. Eve. 1988. Cult Archaeology and Creationism. Iowa City: University of Iowa Press.
     Hartley, L. P. 2002. The Go-Between. New York: New York Review Books.
     Hawkes, C. 1954. “Archaeological Theory and Method: Some Suggestions from the Old World.” American
                  Anthropologist 55:55–68.
     Hempel, C. B. 1966. Philosophy of Natural Science. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
     Herrnstein, R. J., and C. Murray. 1996. The Bell Curve, Intelligence and Class Structure in American Life. New York:
                  Simon and Schuster.
     Hodder, I. 1985. “Postprocessual Archaeology.” In Advances in Archaeological Method and Theory, vol. 8. ed.
                  M. Schiffer. New York: Academic Press.
     ———. 1989. The Meanings of Things. London: Unwin Hyman.
     ———. 1991. “Postprocessual Archaeology and the Current Debate.” In Processual and Postprocessual
                  Archaeologies, Multiple Ways of Knowing the Past. ed. R. W. Preceul. Carbondale, IL: Center for
                  Archaeological Investigations.
     Hodder, I., M. Shanks, A. Alexandri, V. Buchli, J. Carman, J. Last, and G. Lucas. 1995. Interpreting Archaeology:
                  Finding Meaning in the Past. London: Routledge.
     Itzkoff, S. 1987. Why Humans Vary in Intelligence. Ashﬁeld, MA: Paideia.
     Jochim, M. A. 1998. A Hunter-Gatherer Landscape: Southwest Germany in the Late Paleolithic and Mesolithic. New
                  York: Plenum.
     Johnson, G. A. 1987. “Comment on T. K. Earle and R. W. Preucel. 1987. Processual Archaeology and the Radical
                  Critique.” Current Anthropology 28(4):517–518.
     Jones, D. 1995. “Sexual Selection, Physical Attractiveness, and Facial Neoteny: Cross-cultural Evidence and
                  Implications.” Current Anthropology 36(5):723–748.
     Kaplan, A. 1984. “Philosophy of Science in Anthropology.” Annual Review of Anthropology 13:25–39.
     Kirk, G. S., and J. E. Raven. 1966. The Presocratic Philosophers. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
     Kitto, H. D. F. 1951. The Greeks. Edinburgh: Penguin.
     Knapp, A. B., and W. Ashmore. 1999. “Archaeological Landscapes: Constructed, Conceptualized, Ideational.” In
                  Archaeologies of Landscape: Contemporary Perspectives, ed. W. Ashmore and A. B. Knapp. Malden, MA:
                  Blackwell.
     Kohl, P. L. 1981. “Materialist Approaches in Prehistory.” Annual Review of Anthropology 10:89–118.
     Krebs, J., and N. B. Davies. 1981. Introduction to Behavioral Ecology. Oxford: Blackwell.
     Langer, W. L. (gen. ed.), P. MacKendrick, D. Geanakoplos, J. H. Hexter, and R. Pipes. 1968. Western Civilization.
                  New York: Harper & Row.
     Leach, E. R. 1984. “Glimpses of the Unmentionable in the History of British Social Anthropology.” Annual Review
                  of Anthropology 13:1–23.
     Leone, M. 1995. “A Historical Archaeology of Capitalism.” American Anthropologist 97(2):251–268.
     Leone, M., P. B. Potter, Jr., and P. A. Schackel. 1987. “Toward a Critical Archaeology.” Current Anthropology
                  28(3):283–302.
     Ling, R. 1987. “A New Look at Pompeii.” In Origins, ed. B. Cunliffe. London: BBC Books.
     Lodge, D. 1984. Small World. London: Penguin.
     Lovejoy, A. O. 1960. The Great Chain of Being: A Study of the History of an Idea. New York: Harper & Row
     Marx, K. 1904. The Critique of Political Economy. Trans. I. N. Stone. Chicago: International Library
                  Publication.
     McGuire, R. H. 1992a. A Marxist Archaeology. San Diego: Academic Press.
     ———. 1992b. “Archeology and the First Americans.” American Anthropologist 94(4):816 – 834.
     Meek, R. L. 1953. Marx and Engels on Malthus. London: Lawrence and Wishart.
     Meltzer, D. J., D. D. Fowler, & J. A. Sabloff, eds. 1986. American Archaeology Past and Future. Washington, DC:
                  Smithsonian Institution Press.
     Menken, H. L. 1977 (c. 1922). Prejudices, Third Series, “Ad Imagininem dei creavit illium,” Coda. New York:
                  Octagon Books.
                                                                PREHISTORY, HISTORY, AND ARCHAEOLOGY                  37


Miller, D. 1987. Material Culture and Mass Consumption. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Morgan, L. H. 1877. Ancient Society. Reprint ed. 1964, ed. and with an introduction by L. A. White. Cambridge,
            MA: Harvard University Press.
Nelson, S. M. 1997. Gender in Archaeology. Walnut Creek, CA: Altamira Press.
Neiman, F. D. 1995. “Stylistic Variation in Evolutionary Perspective: Inferences from Decorative Diversity and
            Interassemblage Distance in Illinois Woodland Ceramic Assemblages.” American Antiquity
            60(1):7–36.
Nisbet, R. J. 1980. History of the Idea of Progress. New York: Basic Books.
Nordbladh, J., and T. Yates. 1990. “This Perfect Body, This Virgin Text: Between Sex and Gender in Archaeology.”
            In Archaeology After Structuralism, ed. I. Bapty and T. Yates. London: Routledge.
O’Meara, J. T. 1989. “Anthropology as Empirical Science.” American Anthropologist 91(2):354 –369.
Orton, C. 1980. Mathematics in Archaeology. London: Collins.
Orwell, G. 1961. Nineteen Eighty-Four: A Novel. New York: New American Library.
Owen, L.R. in 2005. Distorting the Past: Gender and the Division of Labor in the European Upper Paleolithic.
            Tübingen: Kerns Verlag.
Paddayya, K. 1985. “Theoretical Archaeology—A Review.” In Recent Advances in Indian Archaeology, ed. S. B. Deo
            and K. Paddayya. Poona, India: Deccan College of Post-Graduate and Research Institute.
Patterson, T. C., and C. W. Gailey, eds. 1987. Power Relations and State Formation. Washington, DC: American
            Anthropological Association.
Pauketat, T., and T. Emerson. 1991. “The Ideology of Authority and the Power of the Pot.” American
            Anthropologist 93(4):919–941.
Pinsky, V., and A. Wylie, eds. 1995. Critical Traditions in Contemporary Archaeology. Albuquerque: University of
            New Mexico Press.
Popper, K. 1959. The Logic of Scientiﬁc Discovery. London: Hutchinson. (facsimile)
Pyne, K. A. 1996. Art and the Higher Life: Painting and Evolutionary Thought in Late Nineteenth Century America.
            Austin: University of Texas Press.
Read, D. 1996. Personal communication to Wenke.
Reeves, N. 1990. The Complete Tutankhamun. New York: Thames and Hudson.
Renfrew, C. 1978. “Trajectory, Discontinuity and Morphogenesis: The Implications of Catastrophe Theory for
            Archaeology.” American Antiquity 43:202–222.
Richards, R. J. 1987. Darwin and the Emergence of Evolutionary Theories of Mind and Behavior. Chicago: University
            of Chicago Press.
Rindos, D. 1984. The Origins of Agriculture. New York: Academic Press.
Robertshaw, P., ed. 1990. A History of African Archaeology. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
Rogers, J. D., ed. 1995. Ethnohistory and Archaeology: Approaches to Postcontact Change in the Americas. New York:
            Plenum Press.
Ross, E. B., ed. 1980. Beyond the Myths of Culture: Essays on Cultural Materialism. New York: Academic Press.
Rowlands, M., and K. Kristansen, eds. 1995. Social Transformation in Archaeology. New York: Routledge.
Sahlins, M. D., and E. R. Service, eds. 1960. Evolution and Culture. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Salmon, M. H. 1982. Philosophy and Archaeology. New York: Academic Press.
Salmon, M. H., and W. C. Salmon. 1979. “Alternative Models of Scientiﬁc Explanation.” American Anthropologist
            81:61–74.
Salt, G. W., ed. 1984. Ecology and Evolutionary Biology. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Schiffer, M. B. 1981. “Some Issues in the Philosophy of Archaeology.” American Antiquity 46:899–908.
———. 1987. Formation Processes of the Archaeological Record. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico.
Schmidt, A. 1971. The Concept of Nature in Marx. London: NLB.
Shanks, M., and C. Tilley. 1987. Re-constructing Archaeology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
———. 1988. Social Theory and Archaeology. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
Skibo, J. M., W. H. Walker, and A. E. Nielsen, eds. 1995. Expanding Archaeology. Salt Lake City: University of Utah
            Press.
Spaulding, A. C. 1973. “Archeology in the Active Voice: The New Anthropology.” In Research and Theory in
            Current Archaeology, ed. C. L. Redman. New York: Wiley.
Spencer, H. 1883. Social Statics. New York: Appleton.
Spriggs, M., ed. 1984. Marxist Perspectives in Archaeology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Spuhler, J. N. 1985. “Anthropology, Evolution, and ‘Scientiﬁc Creationism.’ ” Annual Review of Anthropology
            14:103–133.
Steward, J. 1949. “Cultural Causality and Law: A Trial Formulation of the Development of Early Civilizations.”
            American Anthropologist 51:1–27.
Stone, P., and R. MacKenzie, eds. 1995. The Excluded Past: Archaeology in Education. New York: Routledge.
Tilley, C. 1996. An Ethnography of the Neolithic: Early Prehistoric Societies in Southern Scandanavia. New York:
            Cambridge University Press.
38   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


     Toth, N., and K. D. Schick. 1986. “The First Million Years: The Archaeology of Protohuman Culture.” Advances
                 in Archaeological Method and Theory 9:1–96.
     Trigger, B. G. 1984. “Archaeology at the Crossroads: What’s New?” Annual Review of Anthropology 13:275–300.
     ———. 1985. “Marxism in Archaeology: Real or Spurious?” Reviews in Anthropology 12:114 –123.
     ———. 1989. History of Archaeological Thought. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
     ———. 1991. “Distinguished Lecture in Archaeology: Constraint and Freedom.” American Anthropologist
                 93(3):551–569.
     ———. 1991. “Post-Processual Developments in Anglo-American Archaeology.” Norwegian Archaeological
                 Review 24(2):65–76.
     ———. 1993. Early Civilizations: Ancient Egypt in Context. Cairo: American University in Cairo Press.
     Turner, H. 1985. Herbert Spencer: A Renewed Appreciation. Beverly Hills: Sage.
     UNESCO and S. J. de Laet, eds. 1994. History of Humanity: Vol. 1, Prehistory and the Beginnings of Civilization.
                 New York: Routledge.
     Vasicek, Z., and J. Malina, eds. 1990. Archaeology Yesterday and Today. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
     Watson, P. J., S. A. LeBlanc, and C. L. Redman. 1971. Explanation in Archeology. New York: Columbia University
                 Press.
     ———. 1984. Archeological Explanation. New York: Columbia University Press.
     Wells, P. S. 1980. Culture Contact and Culture Change. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
     Wenke, R. J. 1975–1976. “Imperial Investments and Agricultural Developments in Parthian and Sasanian
                 Khuzestan: 150 b.c. to a.d. 640.” Mesopotamia 10 –11:31–217.
     ———. 1981. “Explaining the Evolution of Cultural Complexity: A Review.” In Advances in Archaeological Method
                 and Theory, Vol. 4, ed. M. B. Schiffer. New York: Academic Press.
     ———. 1987. “Western Iran in the Partho-Sasanian Period: The Imperial Transformation.” In The Archaeology
                 of Western Iran, ed. F. Hole. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
     Wenke, R., J. Long, and P. Buck. 1988. “Epipaleolithic and Neolithic Subsistence and Settlement in the Fayyum
                 Oasis of Egypt.” Journal of Field Archaeology 15(1):29–51.
     White, L. A. 1949. The Science of Culture. New York: Grove Press.
     ———. 1959. “The Concept of Culture.” American Anthropologist 61:227–251.
     Wolfram, S. 2002. A New Kind of Science. Champaign, IL: Wolfram Media.
     Wylie, A. 1982. “An Analogy by Any Other Name Is Just as Analogical.” Journal of Anthropological Archaeology
                 1:382–401.
     ———. 1989. “Matters of Face and Matters of Interest.” In Archaeological Approaches to Cultural Identity: One
                 World Archaeology, No. 10, ed. S. Shannen. London: Unwin-Hyman.
     ———. 1991. “Gender Theory and the Archaeological Record: Why Is There No Archaeology of Gender?” In
                 Engendering Archaeology, ed. J. M. Gero and M. W. Conkey. Oxford: Blackwell.
     Young, T. C., Jr. 1988. “Since Herodotus, Has History Been a Valid Concept?” American Antiquity 53(1):7–12.
     Yoffee, N., and A. Sherratt, eds. 1993. Archaeological Theory: Who Sets the Agenda? Cambridge: Cambridge
                 University Press.



     NOTES
      1. Quoted in Daniel, The Origins and Growth of Archaeology, p. 49.
      2. From the ﬁlm Indiana Jones, quoted in Bintliff, “Why Indiana Jones Is Smarter Than the Post-Processualists,”
         p. 100.
      3. See chapter 7 for a detailed discussion of this premise.
      4. See, for example, Shanks and Tilley, Social Theory and Archaeology.
      5. See, for example, Rindos, The Origins of Agriculture; Dunnell, “Evolution Theory and Archaeology.”
      6. Hartley, The Go-Between.
      7. Harris and Weeks, X-Raying the Pharaohs.
      8. Reeves, The Complete Tutankhamun, p. 203.
      9. Ceram, Gods, Graves, and Scholars, pp. 8–9.
     10. Wenke et al., “Epipaleolithic and Neolithic Subsistence and Settlement in the Fayyum Oasis of Egypt.”
     11. The Logic of Scientiﬁc Discovery, 1959.
     12. A New Kind of Science, 2002.
     13. Greek science and philosophy incorporated elements from other cultures. Metallurgy, geometry, math-
         ematics, and many other arts and sciences all have long histories that predate classical Greek culture by
         millennia. Martin Bernal (Black Athena) and some other scholars have recently argued that Greek intellectual
         accomplishments were deeply and strongly rooted in Egyptian and Syro-Palestinian achievements, but few
         scholars agree with his conclusions. There simply is very little in ancient non-Greek cultures that seems to
                                                                   PREHISTORY, HISTORY, AND ARCHAEOLOGY                    39


    presage the political brilliance of Pericles; the dramas of Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Aristophanes; the
    oratory of Demosthenes; the architecture of Mnesicles and Ictinus (designers of the Acropolis); the
    histories of Thucydides and Herodotus; and the philosophy of Socrates and Plato—among many other arts
    and sciences.
14. H. D. F. Kitto’s The Greeks is a brilliant and literate summary of the ancient Greek contribution to Western
    thought.
15. Daniel, The Origins and Growth of Archaeology, p. 90.
16. Chang, The Archaeology of Ancient China, p. 5.
17. Reviewed in Graslund, The Birth of Prehistoric Chronology, p. 18.
18. Spencer, Social Statics, p. 80.
19. Desmond, Archetypes and Ancestors, pp. 100 –101.
20. Attributed.
21. Darwin, quoted in Adams, Eternal Quest, p. 334.
22. Eiseley, Darwin and the Mysterious Mr. X.
23. Evolution as Entropy, by Brooks and Wiley.
24. Quoted in Desmond and Moore, Darwin, p. 636.
25. Schmidt, The Concept of Nature in Marx, p. 41.
26. E.g., V. G. Childe.
27. These and other quotes in this paragraph are from I. M. Diakonoff, Early Antiquity, pp. 1–27.
28. See, for example, R. McGuire, A Marxist Archaeology.
29. See B. Trigger’s perceptive analysis, “Marxism in Archaeology: Real or Spurious?” Also see R. McGuire, A
    Marxist Archaeology; M. Spriggs, ed., Marxist Perspectives in Archaeology.
30. Menken, Prejudices, Third Series, “Ad Imagininem dei creavit illium,” Coda.
31. Daniel, The Origins and Growth of Archaeology.
32. T. E. Lawrence (Lawrence of Arabia), for example, has been often been accused of spying for the British while
    working with Woolley in Mesopotamia (see Brown and Cave, A Touch of Genius).
33. G. Childe, Man Makes Himself.
34. American Anthropologist 51:1–27.
35. Variants of this postmodernist aphorism have been used by various scholars; see David Lodge’s entertaining
    novel Small World, p. 328 and elsewhere.
36. See Watson, Redman, and LeBlanc, Explanation in Archaeology; also see Watson et al., Archaeological
    Explanation; Bamforth and Spaulding, “Human Behavior, Explanation, Archaeology, History, and Science”;
    Schiffer, “Some Issues in the Philosophy of Archaeology.”
37. White, The Science of Culture.
38. Trigger, “Archaeology at the Crossroads: What’s New?”; also see Bamforth and Spaulding, “Human Behavior,
    Explanation, Archaeology, History, and Science”; and Salmon, “Philosophy and Archaeology.”
39. Of Grammatology.
40. Shanks and Tilley, Re-Constructing Archaeology, p. 243.
41. Hodder, “Postprocessual Archaeology.”
42. See Trigger’s “Post-Processual Developments in Anglo-American Archaeology,” pp. 65–69.
43. See, for example, their Social Theory and Archaeology.
44. See, for example, Derrida, Writing and Difference, or Foucault, The Foucault Reader.
45. Ernst Gellner found it difﬁcult to deﬁne post-modernism, but he leaves no doubt about his opinion of it, as
    seen in his Post Modernism, Reason, and Religion, pp. 22–23: “Post-modernism is a contemporary movement.
    It is strong and fashionable. Over and above this, it is not altogether clear what the devil it is. In fact, clarity
    is not conspicuous amongst its marked attributes. It not only generally fails to practise it, but also on
    occasion actually repudiates it. But anyway, there appear to be no 39 post-modernist Articles of Faith, no
    post-modernist manifesto, which one could consult so as to assure oneself that one has identiﬁed its ideas
    properly. . . . The movement and its ideas are . . . a little too ethereal and volatile to be captured and seized
    with precision: perhaps the acute awareness of the movement that all meanings are to be deconstructed
    in a way which also brings in their opposites, and highlights the contradictions contained in them . . .
    actually precludes a crisp and unambiguous formulation of the position.”
46. Hodder, The Meaning of Things, p. 65.
47. Leone, “A Historical Archaeology of Capitalism,” p. 213; see also Wylie, “Matters of Face and Matters of
    Interest.”
48. Anschuetz et al., “An Archaeology of Landscapes: Perspectives and Directions.”
49. Knapp and Ashmore, “Archaeological Landscapes: Constructed, Conceptualized, Ideational,” p. 1.
50. Tilley, An Ethnography of the Neolithic: Early Prehistoric Societies in Southern Scandanavia, pp. 193–214. Tilley
    also notes that these Neolithic structures are “read” by modern observers, for example, as “sculptures” in the
    landscape.
51. Feinman et al., “Political Hierarchies and Organizational Strategies in the Puebloan Southwest,” pp. 459– 466.
40   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


     52. As Dwight Read has observed, “Gender, as a cultural construct . . . is not observable; what is observable are
         its implications for how gender is embedded in the cultural system which leads, through the actions of
         individuals, to patterning in the observable world of material objects. The constant problem that
         archaeology faces is that the mapping from culture to patterning of material objects is never an isomorphism,
         is sometimes a homomorphism, and most often is a mapping which confounds multitudinous structuring
         processes. But this is a constant problem, not one peculiar to gender constructs.”
     53. Brumﬁel, “A Review of Prehistory of the Americas (by S. J. Fiedel).”
     54. For example, Gero and Conkey, Engendering Archaeology; Nelson, Gender in Archaeology.
     55. Trigger, “Distinguished Lecture in Archaeology: Constraint and Freedom,” pp. 562–563.
     56. Hodder, “Postprocessual Archaeology and the Current Debate.”
     57. A similar position has been advocated by John Bintliff, who recently predicted the demise of most forms of
         post-processual archaeology, suggesting that “[t]he Theoretical Archaeology of the 1990s is undeniably going
         to be ‘Cognitive Processualism,’ ” ( “Why Indiana Jones Is Smarter Than the Post-Processualists,” p. 100). The
         sense of cognitive Processualism as used by Renfrew and Bintliff is close to that of the holistic archaeology
         advocated by Bruce Trigger (see earlier) in that all useful methods of analysis are applied to the past, but in
         the context of an analytical science based on materialist perspectives.
     58. Nineteen Eighty-Four.
     59. McGuire, “Archaeology and the First Americans,” p. 828.
     60. Numerous examples of cooperative partnerships between archaeologists and Native peoples can be found in
         short contributions published in the “Working Together” section in The SAA Archaeological Record and its
         predecessor, The SAA Bulletin. See also Dongoske et al., eds., Working Together: Native Americans and
         Archaeologists.
2
Fundamentals of Archaeology

    Though nothing can bring back the hour
    Of splendour in the grass, of glory in the ﬂower;
    We will grieve not, rather ﬁnd
    Strength in what remains behind. . . .
                  William Wordsworth (1770–1850)




I       n Intimations of Immortality, Wordsworth recognized that humanity’s hopes of
        immortality must lie elsewhere than in our physical selves or in our works; for these
are transitory; and in the process of decay from the moment of conception. “Shades of the
prison house begin to close upon the growing boy,” he wrote, intimating that Death’s grip
is always there, always tightening.
     Philosopher Bertrand Russell shared none of Wordsworth’s hopes about our prospects
of immortality, but he had the same sense of inevitable decay. When asked what he thought
would happen to him after death, he cheerfully said, “When I die, I rot.”
     Perhaps the only people in the world who view the long record of the world’s record
of rot and decay with hope and optimism are archaeologists. In chapter 1 we reviewed some
of the great theories of history and the past—the inﬂuential ideas about why history has
turned out the way it has. Whatever one thinks of these theories, whatever one’s view of
the past, to assess these various ideas one must link them to the physical material remains
of the past. In this chapter we shall consider the methods that have been developed to apply
these great ideas to the material record of the past.


ARCHAEOLOGISTS AND THE PRACTICE OF ARCHAEOLOGY

Before considering in more detail how archaeology is done, let us consider who actually
does it. When trapped in airplanes or up against the wall at a party, archaeologists who reveal
their occupation often are told, “When I was growing up I wanted to be an archaeologist,”
or “It must be exciting to be an archaeologist!”
     Few non-archaeologists realize, however, that most archaeologists have had to spend
10 years or more in college and graduate school in preparation for their profession, or that for
every hour an archaeologist spends excavating, he or she spends hundreds of hours teaching
university classes, raising money for research, analyzing artifacts, and writing research reports.

                                               41
42   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


          Most professional archaeologists in the United States have a Ph.D., a Doctor of
     Philosophy degree, the prize for an average of six years of post-graduate study. “Those who
     can, do, those who can’t, teach” does not apply to archaeology: Many professionals hold
     teaching positions, although a growing proportion of archaeologists are employed by public
     agencies and private companies. The majority of North American archaeologists have been
     trained as anthropologists; a minority are language scholars, such as Egyptologists, Assyrio-
     logists, Classicists (e.g., specialists in ancient Greek and Roman cultures), art historians,
     and biblical scholars.
          Anthropological archaeologists consider their discipline a social science, whereas
     language scholars such as Egyptologists often view their studies as part of the humanities.
     Language scholars tend to be particularly interested in relating archaeological remains to
     ancient written documents, such as the Bible, Greek and Roman texts, Egyptian hieroglyphic
     inscriptions, and so on. These different perspectives are not strictly separate, and anthro-
     pological concepts are beginning to be incorporated in the humanities, while some
     anthropologists also have mastered ancient languages. But, as in most academic disciplines,
     specialization is a necessary part of training. To be well trained in both anthropology and
     Egyptology, for example, requires at least 8–10 years of graduate study for those hardy few
     who attempt such extensive preparation.
          The majority of North American archaeologists who are anthropologists are gener-
     ally considered “social scientists,” but both this term and “anthropology” are increasingly
     ambiguous. Anthropology literally means “the science (or study) of man,” but that leaves
     rather a lot to be deﬁned. Anthropology today continues to be divided among several spe-
     cializations, each of which is at least marginally relevant to the study of world prehistory.
     Biological anthropologists1 are concerned mainly with the evolution of, and variations in the
     physical attributes of, humans and primates. Some biological anthropologists search for the
     fossils of extinct forms of early humans, while others study the genetics of existing human
     groups; so me are primatologists, who analyze the behavior and other characteristics of
     nonhuman primates; others are specialists in the adaptation of human groups to different
     environments (especially in extreme environments, such as the high Andes Mountains).
     Sociocultural anthropologists focus on studies of living or recent human societies. They
     include an extremely diverse range of specialists, such as those who study the languages
     of nonliterate peoples, and others who do the traditional ethnological studies of human
     societies, analyzing the lifeways of selected groups, from the hunter-gatherers of the rain
     forests of the Amazon to the patrons of the bars of south Texas.2 Archaeologists represent a
     third major specialization within anthropology. Most anthropological archaeologists have
     some graduate training in the other ﬁelds of anthropology, in addition to their concentra-
     tions in archaeological methods and theories. Most archaeologists also take advanced
     courses in statistics, geology, demography, and related disciplines.
          The lines that used to separate anthropology, sociology, psychology, and other social
     sciences have blurred greatly in recent times. The concept of “culture”—the uniquely
     human intellectual and behavioral capacities (see chapter 3)—has been, and remains, for
     many anthropologists the connective tissue that incorporates them all in a single discipline,
     but for many anthropologists there is no strong theoretical structure that unites their
     discipline.
          In Europe, Asia, and Africa, archaeology is often a separate university department—
     not connected with sociocultural anthropology or biological anthropology, as it is in the
                                                           FUNDAMENTALS OF ARCHAEOLOGY         43


United States. In those countries archaeology is often viewed as a form of history, or, in
some cases, as a natural science like paleontology. But contemporary archaeology in the
United Kingdom and in some other European countries has become increasingly viewed
as social studies, and conversely, in North America, some centers of archaeology have
separated and allied themselves more closely with the biological and geological sciences.
     Archaeology as a discipline has long been dominated by North American and
European scholars,3 but India, Japan, China, Egypt, Argentina, and many other countries
have long and productive traditions of archaeological research, and there is a growing
internationalism to archaeology.


THE BASIC DATA OF THE PAST

People are messy animals. More than two million years ago, our ancestors began littering
Africa with stone tools and smashed animal bones, and ever since we have been carpeting
the world with layer upon layer of our own garbage. All this junk, collectively, from two-
million-year-old stone tools to today’s eternal aluminum beer cans, as well as the bones of
our human ancestors and the remains of the plants and animals they ate, constitute the
archaeological record.
     Archaeologists see cosmic signiﬁcance in the archaeological record. There is a “truth”
of sorts embedded in the archaeological record, and archaeologists seek to clarify that
truth. The major premise of archaeology is simple and unassailable: It is that much of what
we will ever know about our origins, our nature, and even our destiny must be read in the
patterns inherent in these layers of debris. Archaeologists assume that they can see in
the contents, spatial arrangements, and depositional sequence of the world’s garbage the
reﬂections of the factors that have shaped our physical and cultural evolution.
     This material archaeological record is the only evidence we have to understand more
than 99 percent of our past—the period before written languages appeared. And even for
the historical era, when we have written records of our past, the archaeological record is
important: Whereas historical documents may be full of the usual human lies, propaganda,
and misconceptions, the material remains are a physical record of what did happen, not
what someone said happened or thought happened or wanted to have happened.

Artifacts, Features, and Sites
All academic disciplines have their own jargon, and archaeology is no exception. Archaeo-
logists analyze the archaeological record primarily in terms of artifacts, which can be
deﬁned as things that owe any of their physical characteristics or their place in time and
space to human activity. Thus, a beautifully shaped stone spear-point from a 20,000-year-old
campsite in France is an artifact (Figure 2.1), but so is an undistinguished stone ﬂake that
some weary Native American pitched out of a Mississippi corn ﬁeld a thousand years ago.
     Nor do things cease to be artifacts because of their recent origins. For many years,
archaeologist William Rathje4 and numerous archaeology students at the University of
Arizona studied the artifacts added each day to the Tucson municipal dump and littered
along city roads, trying to discern how things are thrown away and what they say about the
community that created the trash—and the implications such patterns of discard have for
            44        PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                         understanding the patterns of
                                                                                         discard in the past (they learned,
                                                                                         among other things, that the
                                                                                         average Tucson resident wastes
                                                                                         astounding amounts of food;
                                                                                         that in rural road litter,
                                                                                         unsurprisingly, beer cans and
                                                                                         contraceptives are often found
                                                                                         together; and that food, news-
                                                                                         papers, and other debris pre-
                                                                                         serve extraordinarily well for
                                                                                         years in municipal dumps).
                                                                                               These can include foot-
                                                                                         prints left several million years
                                                                                         ago when a few of our earliest
                                                                                         bipedal ancestors strolled across
                                                                                         a volcanic plain at Laetoli, in
FIGURE 2.1 Stone artifacts include highly worked pieces such as the Solutrean            Tanzania (Figure 2.2)—or the
point on the left, as well as undistinguished pieces such as the ﬂake on the right.
                                                                                         astronauts’ footprints on the
                                                                                         moon.
                              Another common archaeological term is feature, which refers to a modiﬁcation to a
                        site that is not portable. They also can be the remains of a hearths, or a storage bin set into
                        the corner of a complex of mudbrick walls (Figure 2.3). Features usually reﬂect inferred
                        speciﬁc, sometimes repeated, activities, such as quarries and latrines.5
                              Perhaps the most common archaeological term is site, an imprecise term generally used
                        to refer to relatively dense concentrations of artifacts and features. The ancient city of
                        Babylon, in Iraq (Figure 2.4), which today comprises a huge mound of slowly dissolving
                        baked brick buildings, millions of pottery fragments (known as “sherds” to archaeologists),
                        and all the other debris of an ancient city is a site. But so too is any one of the many areas in
                        Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania, where a few score stone tools and animal bones mark spots where
                        1.7 million years ago a few of our ancestors hungrily disassembled a killed or scavenged
                        antelope.
                              Ancient village and town sites are often hard to miss because they are usually marked
                        by remnants of walls and massive quantities of pottery and other debris. It is convenient to
                        think of the archaeological record in this case as composed of many discrete sites
                        representing different settlements, but, in truth, the whole world is littered with artifacts
                        and features: What varies is simply the relative density of artifacts.
                              In recent years, archaeologists have also become interested in “nonsite” approaches.6
                        This method records not only traditional, high-density sites, but also the intervening areas
                        between sites where artifact density is low or nonexistent. By discovering what lies between
                        sites, archaeologists can better understand the full range of behaviors across a landscape.
                              My colleagues and I (Olszewski), for example, use a nonsite landscape approach for
                        our archaeological survey project (Abydos Survey for Paleolithic Sites, or ASPS) in the high
                        desert of Middle Egypt. Stone artifacts of the Paleolithic period are extremely visible on the
                        barren reaches of this landscape. We record the density of artifacts by taking a sample every
                        100 m that we walk. At each of these sample spots, we establish a circle of 2 m diameter and
                                                             FUNDAMENTALS OF ARCHAEOLOGY             45


then collect every stone artifact that falls into
that circle (Figure 2.5). Sometimes these
sample circles are devoid of artifacts, in
which case, we record a density of zero. The
location of each sample circle is logged using
a global positioning system (GPS) (see the
section “Locating and Excavating Sites”). We
then plot the density data for each circle
and the circle’s location using a mapping
program, which allows us to examine pat-
terning in the landscape. Our survey results
from the 2002/2003 ﬁeld season, for example,
show that locations along the Wadi Umm
al-Qaab7 were preferentially used (higher
density) compared to areas to the west, in the
direction of the Wadi al-Jir (Figure 2.6). This
may relate to the fact that the Wadi al-Jir is
deeply entrenched and thus difﬁcult to use
as a pathway from the Nile Valley corridor
into the high desert, while the Wadi Umm
al-Qaab is a lot easier to walk. Looking at
artifact density compared to features of land-
scape topography creates one layer than can
be used in Geographic Information System
(GIS) analyses (see the section on “Quanti-
ﬁcation and Computers in Archaeology”).
     The world’s archaeological record is the
raw material for the analysis of the past, but
to ﬁnd meaning in it we must bring to bear a        FIGURE 2.2 A trail of hominin footprints was found preserved in
wide range of analytical techniques and a           volcanic ash at Laetoli, Tanzania. These prints demonstrate that
                                                    hominins were fully bipedal by 3.6 million years ago.
body of theories, hypotheses, and ideas of
many different kinds.


The Formation of the Archaeological Record
The “past” in a sense is simply the present archaeological record. This may sound like a
Zen koan (a riddle without a solution whose purpose is to demonstrate the inadequacy of
logical reasoning and provide enlightenment), but, in fact, the past is the present, in that
we can only see the past in the present archaeological record.
     The artifacts, features, and sites constituting the archaeological record vary widely in
their contents and ages, but all must be understood to have been formed by a complex
interplay not only of the activities of the people who created them but also of natural forces,
such as erosion, volcanic deposits, and organic decay.8 Studying archaeological sites from
this perspective is called taphonomy.9
     Any hopes we may have of explaining the past are necessarily linked to our ability to
understand how the past—in the sense of the archaeological record—was created.10
            46       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                         Consider as an example
                                                                                    the problem of understanding
                                                                                    the origins of modern humans
                                                                                    —that is, of us, Homo sapiens
                                                                                    sapiens. Many “models” (i.e.,
                                                                                    sets of linked hypotheses about
                                                                                    the causes of a particular devel-
                                                                                    opment) of modern human
                                                                                    origins have been formulated,
                                                                                    but currently only one has
                                                                                    the conﬁdence of a majority
                                                                                    of scholars: This model—
                                                                                    described variously as the
                                                                                    “African Origins,” “Total
                                                                                    Replacement,” or “Eve” model11
                                                                                    —is that modern humans
                                                                                    evolved ﬁrst and only in Africa,
                                                                                    just a few hundred thousand
FIGURE 2.3 This feature is a set of clay-lined hearths from a pithouse (semi-       years ago or less, and then
subterranean dwelling) at an Ancestral Puebloan site in the American Southwest.     migrated to the rest of the
                                                                                    world, displacing all other
                                                                                    hominin forms, and with little
                                                                                    or no genetic interchange with
                                                                                    them. An alternative model,
                                                                                    commonly known as the “Mul-
                                                                                    tiregional Evolution” model,12
                                                                                    and held by a minority of
                                                                                    anthropologists, accepts that
                                                                                    North Africa was a conduit
                                                                                    for hominin migrations for
                                                                                    millions of years but contends
                                                                                    that modern humans arose out
                                                                                    of gene ﬂow among some or all
                                                                                    of the many different human
                                                                                    populations that had colonized
                                                                                    Africa, Europe, and Asia many
                                                                                    hundreds of thousands, per-
                                                                                    haps millions, of years ago.
                                                                                         The evidence relevant
FIGURE 2.4 Architectural remains, such as these stone room walls at the Neolithic   to these “models” of human
site of Basta in Jordan, are an example of an early farming village site.           origins is discussed in chapter 4.
                                                                                    The important point here is
                        that to analyze this archaeological record we have to sort out a bewildering array of cul-
                        tural and natural factors that produced the archaeological record of relevance here. Early
                        Homo sapiens in Africa, for example, may have developed a simple advantage in tool-
                        making that made them slightly better than other forms of humans at making a living
                        as hunter-foragers, with the long-term result that this slight advantage allowed them to
                                                               FUNDAMENTALS OF ARCHAEOLOGY              47


supplant other groups. If so,
then we should be able to see
reﬂections of this supposed
advantage in the stone tools,
food remains, and other data of
the archaeological record. We
might look at the animal bones
found in sites associated with
early Homo sapiens in Africa,
for example, and see if they
show different, perhaps more
efﬁcient, hunting techniques,
compared to those of Europe
and Asia. The problem, how-
ever, is to sort out the natural
and cultural factors that created
these sites. At various South
African sites, for example,        FIGURE 2.5 Systematic collection of surface artifacts is shown here as archaeolo-
human skeletal remains and         gists establish a size-standardized circular collection unit during the Abydos Survey
tools have been found in caves     for Paleolithic Sites project.
along with animal bones. But
we know that leopards and other “natural” predators regularly killed animals and brought
them back to these cave dens. So how can we tell which animals were killed by people and
which by other animals? One can use a low-power microscope to look at marks on some




FIGURE 2.6 This map shows the variable density of surface artifacts in the area surrounding
the Wadi Umm al-Qaab, Egypt, recorded by the Abydos Survey for Paleolithic Sites project. Such
information is a valuable clue to how the landscape was used by prehistoric groups.
           48       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                  bones and see evidence that they were butchered with stone tools, but what if a leopard
                  killed this animal and humans simply scavenged it? While it is not always easy to dif-
                  ferentiate marks left on bones by animal teeth from those made by humans with stone or
                  bone tools, precise observations can reduce errors in identiﬁcation to less than 5 percent.13
                        While we can use taphonomy to address broad questions about hominin behaviors,
                  such as those described earlier, many archaeologists also employ this technique to study the
                  nature of speciﬁc archaeological sites. One example is the research at the French site of
                  Cagny l’Epinette.14 Initial excavations and interpretations here identiﬁed a “living ﬂoor” of
                  Lower Paleolithic age. This occupation surface was thought to be relatively pristine and was
                  described as containing a thin, but dense, concentration of stone artifacts, as well as evid-
                  ence for activity areas associated with the butchering of animals and other tasks. In effect,
                  it is analogous to having a mini-version of a Pompeii-like situation, where behaviors are
                  virtually frozen in time.
                        But is this living ﬂoor interpretation the correct explanation? Harold Dibble and his
                  colleagues tested this in their new excavations at the site by carefully recording spatial
                  information for artifacts and animal bones, as well as many details about the stone artifacts
                  and sediments, such as the presence of ﬁne gravel or larger cobbles in the dirt associated
                  with the living ﬂoor artifacts and animal bones. Their results, which are supported by
                  several lines of independent evidence, indicate that Cagny l’Epinette (Figure 2.7) is not a
                  living ﬂoor, but the result of stream deposition. This can be seen, for example, in the edge
                  damage on stone artifacts resulting from stream transport and the lack of very small stone
                  artifacts, which because they are light in weight were carried farther away by stream action
                  than the larger stone artifacts and animal bones. Other evidence includes the orientation
                  of the artifacts,15 which are mainly parallel or perpendicular to stream ﬂow rather than
                  randomly oriented as would be expected on a living ﬂoor; very little evidence in the form
                  of cut marks on animal bones to indicate butchering; and the size match of the stone
                                                                                  artifacts and natural materials
                                                                                  such as cobbles. Because these
                                                                                  cultural and natural materials
                                                                                  are similar in size, and we know
                                                                                  that hominins were not deposit-
                                                                                  ing the natural materials, this
                                                                                  also suggests processes such
                                                                                  as stream action. The recent
                                                                                  research at Cagny l’Epinette
                                                                                  has thus shown that it is not
                                                                                  hominin behavior that is dir-
                                                                                  ectly reﬂected at this site, but
                                                                                  a combination of cultural and
                                                                                  natural materials brought
                                                                                  together through redeposition.
                                                                                  Pompeii-like situations in
                                                                                  archaeology are indeed quite
                                                                                  rare.
                                                                                       There are many other
FIGURE 2.7 Excavations at the Lower Paleolithic site of Cagny l’Epinette, France. ambiguities in the archaeo-
                                                              FUNDAMENTALS OF ARCHAEOLOGY          49


logical record pertaining to modern human origins, and this complexity of disentangling
cultural from natural factors is found in almost every archaeological project, whether the
site is two million or 200 years old. And to the extent that there is brilliance and great
creativity in the practice of archaeology, it is usually expressed in formulating some major
problems in terms that can be “tested” effectively with archaeological data, whether from
new excavations or from laboratory analyses.
     The archaeological record is often viewed as “incomplete” because decay and other
factors have changed it. But in a sense, the archaeological record is only incomplete if one
looks at it as potentially a perfect reﬂection of the complete history of actions by the human
societies that created it. It is what it is: the product of cultural and natural factors. The
archaeological record can never be that perfect reﬂection; instead, it is itself a product of
these forces, and in that sense it is not really “incomplete”—even though our knowledge
of these forces must always be incomplete.16

Artifact Production and Preservation
    The innocent and the beautiful
    Have no enemy but time.
                     W. B. Yeats17
The basic sequence of events that has produced the world’s archaeological record is the
same for stone tools as it is for today’s best DataWhacker computer. In each case, people:
(1) acquire the raw materials, (2) make some of these materials into artifacts by changing
them (or simply altering their location) in some way, (3) use some of the artifacts, and
(4) then discard them.
     At each stage of this sequence, a variety of cultural and/or natural factors comes into
play. In ancient Mesopotamia, for example, people lived primarily in houses made of
mudbricks—made simply by mixing mud with straw and forming bricks by hand or in
simple wood molds and leaving them to dry. Mesopotamia’s intense sun, occasional rain,
strong winds, and ground water seepage then began to degrade these bricks and the build-
ings created from them. Eventually the buildings were abandoned and a variety of cultural
and natural factors continued to operate on them. Wooden roof beams, stone thresholds,
and even some mudbricks, for example, were regularly carried away for a variety of reuses.
     This process, of making and using—and reusing—things and then discarding them, is
really no different today. For example, landﬁlls around the world are currently ﬁlling up
with the carcasses of typewriters and early generations of computers, many of which have
been scavenged for spare parts. Although these machines may last longer than most of the
remains of antiquity, all are subject to eventual obliteration through a combination of
cultural and natural forces.
     How quickly these materials are returned to their elemental chemical state is simply a
matter of their composition and the conditions of preservation. The laws of thermodynamics
assert that matter is never destroyed nor lost in the universe, but this is little consolation
to the archaeologist looking, for example, at the smear of calcium that is all that is left of a
corpse buried many millennia ago in the warm, wet soils of the Egyptian Delta. Even in drier,
better-preserved contexts, a number of things can destroy archaeological remains. Floods
wash them away, glacial ice sheets grind them to bits, rodents go out of their way to burrow
through them, earthworms move them, and rivers and winds bury them under silt and sand.
            50        PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                             The greatest destruction,
                                                                                        however, is caused by people.
                                                                                        The gleaming limestone sheaths
                                                                                        that originally enclosed each of
                                                                                        the Egyptian pyramids were
                                                                                        looted in medieval times and
                                                                                        used as building materials. All
                                                                                        over the ancient world, in fact,
                                                                                        successive settlements were
                                                                                        built on—and of—the remnants
                                                                                        of earlier occupations. Still, our
                                                                                        own generation is perhaps the
                                                                                        worst despoiler of antiquities.
                                                                                        In Rome, New York, and many
                                                                                        other cities, for example, nearly
                                                                                        every construction project dis-
                                                                                        turbs the archaeological record
                                                                                        of earlier times.
FIGURE 2.8 Looting of archaeological sites removes artifacts from their context
and destroys sites. Seen here are the results of grave robbing at the site of el Brujor      Industrialization at least
in Peru.                                                                                has some   possible beneﬁts, but
                                                                                        the same cannot be said for the
                                                                                        other great destroyer of the
                       past, looting. Illegal antiquities from around the world are openly on sale around the world.
                       It is sad to relate, but even the mild ﬁnes and other penalties currently in force in some
                       countries are only occasionally applied to people convicted of looting. And in many
                       countries the primary looters are impoverished peasants who are simply trying to make a
                       minimal living.
                             Looting destroys the only hope we have of analyzing cultural processes in the
                       archaeological record because it obliterates the context of artifacts and features (Figure 2.8).
                       Thus, for example, to study the origins of the ﬁrst civilizations of Mexico, it is crucial to
                       excavate sites in such a way that the goods people were buried with and the contents of
                       their houses are meticulously recorded, so that the distribution of wealth in the community
                       can be estimated. But once a looter has ripped through house ﬂoors to loot graves of their
                       contents, the anthropological signiﬁcance of the site is lost forever.
                             Context involves not only the relationship of speciﬁc artifacts and features to each
                       other at a site but also their relationships to other types of data such as plant remains and
                       animal bones. These spatial data provide valuable additional information about the
                       organization of activities at sites.
                             Natural decay processes affect sites too, but if a site is not looted the effects of these
                       natural processes can be discerned and taken into account in interpretations. Stone tools
                       are almost indestructible, but organics—bones, hides, wood, plants, people, and so on—
                       rot. The best preservation of organic remains occurs where there is not enough water, heat,
                       pH balance, or oxygen for the chemistry of decay to occur. The best preservation is in dry
                       caves, under thick layers of volcanic ash, or in peat bogs, permafrost, or deep, dark, cold
                       water. Entire mammoths have been retrieved from frozen pits in Siberia, and well-
                       preserved human corpses thousands of years old have been recovered from peat bogs
                       (Figure 2.9), swamps, and in one case, a glacier in Europe.
                                                               FUNDAMENTALS OF ARCHAEOLOGY              51


     No one knows how powerful the analytical
equipment of the future will be, so archaeologists
must consider the option of not digging some
fraction of extremely important sites, in hopes
that someday we will have equipment and tech-
niques of vastly greater sophistication.

Archaeological Research
Design
No matter what an archaeologist’s academic
orientation, anyone who metaphorically or actu-
ally dons the pith helmet chooses where to
excavate or survey and then interpret what is
found. Choosing the place to dig, for example, is
usually not so speculative a procedure as imagined
by non-archaeologists, who frequently ask, “How
do you know where to look?” In modern archaeo-
logy, one rarely sets out on expeditions to remote
places on the Micawberish assumption that
something interesting will turn up—although
many ancient remains are still found by accident
or unsystematic exploration. But increasingly,
archaeological remains are identiﬁed through a
process of systematic survey. It does not take a
trained archaeologist to ﬁnd the pyramids of
Egypt or Mexico, but most archaeological remains
are less evident and accessible, such as those
covered by drifting sand or alluvial soils, buried       FIGURE 2.9 “Tollund man,” a 2,000-year-old hanging victim
beneath contemporary settlements, or located in          from the peat bogs of Denmark, illustrates the “pickling” prop-
                                                         erties of weakly acidic environments.
remote, untravelled areas.
     Many archaeological surveys and excavations
are done within the context of a speciﬁc intellectual question or problem. If one were
interested in the origin of maize agriculture in ancient Mexico, for example, one would read
the numerous articles on this subject, and then examine maps of where early varieties of
maize have been found. One might then hypothesize some possible causes of the transition
to maize agriculture. This process of hypothesis formation is one of the more creative
aspects of the discipline. The goal for the archaeologist is to develop some novel ideas or
ways of looking at a problem that lead him or her to look for certain kinds of data. One
might, then, hypothesize that for various reasons maize was domesticated in lowland
coastal areas and in the context of certain kinds of communities. One could then identify
where relevant remains might be found and then design a program of surveys and/or
excavations to study this problem in this area.
     Only some archaeological research is in this problem-oriented format. Many con-
temporary archaeologists believe that such an approach unnecessarily limits archaeology to
a dubious kind of empirical science. Instead they seek to understand the archaeological
record in the terms they speculate the ancient peoples themselves viewed their world.
52   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


     Archaeologists James Brady and Wendy Ashmore,18 for example, focused on the conceptual
     world of the ancient Maya, of Mesoamerica. In their view the physical world of the Maya,
     especially the mountains, caves, and water sources, combine in the form of an animate and
     sacred landscape that continuously renews and re-creates the core beliefs and cosmic
     processes that the ancient Maya considered fundamental to their universe. They suggest
     that the ancient Maya built many structures in forms and placements that reinforced the
     king’s power and the religious beliefs of the kingdom. Stone pyramids, for example, were
     considered forms of sacred hills, and artiﬁcial caves through which ﬂood waters were
     channeled reinforced the notion of the king as an agent of the gods who governs life-giving
     irrigation waters.
           The problem many archaeologists face in this regard is that, on the one hand, we have
     ample evidence that the physical worlds of the ancients were invested with symbolic
     signiﬁcance that is far different from our own; but, on the other hand, we have face enorm-
     ous difﬁculties in ever verifying our interpretations. In fact, many archaeologists believe
     that we can never verify, in an empirical sense, our attempts to reconstruct the symbolic
     signiﬁcance of the Maya landscape or any other ancient place and time.
           Often archaeological research is simply exploratory. One might select an area and do
     surveys to see if any important remains can be found there. Also, in recent years “problem-
     oriented” archaeological research has been complemented by rapid growth in “public”
     archaeology, or “CRM”—that is, cultural resource management. In many countries,
     governments stipulate that new construction must be preceded by an analysis of its impact
     on the historical and archaeological record, and then research is undertaken if signiﬁc-
     ant remains are found. These efforts mitigate—offset—the destruction of portions of
     the archaeological record through the preservation of some sites from destruction or the
     careful excavation of those sites that will be destroyed. Hundreds, perhaps thousands,
     of archaeologists now are employed around the world as “public archaeologists” to do this
     kind of work.
           “Public archaeology” is usually well funded by the relevant government, but other
     archaeological approaches are a different matter. Interesting ideas about the past are in no
     short supply in archaeology, but money to do the relevant research certainly is. In the
     United States, for example, an archaeologist can submit a written proposal for research
     funds to the U.S. National Science Foundation or the National Endowment for the
     Humanities, explaining precisely what kinds of archaeological evidence he or she hopes to
     ﬁnd and why it is important. This proposal will be judged by a group of one’s peers, and if
     it is successful (in recent years only about 15 percent of National Science Foundation
     archaeology proposals were funded), one then would receive the money and conduct the
     ﬁeld research.19 Most archaeologists who direct long-term research projects must spend
     months of each year trying to obtain funds to continue the project by writing proposals,
     administering grants received, requesting funds from corporations and private donors, and
     so on.


     LOCATING AND EXCAVATING SITES
     Actually locating sites might involve walking surveys, where 5 or 10 archaeologists, working
     from maps or aerial photographs, simply line up and walk over a selected area, recording
     sites as they are found. Aerial photographs and other photogrammetric techniques can
                                                              FUNDAMENTALS OF ARCHAEOLOGY             53


often be used to reveal ancient
agricultural ﬁelds, roads, and other
features not visible from the ground.
The CORONA satellite images
(Figure 2.10), for example, which are
a type of remote sensing, have
recently been used to understand the
history of settlement and ecology of
Mesopotamia. Other remote sensing
techniques include magentometry,
and ground-penetrating radar that
send signals that “bounce” off sub-
surface anomalies such as structures,
burials, or other features. Archaeo-
logists can thus map these anomalies,
often showing enough of the outline
of the features so that their type
can be identiﬁed, for example, a
residential dwelling, without necess-
arily excavating.
     Until recently, many archaeo-         FIGURE 2.10 Aerial photographs often reveal archaeological remains that
logists relied on placing marks (such      are not directly visible from ground level, as in the outline of this Roman
                                           temple on Hayling Island, Hampshire, England. Stone walls just below ground
as dots or Xs) on topographic maps
                                           surface caused parching of grain just above them during the 1976 drought,
or aerial photographs to record the
                                           revealing the outline of the temple wall.
location of the sites they found on
surveys. This has dramatically
changed, however, with the wide availability of GPS. GPS reads locational data by
triangulating signals from orbiting satellites and thus records highly accurate spatial
information, such as the universal transverse mercator (UTM) coordinates or, alternatively,
longitude and latitude.20 Moreover, GPS units are relatively inexpensive, portable and thus
easy to use in the ﬁeld, and capable of digitally storing information. At the end of each ﬁeld
day, these data are downloaded into computer software programs, a process that decreases
the chance of error associated with handwriting data and later keyboarding that
information into a computer application.
     However they are located, archaeological sites can either be simply mapped and
recorded, or they can be excavated—depending on the project’s resources and objectives.
The methods used to excavate archaeological sites depend on the kind of remains involved
and the objectives of the archaeologist. Normally the ﬁrst step is to make a careful map of
the site so that objects and features found can be given precise three-dimensional
coordinates, the provenience (Figure 2.11). Then the site is gridded into, say, 5-by-5 m
blocks, and a sample of these blocks is selected for excavation. Actual digging is done with
dental tools, paint brushes, trowels, shovels, bulldozers, or dynamite—depending, again,
on the objectives and context.
     Although many of the hand tools that archaeologists dig with at sites have remained
the same for more than a hundred years, one of the most signiﬁcant advances in recording
information during excavation has come about due to the total station. A total station
            54       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                    combines a theodolite (a survey
                                                                                    instrument that measures
                                                                                    horizontal and vertical angles)
                                                                                    with an electronic distance
                                                                                    meter (EDM) (Figure 2.12).
                                                                                    The EDM shoots a laser beam
                                                                                    to a reﬂective prism that is held
                                                                                    at a speciﬁc point, for example,
                                                                                    on a stone tool that has been
                                                                                    uncovered. The prism bounces
                                                                                    the laser beam back to the EDM,
                                                                                    which uses the horizontal and
                                                                                    vertical angle measurements
                                                                                    from the theodolite and calcul-
                                                                                    ates the exact three-dimensional
                                                                                    Cartesian coordinates (grid
                                                                                    coordinates) of the point being
                                                                                    measured.21 Total stations can
FIGURE 2.11 The Lower and Middle Paleolithic site of Abri Vaufrey, France, dur-
ing excavations. Note the grid system demarcated using weighted strings suspended   be linked to small computers,
from above.                                                                         which automatically store the
                                                                                    data, thus eliminating errors
                                                                                    that occur when data have to
                                                                                    be handwritten in ﬁeld note-
                                                                                    books. Of course, these data
                                                                                    can be downloaded into a
                                                                                    mapping program each day.
                                                                                    Being able to “see” the site
                                                                                    (stone tools, animal bones,
                                                                                    features, etc.) in plan and
                                                                                    proﬁle views as it is excavated
                                                                                    on a daily basis is a great boon
                                                                                    to decision-making in the ﬁeld.
                                                                                    Total stations can also be used
                                                                                    to accurately map the surface
                                                                                    of sites, for example, founda-
                                                                                    tions of dwellings and other
                                                                                    features, the natural topography
                                                                                    of the site and its surrounding
                                                                                    area, and the distribution of
                                                                                    sites across the landscape.
                                                                                          Like every other profession,
FIGURE 2.12 The use of total stations has revolutionized archaeological             archaeology has its variants of
recording for both accuracy and speed. On the left, a crew member uses a small      Murphy’s Laws: Veteran ﬁeld
computer to coordinate information received from the total station. On the right,   workers know that the most
another crew member holds the prism pole at the point being recorded by the total   important ﬁnd will likely be
station.                                                                            made on the last day of the
                                                                   FUNDAMENTALS OF ARCHAEOLOGY                55


season, when there is no time or
money to continue the excava-
tions, and that particularly
important ﬁnds are usually
located in the most inaccessible
places. Archaeology is also a
lot of hard work, usually, and
much of it takes place at unc-
ongenial hours of the day and
seasons of the year. Anyone
who has dug a backyard trench
for a sewer pipe on a hot August
day has already experienced
many of the thrills of ﬁeld
archaeology.
     The simple mechanics of
excavation are within the range
of abilities of almost any healthy
adult. The best ﬁeld archaeo-
                                       FIGURE 2.13 This proﬁle drawing shows the depositional history of a com-
logists tend to be those who have      munity at Tepe Sabz, near Deh Luran, Iran, from about 5500 to 3500 b.c. Skill in
a good sense of spatial relation-      ﬁeld archaeology is largely the ability to discern and interpret such cultural layers in
ships and enormous patience.           the confusing jumble of mudbrick, stones, ash, and other debris.
“God is in the details,” said a
great architect,22 and the same is
true of archaeology. One usu-
ally tries to excavate according to the stratigraphy (Figure 2.13) of the site, so that the
different layers of debris are removed in the reverse sequence in which they were
deposited—as opposed to simply digging the site by arbitrary levels and removing
successive layers, each, say, 25 cm thick.
     Thomas Jefferson may have conducted the ﬁrst scientiﬁc stratigraphic archaeological
excavation in history.23 In 1784 he excavated a trench through a Native American burial
mound near his home in Virginia and recognized that it had been built up over time by
many burials and reburials. Jefferson was able to read a time sequence in the stratigraphy
of the site, and he related the differences in preservation of the human bones to the relative
time these people had been buried. Jefferson also applied his research to a speciﬁc problem:
In Jefferson’s time many people thought that the “mound-builders” were ancient
Europeans, not Native Americans; Jefferson concluded that Native Americans may have
been the builders of these mounds.
     Modern stratigraphic excavation techniques are based on the same logic as Jefferson’s.
In Tabun Cave in Palestine, for example, Neandertals came each year for a few months and
built ﬁres, made tools, butchered animals, and generally lived out their presumably
unremarkable lives. Rocks falling from the ceiling and animals bringing their prey back to
the cave when people were not there added to the layers of debris. Thus the excavators,24
who were interested in subtle changes in diet and tool manufacture over the whole history
of the cave’s occupation because they were looking for evidence regarding the relationship
of the Neandertals to ourselves, had to tease apart layer after layer of debris, trying to
            56        PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                         separate layers that were the result of short time intervals. The excavators were, in effect,
                         trying to see change in the way the Neandertals lived over thousands of years.
                              Aaron Copland described listening to one of Ralph Vaughn William’s symphonies as
                         like staring at a cow for 45 minutes, and although studying archaeological strata is even less
                         eventful, it is one of the most important activities in archaeology. Stratigraphic ana-
                         lyses require that the analyst reconstruct the many different processes that produced the
                         sequence of deposits, and this can require considerable skill, patience, and experience. In
                         cave sediments, for example, one must try to discern faint traces of burrowing animals that
                         may have tunneled in from the surface and whose burrows were subsequently ﬁlled with
                         charcoal, ash, and artifacts that date to periods long after their stratigraphic position would
                         suggest. Some of the most complex stratigraphy is found in the remains of early villages
                         and towns in the Middle East, where mudbrick buildings were built and rebuilt and
                         replaced in the same area over many centuries, so that the last, most recent community sat
                         (or sits) atop 10 or more meters of compacted debris representing the remains of thousands
                         of years of building and then abandoning houses, walls, streets, latrines, hearths, and the
                         other facilities of ancient daily life.
                              Excavation techniques and stratigraphic analyses in such sites reward patience, work,
                         and imagination. British archaeologist Sir Leonard Woolley, for example, while excavating
                         Ur, in Mesopotamia, removed some debris and saw two holes in the ground where
                         something had apparently rotted away. He poured them full of plaster and when the plaster
                         had hardened, Woolley unearthed an almost complete cast of an ancient wooden musical
                         instrument that had long since disintegrated (Figure 2.14). One of the pioneers in devising
                         the techniques of excavating ancient cities was Sir Mortimer Wheeler, a British archaeologist
                         whose excavations at sites in the Indus Valley (modern Pakistan) were done with great
                                                                                         care to reveal a stratigraphic
                                                                                         record that would allow him to
                                                                                         understand how these cities
                                                                                         grew and changed over time.25
                                                                                              Stratigraphic analyses are
                                                                                         a fundamental part of ﬁeld
                                                                                         archaeology because they
                                                                                         provide the primary data for
                                                                                         looking at change over time in
                                                                                         all aspects of cultures. The
                                                                                         archaeologist knows that if he
                                                                                         or she can detect disturbances
                                                                                         and read the strata correctly, the
                                                                                         lowest strata can be assumed to
                                                                                         be earlier than the ones above
                                                                                         it, and thus a form of “time”
                                                                                         can be read in a stratigraphic
                                                                                         sequence. Understanding the
                                                                                         nature of these changes, how-
FIGURE 2.14 Sir Leonard Woolley’s innovation of pouring plaster into a couple            ever, requires analyses of the
of unusual holes in the ground at the Mesopotamian site of Ur resulted in the recov-     materials and artifacts found in
ery of a cast of a lyre.                                                                 these strata.
                                                             FUNDAMENTALS OF ARCHAEOLOGY          57


ANALYSES OF THE PAST

A century ago, most archaeologists were “generalists” in that they were all broadly trained
academically and could do most of the analyses their research required, including the
excavations and laboratory analyses. The extreme specialization of modern culture,
however, has had its impact on archaeology too, and today almost every professional has
some kind of technical specialization or area of research in which she or he is particularly
qualiﬁed. Every archaeological site is unique and nonrenewable, and many technical
specialists are required to make the most of the evidence unearthed. Most excavation staffs
today include geologists, botanists, palynologists (experts on plant pollen), architectural
draftsmen, faunal experts (specialists in analyzing animal remains), artifact illustrators, and
other specialists. Conserving ﬁnds once they are discovered has also become a highly
technical specialty, requiring advanced training in chemistry and other sciences.26 A few of
these specializations are discussed here; others are considered in the context of speciﬁc
archaeological problems in later chapters.


Reconstructing Ancient Environments and Cultural
Ecologies
Archaeologists usually begin their analyses by trying to reconstruct the physical
environments in which a particular segment of the archaeological record was formed.
Climates and the world’s geomorphology—the shape and constituents of land surfaces—
have changed greatly over the several million years we and our ancestors have lived, and
each archaeological analysis begins with an effort to reconstruct the physical world of the
culture being analyzed.
      Ancient climates can often be reconstructed from ﬂoral and faunal remains. The study
of animal remains, or faunal analysis, is a complex discipline in which in most cases the
archaeologist is trying to reconstruct human diet and local environments. Taphonomic27
analyses usually are focused on the factors that decompose and in other ways change animal
bones after the animal dies. Faunal analysts generally tally the numbers and kinds of animals
represented by the remains they ﬁnd, and then use statistical methods to estimate food
values, the ages and sexes of the animals involved, and changes in diets and the physical
characteristics of the animals being exploited.28 One of the most prolonged and heated
arguments in contemporary archaeology now involves analyses of marks (Figure 2.15) left
by humans cutting up animals with stone tools: For reasons discussed in chapters 3 and 4,
it is important in understanding the origins of our genus to study butchered animal bones
to try to distinguish between cases in which people butchered animals they had killed
themselves and those in which they butchered animals they scavenged from kills of other
animals, such as lions and hyenas.29
      Throughout the history of our genus, plants have been the main source of food for
most humans, and so ﬂoral analyses—studies of the remains of plants—are an extremely
important part of archaeology, particularly in studies of how domesticated plants and
animals and agricultural economies evolved.30 Carbon is chemically quite stable, so charred
plants and seeds preserve well. Carbonized plant remains can be retrieved by ﬂotation:
Excavated sediments are mixed with water or some other ﬂuid and the charred plant
           58       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                  fragments rise to the surface,
                                                                                  where they can be skimmed off
                                                                                  and identiﬁed (Figure 2.16).
                                                                                       The importance of such
                                                                                  analyses lies in the fact that
                                                                                  these plants indicate much
                                                                                  about the climates and vegeta-
                                                                                  tion of the periods in which
                                                                                  these animals lived. We shall
                                                                                  see, for example, that there are
                                                                                  debates about when and where
                                                                                  various animals were domestic-
                                                                                  ated (chapter 6).
                                                                                       Human bodies are trea-
                                                                                  sure troves of information
                                                                                  for archaeologists, particularly
                                                                                  if they are mummiﬁed. For
                                                                                  example, 11 naturally mum-
                                                                                  miﬁed bodies found in beach
FIGURE 2.15 This animal bone from the FxJj; 50 site in Koobi Fora, Kenya, shows   sand in northern Chile that
evidence of cut marks made by stone tools.                                        date to about 1000 b.c. indic-
                                                                                  ated when analyzed that, among
                                                                                  other things, one of them is the
                                                                                  earliest known coca leaf chewer,
                                                                                  while other bodies showed
                                                                                  the changes of the bones of
                                                                                  the inner ear that are typical
                                                                                  of people who spend a lot of
                                                                                  time diving in cold water. In
                                                                                  addition, they had the kinds of
                                                                                  dental caries and missing teeth
                                                                                  associated with the sticky
                                                                                  starches of an agricultural diet
                                                                                  —although about 40 percent
                                                                                  of their diet came from marine
                                                                                  resources.31
                                                                                       Studies of human paleo-
                                                                                  pathology, in general, can tell
                                                                                  us much about the demo-
                                                                                  graphy and health of ancient
FIGURE 2.16 Crew members use a ﬂotation machine to recover ancient                peoples.32
carbonized plant remains.                                                              A rapidly growing techn-
                                                                                  ical specialty within archaeo-
                      logy is geoarchaeology, the combination of archaeological and geological analyses.33 Geology
                      and archaeology form a “natural” marriage in many obvious ways, for both disciplines are
                      concerned with the alterations of natural landscapes. Glaciers, changing rainfall patterns,
                                                             FUNDAMENTALS OF ARCHAEOLOGY         59


and many other natural forces alter landscapes, and so, of course, do people. Geologists are
broadly concerned with ancient physical environments, and archaeologists require
knowledge of these environments to interpret their ﬁnds.
     Geoarchaeological analyses involve many different kinds of questions and techniques.
In the Egyptian Delta, for example, many of the earliest communities were built on large
sand-gravel mounds created by the Nile as it deposited the sediments it carried. But many
of these communities have been buried under many meters of sediments from all of the
annual ﬂoods since that time, and by other factors as well. Moreover, the Nile tributaries
in the Delta have changed course many times, leaving a maze of criss-crossed buried river
channels. To ﬁnd these buried sand-gravel mounds and the archaeological sites on them
thus often requires complex geological analyses involving augering, satellite image analysis,
and many other techniques.
     Geoarchaeological analyses are sometimes required simply to determine if some
alteration to the landscape or objects are of natural or human origin. Other geoarchaeo-
logists deal with dating strata, reconstructing ancient temperature and rainfall patterns,
and related problems.
     Reconstructing the physical environment and cultural ecology of any particular site
usually involves the coordinated efforts of many specialists. In some ancient sites, for
example, such as the ﬂoors of caves, the archaeological record is principally one in which
repeated seasonal occupations of an area have left strata containing small particles of bones,
burned seeds and other plant remains, debris from making stone tools, and other remnants.
Spilled food, human wastes, the manure of domestic animals—all these and many other
factors associated with human life change the chemistry, texture, and contents of the
surfaces on which people live. A geoarchaeologist might, for example, measure the chemical
composition of a large sample of sediments taken from different areas of such a site and
look for areas relatively high in nitrogen and the other by-products of organic decay. Other
specialists would identify the plants and animals that lived or were consumed in the
adjacent areas.


Artifact Analyses
Aside from ancient buildings, in sheer bulk the largest part of the archaeological record is
made up of stone tools and pottery fragments (sherds). Stone tools are the earliest known
artifacts, having been ﬁrst used more than two million years ago, and they have remained
in use to the present day. When a chunk of ﬁne-grain stone is struck with sufﬁcient force
at the proper angle with another rock or with a wood or bone baton, a shock wave will pass
through the stone and detach a ﬂake of the desired size and shape. Classrooms all over the
world are bloodied each year as instructors attempt to demonstrate this process, but with
a little experience most become quite skilled. In analyzing ancient stone tools, many
archaeologists have mastered the skills needed to make stone tools themselves. Few things
are sharper than a fragment struck from ﬁne-grain ﬂint or from obsidian (volcanic glass).
Obsidian is so ﬁne-grained that ﬂakes of it can have edges only about 20 molecules thick—
hundreds of times thinner than steel tools. One archaeologist (the late Richard Daughtery,
of Washington State University) convinced his doctor to use obsidian tools as well as
standard surgical scalpels during his own heart surgery and claimed that the incisions made
with obsidian healed faster.
            60       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                 Through experimentation, some archaeologists are
                                                           able to produce copies of almost every stone tool type
                                                           used in antiquity. A common research strategy is to make
                                                           ﬂint tools, use them to cut up animals, saw wood, clean
                                                           hides, bore holes, and so on, and then compare the
                                                           resulting wear traces with the marks found on ancient
                                                           artifacts. Sometimes electron-scanning microscopes are
                                                           used to study minute variations in these use marks. Some
                                                           rough correspondence can be found between the types of
                                                           lithic uses and the characteristics of wear marks, but there
                                                           are many ambiguities. Archaeologists have shown that the
                                                           marks produced on stone tools by different uses can be
                                                           subtle and often ambiguous.34
                                                                 Ethnographic data from people who still use lithics,
                                                           like Brian Hayden’s study of stone use in the Mexican
                                                           highlands and Polly Weissner’s study of how the !Kung
                                                           hunter-gatherers use styles of stone spear-points to
                                                           identify their social groupings,35 indicate that even crude-
                                                           looking stone tools may reﬂect a great amount of social
                                                           life and economic forces.36
                                                                 Ceramics were in use much later than the ﬁrst stone
                                                           tools (appearing in quantity in many places about 10,000
                                                           years ago), but they were used in such massive quantities
                                                           in antiquity that, for many archaeologists, life consists
                                                           mainly of the slow sorting and analyzing of potsherds.
                                                           Ceramic pots were ﬁrst made by hand and dried in the
                                                           sun or low-temperature kilns, but in many areas of the
                                                           Old World, the invention of the potter’s wheel and high-
FIGURE 2.17 This “Susa A” style jar, from early            temperature kilns produced pottery that is nearly a form
fourth millennium b.c. Iran, exempliﬁes the hand-
                                                           of glass and therefore all but indestructible (Figure 2.17).
painted, highly decorated pottery styles that were
                                                                 Ceramics form such a large part of archaeologists’
widely distributed in Southwest Asia just before initial
cultural complexity.                                       lives because ceramics express so much about the people
                                                           who made them.37 Pots are direct indicators of function,
                                                           in that they show how diets and economies changed over
                       time. David Braun, for example, has documented how pottery in the American Southeast
                       changed in prehistoric times as a form of agriculture developed in which people boiled
                       seeds of various native plants, and pottery was developed to withstand the heat and
                       mechanical stresses of this kind of food preparation.38
                            Ceramics are almost always analyzed on the basis of their style. This idea of style is hard
                       to deﬁne, but—as discussed later—changing styles are the basis on which archaeologists
                       date much of the archaeological record. But for many archaeologists, ceramics styles are
                       more than just convenient devices for dating—stylistic decoration of artifacts is the primary
                       means by which one can enter the cognitive world of the ancients. Societies throughout
                       history have invested their objects with styles that have profound and complex meanings
                       and effects. As we will see in the case of the Maya (chapter 13) and every other early civiliza-
                       tion, rulers used particular symbols and styles, such as in styles of dress, personal
                                                                 FUNDAMENTALS OF ARCHAEOLOGY        61


ornamentation, and inscriptions, as mechanisms through which they portrayed, commun-
icated, and implemented their power. In all societies, styles ﬁx social meaning and are
powerful ways in which these groups deﬁne and construct their culture. Styles of objects,
language, and personal behavior identify people in terms of gender, age group, ethnic
group, socioeconomic class, and many other important ways.39
     Although stone tools and ceramics make up much of the archaeological record,
artifacts of wood, animal hides, metals, minerals, and almost everything else have been in
use for thousands, and in some cases even millions, of years (Figure 2.18).40

ARRANGING ARTIFACTS
The novelist Luis Borges imagined an ancient Chinese classiﬁcation of animals that
included the following categories:
    (a) those that belong to the Emperor, (b) embalmed ones, (c) those that are trained, (d)
    suckling pigs, (e) mermaids, (f ) fabulous ones, (g) stray dogs, (h) those that are included
    in this classiﬁcation, (i) those that tremble as if they were mad, (j) innumerable ones, (k)
    those drawn with a very ﬁne camel’s hair brush, (l) others, (m) those that have just broken
    a ﬂower vase, and (n) those that resemble ﬂies from a distance.41
A zoologist working with this classiﬁcation of animals might develop exquisite sensibilities,
but he or she would have a difﬁcult time using this system to study animal remains of
archaeological interest. A fundamental procedure of science, or any form of analysis, is to
construct classiﬁcations, or typologies, that facilitate certain kinds of research objectives. To
understand how the world operates, we have to categorize it into groups of similar things
and then discover the relationships among these groups. Modern chemistry or physics, for
example, would be inconceivable were it not for classes such as electrons, atoms, and
molecules, and the laws of thermodynamics. In the same way, evolutionary biology is
possible only because of concepts of chromosomes, cells, and species, and the principles of
population genetics. These notions about classiﬁcation and analysis are quite straight-
forward and simple, but when we consider the kinds of data archaeologists work with, we
ﬁnd that archaeological classiﬁcations and analyses have differed somewhat from those of
other disciplines.42 The archaeologists’ broken pottery, house foundations, and stone tools
have not been organized in classiﬁcations in the same ways as the atom and the cell. A
potassium atom is exactly the same thing to a Japanese chemist and an American chemist,
but when a French archaeologist describes stone tools from southern France as “scrapers,”
those artifacts differ in many respects from North American “scrapers” as described by
an American archaeologist. Archaeological classiﬁcations generally have been constructed
with much more limited purposes than the units of the natural sciences. It is theory,
whether biological, quantum, or Marxian, that tells the researcher how to break up the
world for analysis, and in archaeology the only theories are relatively weak behavioral
generalizations.
     One of the most common classiﬁcations in archaeology has been in terms of functional
types. Archaeologists, for example, frequently categorize the 1.75-million-year-old tools
from Olduvai Gorge as “cleavers,” “scrapers,” and “choppers” (Figure 2.19). Such a classiﬁ-
catory system is based in part on ideas about how our earliest ancestors actually used these
tools. Obviously, imagination plays a role in creating functional types, particularly when
archaeologists are dealing with extremely old remains left by people very unlike known or
62   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY




                              FIGURE 2.18 A great part of the world’s archaeo-
                              logical record is composed of stone, wood, and clay
                              artifacts. The ﬂint knife depicted here dates from
                              about 4000 b.c., from Egypt. Its ivory handle is carved
                              with scores of delicate animal ﬁgures. The ceramic
                              pot and ﬁgurine are also from Egypt, from about
                              3100 b.c.
                                                            FUNDAMENTALS OF ARCHAEOLOGY         63




FIGURE 2.19 Some examples of 1.75-million-year-old Oldowan stone tools.



existing cultures. The use of high-powered microscopes to study wear patterns on stone
tools and other technical advances has given archaeologists more conﬁdence in their ability
to infer the functions of artifacts, but there will always be an element of speculation,
inference, and error in these typologies.
     Another widely used archaeological classiﬁcatory approach employs chronological
types. Chronological (or “historical”) types are artifacts whose combination of attributes is
known to be limited to particular time periods. We have already noted that stylistic
elements such as pottery decorations and house architecture have limited distribution in
time, and by sorting artifacts into groups based on their similarity of stylistic elements we
can often devise relative chronologies of archaeological remains.
     While depending on chronological and functional types in most analyses, archaeologists
continue to search for more powerful systems of arrangement. In contemporary archaeo-
logy, debates about the logic and mechanics of arranging and classifying artifacts into
analytical units continue, with some stressing a statistical approach, others more formal
methods, and yet others completely new ways of linking tool forms and tool types.43
64   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


     Quantitative Methods and Computers in Archaeology
     Once archaeologists have grouped the artifacts of the archaeological record into classes or
     types, they analyze the distribution of these classes and types through time and space. In a
     ﬁlm scene, W. C. Fields, while dealing cards, was asked by a prospective player, “Is this a
     game of chance?” Fields—felonious eyes agleam—replied, “Not the way I play it!” Modern
     archaeology, on the other hand, is in many crucial ways a game of chance in the sense that
     we must use probability theory and statistics to interpret what we ﬁnd. Chance in this sense
     enters directly into the formation of what archaeologists have to work with—the archaeo-
     logical record. Some 1.7 million years ago, for example, an individual who from the neck
     down looked very much like ourselves made a light lunch of a cow-like animal (possibly
     killed and partially eaten by some other animal) and tossed some of its bones into some
     lakeside sediments, where the bones were preserved—cut marks intact—until Louis Leakey
     dug them out in the 1950s. Doubtless this same individual of 1.7 million years ago munched
     on other bones that were thrown away in areas where they rotted or were totally fragmented
     by hyenas, and have thus disappeared. And chance enters into not only the preservation of
     objects but also their discovery. Many major archaeological sites in European countries, for
     example, are within a short distance of major roads—a sign that there are probably many
     other sites that have not yet been discovered because no one has happened on them.
     Chance—or, more precisely, probability statistics—is also part of the analytical methods of
     modern archaeology. The costs in time and money of archaeology are such that even well-
     known sites, like the ancient Iranian city of Susa, where the biblical Esther lived 3,000 years
     after the city’s founding, are so large that even a century of excavation has removed only a
     small fraction of the site. Even in Egypt, where centuries of excavations and reoccupation
     have destroyed many sites, hundreds of huge sites have been only partly excavated.
           The only reasonable archaeological strategy in the face of such a massive archaeological
     record is to sample: to excavate some parts of some sites in the hope that these samples will
     accurately reﬂect the whole.
           The essentials of statistical sampling are familiar to most people. Polling organizations
     regularly ask a few thousand people how they are going to vote in an election and use this
     information to make very reliable predictions about the voting behavior of the larger
     population (all the people who actually vote). Deﬁning the target population—that is, what
     it is one is trying to estimate—is the key to valid statistical analyses. Introductory statistics
     professors are fond of citing the fact that the average adult human has one testicle and one
     breast. One of the reasons sampling works in elections is that pollsters stratify samples: They
     know from previous elections that people in the North vote differently from those in the
     South and that certain occupational groups are far more likely to vote than others. Thus,
     they break up, or stratify, their samples so that these and other subpopulations are
     proportionately represented. Then, by using procedures of statistical inference, they are
     often able to estimate election results quite precisely.
           Archaeologists also use sampling theory and procedures. If they wish to know relatively
     straightforward information, such as the number and kinds of sites in a large region, they
     can divide the area up into subareas—perhaps stratifying it according to ecological zones—
     and then go out and record the number of sites in perhaps 10 percent of all the subareas.
     Excellent results are usually obtained from such procedures, if the objective is simply an
     estimate of site densities. One critical sampling problem derives from the great size and
     complexity of the archaeological record. Suppose, for example, that you have the idea that
                                                             FUNDAMENTALS OF ARCHAEOLOGY         65


trade in items such as ﬂint and obsidian was a key element in the rise of the ﬁrst states of
ancient Mexico. The only way to test your idea would be to determine if there had been a
signiﬁcant increase in the amount or kinds of these commodities at sites occupied just prior
to or during the period when the ﬁrst states appeared. To do this with statistical precision,
you would have to excavate at least portions of a statistically valid sample of at least 30 or
40 sites—something just not feasible in today’s archaeology. The result is that archaeologists
are not purists when it comes to using statistics and probability models. Because so much
of the residue of the past has decayed, and because of the high cost of gathering and
analyzing archaeological data, archaeologists tend to misuse statistics and probability
theory by making sweeping inferences on the basis of inadequate data. No Wall Street trader
(or even drunk riverboat gambler) would bet on the odds that archaeologists do when
testing their hypotheses; but archaeologists deal only in history and science, whereas
gamblers and stockbrokers deal in money.
     Archaeologists have opted for the only realistic compromise: They use statistical
sampling techniques, knowing that they often don’t meet the theoretical requirements of
optimal statistical inference, but believing that useful—if not perfect—results can be
obtained. Fortunately, most statistical sampling techniques are very “robust” in that one
can strain their assumptions badly and still get quite reasonable results.
     To a large extent, archaeological interest in sampling and many other aspects of
modern archaeology are side effects of the invention and improvement of the modern
computer. Applying even the simplest statistical description and inference to archaeology
would be impossibly time-consuming without computers. Quantiﬁcation in archaeology
is not just a matter of sampling: It underlies most other methodological advances. The
archaeological record is so complex that in most cases the archaeologist cannot see patterns
in the welter of data without the aid of numerical summaries or quantitative presentation.
     One example of new methodologies that help identify complex archaeological
patterning is the Geographic Information System (GIS), which has been used by both
processual and post-processual archaeologists. With this technique, spatial data, such as the
location across the landscape of certain types of stone artifacts or the distribution of house
sites and temples, are combined with nonspatial information, such as images or database
records.44 GIS is designed so that questions about the data can be asked and analyzed with
statistics. In my (Olszewski) ASPS project in Egypt, for example, I might want to know
where a certain type of stone artifact, such as a Levallois core, has been found. By setting
up a query, I can generate a map showing the distribution of Levallois cores, along with
descriptive database information about each of them. One advantage of GIS is that once
I’ve generated this map, I can ask questions about it to generate other maps. For example,
perhaps I want to know where the Nubian Levallois cores are in relationship to radial
Levallois cores (Figure 2.20). If a pattern is present, then I can run additional queries and
statistical analyses that will facilitate interpreting the pattern.


DATING THE PAST

Computers are useless. They can only give you
answers.
Pablo Picasso (1881–1973)
            66       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                     The basics of excavating arti-
                                                                                     facts and features, classifying
                                                                                     them, and counting them
                                                                                     are relatively straightforward
                                                                                     problems common to many
                                                                                     sciences. But like other dis-
                                                                                     ciplines, archaeology involves
                                                                                     many specialized forms of
                                                                                     measuring artifacts and the rest
                                                                                     of the archaeological record.
                                                                                     This ﬁeld is generically referred
                                                                                     to as archaeometry.


                                                                                     Dating
                                                                                     Methods in
                                                                                     Archaeology
                                                                                     The primary importance of
                                                                                     dating methods in archaeology
                                                                                     is in analyzing cultural changes.
                                                                                     To take an example, some have
FIGURE 2.20 The distribution of Middle Paleolithic Levallois and Nubian cores        argued (chapter 6) that people
in surface samples near the Wadi Umm al-Qaab, Egypt; collected by the Abydos         ﬁrst domesticated sheep and
Survey for Paleolithic Sites project.                                                goats and began farming wheat
                                                                                     and barley in the Middle East
                                                                                     because human population
                       densities had risen to the point that people could no longer survive on hunting and
                       gathering alone. Other people suggest that rising population densities had little to do
                       directly with the origins of agriculture in this area.
                             Our only hope of resolving such disputes—of testing hypotheses—about the
                       mechanics of major cultural transformations is to look at the archaeological record. If we
                       conduct archaeological surveys in the area of the Middle East where agriculture ﬁrst
                       appeared and determine what sites were occupied during what periods and how large they
                       were, we can estimate population densities before, during, and after the period when
                       agriculture ﬁrst appeared—about 10,000 years ago. If we discover that there is no signiﬁcant
                       rise in population densities just before and during the period when we ﬁnd the ﬁrst
                       domesticated plants and animals and agricultural implements, we might reject the idea that
                       rising population densities were the important direct cause of this change. In short, our
                       only hope of determining cause and effect in ancient cultures is to show correlations in time
                       and space.
                             But how are we to date artifacts in order to show such correlations?
                             Archaeologists rely on two different kinds of dating methods. In some situations the
                       objective is to obtain a chronometric date: that is, an age expressed in years, such as “that
                       house was built 7,200 years ago.” In many situations, chronometric dates may be difﬁcult
                       to obtain or simply unnecessary for the problem at issue, and for these situations
                                                            FUNDAMENTALS OF ARCHAEOLOGY            67


archaeologists have devised several methods of relative dating, in which the objective is to
arrange sites or artifacts in a sequence that reﬂects the order in which they were created—
even though we may not know for certain the actual age of any of them.

CHRONOMETRIC DATING
Many archaeologists dream of a small pocket-sized device, stuffed with microchips and
Star Trekian “dilithium oxide” crystals, which, when pointed at an artifact, will read out
the object’s exact date of manufacture. Fanciful as this may sound, modern physiochemical
dating methods have been greatly improved in the last decade, and age estimates are
becoming increasingly reliable.45
      Perhaps the most precise and yet technologically simple form of chronometric dating
is dendrochronology—the use of sequences of tree rings to infer time.46 Most trees add a
single “ring” each year to their circumference; thus, if we count the number of rings, the
age of a tree can be precisely established. Normally the tree grows faster in wet years than
in dry ones; therefore, over the centuries there is a unique series of changes in ring widths,
and precise dates can be inferred by comparing cross sections of trees that overlapped in
time (Figure 2.21). By comparing beams, posts, and other artifacts to cross sections taken
from trees that live for long periods, it is often possible to determine the exact year in which
the tree used to make the artifact was cut. But here’s the rub: In dry climates tree trunks
cut as lumber tend to be used and reused for very long times, so that the date that the tree
actually was cut may be centuries earlier than the period it was used as a beam in some
house. Also, since local climates vary, dendrochronological records must be built up for
each region, and at present detailed records are available for the North American West,
Europe, and the Near East.
      The most widely used chronometric technique is 14C (carbon-14 or radiocarbon
dating), a method ﬁrst outlined in the 1940s by Nobel laureate Willard Libby.47 When
solar radiation strikes the upper
atmosphere, it converts a
small amount of atmospheric
nitrogen into the radioactive
isotope 14C. Wind and other
factors spread this 14C through-
out the atmosphere, and because
all living organisms exchange
gases with the atmosphere, the
ratio of 14C in their cells is equal
to that in the atmosphere.
When the organism dies, the
14
  C trapped in its cells begins to
revert to nitrogen. This dis-
integration occurs because 14C
is unstable. Because we know
that approximately half of any        FIGURE 2.21 The most precise dates in archaeology are derived through
given quantity of 14C will dis-       dendrochronology. In many important areas of the world, however, a dendro-
integrate in about 5,730 years,       chronological sequence has not been established, and in other areas, such as
we can estimate the time an           Mesopotamia, there are no native, long-lived species of trees.
68   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


     organism has been dead by measuring the amount of 14C against the stable isotopes 12C and
     13
        C remaining in its cells. After about 50,000 years, too little persists to be measurable with
     standard laboratory methods, although with large samples and the most powerful
     equipment, reliable dates up to 100,000 years ago are theoretically possible.
           Radiocarbon dating works best on wood and charcoal, but paper, leather, bone, skin,
     peat, and many other organic materials can also be dated by this method. Grains and grasses
     make excellent archaeological samples when charred by ﬁre because they preserve well and
     are short-lived compared to trees.
           The ratio of 14C in the atmosphere has not been constant over the last 50,000 years,
     and thus 14C dates have had to be “corrected” by measuring the ratio of 14C in tree rings
     dated through dendrochronology. Fortunately, some trees, such as the bristlecone pine of
     northern California, live thousands of years; cores from their trunks can be dated through
     dendrochronology, and then each ring can be radiocarbon-dated to construct a “correction
     curve.”48 Logs found submerged in northern European bogs, where they have been
     preserved for thousands of years, have recently allowed the calculation of a radiocarbon
     correction curve extending back more than 7,000 years for that area. But samples dated by
     the 14C method can still be contaminated with younger or older carbon sources, such as
     ground water or petroleum deposits.
           Additionally, we also know that the amount of 14C is not the same for all environments.
     The northern and southern hemispheres, for example, have different proportions of 14C.
     These types of factors must be considered or accounted for by the laboratories that process
     samples for 14C dating.
           A major advance in radiocarbon dating was made in the 1970s when various
     researchers used particle accelerators (the AMS method, or accelerator mass spectrometry)
     to date samples. This method allows reliable dates to be obtained from samples the size of
     a match-head, whereas older methods require about a handful of carbon. Accelerator
     dating has other advantages: Samples can be more easily puriﬁed of contaminants,
     individual samples can be subdivided into very small amounts and tested for internal
     consistency, and older samples can be dated because problems involving background
     radiation have been obviated. Because accelerator dating can be done on such small
     samples, reliable dates can be obtained from the cooking soot on pots, dung, and other
     organic temper in pottery, slag, textiles, and many other materials.
           In February 1989 an international team of 21 scientists reported the results of
     radiometric dating of the Shroud of Turin, a cloth that appears to bear the image of a man
     who has been whipped and cruciﬁed. For centuries, many people have believed that the
     Shroud was used to wrap the body of Jesus Christ. The scientists took three samples of cloth,
     each about 50 mg (about the size of a postage stamp), and sent them to three different
     laboratories, in England, Switzerland, and the United States. Using accelerator mass
     spectrometers, scientists at the three laboratories all concluded independently that the linen
     used for the Shroud was made about a.d. 1260–1390.
           Interpretations of radiocarbon dates are rarely simple. The radiocarbon method was
     ﬁrst applied by Libby to wood from the Pyramid of Djoser in Egypt, and over the years
     thousands of radiocarbon analyses of Egyptian materials have been made. In a recent
     attempt to reﬁne the radiocarbon chronology of Egypt, I (Wenke) was part of a group of
     scholars49 that retrieved hundreds of samples from the 22 major Egyptian pyramids and
     scores of temples and tombs. Because we were engaged in a decade-long project to try to
                                                            FUNDAMENTALS OF ARCHAEOLOGY         69


deﬁne the basic mechanics of ancient Egyptian cultural change, one of the aims of this study
was to determine when the Egyptian pyramids were built. Construction of the enormous
pyramids and other monuments in the Nile Valley was obviously a critical part of this
cultural change, since they must have required astounding investments of time and energy.
But how do we know when they were built and what their relation in time was to
ﬂuctuations in the Nile ﬂoods, political developments in neighboring areas, and other
important events?
     Not a single ancient text from the age when the pyramids were built has ever been
found that describes their construction, or even refers to them. Egyptologists have dated
the pyramids primarily on the basis of names on inscriptions in temples and tombs in areas
near the pyramids. Ancient king-lists have been found, and the length of reigns of speciﬁc
kings are often given in inscriptions, so Egyptologists have been able to estimate the
sequence of pharaohs and how long each ruled. Occasionally, a text would record a speciﬁc
astronomical event in the reign of a speciﬁc king, such as the rising of the star Sirius at a
particular time and place on the horizon. Such events can be precisely dated, so we know
the dates of some rulers with great accuracy. Unfortunately, such astronomical observa-
tions have not been found for the period when the pyramids appear to have been built.
     Most of the mortar used to bind the blocks of stone making up the pyramids appears
to have been produced by burning gypsum to create a powder that was combined with
water and other materials. Thus pieces of carbon from the ﬁres can be found throughout
this mortar. We thought that if these charcoal fragments could be dated, then we could
estimate when the brush, trees, and so on, had been cut to get the fuel to burn the gypsum,
and from this we could estimate the age of the pyramids. We also hoped that if we took a
lot of samples in sequence, from the base to the top of each pyramid, we might arrive at
some estimate of how long it took to construct them and the sequence in which they were
constructed.
     After having obtained the necessary research funds and permissions, we started at the
ﬁrst course of the Great Pyramid of Khufu and began extracting bits of carbon out of the
mortar. Six months later we had just over a hundred samples from 17 of the largest
pyramids. Some samples were about the size of a pea; others constituted roughly a handful
of carbon. We sent the larger samples to the Radiocarbon Laboratory at Southern
Methodist University for conventional radiocarbon dating, and we sent the smaller samples
to a laboratory in Switzerland, to be dated with the recently developed AMS methods. The
majority of our dates came out almost 400 years older than most Egyptologists would
estimate as the ages for these various pyramids. We presented a paper on our results at a
scientiﬁc conference and were informed by most Egyptologists and virtually everyone else
that our radiocarbon dates had little or nothing to do with the ages of the pyramids. It was
suggested that our dates came out too old because (1) the ancient Egyptians used old wood
in the ﬁres to produce the mortar, or (2) the carbon came from plants that naturally absorb
relatively large amounts of radioactive carbon, or (3) the mortar itself had contaminated
the carbon, or (4) the correlation curves we used were wrong. Because of “wiggles” in the
correction curve, for example, for any particular sample one might be able to read three or
more different dates from the graph, none of which is more likely than the other dates.
     All these factors may, in fact, have played a role in producing our dates, and even
though we tried to control for as many of them as we could, we still were in no position to
conclude that the traditional Old Kingdom chronology is wrong. In 1994–1995 we returned
70   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


     to Egypt and collected hundreds of additional samples. This time, with botanical identi-
     ﬁcations of the materials analyzed and a more comprehensive sampling design, our initial
     results were conﬁrmed in the sense that the radiocarbon chronology for the construction
     of the pyramids shows that most of the monuments we dated were built earlier than the
     historical chronology would suggest.50
           In any case, as the preceding indicates, radiocarbon dating can be very useful, but inter-
     pretations of radiocarbon dates are usually difﬁcult: Dates that agree with one’s suppositions
     tend to ﬁnd a ready audience, while dates that do not are often labeled “intrusive.”
           Another important form of archaeological dating is the potassium-argon method.
     Potassium-argon dating is based on the fact that a radioactive isotope of potassium (40K),
     present in minute quantities in rocks and volcanic ash, decays into the gas argon (40Ar) at
     a known rate (half of a given amount of 40K will change into 40Ar in about 1.3 billion years).
     Because 40Ar is a gas, it escapes when rock is molten (as in lava), but when the rock cools,
     the 40AR is trapped inside. By using sensitive instruments to measure the ratio of 40K to 40Ar,
     it is possible to estimate the time since the rock or ash cooled and solidiﬁed.
           Because of the long half-life of 40K (1.3 billion years), potassium-argon dating can be
     used to estimate dates of materials many millions of years old. The remains of our ancestors
     at Olduvai Gorge and other sites more than a million years old have been dated with the
     potassium-argon method.
           Carbon-14 and potassium-argon dating remain the mainstays of chronometric dating,
     but archaeologists can now use many other techniques involving chemical changes,
     although most of these are subject to considerable error and many qualiﬁcations.51
           Paleomagnetic dating is based on the fact that the north and south pole have “reversed”
     their magnetism many times. Today the north pole is positive and the south pole is
     negative, but these were reversed in some periods, such as for most of the period between
     about 700,000 and 1.6 million years ago. Magnetic rocks preserve a record of these changes
     in polarity. As a result, ﬁnds that are, for example, between two layers of magnetic rock can
     often be roughly dated.
           Luminescence dating52 has become increasingly important in archaeological research.
     The technique is based on the fact that commonly occurring crystalline minerals such as
     quartz and feldspars “soak up,” in a sense the radioactivity of the naturally occurring
     radioactive elements in the sediments in which they are found. In this sense they record how
     long they have been exposed to these radioactive elements. When these minerals are heated
     to a high enough temperature (e.g., by ﬁring pottery or using earthen ovens) or are
     “bleached” by sunlight the record of exposure to natural radiation is erased, setting their
     radiological “clocks” at zero. Once these materials cool, or in the case of sediments are
     removed from sunlight through burial, the minerals again begin to record their time in
     contact with their radioactive environment. Even sun-baked surfaces such as agricultural
     ﬁelds and natural soils will record the time of their own burial. In a dark laboratory the
     accumulated energy can be released as light and measured with a device called a
     photomultiplier. The earliest technique, thermoluminescence (TL, developed in the 1970s
     for pottery), uses heat to release the light. Optically stimulated luminescence (OSL),
     developed for application to sediments, uses one wavelength of light to release light of
     another wavelength. In both TL and OSL the researcher uses the luminescence record from
     the sample together with the rate of radioactivity decay in its environment to calculate the
     age of the sample. Recent technical advances have made possible OSL age determinations
                                                               FUNDAMENTALS OF ARCHAEOLOGY           71


for single grains of sand. Age determinations from zero to one million years are possible
with TL and OSL. Luminescence techniques can be used to date the last heating of an
artifact or the burial of a surface. This has the great advantage of dating the actual
construction of the artifact, or the burial of a site. The radiocarbon method, in contrast,
dates the death of the organism—an event that may be very far removed from the creation
of an artifact or its burial.
     Electron spin resonance (ESR) dating is similar to luminescence dating in that the
scientist measures the record of exposure to radiation. In ESR, samples of ancient teeth and
some other materials are placed in a variable magnetic ﬁeld and the energy interactions
between the object and the magnetic ﬁeld are measured. ESR is less destructive than other
dating techniques, but like TL and OSL it can be applied to very tiny samples (less than 1 g).
     Other methods of physical dating have been developed and applied to archaeological
problems, and reﬁnements of these methods continue. All of these techniques have
inherent expected margins of error and all are still somewhat experimental. Thus, archae-
ologists tend, where possible, to use as many different techniques on as many samples as
possible, in hopes that a clear pattern will be observed with all of the methods converging
on approximately the same age estimates. In a recent analysis of Egypt in the period
between about 170,000 and 70,000 years ago, scientists on a project directed by Fred
Wendorf, Romuald Schild, and Angela Close applied an impressive array of different
dating techniques, including uranium series dating of carbonates and tooth enamel;
thermoluminescence dating of deposits, both with traditional techniques and the newer
optical methods; electron spin resonance dating of tooth enamel and other materials; and
amino-acid analyses of eggshells.53


RELATIVE DATING
To the novice, perhaps one of the most impressive things archaeologists can do is to be able
to tell the approximate date, place of manufacture, and place of origin of a tiny sherd of
pottery simply by looking at it.
      This kind of relative dating involves the concept of “style.” Artisans throughout history
have invested their artifacts with characteristics that vary predictably over time and space,
and the distribution of these stylistic elements tends to follow certain patterns, whether the
objects involved are skirt lengths, musical forms, or stone tools. Styles originate in some
small area, spread to adjacent ones, reach a peak in popularity, and then die out (Figure
2.22). To some extent, styles reﬂect rates of interaction and shared aesthetic preferences,
and these are not always exact functions of time and distance. Dress styles in midtown
Manhattan, for example, may be more similar to those on Rome’s Via Veneto than to those
in a small town in rural New Jersey, even though this pattern of stylistic similarity “reverses”
their relative distances. And often a style dies out at its point of origin long before it reaches
its ultimate dispersal.
      Seriation, a type of relative dating, is often used where many surface collections of
artifacts have been made. Several generations of archaeologists,54 for example, have
surveyed most of the area around Mexico City, identifying thousands of settlements dating
from 12,000 years ago up to the Spanish Conquest. Most of these sites are small mounds
whose surfaces were littered with pottery sherds and obsidian tools. The differences in style
between a Late Aztec Black-on-Orange dish (c. a.d. 900) and Middle Formative plainware
             72         PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                      jar (c. 550 b.c.) are so obvious that anyone can learn to date
                                                      sites of these periods in a few days of study. On this basis,
                                                      archaeologists have dated thousands of sites without excavating
                                                      them, simply by grouping them into a relative seriation of four
                                                      or ﬁve major periods. Carbon-14 dating can be used to provide
                                                      a few absolute dates to anchor this sequence, and most
                                                      chronologies based on changes in artifact styles are derived from
                                                      excavations, in which the archaeologist can order the found
                                                      pottery in time on the basis of stratigraphy. But pottery styles
                                                      alone are all that is necessary to construct a seriation. Accurate
                                                      relative seriations usually require massive quantities of data
                                                      from artifacts of a highly decorated nature (like pottery) from a
                                                      relatively small area, and they tend to be least precise when
                                                      extended to largely undecorated objects such as early stone tools
                                                      (Figure 2.23).


                                                      SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

                                                      Having considered various elements of modern archaeological
                                                      methods and theory, it is, perhaps, useful to consider an
                                                      example of a speciﬁc archaeological project. As one such
                                                      example, I (Wenke) offer the Fayyum Archaeological Project,
                                                      which I codirected in Egypt in the 1980s. I offer this example
                                                      not as a model of its kind, but simply as an illustration of the
                                                      kind of archaeology that remains in some ways typical of
                                                      contemporary archaeology.
                                                           The proximate cause of the Fayyum Archaeological Project,
FIGURE 2.22 Relative seriation of nine                which was wholly conducted in Egypt, was in fact the Iranian
archaeological sites on the basis of three pottery    Revolution. I had done archaeological research in Iran on
styles from the American Southwest. The per-          several occasions in the early 1970s and was due to resume work
centage that each pottery style represents of the     there in 1979, on a day almost exactly between the shah’s
total pottery found at each site is represented by    departure from Iran and the ﬁrst seizure of the American
the width of the colored area on the strip of
                                                      Embassy by Islamic militants. I had received my ﬁrst National
paper (A). Since most styles tend gradually to
grow in popularity and then slowly die out, a
                                                      Science Foundation grant and would probably have gone to
seriation can be produced by arranging the            Teheran despite the revolution, had the Iranians permitted—
paper strips in such a way that the three pottery     which they emphatically did not. Through a series of events too
styles have this “battleship shape” distribution      baroque to recount here, I had the good fortune to be able to
through time. The inferred order of the nine          work instead in Egypt.
sites is shown in B. Mathematical models and               I was hardly the ﬁrst archaeologist forced to change
computer programs have been developed to sort         geographical focus by political events. Political situations in
scores of sites and pottery styles into these kinds   many countries, from Peru to China, from Russia to Tanzania,
of graphs. Such mathematical aids are often           have often rerouted archaeologists.
needed because the number of possible unique               In 1980 I codirected excavations at el-Hibeh, a site on the
orderings of 9 sites is 9!, or 362,880.
                                                      Nile that was a major town during most of the ﬁrst millennium
                                                      b.c.55 But I had long been interested in the origins of agricultural
                                                                FUNDAMENTALS OF ARCHAEOLOGY              73


economies, and I was much
impressed by some new ideas
about agricultural origins in
Egypt. Simply put, I was
curious why wheat and barley
farming appeared in Egypt so
long—about 2,000 years—
after it did in Southwest Asia.
So while in Egypt I started
searching for an area in which
to investigate the origins of
Egyptian agriculture.
      Many of the most import-
ant sites in Egypt have been
excavated for decades and are          FIGURE 2.23 Many stone tool types are not good indicators of short time
already being studied by other         periods, and thus are not useful in seriation. On the left is a Middle Paleolithic
archaeologists; one cannot just        sidescraper. The top row shows a Middle Paleolithic notch and Epipaleolithic
decide to excavate this or that        microliths. The bottom row shows an Upper Paleolithic burin and an endscraper.
site. The late Professor Michael
Hoffman suggested that I look
at unsurveyed parts of the Fayyum Oasis, in central Egypt. Years of work by other
archaeologists had shown evidence of early agriculture at the site, but it was not being
explored at that time.
      Although my main interest was the origins of agriculture, I wanted to do a complete
regional survey, to locate sites of all periods in this area. The remains of large towns of the
last few centuries b.c., for example, can be found at many places in the research area.
Archaeological projects in Egypt usually have on their staffs an Egyptologist—someone
who reads ancient Egyptian writing—and I was fortunate enough to recruit a recent
graduate from the Sorbonne (The University of Paris), Dr. Mary Ellen Lane, as codirector.
With a representative of the Egyptian Antiquities Organization, we made several trips into
the deserts of the southern Fayyum without ﬁnding much except a restaurant in the
provincial capital, where I got deathly ill for only 90 piastres.
      In the 1920s, the intrepid British archaeologist Gertrude Caton-Thompson had
surveyed the southern edge of the Fayyum Lake, noting here and there scatters of Neolithic-
style stone tools. One day, hiking through an area near where she had surveyed, we saw a
large pile of bones. On inspection it proved to be the remains of a hippopotamus, and we
were delighted to see that near it were stone projectile points (“arrowheads”) of a Neolithic
type. Within a few hours of surveying, it was evident that we had found a dense scatter of
hearths, pottery, stone tools, and animal bones, and that the styles of artifacts suggested two
periods of occupation: an “Epipaleolithic” period of occupation by hunter-foragers at
about 7000 b.c., followed by an occupation by some of Egypt’s earliest known farmers, at
about 5500 b.c. Thus, we had the opportunity to study one of the most important cultural
changes in Egypt, the transition from hunting-foraging to agriculture. Other archaeologists
had worked in the Fayyum on this problem, but we had found a well-preserved part of the
archaeological record there that we thought would give us new and important data to
analyze this transition.
74   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


          Back in Cairo, several weeks of library research convinced us that what we had was
     signiﬁcant, and that we should try for our ﬁrst ﬁeld season in the summer of 1981—a year
     later. All we needed was $200,000, a staff of at least 20 trained archaeologists, and
     permission from the Egyptian government.
          Famed felon Willie Sutton, when asked why he robbed banks, patiently explained,
     “That’s where the money is.” Archaeologists, too, must go where the money is, and in this
     era it is mainly in the hands of the government. After months of writing proposals, we
     received about $200,000 from the U.S. Agency for International Development and the U.S.
     National Science Foundation. We then recruited our staff of specialists in ancient plant
     remains, animal bones, and geology, and conscripted eight graduate students to assist with
     the demanding ﬁeld work.
          On June 4, 1981, we left Cairo in several jeeps and trucks to make the four-hour trip
     to the research area. We lived that summer and autumn in a large gray house that looked
     across a green palm grove and the blue of the Fayyum Lake to the white limestone cliffs on
     the northern edge of the Fayyum Oasis. Our villa—the country home of a wealthy Cairo
     family—was a lovely international-style building with every convenience except three:
     water, electricity, and a sewage system. But we bought a generator, the provincial governor
     graciously arranged for a water truck to visit us every three days, and we devised an
     entertaining method of periodically napalming our open cesspool.
          “Tell me what you eat, and I will tell you what you are,” said the French gastronome
     Brilliant-Savarin, but archaeological ﬁeld projects usually do not usually offer much scope
     to express one’s self in terms of the food one chooses to eat. Our budget and the remoteness
     of our ﬁeld quarters meant that our diet was almost wholly composed of bread, canned
     tuna ﬁsh, a vile processed cheese by-product, rice, tomatoes, and several hundred chickens,
     who were executed on our kitchen steps and then converted into indescribable meals. “Fire-
     Cracked Veal” and “Dreaded Veal Cutlet” were occasional holiday treats. We bored each
     other constantly with food fantasies. The morbidity rates—physical and psychological—
     on archaeological projects are often high, especially when, as in our case, water for washing
     was scarce and the cook had nothing but contempt for the germ theory of disease. We
     totaled at least ﬁve different strains of parasitical and bacterial infections among our crew,
     and we lost many days to illness. There was also one emergency appendectomy (mine),
     performed in Cairo after a thought-provoking four-hour truck ride from the desert, greatly
     assisted by our geologist, Professor Fekri Hassan, now of the University of London, whose
     truck and driver got me to a Cairo hospital in record time. After the appendectomy it was
     determined that I had kidney stones, not appendicitis, but I was in no position to complain.
          When we began our six months of ﬁeld work, we geared most of our efforts to
     reconstructing as precisely as possible the ways of life of the people who had lived in the
     Fayyum in the Qarunian period (c. 6500 b.c.), just before the appearance of domesticated
     plants and animals in this region, and in the succeeding Neolithic Fayyum A period (c. 5000
     b.c.), when the ﬁrst agriculturalists appeared. We hoped to reconstruct the pattern of
     human settlement in the Fayyum between 7000 b.c. and a.d. 1500 and explain the changes
     in these settlement patterns over this long period.
          We began by making a topographic map of the area in which we intended to work. We
     then devised a sampling program and collected every artifact in the sampling units deﬁned,
     that is, in the hundreds of 5-by–5-m squares in our study area. The Fayyum is surrounded
     by the Sahara Desert, and the average temperature during most of this work was over 40°C
                                                                          FUNDAMENTALS OF ARCHAEOLOGY                 75


(104°F); by midday the stone tools were often so hot we would have to juggle them as we
bagged them. Afternoons were spent back at the ﬁeld camp, sorting, drawing, and
photographing artifacts, drinking warm water, and drawing each other’s attention to the
heat. In some cases, “It’s not the heat, it’s the humidity” is not at all true. In September we
began excavations, mainly of the hearths and pits that were the dominant feature of both
the Qarunian and Fayyum A occupations. In most we found charred animal bones, some
carbonized plant remains, and other debris.
     To evaluate our “model” of how agriculture appeared in the Fayyum and why, we had
to collect sufﬁcient evidence to make statistical arguments about certain kinds of conditions
and events in Fayyum prehistory. The details of these arguments are not relevant here, but
it should be stressed that as in most archaeological projects, not all the information we
had hoped would be there was actually found. But most of it was, and the preliminary
analysis of this information was published in several journals and presented at various
conferences.56 We have since made occasional returns to the Fayyum to collect more
information, in hopes that eventually we will produce a more complete analysis of this part
of the world’s archaeological record.
     In Cairo, after the season was over, we delivered the artifacts to the Egyptian Museum
and made preparations to leave. It is traditional, after the privations of the ﬁeld, to treat
oneself to some rest and relaxation, and some project members agonized between such
choices as the Club Med’s Red Sea beaches or the delights of Rome. Most of the crew just
went home and enjoyed the luxury of sleeping past 4:00 a.m.


BIBLIOGRAPHY
Adams, W. Y., and E. W. Adams. 1991. Archaeological Typology and Practical Reality: A Dialectical Approach to
            Artifact Classiﬁcation and Sorting. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Aitken, M. J. 1990. Science-Based Dating in Archaeology. London and New York: Longman.
Aldenderfer, M. S. 1998. “Quantitative Methods in Archaeology: A Review of Recent Trends and Developments.”
            Journal of Archaeological Research 6(2):91–120.
Aldenderfer, M. S., and R. K. Blashﬁeld. 1984. Cluster Analysis. Beverly Hills: Sage.
Ambrose, S. H., and M. J. DeNiro. 1986. “Reconstruction of African Human Diet Using Bone Collagen Carbon
            and Nitrogen Isotope Ratios.” Nature 319:321– 324.
Andel, T. H. van 1989. “Late Quaternary Sea Level and Archaeology.” Antiquity 63(241):733–745.
Andersen, S. H. 1986. “Mesolithic Dugouts and Paddles from Tybrind Vig, Denmark.” Acta Archaeologica
            57:87–106.
Anderson, A., ed. 1989. Prodigious Birds: Moas and Moa-hunting in New Zealand. Cambridge: Cambridge
            University Press.
Anderson, D. G., and J. C. Gilliam. 2000. “Paleoindian Colonization of the Americas: Implications from an
            Examination of Physiography, Demography, and Artifact Distribution.” American Antiquity
            65(1):43–66.
Atkinson, T. C., K. R. Briffa, and G. R. Coope. 1987. “Seasonal Temperatures in Britain During the Past 22,000
            Years, Reconstructed Using Beetle Remains.” Nature 325:587– 592.
Badekas, J., ed. 1975. Photogrammetric Surveys of Monuments and Sites. New York: Elsevier.
Bahn, P. G., and R. W. K. Paterson. 1986. “The Last Rights: More on Archaeology and the Dead.” Oxford Journal
            of Archaeology 3:127–139.
Bailey, R. N., E. Cambridge, and H. D. Briggs. 1988. Dowsing and Church Archaeology. Wimborne, Dorset: Intercept.
Baillie, M. G. L. 1982. Tree-Ring Dating. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Baillie, M. G. L., and M. A. R. Munro. 1988. “Irish Tree Rings, Santorini and Volcanic Dust Veils.” Nature
            332:344–346.
Bard, E., B. Hamelin, R. G. Fairbanks, and A. Zindler. 1990. “Calibration of the 14C Timescale over the Past 30,000
            Years Using Mass Spectrometric U-Th Ages from Barbados Corals.” Nature 345:405 – 410.
Barisano, E., E. Bartholome, and B. Marcolongo. 1986. Télédétection et Archéologie. Paris: CNRS.
Barker, P. 1986. Understanding Archaeological Excavation. London: Batsford.
76   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


     Bass, G. F., ed. 1988. Ships and Shipwrecks of the Americas: A History Based on Underwater Archaeology. New York:
                  Thames & Hudson.
     Basset, C. A. 1987. “The Culture Thieves.” Science 86, July/Aug: 22–29.
     Battarbee, R. W. 1986. “Diatom Analysis.” In Handbook of Holocene Palaeocology and Palaeohydrology, ed.
                  B. E. Berglund, pp. 527–570. London: Wiley.
     Baxter, M. J. 2003. Statistics in Archaeology. New York: Oxford University Press.
     Beattie, O., & Geiger, J. 1987. Frozen in Time. London: Bloomsbury.
     Beck, C., ed. 1995. Dating in Exposed and Surface Contexts. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
     Behre, K-E., ed. 1986. Anthropogenic Indicators in Pollen Diagrams. Rotterdam and Boston: Balkema.
     Behrensmeyer, A. K., and A. P. Hill, eds. 1980. Fossils in the Making: Vertebrate Taphonomy and Paleoecology.
                  Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
     Behrensmeyer, A. K., K. D. Gordon, and G. T. Yanagi. 1986. “Trampling as a Cause of Bone Surface Damage and
                  Pseudo-Cutmarks.” Nature 319:768 –768.
     Bimson, M., and J. C. Freestone, eds. 1987. Early Vitreous Materials. London: British Museum Occasional Paper 56.
     Binford, L. R. 1964. “A Consideration of Archaeological Research Design.” American Antiquity 29:425 – 441.
     ———. 1985. “Human Ancestors: Changing Views of Their Behavior.” Journal of Anthropological Archaeology
                  4:292–327.
     Binneman, J., and J. Deacon. 1986. “Experimental Determination of Use Wear on Stone Adzes from Boomplaas
                  Cave, South Africa.” Journal of Archaeological Science 13:219–219.
     Blumenschine, R. J., J. A. Cavallo, and S. D. Capaldo. 1994. “Competition for Carcasses and Early Hominid
                  Behavioral Ecology: A Case Study and Conceptual Framework.” Journal of Human Evolution
                  27(1–3):197–213.
     Blumenschine, R. J., C. W. Marean, and S. D. Capaldo. 1996. “Blind Tests of Inter-Analyst Correspondence and
                  Accuracy in the Identiﬁcation of Cut Marks, Percussion Marks, and Carnivore Tooth Marks on Bone
                  Surfaces.” Journal of Archaeological Science 23(4):493–507.
     Boddington, A., A. N. Garland, & R. C. Janaway, eds. 1987. Death, Decay and Reconstruction: Approaches to
                  Archaeology and Forensic Science. Manchester: Manchester University Press.
     Bodner, C., and R. M. Rowlett. 1980. “Separation of Bone, Charcoal, and Seeds by Chemical Flotation.” American
                  Antiquity 45:110 –114.
     Bonani, G., H. Haas, Z. Hawass, M. Lehner, S. Nakhla, J. Nolan, R. Wenke, and W. Wölﬂi. 2001. “Radiocarbon
                  Dates of Old and Middle Kingdom Monuments in Egypt.” Radiocarbon 43(3):1297–1320.
     Bower, J. 1986. “A Survey of Surveys: Aspects of Surface Archaeology in Sub-Saharan Africa.” The African
                  Archaeological Review 4:21– 40.
     Brady, J. E., and W. Ashmore 1999. “Mountains, Caves, Water: Ideational Landscapes of the Ancient Maya.” In
                  Archaeologies of Landscape: Contemporary Perspectives, ed. W. Ashmore and A. B. Knapp, pp. 124 –148.
                  Malden, MA: Blackwell.
     Brain, C. K. 1981. The Hunters or the Hunted? An Introduction to African Cave Taphonomy. Chicago: University
                  of Chicago Press.
     Branting, S. 2002. “Modelling Terrain: The Global Positioning System (GPS) Survey at Kerkenes Dag, Turkey.”
                  Antiquity 76(293):639 – 640.
     Brassell, S. C., et al. 1986. “Molecular Stratigraphy: A New Tool for Climatic Assessment.” Nature 320:129 –133.
     Braun, D. P. 1983. “Pots as Tools.” In Archaeological Hammers and Theories, eds. A. Keene and J. Moore. New
                  York: Academic Press.
     Brewer, D. J. 1987. “Seasonality in the Prehistoric Faiyum Based on the Incremental Growth Structures of the Nile
                  Catﬁsh (Pisces: Clarias).” Journal of Archaeological Science 14:459 – 472.
     Brinkhuizen, D. C., and A. T. Clason, eds. 1986. Fish and Archaeology: Studies in Osteometry, Taphonomy,
                  Seasonality and Fishing. Oxford: British Arch. Reports, Int. Series No. 294.
     Bronitsky, G. 1986. “The Use of Materials Science Techniques in the Study of Pottery Construction and Use.” In
                  Advances in Archaeological Method and Theory 9, ed. M. B. Schiffer. New York: Academic Press.
     Brothwell, D. 1986. The Bog Man and the Archaeology of People. London: British Museum Publications.
     Buchanan, W. F. 1988. Shellﬁsh in Prehistoric Diet: Elands Bay, S.W. Cape Coast, South Africa. Oxford: British Arch.
                  Reports, Int. Series No. 455.
     Bunn, H. T. 1981. “Archaeological Evidence for Meat-eating by Plio-Pleistocene Hominids from Koobi Fora and
                  Olduvai Gorge.” Nature 291:574 – 577.
     Bunn, H. T., and E. M. Kroll. 1986. “Systematic Butchery by Plio-Pleistocene Hominids at Olduvai Gorge,
                  Tanzania.” Current Anthropology 27(5):431– 452.
     Carr, C., ed. 1989. For Concordance in Archaeological Analysis. Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press.
     Carver, M. 1987. Underneath English Towns: Interpreting Urban Archaeology. London: Batsford.
     Chappell, J., and N. J. Shackleton. 1986. “Oxygen Isotopes and Sea Level.” Nature 324:137–140.
     Clark, A. 1990. Seeing Beneath the Soil: Prospecting Methods in Archaeology. London: Batsford.
     Coles, B., and J. Coles. 1989. People of the Wetlands. London and New York: Thames & Hudson.
                                                                          FUNDAMENTALS OF ARCHAEOLOGY                77


Conkey, M., and C. Hastorf, eds. 1990. The Uses of Style in Archaeology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cooke, W. D., and B. Lomas. 1987. “Ancient Textiles—Modern Technology.” Archaeology Today 8(2):21– 25.
Cotterel, B., and J. Kamminga. 1990. Mechanics of Pre-Industrial Technology. Cambridge: Cambridge University
             Press.
Courty, M-A., P. Goldberg, and R. MacPhail. 1990. Soils and Micromorphology in Archaeology. Cambridge:
             Cambridge University Press.
Crabtree, D. 1972. An Introduction to Flintworking. Pocatello: Occasional Papers of the Idaho State University
             Museum, No. 28.
Crabtree, P. J., and K. Ryan, eds. 1991. Animal Use and Culture Change. MASCA Research Papers in Science and
             Archaeology, supplements to Vol. 8. Museum of Applied Science, Center for Archaeology.
             Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Dahl-Jensen, D., and S. J. Johnsen. 1986. “Palaeotemperatures Still Exist in the Greenland Ice Sheet.” Nature
             320:250–252.
David, N., J. Sterner, and K. Gavua. 1988. “Why Pots Are Decorated.” Current Anthropology 29(3):365–389.
Davis, S. J. M. 1987. The Archaeology of Animals. London: Batsford.
Deetz, J. 1967. Invitation to Archaeology. Garden City, NY: Natural History Press.
Dekin, A. A. 1987. “Sealed in Time: Ice Entombs an Eskimo Family for Five Centuries.” National Geographic
             171(6):824 – 836.
Dibble, H. L. 1987. “The Interpretation of Middle Paleolithic Scraper Morphology.” American Antiquity
             52:109–117.
Dibble, H. L., P. G. Chase, S. P. McPherron, and A. Truffreau. 1997. “Testing the Reality of a ‘Living Floor’ with
             Archaeological Data.” American Antiquity 62(4):629 – 651.
Dormion, G., and J-P. Goidin. 1987. Les Nouveaux Mystères de la Grande Pyramide. Paris: Albin Michel.
Dorn, R. I., D. B. Bamforth, T. A. Cahill, J. C. Dohrenwend, B. D. Turrin, D. J. Donahue, A. J. T. Hill, A. Long,
             M. E. Macko, E. B. Weil, D. S. Whitley, and T. H. Zabel. 1986. “Carbon-Ratio and Accelerator
             Radiocarbon Dating of Rock Varnish on Mojave Artifacts and Landforms.” Science 231:830 – 833.
Drennan, R. D. 1976. “A Reﬁnement of Chronological Seriation Using Nonmetric Multidimensional Scaling.”
             American Antiquity 41:290 –320.
Dunnell, R. C. 1970. “Seriation Method and Its Evaluation.” American Antiquity 35:305 –319.
———. 1982. “Science, Social Science, and Common Sense: The Agonizing Dilemma of Modern Archaeology.”
             Journal of Anthropological Research 38:1– 25.
———. 1986. “Methodological Issues in Americanist Artifact Classiﬁcation.” Advances in Archaeological Method
             and Theory 9:149–207.
Dunnell, R. C., and W. Dancey. 1983. “The Siteless Survey: A Regional Scale Data Collection Strategy.” Advances
             in Archaeological Method and Theory 6:267– 287.
Enge, P. 2004. “Retooling the Global Positioning System.” Scientiﬁc American (May):91–97.
Faegri, K., P. Ekaland, and K. Krzywinski, eds. 1989. Textbook of Pollen Analysis, 4th ed. London: Wiley.
Fowler, P. J. 1988/1989. “The Experimental Earthworks 1958 – 88.” Annual Report of the Council for British
             Archaeology 39:83–98.
Fox, A. 2004. Real Country: Music and Language in a Working-Class Culture. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Gage, M. D., and V. S. Jones. 1999. “Principles of Ground-Penetrating Radar.” Journal of Alabama Archaeology
             45(1):49–61.
Gifford, D. P. 1981. “Taphonomy and Paleoecology: A Critical Review of Archaeology’s Sister Discipline.” In
             Advances in Archaeological Method and Theory, Vol. 4, ed. M. B. Schiffer. New York: Academic Press.
Gilbert, R. I., Jr., and J. H. Mielke, eds. 1985. The Analysis of Prehistoric Diets. New York: Academic Press.
Gould, R. A. 1995. Recovering the Past. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
Gould, R. A., and P. J. Watson. 1982. “A Dialogue on the Meaning and Use of Analogy in Ethnoarchaeological
             Reasoning.” Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 1:355 –381.
Gowlett, J. A. J. 1987. “The Archaeology of Radiocarbon Accelerator Dating.” Journal of World Prehistory
             1(2):127–170.
Grayson, D. 1984. Quantitative Zooarchaeology: Topics in the Analysis of Archaeological Faunas. Orlando: Academic
             Press.
Green, L. R., and F. A. Hart. 1987. “Colour and Chemical Composition in Ancient Glass: An Examination of Some
             Roman and Wealden Glass by Means of Ultaviolet-Visible-Infrared Spectrometry and Electron
             Microprobe Analysis.” Journal of Archaeological Science 14:271– 282.
Grün, R. 1989. Die ESR-Alterbestimmungsmethode. Heidelberg: Springer.
Guthrie, R. D. 1990. Frozen Fauna of the Mammoth Steppe. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Haas, H., J. Devine, R. J. Wenke, M. E. Lehner, W. Wolﬂi, and G. Bonani. 1987. “Radiocarbon Chronology and
             the Historical Calendar in Egypt.” In Chronologies in the Near East, ed. O. Avrenche, J. Evin, and
             P. Hours. British Archaeological Reports 379:585 – 606.
Hall, A. 1986. “The Fossil Evidence for Plants in Mediaeval Towns.” Biologist 33(5):262–267.
78   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


     Harris, E. C. 1989. Principles of Archaeological Stratigraphy, 2nd ed. Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
     Hastorf, C. A., and V. S. Popper, eds. 1989. Current Palaeoethnobotany: Analytical Methods and Cultural
                  Interpretations of Archaeological Plant Remains. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
     Hayden, B., ed. 1987. Lithic Studies Among the Contemporary Highland Maya. Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
     Heaton, T. H. E., et al. 1986. “Climatic Inﬂuence on the Isotopic Composition of Bone Nitrogen.” Nature
                  322:822– 823.
     Hill, H. E., and J. Evans. 1987. “The Identiﬁcation of Plants Used in Prehistory from Organic Residues.” In
                  Archaeometry: Further Australasian Studies, ed. W. R. Ambrose and J. M. J. Mummery. Canberra:
                  Australian National University.
     Hillman, G. C. 1986. “Plant Foods in Ancient Diet: The Archaeological Role of Paleofaeces in General and Lindow
                  Man’s Gut Contents in Particular.” In Lindow Man: The Body in the Bog, ed. I. M. Stead et al. London:
                  British Museum Publications.
     Hillman, G. C., E. Madeyska, and J. Hather. 1988. “Wild Plant Foods and Diet at Late Palaeolithic Wadi
                  Kubbaniya: Evidence from Charred Remains.” In The Prehistory of Wadi Kubbaniya, Vol. 2: Studies in
                  Late Palaeolithic Subsistence, ed. F. Wendorf et al. Dallas: Southern Methodist University Press.
     Hillson, S. 1986. Teeth. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
     Holden, C. 1987. “A Quest for Ancient Egyptian Air.” Science 236:1419–1420.
     Holliday, V. T., ed. 1991. Soils in Archaeology: Landscape Evolution and Human Occupation. Washington, DC:
                  Smithsonian Institution Press.
     Jelinek, A. 1982. “The Tabun Cave and Paleolithic Man in the Levant.” Science 216:1369–1375.
     Joukowsky, M. 1980. A Complete Manual of Field Archaeology. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
     Jouzel, J., C. Lorius, J. R. Petit, C. Genthon, N. I. Barkov, V. M. Kotlyakov, and V. M. Petrov. 1987. “Vostok Ice
                  Core: A Continuous Isotope Temperature Record over the Last Climate Cycle (160,000 Years).” Nature
                  329:403– 408.
     Kantner, J. 1997. “Ancient Roads, Modern Mapping: Evaluating Chaco Anasazi Roadways Using GIS
                  Technology.” Expedition 39(3):49–62.
     Keeley, L. H. 1980. Experimental Determination of Stone Tool Use: A Microwear Analysis. Chicago and London:
                  University of Chicago Press.
     Kerisel, J. 1988. “Le Dossier Scientiﬁque sur la Pyramide de Khéops.” Archéologia 232 (Feb.):46 –54.
     Kimes, T., C. Haselgrove, and I. Hodder. 1982. “A Method for the Identiﬁcation of the Location of Regional
                  Cultural Boundaries.” Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 1:113–131.
     Klein, R. G. 1999. The Human Career: Human Biological and Cultural Origins. Chicago: University of Chicago
                  Press.
     Koike, H. 1986. “Prehistoric Hunting Pressure and Paleobiomass: An Environmental Reconstruction and
                  Archaeozoological Analysis of a Jomon Shellmound Area.” In Prehistoric Hunter-Gatherers in Japan,
                  ed. T. Akazawa and C. M. Aikens. Tokyo: University Museum Bulletin 27, University of Tokyo.
     Koike, H., and N. Ohtaishi. 1987. “Estimation of Prehistoric Hunting Rates Based on the Age Composition of
                  Sika Deer (Cervus nippon).” Journal of Archaeological Science 14:251–269.
     Körber-Grohne, V. 1988. “Microscopic Methods for Identiﬁcation of Plant Fibres and Animal Hairs from the
                  Prince’s Tomb of Hochdorf, Southwest Germany.” Journal of Archaeological Science 15:73–82.
     Kukla, G. J. 1987. “Loess Stratigraphy in Central China.” Quaternary Science Reviews 6:191–219.
     Langford, M., G. Taylor, and J. R. Flenley. 1986. “The Application of Texture Analysis for Automated Pollen
                  Identiﬁcation.” In Proceedings of the Conference on Identiﬁcation and Pattern Recognition, Toulouse,
                  June 1986, Vol. 2:729–739. Toulouse: Université Paul Sabatier.
     Leakey, M. 1987. “Animal Prints and Trails.” In Laetoli, a Pliocene Site in Northern Tanzania, ed. M. Leakey and
                  J. M. Harris. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
     LeBlanc, S. A. 1975. “Microseriation. A Method for Fine Chronological Differentiation.” American Antiquity
                  40:22–38.
     Lehner, M. 1983. “Some Observations on the Layout of the Khufu and Khafre Pyramids.” Journal of the American
                  Research Center in Egypt 20:7–29.
     ———. 1985. The Pyramid Tomb of Hetep-heres and the Satellite Pyramid of Khufu. Mainz am Rhein: Philipp von
                  Zabern.
     Lewenstein, S. 1987. Stone Tool Use at Cerros. The Ethnoarchaeological and Use-Wear Evidence. Austin: University
                  of Texas Press.
     Libby, W. F. 1955. Radiocarbon Dating. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
     Llobera, M. 2001. “Building Past Landscape Perception with GIS: Understanding Topographic Prominence.”
                  Journal of Archaeological Science 28(9):1005–1014.
     Longacre, W. A., ed. 1991. Ceramic Ethnoarchaeology. Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
     Loy, T. H. 1987. “Recent Advances in Blood Residue Analysis.” In Archaeometry: Further Australasian Studies, ed.
                  W. R. Ambrose and J. M. J. Mummery. Canberra: Australian National University.
     Lyman, R. L. 1994. Vertebrate Taphonomy. New York: Cambridge University Press.
                                                                            FUNDAMENTALS OF ARCHAEOLOGY                 79


Mahaney, W. C., ed. 1984. Quaternary Dating Methods. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Mannion, A. M. 1987. “Fossil Diatoms and Their Signiﬁcance in Archaeological Research.” Oxford Journal of
            Archaeology 6:131–147.
Marquardt, W. H. 1979. “Advances in Archaeological Seriation.” In Advances in Archaeological Method and
            Theory, Vol. 1, ed. M. B. Schiffer. New York: Academic Press.
McBrearty, S., and A. S. Brooks. 2000. “The Revolution That Wasn’t: A New Interpretation of the Origin of
            Modern Human Behavior.” Journal of Human Evolution 39:453–563.
McPherron, S. P., and H. L. Dibble. 2002. Using Computers in Archaeology: A Practical Guide. New York: McGraw-
            Hill Mayﬁeld.
———. 2003. “Using Computers in Adverse Field Conditions: Tales from the Egyptian Desert.” The SAA
            Archaeological Record 3:28–32.
Mead, J. I., L. D. Agenbroad, O. K. Davis, and P. S. Martin. 1986. “Dung of Mammuthus in the Arid Southwest,
            North America.” Quarternary Research 25:121–127.
Merkel, J., and I. Shimada. 1988. “Arsenical Copper Smelting at Batán Grande, Peru. IAMS (Institute for
            ArchaeoMetallurgical Studies) 12 (June): 4 – 7.
Minnis, P. E. 1987. “Identiﬁcation of Wood from Archaeological Sites in the American Southwest.” Journal of
            Archaeological Science 14:121–132.
Mithen, S., and M. Reed. 2002. “Stepping Out: A Computer Simulation of Hominid Dispersal from Africa.”
            Journal of Human Evolution 43(4):433 – 462.
Montluçon, J. 1986. “L’électricité pour mettre à nu les objets archéologiques.” La Recherche 17:252–255.
Moore, A. M. T., G. H. Hillman, and A. J. Legge. 2000. Village on the Euphrates. New York: Oxford University Press.
Nash, D. T., and M. D. Petraglia, eds. 1987. Natural Formation Processes and the Archaeological Record. Oxford:
            British Arch. Reports, Int. Series 352.
Noel, M., and A. Bocquet. 1987. Les Hommes et le Bois: Histoire et Technologie du Bois de la Préhistoire à Nos Jours.
            Paris: Hachette.
Noten, F. van, and J. Raymaekers. 1988. “Early Iron Smelting in Central Africa.” Scientiﬁc American 258(6):84 – 91.
Odell, G. 2000. “Stone Tool Research at the End of the Millennium: Procurement and Technology.” Journal of
            Archaeological Research 8(4):269–331.
———. 2001. “Stone Tool Research at the End of the Millennium: Classiﬁcation, Function, and Behavior.”
            Journal of Archaeological Research 9(1):45–100.
Ortner, D. J., and A. C. Aufderheide, eds. 1991. Human Paleopathology: Current Syntheses and Future Options.
            Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
Orton, C. 2000. Sampling in Archaeology. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Parsons, J. R. 1971. Prehistoric Settlement Patterns in the Texcoco Region, Mexico. Ann Arbor: Memoir of the
            Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan, No. 3.
Parton, J. 1874. Life of Thomas Jefferson. Boston: Houghton, Mifﬂin, and Co.
Pauketat, T., and T. Emerson. 1991. “The Ideology of Authority and the Power of the Pot.” American
            Anthropologist 93(4):919–941.
Pearsall, D. M. 1989. Paleoethnobotany. New York: Academic Press.
Pearson, G. W. 1987. “How to Cope with Calibration.” Antiquity 60:98–104.
Peters, C. P., and R. J. Blumenschine. 1995. “Landscape Perspectives on Possible Land Use Patterns for Early
            Pleistocene Hominids in the Olduvai Basin, Tanzania.” Journal of Human Evolution 29:321–362.
Petrie, W. M. F. 1900. “Sequences in Prehistoric Remains.” Journal of the Anthropological Institute 29:295–301.
Philip, G., D. Donoghue, A. Beck, and N. Galiatsatos. 2002. “CORONA Satellite Photography: An Archaeological
            Application from the Middle East.” Antiquity 76(291):108–118.
Pickering, M. P. 1989. “Food for Thought: An Alternative to Cannibalism in the Neolithic.” Australian Archaeology
            28:35–39.
Pigeot, N. 1988. Magdaléniens d’Etiolles: Economie de Débitage et Organisation Sociale. Paris: Centre National de
            la Recherche Scientiﬁque.
Piperno, D. R. 1987. Phytolith Analysis. Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
Potts, R. 1988. Early Hominid Activities at Olduvai. New York: Aldine de Gruyter.
Price, T. D., ed. 1989. The Chemistry of Prehistoric Human Bone. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Pritchard, J. B., ed. 1987. The Times Atlas of the Bible. London: Times Books.
Rathje, W. 1981. “A Manifesto for Modern Material Culture Studies.” In Modern Material Culture: The
            Archaeology of Us, ed. R. Gould. New York: Academic Press.
Read, D. 1989. “The Substance of Archaeological Analysis and the Mold of Statistical Method: Enlightenment Out
            of Discordance?” In For Concordance in Archaeological Analysis, ed. C. Carr. Prospect Heights, IL:
            Waveland.
Reeves, N. 1990. The Complete Tutankhamun. New York: Thames & Hudson.
Relethford, J. H. 2001. Genetics and the Search for Modern Human Origins. New York: Wiley-Liss.
Rice, P. M. 1987. Pottery Analysis. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
80   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


     Riley, D. N. 1987. Air Photography and Archaeology. London: Duckworth.
     Rossignol, J., and L. Wandsnider, eds. 1992. Space, Time, and Archaeological Landscapes. New York: Plenum.
     Rottländer, R. C. A. 1986. “Chemical Investigation of Potsherds of the Heuneberg, Upper Danube.” In Proceedings
                  of the 24th International Archaeometry Symposium, ed. J. S. Olin and M. J. Blackman, pp. 403– 405.
                  Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution.
     Rowley-Conwy, P. 1987. “The Interpretation of Ard Marks.” Antiquity 61:263–266.
     Russell, M. 1987. “Mortuary Practices at the Krapina Neadertal Site.” American Journal of Physical Anthropology
                  72:381–397.
     Sackett, J. R. 1982. “Approaches to Style in Lithic Archaeology.” Journal of Anthropological Archaeology
                  1(1):59–112.
     Sanders, W. T., J. R. Parsons, and R. S. Santley. 1979. The Basin of Mexico: The Ecological Processes in the Evolution
                  of a Civilization. New York: Academic Press.
     Scarre, C., ed. 1988. Past Worlds: The Times Atlas of Archaeology. London: Times Books.
     Schick, K. 1992. “Geoarchaeological Analysis of an Acheulean Site at Kalambo Falls, Zambia.” Geoarchaeology: An
                  International Journal 7(1):1–26.
     Schiffer, M. B. 1987. Formation Processes of the Archaeological Record. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico
                  Press.
     Schwarcz, H. P. 1994. “Chronology of Modern Humans in the Levant.” In Late Quaternary and Paleoclimates of
                  the Eastern Mediterranean, ed. O. Bar-Yosef and R. S. Kra, pp. 21–31. Tucson: Radiocarbon.
     Sealy, J. C. 1986. Stable Carbon Isotopes and Prehistoric Diets in the South-Western Cape Province, South Africa.
                  Oxford: British Arch. Reports, Int. Series No. 293.
     Sease, C. 1988. A Conservation Manual for the Field Archaeologist. Archaeological Research Tools 4. Los Angeles:
                  UCLA Institute of Archaeology.
     Semenov, S. 1964. Prehistoric Technology. Trans. M. W. Thompson. London: Cory, Adams & Mackay.
     Shackleton, N. J. 1987. “Oxygen Isotope, Ice Volume and Sea Level.” Quarternary Science Reviews 6:183–190.
     Shipman, P. 1983. “Early Hominid Lifestyle: Hunting and Gathering or Foraging and Scavenging?” In Animals
                  and Archaeology, Vol. 1 of Hunters and Their Prey, ed. J. Glutton-Brock and C. Grigson. Oxford: British
                  Archaeological Reports International Series, 163.
     Sieveking, G., and M. H. Newcomer, eds. 1987. The Human Uses of Flint and Chert. Cambridge: Cambridge
                  University Press.
     Smith, A. B., and C. Poggenpoel. 1988. “The Technology of Bone Tool Fabrication in the Southwestern Cape of
                  South Africa.” World Archaeology 20(1):103–115.
     “Special Radiocarbon Section: Six Articles.” 1987. Antiquity 61:97–138.
     Spence, C., ed. 1990. Archaeological Site Manual, 2nd ed. London: Museum of London.
     Stead, I. M., J. B. Bourke, and D. Brothwell, eds. 1986. Lindow Man: The Body in the Bog. London: British Museum
                  Publications.
     Stein, J. K. 1983. “Earthworm Activity: A Source of Potential Disturbance of Archaeological Sediments.” American
                  Antiquity 48:227–289.
     ———. 1986. “Coring Archaeological Sites.” American Antiquity 51:505–527.
     Street, M. 1986. “Un Pompéi de L’âge Glaciaire.” La Recherche 17:534–535.
     Stuiver, M., and G. W. Pearson. 1986. “High-Precision Calibration of the Radiocarbon Time Scale, AD 1950–500
                  BC.” Radiocarbon 28 (2B), Calibration Issue: Proceedings of the Twelfth International Radiocarbon
                  Conference, 1985. Trondheim, Norway.
     Taylor, R. E. 1987. Radiocarbon Dating: An Archaeological Perspective. Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
     ———. 1996. “Radiocarbon Dating: The Continuing Revolution.” Evolutionary Anthropology 4:169–181.
     Taylor, R. E., and M. J. Aitken, eds. 1997. Chronometric Dating in Archaeology. New York: Plenum.
     Thomas, D. H. 1975. “Nonsite Sampling in Archaeology: Up the Creek Without a Paddle?” In Sampling in
                  Archaeology, ed. J. W. Mueller, pp. 61–81. Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
     ———. 1986. Reﬁguring Anthropology. Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press.
     Throckmorton, P., ed. 1987. The Sea Remembers: Shipwrecks and Archaeology. New York: Weidenfeld.
     Toth, N. 1987. “The First Technology.” Scientiﬁc American 256(4):104 –113.
     Traverse, A. 1988. Paleopalynology. Boston: Unwin Hyman.
     Tsukuda, M., S. Sugita, and Y. Tsukuda. 1986. “Oldest Primitive Agriculture and Vegetational Environments in
                  Japan.” Nature 322:632– 664.
     Tylecote, R. F. 1987. The Early History of Metallurgy in Europe. London and New York: Longman.
     Valladas, H., J-P. Chadelle, J-M. Geneste, J-L. Joron, L. Meignen, and P-J. Texier. 1987. “Datations par la
                  Theremoluminescence de Gisement Moustériens du Sud de la France.” L’Anthropologie 91:211–226.
     Vandiver, P. B., O. Soffer, B. Klima, and J. Svoboda. 1989. “The Origins of Ceramic Technology at Dolni
                  Vestonice, Czechoslovakia.” Science 246:1002–1008.
     Vaughn, P. 1985. Use-Wear Analysis of Flaked Stone Tools. Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
     Verano, J. W., and D. H. Ubelaker, eds. 1992. Disease and Demography in the Americas. Washington, DC:
                  Smithsonian Institution Press.
                                                                            FUNDAMENTALS OF ARCHAEOLOGY                 81


Villa, P., C. Bouville, J. Courtin, D. Helmer, E. Mahieu, P. Shipman, G. Belluomini, and M. Branca. 1986.
            “Cannibalism in the Neolithic.” Science 233:431– 437.
Walton, T. 2002. “GPS Use and Archaeological Site Recording.” Archaeology in New Zealand 45(4): 293 –296.
Waters, M. R. 1992. Principles of Geoarchaeology: A North American Perspective. Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
Weigelt, J. 1989. Recent Vertebrate Carcasses and Their Palaeobiological Implications. Chicago: University of
            Chicago Press.
Weisner, P. 1983. “Style and Social Information in Kalahari San Projectile Points.” American Antiquity
            48(2):253–277.
Welsh, F. 1988. Building the Trireme. London: Constable.
Wendorf, F., R. Schild, A. E. Close, and Associates. 1993. The Middle Paleolithic of Bir Tarfawi and Bir Sahara East.
            New York: Plenum Press.
Wenke, R. J. 1987. “Western Iran in the Partho-Sasanian Period: The Imperial Transformation.” In The
            Archaeology of Western Iran, ed. F. Hole. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
Wenke, R. J., J. E. Long, and P. E. Buck. 1988. “Epipaleolithic and Neolithic Subsistence and Settlement in the
            Fayyum Oasis of Egypt.” Journal of Field Archaeology 15(1):29–51.
Whallon, R., and J. A. Brown, eds. 1982. Essays on Archaeological Typology. Evanston: Center for American
            Archaeology Press.
Wheeler, A., and A. K. G. Jones. 1989. Fishes. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wheeler, M. 1954. Archaeology from the Earth. Baltimore: Penguin.
Wolpoff, M. H., J. Hawks, and R. Caspari. 2000. “Multiregional, Not Multiple Origins.” American Journal of
            Physical Anthropology 112(1):129–136.
Wylie, A. 1982. “An Analogy by Any Other Name Is Just as Analogical.” Journal of Anthropological Archaeology
            1:382–401.
Yellen, J. 1991. “Small Mammals: !Kung San Utilization and the Production of Faunal Assemblages.” Journal of
            Anthropological Archaeology 10:1–26.



NOTES
 1. In recent years, the term physical anthropology has often been replaced by biological anthropology.
 2. Urban anthropology is becoming an increasingly important area of study. See, for example, Fox, Real Country:
    Music and Language in a Working-Class Culture.
 3. Including many scholars who teach at universities in Australia, New Zealand, and elsewhere.
 4. Rathje, “A Manifesto for Modern Material Culture Studies.”
 5. The idea of “feature,” although still common in archaeology, has been discarded by some archaeologists in
    favor of a terminology based on depositional stratigraphy; see, for example, Harris, Principles of Archaeological
    Stratigraphy, 2nd ed.
 6. For example, Dunnell and Dancey, “The Siteless Survey: A Regional Scale Data Collection Strategy”; Thomas,
    “Nonsite Sampling in Archaeology: Up the Creek without a Paddle?”; Peters and Blumenschine, “Landscape
    Perspectives on Possible Land Use Patterns for Early Pleistocene Hominids in the Olduvai Basin, Tanzania.”
 7. Wadi is the local term for a canyon.
 8. Schiffer, Formation Processes of the Archaeological Record.
 9. The term taphonomy (see Reconstructing Ancient Environments and Cultural Ecologies) comes to
    archaeology from faunal analysis. Today this term is widely used in the context of reconstructing how
    archaeological sites are formed by both natural and cultural processes over time.
10. Schiffer, Formation Processes of the Archaeological Record.
11. See, for example, Relethford, Genetics and the Search for Modern Human Origins; McBrearty and Brooks, “The
    Revolution That Wasn’t: A New Interpretation of the Origin of Modern Human Behavior.”
12. Wolpoff et al., “Multiregional, Not Multiple Origins.”
13. Blumenschine et al., “Blind Tests of Inter-Analyst Correspondence and Accurarcy in the Identiﬁcation of Cut
    Marks, Percussion Marks, and Carnivore Tooth Marks on Bone Surfaces.”
14. Dibble et al., “Testing the Reality of a ‘Living Floor’ with Archaeological Data.”
15. Orientation of artifacts is obtained by measuring the X, Y, and Z coordinates of the ends of elongated
    artifacts and bones, along with the strike (horizontal) and dip (vertical).
16. Dunnell, “Science, Social Science, and Common Sense: The Agonizing Dilemma of Modern Archaeology.”
17. “In Memory of Eva Gore Booth and Con Markiewics,” 1923.
18. Brady and Ashmore, “Mountains, Caves, Water; Ideational Landscapes of the Ancient Maya.”
19. Currently the archaeology programs of the U.S. National Science Foundation and the U.S. National
    Endowment for the Humanities often face funding cuts through congressional action.
20. See Enge, “Retooling the Global Positioning System”; McPherron and Dibble, Using Computers in
    Archaeology: A Practical Guide, pp. 54–63. UTM stands for universal transverse Mercator, a grid system that
82   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


         is placed over the entire world. It measures each grid in meters, so that a UTM reading gives you an Easting
         and a Northing, such as E36R775039 N3424964. This particular UTM corresponds to a location in west-central
         Jordan, just southeast of the Dead Sea.
     21. See McPherron and Dibble, Using Computers in Archaeology: A Practical Guide, pp. 30 – 53.
     22. This has been attributed to Mies van der Rohe and others.
     23. Jefferson was once described as “a gentleman of 32 who could calculate an eclipse, survey an estate, tie an
         artery, plan an ediﬁce, try a cause, dance a minuet, and play the violin.” James Parton, Life of Jefferson.
     24. Jelinek, “The Tabun Cave and Paleolithic Man in the Levant.”
     25. Wheeler, Archaeology from the Earth.
     26. Sease, A Conservation Manual for the Field Archaeologist.
     27. Lyman, Vertebrate Taphonomy.
     28. Grayson, Quantitative Zooarchaeology.
     29. Binford, “Human Ancestors: Changing Views of Their Behavior”; Bunn, “Archaeological Evidence for Meat-
         Eating by Plio-Pleistocene Hominids from Koobi Fora and Olduvai Gorge”; Shipman, “Early Hominid
         Lifestyle: Hunting and Gathering or Foraging and Scavenging?”
     30. Moore et al., Village on the Euphrates; Piperno, Phytolith Analysis; Gilbert and Mielke, eds., The Analysis of
         Prehistoric Diets; Bodner and Rowlett, “Separation of Bone, Charcoal, and Seeds by Chemical Flotation.”
     31. Ortner and Aufderheide, eds., Human Paleopathology: Current Syntheses and Future Options.
     32. Ibid.
     33. See, for example, Holliday, ed., Soils in Archaeology: Landscape Evolution and Human Occupation.
     34. Vaughn, Use-Wear Analysis of Flaked Stone Tools; Keeley, Experimental Determination of Stone Tool Use: A
         Microwear Analysis.
     35. Hayden, Lithic Studies Among the Contemporary Highland Maya; Weissner, “Style and Social Information in
         Kalahari San Projectile Points.”
     36. See also, for example, Gould, Recovering the Past.
     37. For an excellent review of the role of ceramics in archaeological analysis, see Rice, Pottery Analysis.
     38. Braun, “Pots as Tools.”
     39. See, for example, papers by Hodder, Plog, Wiesner, and others in Conkey and Hasdorf, eds., The Uses of Style
         in Archaeology.
     40. Information collected about artifacts is stored in databases. These can be relatively simple, such as records in
         software programs such as Access or Excel, or quite sophisticated, combining photographs of the artifacts,
         data on their location within a site, their measurements and other attributes, ﬁeld notes describing them, and
         so on. One example of this type of database is at http://www.museum.upenn.edu/mis/index.html.
     41. Jorge Luis Borges, Other Inquisitions: 1937–1952, quoted in Aldenderfer and Blashﬁeld, Cluster Analysis, p. 7.
     42. Adams and Adams, Archaeological Typology and Practical Reality.
     43. See, for example, Whallon and Brown, Essays on Archaeological Typology; Read, “The Substance of
         Archaeological Analysis and the Mold of Statistical Method: Enlightenment Out of Discordance?” pp. 45– 86;
         Dunnell, “Methodological Issues in Americanist Artifact Classiﬁcation”; Adams and Adams, Archaeological
         Typology and Practical Reality; Dibble, “The Interpretation of Middle Paleolithic Scraper Morphology.”
     44. See McPherron and Dibble, Using Computers in Archaeology: A Practical Guide, pp. 188 –215.
     45. Beck, ed., Dating in Exposed and Surface Contexts.
     46. Baillie, Tree-Ring Dating.
     47. Libby, Radiocarbon Dating.
     48. Taylor, Radiocarbon Dating: An Archaeological Perspective; Taylor, “Radiocarbon Dating: The Continuing
         Revolution.” Until recently, radiocarbon dates were often published as a certain number of years before a.d.
         1950, the benchmark year in which the method was ﬁrst established. “BP” was often used for corrected radio-
         carbon dates, “bp” for uncorrected dates (the “bp” ﬁrst referred to “before present” or even “before physics”;
         see Taylor, Radiocarbon Dating: An Archaeological Perspective, p. 5). These correction curves allow dates to be
         calibrated—adjusted to be more accurate—and they are often reported as cal BC or cal BP. Because not all
         dates can be calibrated, there is a wide range of how dates are reported in the archaeological literature.
     49. Haas et al., “Radiocarbon Chronology and the Historical Calendar in Egypt.”
     50. Bonani et al., “Radiocarbon Dates of Old and Middle Kingdom Monuments in Egypt.”
     51. Mahaney, Quaternary Dating Methods; Taylor and Aitken, Chronometric Dating in Archaeology.
     52. I (Wenke) am indebted to Dan Bush for the following discussion.
     53. Wendorf, Schild, Close, et al., The Middle Paleolithic of Bir Tarfawi and Bir Sahara East.
     54. Sanders et al., The Basin of Mexico.
     55. I (Wenke) thank Maurice and Lois Schwartz, the National Science Foundation, and the U.S. Agency for
         International Development for their support of this research.
     56. See, for example, Wenke et al., “Epipaleolithic and Neolithic Subsistence and Settlement in the Fayyum Oasis
         of Egypt.”
3
The Origins of Culture

What a book a Devil’s Chaplain might write on
the clumsy, wasteful, blundering low & horridly
cruel works of nature!
Charles Darwin




D         arwin, somewhat ambivalently, concluded that a close study of nature and
          evolution argued powerfully for the nonexistence, or noninvolvement in human
affairs, of a supreme deity. Darwin’s analysis convinced him that the origins of the human
species, like that of all other species, are to be found in blind and “cruel” competition at all
levels—that is, in countless millennia of nature “red in tooth and claw” (a phrase coined
by Alfred Lord Tennyson). Darwin was acutely aware of the impact of his ideas on revealed
religions, and even today the reverberations of the conﬂict between evolutionary theory and
some religious doctrines echo in some cultures, including the United States.1
     In this chapter we consider our origins in the competitive world of Pleistocene Africa—
how our genus, Homo, evolved out of more ancient primates in a complex mosaic of
environments. In contemporary paleoanthropology one of the most interesting recent
developments is the growing consensus that many of the hominins who lived before about
300,000 years ago were not the direct ancestors of us, Homo sapiens, genetically. Yet there
are still many unresolved issues in these debates and analyses, and it is entirely possible that
our current understanding of our pre–Homo sapiens past will be radically altered as new
evidence is discovered.


THE PROBLEM OF CULTURAL ORIGINS

In the ﬁlm 2001: A Space Odyssey our chimpanzee-like African ancestors of some millions
of years ago awake one morning to ﬁnd themselves at the foot of a huge, black, perfectly
smooth, monolith. Jabbering in fright and wonder, they contemplate its meaning. In a later
scene, a descendant of these creatures, but still an ape-like primate, “discovers” tools—and
murder—by using an animal leg bone to smash the skull of another ape. He throws the
bone skyward in bloody triumph, where, spinning, it is transformed into a rotating twenty-
ﬁrst-century space station—carrying a man on his way to examine another—or perhaps
the same—monolith, which has been found in an excavation on the moon.

                                              83
       84        PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                 Stanley Kubrick’s powerful ﬁlm
                                                                            of this classic Arthur Clarke story
  1.8 million years ago      Appearance of hand-axes (bifaces) of the       effectively uses the monolith as a
                             Lower Paleolithic                              symbol, perhaps of human evolution
  1.8 million years ago      Appearance of Homo erectus grade of            and enlightenment or of some cosmic
                             hominins
                                                                            intelligence. It leaves the viewer to muse
  2.5 million years ago      Appearance of Homo habilis hominins
                                                                            on the nature of the possible driving
  2.6 million years ago      Appearance of first stone tools in Africa      force of human evolution: natural
                                                                            processes, God, extraterrestrial beings,
 5–4 million years ago       Appearance of australopith hominins            or something else.
                                                                                 Anthropological analyses of the
 8–7 million years ago       First fossil evidence for bipedalism in Africa beginnings of tool-use and the nature
                                                                            and signiﬁcance of our past and future
10–8 millionyears ago        Period of the last common ancestor for
                             lineages eading to hominins (humans and        have, perhaps, much less mythic power
                             their ancestors) and panins (common            than 2001, but the fundamental ques-
                             chimpanzees and bonobos)                       tions addressed are similar: What factors
                                                                            transformed us from just one kind of
                                                                            genera of African ape into space travelers,
                                                                            and what, if anything, does this trans-
                                                                            formation “mean”?
                                                                                 Long ago a Greek philosopher
                   suggested we are the progeny of spores blown here millions of years ago through the
                   illimitable reaches of space, and, perhaps, the answers to our questions of origins are, thus,
                   truly, in the stars. Even today some scientists, impressed by the relatively short time between
                   the formation of the earth and the complexity of contemporary human civilizations,
                   consider it possible that life on earth derives ultimately from the accidental intersection of
                   the earth’s orbit with a cloud of complex chemicals brewed in some ancient stellar
                   explosion.
                        Alternatively, people in every age have found great comfort in their sure and certain
                   knowledge that we and the world are the result of Divine Creation and that there is
                   Someone in Charge.
                        Whatever the value of such speculations, the major premise of anthropology is that
                   one should begin any inquiry into our origins, history, and destiny with a consideration of
                   real-world factors of climate, genetics, culture, and so on. The anthropological assumption
                   is that with the careful sifting and analysis of the shattered fragments of our ancestors, their
                   tools, and other material evidence, we can “know,” in a scientiﬁc sense, at least something
                   about our nature and our past. Indeed, in their search for human origins, anthropologists
                   have concentrated on such embarrassingly ordinary subjects as chimpanzee sexual behavior
                   and the cuisine of African hunter-gatherers.


                 THE NATURE OF CULTURE

                 Intelligence . . . is the faculty of making artiﬁcial
                 objects, especially tools to make tools.
                 Henri Bergson2
                                                                       THE ORIGINS OF CULTURE       85


If we take Bergson’s deﬁnition literally, we might conclude that the earliest evidence for
human “intelligence” dates to some time before 2.6 million years ago, in Ethiopia, where
stone tools have been found under volcanic ash layers dated to that time.3 But what are
we trying to explain when we speak of the origins of culture? Anthropologists restrict the
term “cultural” to human beings (although chimpanzees are sometimes called “proto-
cultural”); thus the origins of culture are essentially the origins of those human qualities
that make us a unique animal.4 But it is more difﬁcult than it might seem to reduce
humanity to this or that constellation of attributes, to capture the essence of being human.
In most religions, for example, a human fetus, whether six seconds or six months after
conception, is human in the only way that really matters, being imbued with an immortal
soul. But what observable, measurable qualities can we use to distinguish ourselves from
other life-forms?
      Most who address this question turn instinctively, as it were, to attributes of the human
mind, and particularly to the unique qualities of human thought. Descartes’s famous
phrase Cogito, ergo sum (“I think, therefore I am”) is a classic expression of this idea.
      A traditional view is that humans are unique in their ability to manipulate symbols and
that the evolution of this ability underlies all human achievements. Anyone who has
seriously studied chimpanzees at play can feel a sense of kinship with these primates; the
term proto-cultural seems hardly an exaggeration. But in analyzing the origins of culture,
it is how we are different from other primates that is important, and in large part this
difference resides in our mentality— our creativity, intuition, logic, aesthetics — all the
powers of the human mind. Anthropologist Leslie White argued,5 for example, that
although chimpanzees are clever animals who can use tools and even can be taught to use
plastic counters, computers, and sign languages to express emotions and desires, they are
fundamentally different from us in two ways: First, they can never use symbols at an
abstract level that would give them any understanding of concepts like “holy water” or the
casting of a vote; second, even the smartest of nonhuman animals seem to pass relatively
little new, learned knowledge from generation to generation in such a way that there is an
observable long-term net increase.
      For White these differences amounted to a qualitative difference between ourselves and
all other animals, but one can also view them as quantitative. We simply do not know what
a chimpanzee sees or what he or she “thinks,” and White’s distinction may be less sharp
than it appears. Nonetheless, chimpanzees can smear canvasses with paint in an excellent
imitation of “modern art,” but they seem utterly untalented at more representational
painting; and it seems highly unlikely that even chimpanzees can respond in great depth to
aesthetics—can savor, for example, the vibrancy of a Van Gogh landscape or the sublime
delicacy of a Ming porcelain jar. Their ability to pass new learned knowledge from gener-
ation to generation is a more complex problem. Japanese monkeys, for example, have been
reported to have learned how to wash sand from handfuls of grain (Figure 3.1) and then
instruct younger members of the group how to do this, but there is evidence that even such
simple food-related behavior is partially genetically determined.6 And even if it were not,
such behavior is at a sufﬁciently low scale that it remains true that “the most characteristic
part of being human is the ability to proﬁt from the accumulated and transmitted
experience of other human beings.”7
      Tooby and Devore have expressed this sense of the distinctiveness of human
intelligence and behavior as a set of two kinds of primate characteristics, and have listed those
            86       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                   that are unique to humans and
                                                                                   those that we share with other
                                                                                   primates but to a much differ-
                                                                                   ent degree.
                                                                                        Fifteen features on this list
                                                                                   basically relate to a generalized
                                                                                   sense of “intelligence” in com-
                                                                                   bination with some emotional
                                                                                   capacities, but the unfortunate
                                                                                   reality is that, although we
                                                                                   know that we modern humans
                                                                                   are different from other pri-
                                                                                   mates, we must presume that
                                                                                   our earlier ancestors were
                                                                                   increasingly similar to other pri-
                                                                                   mates as one goes back in time,
                                                                                   and we must also recognize
FIGURE 3.1 Japanese macaque washing sweet potatoes.                                that we will never know directly
                                                                                   the symbolic capacities of our
                                                                                   earliest ancestors: We must
                  relate “intelligence” to material things that we can ﬁnd and measure, and for the ﬁrst several
                  million years of the human clade, this means looking mainly at changes in the size and
                  shape of hominin skulls and bodies, and, after about 2.6 million years ago, at stone tools
                  and the remains of other objects on which our ancestors imposed their intellects. These
                  indirect reﬂections of evolving symbolic abilities constitute “culture” for the anthropologist
                  in an analytical sense.
                       One might question why a “moral” sense is not listed as a deﬁning attribute of human
                  mentality, as that characteristic has been the focus of theological deﬁnitions of humanity.
                  In rural Southern colloquial American English, if one wants to disparage a person’s
                  knowledge of something, a common phrase is that “he knows about as much about it as a
                  pig knows about Sunday.” Even Mark Twain, no sentimentalist, said, “Man is the only
                  animal that blushes—or needs to.” But many scientists8 have considered human moral
                  systems to be learned, not innate, and to have evolved as extensions of the same symbolizing
                  abilities that allow us to categorize “friend” and “foe.”9
                       The paradox that we have only one tool with which to try to understand the origins
                  of the human mind, namely, the human mind, is a bit of cosmic whimsy appreciated
                  by philosophers of all ages. There is an embedded circularity to this form of the analysis
                  that has led some to kick stones, wondering if they are really “there.” Someone observed
                  that “a ﬁsh would be the last creature to discover water,”10 and we may be in similar
                  circumstances—unable to see the reality in which we live because we can see no other
                  reality. Readers interested in such topics and with much time to indulge their interest
                  are referred to volumes 2– 9 of Father Frederick Copleston’s rewarding History of
                  Philosophy.
                       What some researchers assume, however, is that our ancestors of about 8–10 million
                  years ago were not much different from the chimpanzees one can see in any zoo today,11
                  and, yet, today we are very different from all other apes. This knowledge of our deep antiquity
                                                                      THE ORIGINS OF CULTURE         87


and the nature of our physical and cultural evolution—and the search for an explanation
for them—is relatively recent.


Early Studies of Human Origins
As discussed in chapter 1, the impact of the discovery of human antiquity was profound.12
Many scholars lost their comforting faith in a recently created and human-centered world
and were forced to peer instead into an abyss of millions of years, one that saw our slow
emergence from rodents, reptiles, worms, and, ultimately, the same lifeless chemicals that
appear to make up the rest of the universe.
     By the end of the nineteenth century both Darwin’s ideas (see chapter 1) about the
biological evolution of the human species and the discovery of stone tools in association
with the bones of extinct animals in extremely ancient geological strata had convinced
many scholars of the great antiquity of humans. Nevertheless, as long as no bones were
found that were recognized as those of a human ancestor intermediate between ourselves
and other primates in physical form, it was still possible to cling to the idea that humans
were an exception: that we were an extremely old species, older than had previously been
suspected, but that we had not evolved as other species had.
     Those who had studied Darwin and Lyell closely, however, knew it was just a matter
of time before the ﬁrst fossil “missing link” was found—or recognized in the bones that
had already been found. The French scholar (and full-time customs inspector) Boucher de
Perthes, grown old and tired of waiting, offered a 200-franc
reward to the discoverer of the ﬁrst “antediluvian” (meaning
“before the ﬂood”) human in France. His enterprising workers
were soon “ﬁnding” any number of such remains—all of
which they had themselves put there, of course, in hopes of
collecting the money.
     Boucher de Perthes did not know that pre-modern
hominins had already been discovered some years before but
simply had not been recognized. A fragmentary Neandertal
child’s skull was found near Liège, Belgium, in 1829–1830, and
in 1848 work at a quarry on Gibraltar revealed a skull whose
receding chin, heavy brow ridges, and thick bones we now
recognize as that of a Neandertal. Neither the Belgium or
Gibraltar ﬁnds excited much interest at the time. In 1856,
however, a skullcap and some limb bones were found in a cave
in the Neander Valley near Dusseldorf, Germany (Figure 3.2).
Although these remains were dismissed by the great German
anatomist Rudolf Virchow as those of a deformed human,
Johann Karl Fuhlrott, their discoverer, argued from the
                                                                    FIGURE 3.2 The remains of Neandertals were
beginning that the remains were of an early form of human.
                                                                    recovered from the Neander Valley, near
But Virchow’s opinion, and those of others who variously            Dusseldorf, Germany, in 1857. This evidence that
labeled it an ancient Celt, a victim of rickets, an idiot, or a     ancient people were different from modern
Cossack, conspired to deny these bones their proper signiﬁc-        humankind was part of the assault by evolution-
ance for many years. One French savant even suggested that          ary ideas and evidence on traditional ideas about
the huge brow ridges of the Neandertal came about because           our place in the universe.
88   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


     his deformed arm caused him such pain that he continually furrowed his brow, and the
     expression became ossiﬁed.
          In 1886 two partial skeletons similar to the Neandertal specimen were recovered in a
     cave in Spy, Belgium, in direct association with stone tools and the bones of rhinoceroses,
     mammoths, and other animal species known to have been long extinct. Although Virchow
     also refused to accept these as ancient men, the tide of opinion had turned and scientists
     everywhere were soon looking eagerly for additional specimens of early hominins.
          One of these was a young Dutch physician, Eugene Dubois, who spent years wandering
     the wilds of Sumatra without ﬁnding much of interest; only when he arranged a transfer to
     Java did he make his great discovery. In 1890 he unearthed a fragment of a lower jaw, and
     over the next few years he recovered a skullcap and a femur (thigh bone).13
          For the next 30 years, controversy raged over Dubois’s ﬁnd, with some authorities
     again claiming it to be a deformed freak or a giant chimpanzee, while others recognized it
     as an early form of our genus and a direct ancestor of modern humans. Dubois’s fossil had
     an approximate brain volume of 1,040 cm3, about a third less than modern people but far
     more than any living primate. Scholars of the time recognized that if this animal were in
     fact a human ancestor, it was an ancestor considerably different from ourselves and from
     “Neandertal man” (whose cranial capacity was slightly larger than that of most modern
     humans).
          In 1906 the German anatomist Gustav Schwalbe proposed three successive stages of
     hominin evolution: pithecanthropine (as represented by Dubois’s fossils), Neandertal, and
     modern. It was apparent, however, that if this were the correct succession of hominin
     forms, there would have been many intermediate types not yet found.
          The recognition of an earlier stage of hominin evolution did not come until the 1920s,
     when Raymond Dart discovered a nearly complete skull of a strange-looking child. It was
     encased in stone quarried from a mine at Taung, some 300 kilometers from Johannesburg,
     South Africa. The skull’s shape, small volume, and primitive teeth convinced Dart he had
     found one of humankind’s earliest, most primitive ancestors, which he labeled Australopithecus
     africanus (“Southern ape of Africa”). While Dart’s conclusions were being challenged by
     some of the most inﬂuential scientists in Europe, another important ﬁnd was made, this
     time in northeastern China, near Beijing, at a mining installation called Zhoukoudian
     (formerly rendered in English as “Choukoutien”) (Figure 3.3). For centuries, fossilized
     bones from the area had been ground into powder and used, hopefully, as aphrodisiacs,
     and many specimens of great scientiﬁc signiﬁcance have probably long since been
     consumed in the form of impotent aphrodisiacs and medical potions.14
          A somewhat more scientiﬁc interest in these fossils was stimulated in 1921 when a
     single human-looking tooth from Zhoukoudian was given to the English anatomist Henry
     Black. He recognized it as belonging to an ancient form of hominin, and as a consequence,
     excavations at Zhoukoudian were begun. Altogether, the remains of about 40 individuals
     were found, including many skull fragments, and it was obvious that these individuals were
     similar in brain size, facial structure, and other characteristics to the hominin found by
     Dubois on Java. This supported Schwalbe’s proposed pithecanthropine stage, and fossils of
     this type were accorded the name Sinanthropus or Homo erectus (“erect man”).
          Thus, by the 1930s at least some of the scientiﬁc community recognized four categories
     of early hominins: australopiths, Homo erectus, Neandertals, and modern humans. Since
     that time the arguments have focused not on whether humankind evolved from some sort
                                                                  THE ORIGINS OF CULTURE     89




FIGURE 3.3 Excavations at Zhoukoudian, China. The rope enclosures on the right mark areas where
hominin skulls were found.

of nonhuman ancestor, but on what these various ancestral forms are, how they are related
genetically during their evolutionary histories, and what evolutionary mechanisms
produced ourselves, Homo sapiens sapiens, from pre-human primates. It is somewhat ironic
that many scholars today consider the Javanese Homo erectus, the Neandertals, and most
of the australopiths to have been unrelated or only distantly related to our own ancestors
(discussed in chapter 4), but the importance of these early ﬁnds is that they demonstrated
that we had evolved from nonhuman primates.
     We have many sources of evidence about our origins including the study of our
primate relatives, the fossil bones of our ancestors, and the early stone tools and other
physical traces our forebears left. But before we look at the collected evidence, we must
consider the analytical principles we must use to interpret them—speciﬁcally, evolutionary
theory. The basic premise underlying the study of human origins is that about six to eight
million years ago our ancestors were animals something like chimpanzees, and that the
forces of evolution changed us into what we are today. But what were these forces?
90   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


     Evolutionary Theory
     The origins of evolutionary theory in the writings of Darwin and others was reviewed in
     chapter 1, but a more detailed description of evolutionary principles and processes is
     required here in order to understand how they can be applied to the human past—and to
     the entire span of biological life on this planet.15
          Evolutionary theory is a complex, often mathematically expressed discipline, and its
     major elements can only be brieﬂy summarized here.16
          As noted in chapter 1, Charles Darwin made the fundamental observations that still
     serve as the basic paradigm for evolutionary theory. He noted that many more animals and
     plants were bred than actually lived to reproduce themselves; further, he noted that there
     was much variation in the form and physical qualities of individuals in any species. He
     further inferred that there was some connection between these variations and the differing
     rates of success of individuals in living and reproducing. Finally, he concluded that “natural
     selection” was the process in which nature—in the form of different environments—selected
     some individuals to live and reproduce based on the relative “ﬁtness” of individuals in these
     environments. Darwin then attempted to show how this general process had worked on
     innumerable generations to produce the awesome visible biological diversity of the world.
          What Darwin did not know, however, was how variations in individuals arose and how
     they were passed on from generation to generation. The answers to these problems were
     supplied by geneticists, beginning primarily with Gregor Mendel (1822–1884). Mendel
     studied the inheritance of color and shape in peas, and in a series of convincing experiments
     showed that there were predictable patterns to the results of breeding plants of different
     characteristics.17 Mendel and later scholars formulated what we now call the particulate
     theory of inheritance, which says that physical characteristics of individual organisms are
     passed from one generation to the next in the form of discrete particles (informally known
     as “genes”) and that these particles retain their ability to express themselves even when they
     do not express themselves in every generation. The law of segregation stipulates that these
     particles are inherited in pairs, one of each from each of the parents.
          The elixir of life, in the sense of evolutionary theory, is the substance known as DNA.
     Within the nucleus of every animal cell are chromosomes, thread-like structures composed
     of deoxyribonucleic acid, or DNA. DNA in turn is made of four nucleotides: guanine,
     cytosine, adenine, and thymine (Figure 3.4). These nucleotides combine in groups of three
     to form 20 amino acids, which are the building blocks for all protein formation. The
     arrangement, or sequence, of these bases determines the physical structure of all living
     things, from AIDS viruses to elephants (Figure 3.5). Except for the sperm or ova, every
     human cell, whether it be from the eyeball or toenail, contains the complete genetic code
     for that individual. If the DNA strand representing the entire code for a particular person
     were removed from a single cell and straightened, it would be about 6 feet long. The speciﬁc
     sequence of the DNA for any individual reader of this book would be unique and would
     ﬁll about 125 books the size of the Manhattan telephone directory. DNA contains all the
     information required to direct the operation of a cell, in combination with another nucleic
     acid, RNA (ribonucleic acid). DNA has the ability to reproduce itself, and it also offers the
     potential for the main stuff of evolution, genetic change.
          The two main sources of genetic variety are meiosis and mutation. Animal cells are
     constantly splitting (mitosis) and producing genetically identical copies of themselves, and
                                                                          THE ORIGINS OF CULTURE                91


thus growth and maintenance
are accomplished. But in
meiosis, egg and sperm cells
are produced that carry only
half the genetic code of the
parent—in the case of humans,
our 23 pairs of chromosomes
total 46 total chromosomes in
each body cell, but each egg
and sperm cell carries only half
the total, so each new person
receives 23 chromosomes               FIGURE 3.4 The genetic code determining the biological characteristics of species
each from his or her father           lies in the sequence of bases (thymine, guanine, adenine, cytosine) that links two
and mother. These genes are           strands of nucleotides to form the double helix that is DNA. (A) Bases in part of one
                                      strand of nucleotides. (B) Part of one strand twisted. (C) Complementary bases
shufﬂed and then recombined
                                      joined. (D) Two strands joined and twisted.
in sexual reproduction, and
thus the number of genetically
unique offspring possible for any human couple is determined
by the equation 223 × 223 = 246, or about 70,000,000,000,000.18
                                                                               Human    0
Each of us truly has won a lottery featuring odds against
success that dwarf those of the ﬁnancial kind.                                Rhesus
                                                                              monkey
                                                                                        1  0
     Genetic variability is also produced by mutations in
                                                                                Rabbit  9  8 0
chromosomes—errors DNA makes in copying itself. The
origins of mutations are not completely known, but some                           Duck 11 10 6 0
probably arise through the cosmic ray bombardment to which
                                                                           Rattlesnake 14 15 18 17 0
all living organisms are subjected. Early work on DNA
involved exposing hapless populations of fruit-ﬂies to                            Tuna 21 21 17 17 26 0
radiation, producing monstrous combinations of eye colors,
                                                                                 Moth  31 30 26 27 31 32 0
wing size, and other features. And there is reason to believe
that industrial pollution, loss of ozone in the atmosphere, and                  Yeast 45 45 45 46 47 47 47 0
other factors in the modern environment will lead to greater                         Hu ma        ck      ak    na   Mo     ast
                                                                                            n
                                                                                                 Du         e
                                                                                    Rh                          Tu     th   Ye
rates of mutation in all living things.                                            mo esus
                                                                                      nk
                                                                                     Ra
                                                                                         ey
                                                                                        bb            Ra
                                                                                                        esn
                                                                                            it          ttl
     One illustration of the elements of evolutionary theory
and its power to explain change in the natural world involves
                                                                         FIGURE 3.5 Amino acid sequences. Organisms
organisms too small to be seen with the naked eye—disease-               (human, Rhesus monkey, rabbit, duck, rattlesnake,
causing bacteria. We all know of the importance of antibiotic            tuna, moth, yeast) differ in the sequence of amino
medicines in ﬁghting various diseases, such as Staphylococcus            acids in protein cytochrome c, an enzyme used in
and Streptococcus. Strains of these bacteria can cause pneumonia         energy production. The higher the number
or toxic shock, and the development of penicillin to combat              shown, the greater the difference between any
them was considered a “miracle.” During World War II, drug               two.
companies began mass-producing penicillin as part of the war
effort, and by the time of the Korean War the use of this drug proved very effective.
     Initially, bacterial infections were successfully killed off when patients were given
penicillin. But like all organisms, bacteria also have variations in their genetic composition.
Some of these variations are resistant to antibiotics such as penicillin. In evolutionary
context, the use of antibiotics selects against those microbes that have no resistance to the
92   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


     antibiotic, but selects for those variants that have the genetic coding allowing the microbes
     to ﬁght off the effects of the antibiotic. Somewhat quixotically, our societal practices
     actually help increase the reproductive success of antibiotic-resistant bacteria. This is what
     happens, for example, when people indiscriminantely use antibiotics to treat viral
     infections—antibiotics aren’t the solution to viruses, but taking antibiotics allows the
     survival and reproduction of drug-resistant bacteria in our bodies. When we do get a
     bacterial infection, those drug-resistant bacteria are that much more difﬁcult to treat.
           Medical research is thus constantly searching for new types of antibiotics—previous
     efforts have resulted in the development of tetracycline, erythromycin, and cipro, and many
     others—to replace those antibiotics that have become less effective. Other drug-resistant
     diseases most of us have heard about include tuberculosis and gonorrhea.
          This example demonstrates all of the major elements of evolutionary theory. It explains
     biological changes in life-forms over time and space in terms of natural selection, at least in
     the simplistic sense of differential survival over time in organisms on the basis of their
     genetically determined characteristics. For natural selection to operate there must be
     variability, that is, differences between individuals in their physical form and the speciﬁc
     and unique genetic combinations each individual represents, so that over time there can be
     selection of characteristics, such as changes in drug resistance, brain size, instinctive
     migration, and so on.
          It is important to recognize that evolution is not goal directed: These bacteria could
     not intentionally produce drug resistance to solve their problem; evolutionary processes
     simply and blindly sorted the genetic potential for different degrees of drug resistance on
     the basis of the advantage in reproduction and survival. The biological history of life on
     this planet is one of uncountable extinctions of species—which makes it clear that evolution
     does not “solve” all problems of adaptation.
          But the reader should be aware that intense debates continue about the status of
     Darwinism and what is often called “neo-Darwinism.” In general, biologists do not doubt
     the essential validity of Darwin’s ideas, but they dispute heatedly the mechanisms involved.
     For example, a major book, Evolution as Entropy, by Brooks and Wiley, argues that natural
     selection is not the most important factor in directional change. Instead, they suggest that
     existing systems—whether these be organisms, populations, or species—present a
     conﬁguration that constrains the possible “spaces” or directions in which evolution may
     take place. These are highly abstract and fundamentally mathematical arguments that are
     beyond the scope of this book.


     APPLICATIONS OF EVOLUTIONARY THEORY TO THE PROBLEM OF
     HUMAN ORIGINS
     Most genetic mutations seem to be “bad,” in the sense that they reduce the chances of the
     individual carrying them to reproduce successfully. Other mutations are “good,” in that
     they increase reproductive potential, or “ﬁtness.” But what is good or bad in evolution is
     measured entirely by reproductive success—and can be good or bad in different environ-
     ments. For example, sickle-cell anemia—a genetic condition in which red blood cells are
     misshapen—is a common disease in Africa and the Mediterranean Basin. People who are
     born with a certain combination of the genes for this condition often die in childhood; but
     those with another genetic combination appear to have some protection against malaria.
                                                                    THE ORIGINS OF CULTURE      93


Thus the gene for sickle-cell anemia has persisted because its presence in a population—
although it results in the death of some people—helps others to live to reproductive age in
zones of the world where malaria has long been a ferocious killer. “Natural selection,” in
this sense, is obviously no master or beneﬁcent craftsman.
     The spread and perpetuation of genetic mutations through biological populations are
accomplished by various mechanisms. The variations in skin color in contemporary
peoples, for example, seem to be the result of migration into different environments and
subsequent adaptation. Dark skin offers a defense against skin cancers and other maladies
that direct sunlight on human skin can produce, and so we see dark skin tones not just in
Africa, but in the Indian subcontinent and far out into the Paciﬁc Ocean island chains. But
in humans the critical nutrient vitamin D is synthesized in the skin through the action of
sunlight, and in relatively dark and cloudy climates a dark-skinned person with be at a
disadvantage in times of scarcity of dietary sources of vitamin D—in winter months, for
example. Early humans from Africa, whom we assume to have been dark-skinned, invaded
environments where heavy pigmentation interfered with the synthesis of vitamin D, and
eventually natural selection produced the blond, fair-skinned, blue-eyed human physical
type typical of northern Europe: We must assume that small variations in skin pigmenta-
tion over thousands (replacement model) or millions (multiregional model) of years
allowed those with lighter pigmentation to have a slightly greater reproductive “ﬁtness” for
living in more temperate environments
     In this way, the world’s “races” were formed, with natural selection acting on
mutations in hundreds of genetically determined features. Geographical barriers have
been a factor in channeling and constraining these migratory patterns: The Sahara, the
Himalayas, and other natural barriers have restricted the matings between people in
different areas to the point that modern “races” evolved. Most biological scientists reject
the term “race” as imprecise and misleading. Patterns of evolutionary variability in people
seem best understood in terms of clines, or gradients of variation through time and space
that are not easily and discretely compartmentalized. Skin color, for example, varies greatly
if one examines people on a cline from Sweden to South Africa, and these variations are
only crudely described as “black” and “white.” Also, some of the traits commonly used to
identify “race,” such as skin tone, eyelid shape, nose and lip shape, and so on, also show
immense—and often independent—variation along gradients through time and space:
That is, southern Indians, West Africans, some Paciﬁc Islanders, and others share a
relatively dark skin pigmentation but differ greatly in nose and lip shape, hair texture, and
so on.19
     Changes in physical form can also result from sexual selection: Once individuals choose
mates nonrandomly with regard to some characteristics, evolutionary change can result.
Gaudy colors and exaggerated features, such as represented by the male peacock, are
probably the result of sexual selection, in which females choose mates partly on the basis
of elaborateness of the display. Nor are these displays necessarily irrelevant to genetic
“ﬁtness,” for they often correlate with superior health and genetic potential of some kinds.
Some scientists believe that sexual selection was responsible for such features as the
“exaggerated” size (by comparison to other primates) of human penises and female breasts.20
     Modern population genetics is a complex mathematical discipline and is largely
beyond the scope of this book. And many complex debates continue about the application
of evolutionary theory to human evolution.21 But for the study of cultural origins and the
94   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


     other physical changes we will consider here, including plant and animal domestication
     (chapter 6), the important points to remember are: (1) Genetic variability is constantly
     arising through various mechanisms; and (2) changing environments, sexual selection, and
     other factors “select” or act on this variability and differing reproductive success through
     time and space to produce evolutionary change.
           Although modern cultures have erected some barriers to “natural selection” (few
     people in industrialized countries now die of appendicitis, for example), through our long
     evolutionary history we have been no less a product of evolutionary forces than any other
     life-form. Most modern human physical characteristics are the result of complex genetic
     interactions that involve a subtle, long-term balancing of the costs and beneﬁts of genetic
     changes. Consider, for example, the average height of human beings. As professional
     basketball teams and the pygmies of central Africa demonstrate, humans can live perfectly
     normal lives as individuals 7 feet or 3 feet tall. So why, on the average, are people around
     the world between 5 and 6 feet tall? And why do they vary sharply in average height by sex
     and geographical location? Why are we not all about 4 feet tall or 7 feet tall? As it is with
     almost all human characteristics, the “environment”—nutrition, for example—is a factor
     in human height. The high-calorie diets of North America, for example, have produced
     generations of Asian Americans who are signiﬁcantly taller, on average, than their parents.
     But height is also partially genetically controlled. And we must assume that we average
     between 5 and 6 feet and not between 7 and 8 feet or 3 and 4 feet because our average size
     made sense in complex evolutionary equations. With selective breeding and adequate
     nutrition, a group of people could probably have been bred to an average height of 7 feet
     or more, but the costs of maintaining that body mass obviously did not make evolutionary
     “sense.” The pygmies of the African rain forests appear to have evolved in response to the
     very low food resources available in a tropical rain forest, where most of the energy is locked
     in forms of cellulose of no use to humans.
           Consider another aspect of the human diet. There is overwhelming evidence that
     contemporary death rates from cancer and other diseases are directly related to the fact that
     most of us savage our evolutionary heritage with diets that simply do not meet the needs
     of the omnivorous hunter-gatherers that natural selection fashioned us to be. Every one of
     us is the direct descendant of tens of thousands of generations of people who were naturally
     selected to thrive on the omnivorous diets available to hunter-foragers as they radiated
     from Africa across the world. In many areas these diets would have been high in ﬁber and
     fruit, low on fat and salt—diets that involved eating many different species of animals and
     plants. Although our ancestors’ diets varied greatly in different times and places, in most
     cases they would have been very different from the diets of most of us.22
           Since our brief 9,000 years as farmers have had little effect on our basic physiology and
     metabolism, logic might tell us that we should eat as wide-ranging a diet as our hunting-
     foraging ancestors did. But, alas, evolutionary equations are complex. One might, for
     example, vastly increase one’s vitamin C consumption on the grounds that ancient hunter-
     foragers had high concentrations of this vitamin in their diets, but the factors that improve
     an individual’s chances of becoming a successful mother or father many times before age
     40—an all-important accomplishment in evolutionary terms—may not be the same as
     those that produce ﬁt and happy 70 and 80 year olds. Until about 10,000 years ago—or
     just yesterday in evolutionary terms—few people lived past 50. In terms of an individual’s
     success in passing on his or her genes, what probably mattered most was to have children
                                                                     THE ORIGINS OF CULTURE      95


and successfully raise them on a diet of some meat, a lot of plant foods, and an exercise
regime that modern medical science would consider dangerous.
     In general, human physiology appears to have been selected over millions of years to
operate on a diet of almost anything, particularly if there is some variety and moderation.
Even Irish coffee, that perfect end to a ﬁeld archaeologist’s day, containing four basic food
groups—fat, sugar, alcohol, and caffeine—can be tolerated as long as one scavenges widely
among the other food groups the rest of the day. Yet Eskimos are reported to eat, during
the long winter months, a diet consisting mainly of meat, augmented only with a few scraps
of vegetation they ﬁnd in the stomachs of seals and other animals they kill. And poor Hindu
peasants have produced a population explosion on a meatless diet consisting mainly of
vegetables, rice, oils, and sugar.
     Whatever the diet of our ancestors, we must assume that we are walking, talking genetic
packages that reﬂect what “worked” for hunters and gatherers, plus an unknown amount
of “random” genetic change. So although every characteristic of every person cannot be
accounted for in terms of its competitive value in passing on one’s genes, a lot of what we
are must be explained in exactly these terms. Thus, for example, our brain size averages
about 1,450 cm3 because that size is a good balance between the advantages of greater
intelligence and general cerebration and the high costs of large brains in terms of blood
supply and the reduced mobility of the broadened female pelvis, which is needed for
successful live birth of the cerebral monstrosities that we are.
     There are very real problems with the “adaptationist” views of human evolution—the
idea that most or all of what we are is the product of selected accumulated successful
mutations. A lot of what we are, in fact, may be the result of random genetic variation, not
the direct product of selection for a particular quality or trait. And it is almost impossible
to ﬁnd some trait or behavior that cannot be explained as the solution to some kind of
imagined evolutionary problem or opportunity.23 It is also often difﬁcult to identify exactly
what the focus of selection was for complex physiological or anatomical evolution.
Hamilton, for example, suggests that many of the sex differences between men and women
and between humans and other apes are the result of long-term selection for high levels of
sex hormones—not to exaggerate our sexuality but to give us the stamina we needed as
foragers who walked long and often to ﬁnd food.24
     With this simple introduction to evolution, it is easy to see why the Argument from
Design—the theory that the universe had to have been created by a Divine Being because
everything worked together in such harmony—was almost universally rejected by scientists
from the late nineteenth century on, and why few professional research biologists and
geneticists doubt that humans have evolved from single-cell animals and are genetically
related to all other life-forms on this planet. Science has shown that (1) the chemistry of
human genetics operates identically to that of other life-forms and (2) the differences
between humans and other animals in the “spelling” of their DNA sequence is slight—
depending on which aspects of DNA sequences are examined, there is only about a 1
percent difference between a person and a chimp, for example, and only 2 percent between
a person and a mouse. In fact, the human DNA sequence contains bits of the same genetic
code that produces or once produced mice, plants, ants, dinosaurs, and so forth—a
situation that is exactly what one would expect, based on evolutionary theory.
     Biological evolution can shape a world of great complexity and, in a sense, beauty. And
although it is tempting to see “natural selection” as an active, quasi-intelligent force,
96   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


     shaping plants and animals for certain purposes and to meet certain requirements, this
     is a fundamentally ﬂawed perspective. Natural selection does not “know” what will be
     required at some later date. Natural selection in this sense is simply differential rates of
     reproduction and survival.
           If this is so, what is the key to long-term evolutionary success in a lineage? One
     important element seems to be the maintenance of genetic variability. A classic example of
     this is the problem caused by the introduction of rabbits into Australia. Without a natural
     predator, the rabbits multiplied to the point of becoming a major crop pest. Efforts to
     control them by introducing a rabbit disease killed millions of them, but because of genetic
     variability a few individuals were naturally immune. They survived and quickly
     reestablished a population that was more resistant to this disease.
           As the AIDS epidemic demonstrates, Life with a capital L is a constant struggle between
     life-forms for survival. The AIDS virus’s “strategy” involves rapidly changing forms and a
     late onset—afﬂicting many people long after they have already spread the virus to others.
     But some people will be naturally resistant to the virus, and even if the epidemic sweeps the
     world, these resistant individuals would be able to reestablish human populations. There
     is no reason to suspect that the AIDS virus will be the last one to sweep the world; in fact,
     it seems simply another of a long line of human afﬂictions, and there are likely much worse
     ones to come.
           A discussion, such as this, of evolutionary theory as applied to us and our ancestors
     seems to lead inevitably to a consideration of eugenics—attempts to produce individuals
     with selected genetic characteristics, either through selective mating, abortion, or—now—
     direct manipulation of a person’s genes.
           People are understandably ambivalent about the idea of genetically selected traits.
     Based on what we know about genetically determined aspects of anatomy and physiology,
     for example, it seems manifestly evident that not even a lifetime of practice can make one
     another Mozart, that no amount of education will enable many of us to extend the insights
     of a Newton. Even something as seemingly effortless as the high-ﬂoating left-handed lay-
     up of the professional basketball player can never be acquired by most of us, even were we
     to spend a lifetime in practice.
           But eugenics, of a sort, is already here. Every year human fetuses are aborted because
     genetic testing has shown that they would be born afﬂicted with Down’s syndrome, cystic
     ﬁbrosis, Huntington’s disease, or some other malady. In China and India, untold numbers
     of fetuses are aborted because they are female. And there is every indication that these forms
     of “eugenics” will expand greatly. From a fetus’s genetic structure, scientists can now, or
     soon will be able to, propose many other conditions an individual might have in later life,
     such as Alzheimer’s disease, manic depression, breast cancer, some forms of bowel cancer,
     and obesity. Also, the recent mapping of the entire human genome probably will make it
     possible to predict occurrences of alcoholism, homosexuality, and many other conditions
     previously thought to be mainly consequences of choices people made.
           Simply put, is such knowledge about genetics good or bad? Every reader of this book
     can expect to hear increasing debates on this point for the rest of his or her life, for the
     answer is complex and ultimately a matter of values. One might argue, for example, that
     our best “strategy” in long-term evolutionary equations is to maintain as much genetic
     diversity as possible—the antithesis of “eugenics” programs, in effect. For no one can
     predict what new genetic horrors will arise in AIDS-like viruses or some other disease, and
                                                                     THE ORIGINS OF CULTURE      97


it may well be that only a few individuals have natural genetic immunity to them. And it
may be that some yet-to-be mutated natural resistance to skin cancer, to exposure to
asbestos and organic pollutants, or to some newly mutated disease will be the key to our
long-term survival as a species.
    Evolution is in no sense “over” for us just because we currently are doing rather well.


THE ECOLOGICAL CONTEXT OF CULTURAL ORIGINS

    In the bleak mid-winter
    Frosty wind made moan,
    Earth stood hard as iron,
    Water like a stone;
    Snow had fallen, snow on snow,
    Snow on snow,
    In the bleak mid-winter
    Long ago.
     Christina Rossetti (1830–1894)25
One of the central facts of human physical and cultural evolution is that many of the crucial
developments of our species occurred in Africa between about 8 million and 10,000 years
ago, a period in which world climates ﬂuctuated greatly but were, on average, cooler than
today. About 4.2 million years ago, some of our ﬁrst bipedal (i.e., walking upright)
ancestors appeared in Africa. By about 2.5 million years ago massive glaciers had spread
over northern lands, such as Europe, and about 1.8 million years ago, when early forms of
Homo were radiating from Africa, climates began ﬂuctuating, with long periods of intense
cold followed by periods that were nearly as warm as climates of today. This period of
climatic ﬂuctuation during the past 1.8 million years is known as the Pleistocene epoch, or
the Quaternary period. The correspondence between this period of climatic change and our
own development has led scholars for many years to suspect that somehow Pleistocene
climatic changes directly shaped human evolution, perhaps by creating difﬁcult and demand-
ing environments that “selected” larger and more intelligent hominins. But the relationship
between climatic changes and human changes seems to have been a very complex one.
     For the modern individual, sheltered from climate by cities and central heating, the
effects of winter are reduced to minor inconveniences, but for our Pleistocene ancestors,
the brutal winters of hundreds of thousands of years ago made southern France, Italy,
China, and other currently hospitable regions a challenge to hominin resourcefulness and
tenacity. Advancing and retreating glaciers and the weather systems that drove them
operated in slow but powerful pulses, alternately drawing hominin populations into some
areas and evicting them from others, all the while mixing genes, eliciting adaptations, and
shaping our cultural and physical evolution. In Africa, too, the great climatic changes of
the Pleistocene occasionally changed large areas of formerly habitable land into vast deserts,
and then later changed them back to forests and grassland.
     Average worldwide temperatures have ﬂuctuated more rapidly in the last 14 million
years than ever before, and a world as warm as our own has been a rarity during the last
2.5 million years. There have been, however, occasional interglacials—periods often of
98   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


     50,000 years or more when temperatures rose almost to present-day levels. Even during the
     main glacial periods, there were interstadials, short warming phases when the temperature
     rose but did not reach today’s levels. Archaeologists use the term Holocene to refer to the
     last 10,000 years, which likely represents the latest interglacial period.
          During the glacial periods themselves, ice sheets spread from the poles and from higher
     elevations to cover much of the higher latitudes. So much of the seas were locked in ice
     during the coldest periods that the sea level dropped by as much as 150 m, making dry land
     of coastal areas that today are many meters below the sea. Land bridges that facilitated the
     spread of peoples throughout the world formed between North America and Asia, Europe
     and Britain, and Southeast Asia and what are now offshore islands. Unfortunately,
     Pleistocene ice sheets have ground many critical archaeological sites to powder, and the
     rising seas of the post-glacial periods have covered thousands of others.
          The great climatic shifts of the Pleistocene seem to have been caused by a combination
     of factors, including ﬂuctuations in solar radiation, eccentricities in the earth’s orbit,
     mountain-building activity, and changes in the earth’s atmosphere.26 But in the next several
     decades the world may see the invalidation of the cliché, “everyone talks about the weather,
     but nobody does anything about it.” We seem to have been doing something to it since the
     Industrial Revolution. Various scientists have suggested that we are already seeing the
     results of the Greenhouse Effect—a dramatic warming of average world climates as a result
     of industrial pollution. Some meteorologists predict that by the mid-twenty-ﬁrst century,
     and thus within the life span of some readers of this book, such coastal cities as New York
     will be partially ﬂooded by rising sea levels.
          Between about seven and two million years ago, early hominins lived in the tropics of
     Africa. We were all Africans, and we were all Africans much later—late, in any event, in our
     evolutionary story.27 Even with evidence for hominin invasion of Europe and Asia before
     a million years ago (chapter 4), we must still look to the grasslands and forests of Africa for
     the environments of our origins.
          The history of the hominins appears to represent adaptations to a wide variety of
     habitats and environments, including savanna, bushland, open woodland, and riverine
     forest, as well as a mosaic of these contexts.28 Savannas are relatively ﬂat, arid expanses with
     scattered trees and occasional water holes, and their mixed grasses, shrubs, and other plants
     usually support large herds of grazing animals such as zebras, buffaloes, and gazelles.
     Woodlands and forests represent somewhat more closed, but wetter environments
     compared to savannas.


     The Evidence of Cultural Origins
     We have four basic categories of evidence for analyzing human origins: (1) paleontology,
     the study of ancient forms of animal life, including the ancestors of humankind; (2)
     archaeology, the analysis of the archaeological record—the stones and bones and other
     evidence of past cultures used by our ancestors; (3) primatology, the study of our
     contemporary nonhuman relatives, the other primates, whose behavior patterns may give
     us clues to the behavior of our own ancestors and whose genetic composition can be
     compared through molecular biology with our own to address questions of our common
     descent; and (4) ethnology, particularly the study of contemporary or recent hunting-and-
     gathering peoples, whom we assume to be living in environments and patterns similar to
                                                                       THE ORIGINS OF CULTURE        99


those of our Paleolithic ancestors (although any contemporary human societies must be
regarded as fundamentally different from those of our earliest ancestors).
    Anthropologists use these four kinds of evidence to produce “models of cultural
origins”—sets of related hypotheses about the factors that combined to change our
ancestors from unremarkable primates to human beings.

PALEONTOLOGICAL EVIDENCE OF HUMAN ORIGINS
A brain weight of nine hundred grams is
adequate as an optimum for human behavior.
Anything more is employed in the commission
of misdeeds.
Earnest Hooten

One of the most difﬁcult things for the people of the nineteenth century to accept was
the idea that as a species we are the progeny of nonhuman primates. It is perhaps fortunate
that they did not know then that an even earlier ancestor seems to have been a small,
pink-nosed, libidinous, insect-eating animal whose modern form, the shrew, is on a pound-
for-pound basis among the most ferociously effective predators known.
     Taken as an overall sequence, is there any trend in the evolution of animal life on this
planet that would help us understand the appearance of culture and our own physical type?
One possible answer is suggested by the comparison of the ratio of brain size to body size
in successive animal forms during the many millions of years before the ﬁrst culture-
bearing animals appeared. The anatomist Harry Jerison has devised an encephalization
index by dividing the total brain volume of each animal by the two-thirds power of its body
size. This simple index thus represents a scaled ratio of brain volume to overall size.
Jerison’s results give us an answer of sorts to our questions. The increase in average human
brain size—from approximately 500 to approximately 1,450 cm3 in only a few million years
—has been extraordinarily rapid, but, overall, we seem to be a continuation of a process
that began at least 600 million years ago, a process involving, in some animal forms, long-
term natural selection for increased brain-to-body ratios and, presumably, mental capacity.
     But we represent something more than just another species in this long-term
evolutionary process, for we are truly monstrosities in terms of brain size. Jerison lists the
“encephalization quotients” (which take account of the relationship and brain size across
invertebrates) for a variety of primate individuals, including ourselves (Table 3.1), and it is
clear that we are a radical departure from our nearest primate relatives.
     Why should there be this long-term evolution of larger brain-body ratios? We assume
that it must be because of the reproductive advantages conferred by this development. But

Table 3.1 Encephalization Quotients, or Brain-to-Body Ratios

Gorilla (male)                   1.53                  (172.4 kg body weight, 570 g brain weight)
Gorilla (female)                 1.76                  (90.7 kg body weight, 426 g brain weight)
Chimp (male)                     2.48                  (56.7 kg body weight, 440 g brain weight)
Chimp (female)                   2.17                  (44.0 kg body weight, 325 g brain weight)
Human (male)                     7.79                  (55.5 kg body weight, 1,361 g brain weight)
Human (female)                   7.39                  (51.5 kg body weight, 1,228 g brain weight)
100   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      with regard to human brain size, Jerison stresses that the important point to remember is
      that very advanced behavior can be governed by very small amounts of brain tissue. The
      behavioral adaptations of the lower vertebrates are as remarkable as those of mammals in
      many ways. Encephalization in mammals, in primates, and in the human species is not easy
      to explain as a correlate of the reﬁnement of behavior. Information-processing of a kind
      that could be done only by very large amounts of neural tissue must have been evolving in
      the mammals. But the exact nature of that processing is difﬁcult to demonstrate. Moreover,
      “rewiring” of brain tissue through evolutionary processes may result in behavioral changes
      without an increase in total size of brain.
           In many ﬁctional treatments of the future, people are portrayed with enormous heads
      and correspondingly impoverished physiques. Is this likely, given Jerison’s data? Among
      the grimmer medical implements that was found in many delivery rooms in the last century
      was a device for crushing the head of the fetus if it was too large to deliver without killing
      the mother—a situation that, in the absence of medical intervention, may occur as frequently
      as a few times out of every 100 live births, according to some ethnographic accounts. Even
      experienced obstetricians29 dreaded performing this procedure—now no longer necessary
      if the surgical skills to perform a Cesarean section are available. Mismatched fetal head size
      and maternal pelvic dimensions are expressions of the trend Jerison has identiﬁed, but human
      brain size, in fact, seems to have stabilized at about 1,450 cm3 over the last 100,000 years.
      Yet 100,000 years is insigniﬁcant in the span of animal life on our planet, and encephaliza-
      tion ratios may well continue to increase—or decrease—during the next millions of years.
      The cliché “time will tell” still has some cogency in evolutionary studies. We too, no doubt,
      are in a sense “missing links” in the ancient evolutionary experiment that is the history of
      animal life on this planet.
           One question we must address is: Why are people so much smarter than they apparently
      need to be just to survive and reproduce? As discussed in the next section, we have
      conclusive evidence that our ancestors, who had brains two-thirds of our size, successfully
      made stone tools and other implements, competed with a formidable array of other
      animals, and managed to colonize an area from Java to Spain. In the world of a half million
      years ago, or even 100,000 years ago, one needed a brain only a few hundred cm3 bigger
      than that of a chimp to do very well indeed. Why then did we evolve the capacities for
      quantum mechanics, Arabic verb forms, Puccini arias, and the poetry of Ezra Pound?
           Once again it must be stressed that when we ask such questions we must look almost
      exclusively at our lives as hunter-gatherers, that is, before 10,000 years ago. The agriculture
      and urbanization that appeared in the past 10,000 years is far too short a span to have pro-
      duced signiﬁcant differences in our genetically based mentalities, compared to our Pleistocene
      forebears.

      Early Primates and the Australopiths
      I don’t know, but we call him “Bob”
      Sam Ervin, former U.S. Senator (when asked what the
      name of his horse was)30

      To return to the paleontological evidence, bits and pieces of various animals have been
      placed into our family tree as far back as 20 million years ago (Figure 3.6), but there are
      huge gaps and many questions as to what particular primates are on our ancestral line.
                                                                        THE ORIGINS OF CULTURE          101


Classifying extinct animals is even more contentious than
classifying living ones, but in the traditional classiﬁcation,
we are members of the primate order and the anthropoid
suborder, which includes humans, apes, and monkeys; the
other primate suborder is the prosimians, which includes
lemurs, tarsiers, and other similar animals. We are in the
superfamily Hominoidea and the family Hominidae. The
Hominidae are separated into three subfamilies, the Ponginae
(including the orangutan), the Gorillinae (the gorilla), and the
Homininae (common chimpanzees, bonobos, and humans
and their ancestors).31 The Homininae separated from the
Ponginae and Gorillinae at some point in the distant past of
the Miocene era (c. 25 to 10 million years ago), when primates
included at least 16 genera of hominoids, some of which were
forest-dwelling, quadrupedal animals who may have been on                 FIGURE 3.6 This species of Southeast Asia tree
our genetic line. Within the Homininae, there are two tribes,             shrew resembles closely the small insectivorous
the Panini (common chimpanzees and bonobos) and the                       ratlike animals believed to be ancestral to all
Hominini (humans and their ancestors, including the                       primates, including ourselves.
australopiths). These two tribes separated from a common
ancestor probably around 8 million years ago.
     This determination of when the human line split from that of other primates results
from a combination of the fossil evidence with evidence from molecular biology.32 These
age estimates and sequences are based on estimates of rates of change in nuclear genetic
materials and are known to vary widely in the animal kingdom (rates of change are
much faster in rodents than in humans, for example). But several analytical techniques
have produced similar estimates for the human/chimpanzee split. A crucial period in the
evolution of culture appears to be between ﬁve million years ago, when the ﬁrst
australopiths appeared, and a million years ago, by which time all the world’s hominins
belonged to a single genus, Homo.
     Paleoanthropologists recognize various genera and species of early hominins in the
period between about 4.2 and 1 million years ago. These include a sometimes bewildering
array of australopiths and early Homo. The relationship between these species—and which
ones are on the line to modern humans—is not always clear-cut. The australopiths include
Ardipithecus ramidus, Australopithecus anamensis, Australopithecus bahrelghazali,
Australopithecus afarensis, Australopithecus africanus, Australopithecus garhi, Paranthropus
aethiopicus, Paranthropus robustus, and Paranthropus boisei. Early Homo species during this
range of time include Homo rudolfensis, Homo habilis, Homo ergaster, and Homo erectus.33
These species seem to have differed in various anatomical details and the periods in which
they existed, and they are probably most correctly displayed as a “bushy tree” in which
lineage and descent is not yet precisely known (Figure 3.7).
     The factors that identify Australopiths as probable members of the same tribe are: (1)
They all were bipedal, walking upright on two legs all or most of the time—although they
were perhaps not quite as well-suited anatomically for this means of locomotion as
ourselves; (2) they all appear to have brains only slightly larger, if at all, than modern gorillas
and chimps; (3) they all lived in Africa; and (4) they all had teeth that looked somewhat
like ours and differed from those of gorillas and chimps in various details, such as ﬂattened
           102       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                     surface of molars—probably
                                                                                     to facilitate grinding of foods.
                                                                                     Scholars dispute whether or
                                                                                     not any of the australopiths
                                                                                     used stone tools. Their remains
                                                                                     have been found with such
                                                                                     tools but the association is
                                                                                     ambiguous.

                                                                                       Early Australopiths Much of
                                                                                       the story of cultural origins
                                                                                       may have been “over” by 3.8
                                                                                       million years ago. Mary Leakey
                                                                                       found human footprints of this
                                                                                       age at Laetoli, Kenya, indicat-
                                                                                       ing that our ancestors were
                                                                                       walking upright by that time,
                                                                                       and new fossils such as Austra-
                                                                                       lopithecus anamensis suggest
                                                                                       that bipedalism in the hominins
                                                                                       may be at least 4.2 million
FIGURE 3.7 The “bushy tree” appearance of hominin phylogeny shows the                  years old. The tracks of two
existence of several contemporary hominin species and indicates the difﬁculty of
                                                                                       Australopithecus afarensis at
assigning a particular species to the direct line leading to modern humans.
                                                                                       Laetoli indicate that they may
                                                                                       not have had quite the same
                        smooth gait as modern humans do, as they seem to have a somewhat rolling walk in which
                        the hips swiveled side to side more than they do when we walk. But they clearly show two
                        bipedal creatures, both between about 1.4 and 1.5 m tall, who apparently walked across this
                        surface at different times.
                             There is a sort of destiny in bipedalism: The hands are free to manipulate tools, the
                        ﬁeld of vision gives a slice of time and distance that rewards planning, and the arrangement
                        of the limbs and cranium seems to require only additional brain tissue to “convert” a
                        primate into something human.
                             But upright posture in the absence of tools—and there is no evidence for stone tool
                        use until about a million years after the Laetoli footprints—means something else. It means
                        that an animal with roughly our body shape (but about two-thirds our size) and with our
                        approximate powers of vision, smell, locomotion, and so on, could compete in a world
                        teeming with awesome predators. Without speed, claws, signiﬁcant teeth, night vision, or
                        protective coloration, these primates of 3.8 million years ago and earlier ﬂourished.
                        Walking across the same surface as the Australopithecus afarensis at Laetoli were tigers,
                        rhinoceroses, elephants, and other animals that competed with the australopiths on these
                        African plains, and one wonders how such an unprepossessing animal could survive in this
                        environment. Perhaps they already possessed embryonic forms of the critical elements of
                        cultural behavior: intelligence, protective human family relationships, and tool-use
                        capabilities that were slightly better than that of the chimpanzees (who use sticks and
                        unmodiﬁed stones).
                                                                     THE ORIGINS OF CULTURE      103


      If we had only the tracks at Laetoli as evidence of early australopiths, we would know
little about this crucial stage in human evolution, but recent ﬁnds have produced the
skeletal remains of a growing sample of these individuals—and possibly some of their
ancestors. The earliest australopiths are a likely candidate as one of the founding species of
the human line; they are represented by fossils that date to between 4.5 and 3 million years
ago from several areas of north-central and east Africa.
      In the Hadar region of Ethiopia we ﬁnd the most substantial early remains, including
“Lucy” (named after a Beatles song), a female 25- to 35-year-old hominin. About 3.18
million years ago, Lucy strode upright through the river valleys of Ethiopia, as part of a
group of primates who were around 1.2 to 1.5 meters tall, but who varied greatly in size
and morphological characteristics. No tools of any kind have been found associated with
Lucy and her kin, and without tools, we cannot really know much about Lucy and her
group—the “First Family,” to use the name Donald Johanson, one of her discoverers, gave
them. By counting the number of different bones, we know that there were at least 13
people in Lucy’s group, 4 of them children. A few bits of geological evidence and the absence
of other animal bones near the hominins raise the possibility that the First Family was
trapped in a ravine by a ﬂash ﬂood, but we’ll never really know.
      But if “Lucy” and her group were bipedal, how far back in time does bipedalism go?
Several recent ﬁnds have begun to illuminate this great transformation in the human past.
Between 1990 and 1994, parts of 53 other early hominins were found in the Hadar region,
including a particularly well-preserved skull that seems to conﬁrm some of the
interpretations of Lucy but raises other questions.34 The age of the skull, about one million
years before Lucy, was determined by its location between two layers of volcanic rock.
Because the rock contains potassium, the rate at which potassium radioactively decays
could be used to date each layer accurately (see chapter 2). The skull of this individual has
an ape-like jutting jaw, small braincase, and thick protruding ridges above the eyes—a skull,
in other words, that was much more ape-like than human-like.
      Tim White has identiﬁed some of the earliest Ethiopian fossils as a new genus,
Ardipithecus ramidus, on the premise that they are different from other early australopiths.
This Middle Awash fossil suggests that this small-brained, upright-walking, pre-human
species with an ape-like body existed until at least to Lucy’s time without signiﬁcant
anatomical change. Whatever the evolutionary forces were that converted australopiths
into us, at least as far as mentality is concerned, they appear either to have been slow
processes or not in force at this time. Despite their human-like posture, the brain-to-body
ratios of Lucy and her friends were such that it is highly probable they could have led full
mental and spiritual lives in any municipal zoo: Lucy’s brain was probably only slightly
larger than a softball, and there is no evidence that she or her colleagues used tools or were
cultural in signiﬁcant ways. But the fact that these australopiths had brains insigniﬁcantly
larger than apes is not conclusive evidence on this point. The human brain probably
evolved both through getting bigger and by internal “rewiring,” and we know little about
how the latter might have come about.
      Another recent discovery of fossils in Kenya supports the idea that by 4.2 million years
ago, our ancestors already walked upright, on two legs. In August 1995, anthropologist
Meave Leakey35 reported the discovery in northwestern Kenya’s Lake Turkana area of fossil
hominin jaws, teeth, a piece of skull including the ear region, and a lower leg bone, all of
which date to between 3.9 and 4.2 million years ago. The hominin species from which the
           104         PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                       fossils came has been named Australopithecus anamensis. Leakey said primitive features
                       distinguishing the species from other known early human ancestors were in the crania and
                       dentition and included almost parallel mandibular tooth rows set close together, large
                       canines with long strong roots, wide ﬂaring molar teeth, and a small elliptical external
                       opening of the ear.
                             But she notes that in “contrast, the leg and arm bones have relatively modern mor-
                       phology and the shape of the former indicates that at this early date, human ancestors were
                       walking bipedally.” Leakey said the newly found fossils had features consistent with their
                       being a cross between “Lucy” and the earliest Hadar fossils that have been identiﬁed by
                       Tim White as Ardipithecus ramidus.
                             Still another recent ﬁnd provides cogent evidence about early human bipedalism. Few
                       things are more pedestrian, literally or ﬁguratively, than the human foot, but the archaeo-
                       logical record contains only one reasonably well-preserved set of four articulated hominin
                       foot bones for the critical period when people were becoming (or already were) bipedal.
                       These bones, from South Africa’s Sterkfontein Cave, may date to 3.5 million years ago,36 and
                       they have set off another debate about the origins of human bipedalism (Figure 3.8). They
                       appear to be those of an australopith, and they suggest that these hominins may have retained
                       tree-climbing abilities far beyond what later humans had. One of the preserved bones is the
                       beginning of the big toe, and it suggests that this individual had both ape-like and human-
                       like locomotion abilities. There is no question that the basic anatomy is that of an upright-



                                                                                                             ASIA




          Atlantic                                                                                                 Arabian
          Ocean                                                           Hadar (including Gona)                     Sea
                                                                                      Middle Awash


                                                                                             Omo
                                                                            West Turkana
                                                                                             East Turkana (including Koobi Fora)
                                                                                           Olorgesailie
                                                                                                         Indian Ocean
                                                                                       Laetoli
                                                                                                        Olduvai Gorge
                                                                                                   (including DKI and FLKI)


  SOUTH                      AFRICA
 AMERICA



                                                                        Makapansgat
                   0           800 mi
                                                                         Taung          Sterkfontein, Swartkrans, Kromdraai
                   0       800 km


FIGURE 3.8 The distribution of some early hominin sites in Africa.
                                                                     THE ORIGINS OF CULTURE      105


walking individual, but the big toe diverged sharply to the side, in the manner of apes,
providing a highly ﬂexible, opposable-toed foot that would allow the hominin to climb trees.
     In summary of these recent ﬁnds, human bipedalism probably extends back to 4.2
million years ago and some unknown time earlier than that, but we still have only vague
ideas about why this transformation occurred. In any case, the most important point about
these australopiths is that they were bipedal, and whether or not bipedalism is the stimulus
for all later evolution of “culture,” our ancestors appeared soon after bipedalism, and there
is reason to assume that this was not an accidental correlation.
The Appearance of Homo
Monkeys are superior to men in this: when a
monkey looks into a mirror, he sees a monkey.
Malcolm de Chazal

As in the case of most biological classiﬁcations, cutting the continuum of hominins into
several groups and naming them differently, as in the case of Australopithecus and Homo,
necessarily involves some degree of arbitrariness. Unless we have been badly misled by the
data, what we call the ﬁrst Homo arose out of the mix of australopith species and subspecies,
and thus these different genera names are mainly collective descriptions of gradually
accumulating anatomical differences.
     That Homo did succeed the australopiths now seems clear. Major disputes remain
about the relationship of the australopiths and early Homo, but the evidence generally
supports the notion that, whatever the genetic relationship between the australopiths and
early Homo, early Homo (1) appeared after about 2.5 million years ago—long after Lucy
and her colleagues; (2) had a brain somewhat larger than the australopiths (i.e., c. 600 c3 or
larger); (3) made stone tools—or at least some groups of them did; and (4) was the ﬁrst
hominin to leave Africa. Early Homo is usually assigned to Homo habilis, Homo rudolfensis,
Homo ergaster or Homo erectus.
     The earliest stone tools known are only between two and three million years old, and
we might suspect that they are important markers of the transition to Homo. Primates of
all kinds, including Lucy, no doubt, use sticks and unmodiﬁed stones for a variety of
purposes, but making a stone tool requires that a recognition that sharp-edged pieces can
be detached from an unworked lump of stone. Evidence suggests that the manufacture of
stone tools was a rather late part of the whole transition to humanity, since bipedalism and
even increasing brain size were well underway by the time the ﬁrst stone tools apparently
were made. Toth has suggested that “tool use in apes was not directly selected for in
evolution but rather was a by-product of a general increase in problem-solving abilities
through time.” 37 But once humans could make stone tools, that ability became an
important factor in the rate at which we evolved and spread throughout the world. The
importance of tools to our ancestors can perhaps best be appreciated if one imagines oneself
standing about 4 feet tall on the Serengeti Plain of two million years ago, trying to resolve
into its component nutritious parts a small antelope one has just killed or scavenged from
a temporarily napping lion. Already harried by vultures and other scavengers, one tries to
rip into the body with one’s teeth and nails. Even with Lucy’s relatively stout dentition, it
would have been difﬁcult. The most nutritious parts—the liver, brain, and other internal
organs—are protected by thick layers of skin, ﬂesh, and bone that resist the puny tearing
motions to which our ancestors would have been limited. But just a chip off one of the
106   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      quartz pebbles abundantly scattered over this area would instantly have opened up life-
      saving rations for several individuals.
           The ﬁrst hominin to make and use stone tools was probably one of the australopith
      species (simple stone tools made by hitting one lava chunk with another have been found
      in Ethiopia under layers of volcanic ash that date to 2.5 million years ago38) or early Homo,
      but the species of the ﬁrst tool-makers remains a matter of doubt and dispute. Some of
      these disputes could be resolved if we had many full skeletons of the earliest Homo, but we
      may never have adequate samples of this hominin. Most anthropologists have used the
      category Homo habilis to refer to the species from which Homo ergaster and thereby
      ourselves have descended, and the KNM-ER 1470 skull, dated to about 1.88 million years
      ago, is perhaps the best example of this category. Homo habilis is generally thought to have
      had a cranial capacity of about 600–650 cm3, halfway between some of the smaller
      australopiths and Homo ergaster/Homo erectus, but its taxonomic position will likely change
      on the basis of future ﬁnds.39 A skull and some limb bones of Homo habilis recently dis-
      covered at Olduvai (a specimen known as OH 62) have been dated to about 1.8 million
      years ago, and raise some interesting questions about Homo habilis in general. First, this
      apparently female adult was only about 1 m tall (3 feet, 4 inches). Thus, she was up to a
      foot shorter than “Lucy,” an australopith who lived about 1.3 million years before her, and
      whose height appears to have been somewhere between 3.5 and 4 feet. We might expect
      that human height had been increasing gradually but continuously, as we know that the
      general trend in hominins was certainly toward greater height. But OH 62 suggests this
      trend may not have been constant. Here, too, possible sample biases intrude. OH 62 may
      simply have been an exceptionally short person. But OH 62’s skeletal anatomy looks very
      much like Lucy’s, and in general she suggests that the australopiths and early Homo were
      only slightly different until after 1.8 million years ago.
           In 1984 a group headed by Richard Leakey found a Homo ergaster/Homo erectus
      (known as KNM-WT 15000) near Lake Turkana,40 Kenya, that seems well-dated to about
      1.6 million years ago and is virtually complete. Such a modern and “brainy” hominin at
      this time is somewhat surprising, given the other known fossils (this ﬁnd is discussed in
      more detail in chapter 4).
           These many arguments about human lineage will doubtless continue for many more
      years, and all that really seems clear at this point is that from 3 to 1.5 million years ago,
      bipedal primates of about 1.25 to 1.75 m in height roamed the grasslands and forests, and
      that at least some of these animals made tools.


      ARCHAEOLOGICAL EVIDENCE OF THE ORIGINS OF CULTURE
      We can begin to look at the archeological record to determine how our ancestors actually
      lived and changed over time. As always, the problem here is one of poor evidence. Perhaps
      the only way in which we will understand the details of our origins would be if we found
      several Pompeii-like sites where volcanic eruptions had trapped early humans some two to
      three million years ago, toward evening, say, around a water hole on the East African savanna.
      Such a catastrophe might have killed thousands of animals, including some hominins.
      Without wishing any disaster to even these, our most distant hominin ancestors, such a
      volcanic event would be most scientiﬁcally useful if it happened just after these hominins
      had scavenged or hunted their food, butchered it with stone tools, and then dispersed into
                                                                      THE ORIGINS OF CULTURE       107


social groups to sleep off the meal. At present, however, our direct archaeological evidence
about the initial period of the evolution of culture is extremely meager; we have only a few
small sites, almost all of which are in southern and eastern Africa.
     About ﬁve million years ago, a large lake covered about 130 km2 of what today is the
Serengeti Plain, in central East Africa. Countless generations of animals, including, no
doubt, our hominin ancestors, lived near this lake, and today their fossilized bones are
thickly distributed through the black clay of the ancient shoreline and lake bed. About a
half million years before the appearance of culture-bearing animals in this part of the world,
the lake and the adjacent areas were the scene of dramatic geological activity. Volcanoes
near the lake had been erupting for millions of years, and in a particularly violent episode
about a million and a half years ago, a volcano to the south of the lake covered it with a
layer of ash and molten rock some 5 m thick. Similar eruptions occurred in succeeding
millennia, and today we can measure the intensity of each volcanic episode by gauging the
thickness of each superimposed ash level. Sometime during and after these volcanic
eruptions, the climate of the area began a cycle of alternating dry and wet periods. These
millions of years of volcanic activity and climatic change eventually covered the original
lake and adjacent lands with a 100-m-thick deposit of sand, ash, and lake sediments, the
surface of which is the present Serengeti Plain. Ancient ﬂoods cut down through this plain
at several points, creating Olduvai Gorge and revealing in its cliffs and ﬂoor many
concentrations of stone tools and animal bones. These sites represent by far our best
archaeological record of human activities at the time of the emergence of the genus
Homo.41
     One such concentration, Site DK I, has been radiometrically dated to about 1.75 million
years ago, making it one of the oldest in Olduvai Gorge. The site is composed of a layer several
meters thick of bones, worked and unworked stone, and other debris. Because of the
complex stratigraphy, it is difﬁcult to separate this accumulation into different levels with
any assurance that the divisions represent discrete hominin occupations.
     The most prominent archaeological feature at DK I is a semicircle of stones (Figure 3.9)
lying within a concentration of stone tools and animal bones. Measuring approximately
3 m in diameter and made of chunks of vesicular basalt, this feature was originally inter-
preted by some as a foundation for a windbreak or some other temporary structure, but
the evidence is inconclusive. The tools found here are similar to the other materials from
Beds I and II at Olduvai: hundreds of crudely ﬂaked stones, some of them showing evidence
of use, others simply by-products of the manufacturing process. Although it is tempting to
see Site DK I as a “home-base” for hominins, the evidence suggests that natural processes
played a major role in site formation.42
     Another Olduvai site, FLK I, is particularly important because several hominin bone
fragments were found in its various levels, including the remains of an early hominin that
Louis Leakey named Zinjanthropus, which most now assign to Parathropus boisei and
presumed by many anthropologists not to be a maker of stone tools. This “Zinjanthropus
ﬂoor” covers an area of more than 1,036 m2 and contains several thousand pieces of worked
stone and about 3,500 identiﬁable mammal bones. Many stone artifacts and pieces of
shattered bone are concentrated in a “working area” some 5 m in diameter, and a relatively
clear arc-shaped area in the midst of all this debris suggests to some the remains of a
temporary shelter. But just as with Site DK I, the FLK I site is likely the result of cultural
and natural processes rather than a pristine living surface.
108   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY




      FIGURE 3.9 Site DK I. Plan of the stone circle and the remains on the occupation surface. Stones,
      including artifacts, are shown in gray. Fossil bones are shown in outline. A consideration of tapho-
      nomic processes makes the interpretation of this as a home base or a windbreak unlikely.


           A few other sites in Africa have been shown to have stone tools that date to about
      2 million years ago, including Koobi Fora, where crude stone tools appear to be at least
      2.3 million years old.
           These early stone tools from Olduvai, Koobi Fora, and a few other sites provide some
      indications about the nature of our ancestors. Studies of the Olduwan tools by Nicholas
      Toth indicate that already by 1.7 million years ago our ancestors at Olduvai had developed
      a preference for right-handedness.43 Based on the marks left that indicate how they held
      the stone cores when they hit them to produce stone ﬂakes, the Olduvai hominins seem to
      have the same proportions of right-handers—90 percent—as do modern populations. Toth
      also suggests that archaeologists may have been fundamentally wrong about the Olduvai
      tools in assuming that the big “core-tools” were the object of the tool-making: He studied
      wear patterns on the putative “hand-axes” from Olduvai and concluded that they rarely
      show any wear indicative of use—rather, it was the ﬂakes that were the point of the tool-
      making, and the “hand-axes” and the core-tools were in many cases the by-products of tool
      manufacture.
                                                                     THE ORIGINS OF CULTURE      109


     The question of what these tools were used for is a central element in debates about
the nature of our early evolution.

COMPARATIVE PRIMATOLOGY AND THE ORIGINS OF CULTURE
Many researchers view human evolution as a
long corridor, where chimpanzees enter at one
end and modern hunter-gatherers exit at the
other.
J. Tooby and I. Devore44

To use primate studies to investigate our origins, we must deﬁne clearly the ways in which
we are different from them. Tooby and DeVore list six major areas in which we differ funda-
mentally from other contemporary primates: (1) bipedalism; (2) situation-appropriate,
intensive male parental investment and an increase in female parental investment; (3) an
unparalleled degree of hunting and meat consumption; (4) a change in life-history
correlates: an extension of life span, an increase in the period of investment in offspring, a
marked increase in the altriciality (i.e., the length of time the young remain in the direct
care and physically with the parents) of human young; (5) an expansion of ecozones
occupied, from tropical woodland and forest into savanna areas, but eventually including
every other terrestrial ecozone; (6) concealed ovulation with continuous sexual receptivity.
     Given that chimpanzees and ourselves share a common ancestor, perhaps as recently
as six to eight million years ago, how did these differences arise?
     While some scholars think studying contemporary primates will tell us little about our
origins, others see in them prototypical behavior for everything that is human. McGrew,45
for example, notes that culture in other species is studied by disciplines other than
anthropology, such as psychology and zoology. These lend different views to how we deﬁne
culture and how we recognize culture in nonhuman primates.
     A major problem in applying primatological studies to the question of human origins,
aside from the fact that poachers are killing off the last remaining wild groups of these
animals, is that observing them is not a purely scientiﬁc procedure. Observers see aggression,
dominance, and so on, partly as a projection of their own personalities, and thus models
of cultural origins based on primate studies are inherently suspect.
     To begin with the basic physical changes, to make a human out of a chimpanzee-like
ancestor, the legs had to be lengthened greatly in relation to body size, the hip and knee
joints had to be repositioned to allow bipedalism, and the spine had to develop an S-shaped
curvature to cushion the brain against the shocks of bipedal locomotion. The face, jaw, and
teeth had to be changed from the straight-row, prominent canines-and-incisors conﬁgura-
tion of early primates to the curved human dental arch with reduced canines and incisors,
and adapted to grinding rather than puncturing (Figure 3.10). In the long course of our
evolution from apes, we lost most of our body hair, our sexual organs and behavior changed
greatly, and our brains were greatly expanded and probably “rewired.”
     Consider ﬁrst the simple matter of body size. A survey of numerous primate species
indicates that a pronounced size difference between the sexes is relatively uncommon,46 and
thus “marked morphological and behavioral dimorphism is not a primitive characteristic
of primates but has evolved in certain genera in relation to particular patterns of living.”47
One clue as to what patterns of living these might have been can be seen in the size
           110        PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                        differences of the sexes in living
                                                                                        nonhuman primates. Male and
                                                                                        female gibbons, who spend
                                                                                        most of their lives in trees, are
                                                                                        almost identical in size; among
                                                                                        chimpanzees, who spend some
                                                                                        of their time on the ground,
                                                                                        males are usually larger than
                                                                                        females; and among gorillas,
                                                                                        who are almost completely
                                                                                        terrestrial, males average almost
                                                                                        twice the size of females. Why
                                                                                        should the physical size of the
                                                                                        sexes show this association
                                                                                        with terrain?
                                                                                             A probable factor in
                                                                                        the evolution of both sexual
                                                                                        dimorphisms and the overall
                                                                                        increase in size of Homo
                                                                                        sapiens sapiens of both sexes
FIGURE 3.10 Teeth preserve best of all body parts. Note the difference between
                                                                                        was the need for defense against
chimpanzees and hominins in the shape of the dental arcade. Other distinctive fea-
tures include the presence or absence of a canine diastema and the size of the molars.  predators. Our ancestors appar-
                                                                                        ently evolved in environments
                                                                                        where competition and pre-
                       dation by large cats and other carnivores would have been signiﬁcant, and thus it is not at
                       all surprising that part of our evolution in these environments would have been in the
                       direction of greater physical size. A human with a riﬂe, or even a crude spear, would have
                       some reasonable defenses, but until tool-use reached this point there would no doubt have
                       been strong direct selection for increasing physical size. Our earliest tool-using ancestors
                       were only about 3 or 4 feet tall, weighing perhaps 60 or 70 pounds—not really a formidable
                       competitor, given the other animals in its range. Today, on the African savannas, baboon
                       populations are able to survive, despite occasional predation by leopards and lions, partly
                       because they have retained impressive canine and incisor teeth and great physical strength.
                       By 10 million years ago, however, our ancestors had probably lost these dental defenses.
                       Another factor may have been females’ preference for mating with larger individuals—who
                       may have had greater ability to provide food and protection and to produce offspring with
                       these same qualities.
                            But drawing conclusions about a primate’s physical characteristics and, especially,
                       social behavior on the basis of the characteristics of its physical environment is plagued with
                       ambiguities and difﬁculties. In some animal species, sexual dimorphisms seem to be linked
                       to differences in feeding strategies of males and females. While this may have been of some
                       importance to our early primate ancestors, the kinds of food eaten by males and females
                       probably overlapped considerably soon after tool-use began.48 Nonetheless, early hominin
                       males and females would probably have been under increasingly different selective
                       pressures as soon as males began specializing in hunting and females in gathering—
                       specializations that may have appeared only comparatively late and sporadically.
                                                                             THE ORIGINS OF CULTURE    111


     Another aspect of sexual dimorphism among humans is particularly intriguing when
seen in comparison with nonhuman primates: namely, the secondary sexual characteristics
that differentiate human males and females. Among human females, breasts are signiﬁc-
antly larger than among males—in fact, the size, shape, and other differences distinguishing
male and female breasts are much more pronounced than in any other mammal species,
and only in humans do breasts ﬁrst enlarge at puberty rather than at the ﬁrst pregnancy.49
Selection for increased breast size appears to have involved a complex set of factors,
including the erotic role; Rose Frisch has even suggested that the disproportionate size of
the human female breast may have evolved because of its role “as a cooling ﬁn to get rid of
body heat.”50 Breast size cannot be explained simply in terms of milk production, since size
seems to have almost no relationship to effective functioning in human beings. Similarly,
the human penis is far larger, relatively and absolutely, than that of any other primate,
including the gorilla. In addition, human females have softer skin and higher voices than
males and have lost more of their body hair—although compared to the other species of
primates, males also have remarkably little body hair.
     Many explanations have been offered for the origins of these characteristics. A primary
difference, for example, between humans and other primates, and one that many people
link directly to human origins, is that human females do not exhibit estrus; that is, women’s
receptivity to sexual intercourse does not seem to increase to any large extent with the rise
in estrogen levels that precedes ovulation. How can we account for this? One suggestion
is that
    in all probability the evolutionary development of hair reduction, increased skin sensitivity
    and tactile changes involving skin tension were [sic] all associated with increasing the tactile
    sensations of coital body contact, especially in the frontal presentation. Likewise the breasts
    of young women taken together with other features (limb contour, complexion, and the
    like) seem to represent the main visual sexual releasers for the male. While the latter features
    may have been due to straight-forward intersexual selection by ancient males the former
    features have probably been selected in both sexes for their effect in improving sexual
    rewards, in inducing sexual love, and in maintaining pair bonds. The same is also likely to
    be true for the presence of orgasm in women and the absence of the more typical
    mammalian estrus.51
     Our loss of the body hair that our primate relatives retained is a more radical develop-
ment than it might seem. Naked skins may increase sexual sensitivity, and hair loss even
seems to have helped, paradoxically, in water conservation; but naked skins increase the
risks of skin cancers and other diseases, and they also open the body to vermin in a way
that no chimpanzee must live with.
     Other basic differences between ourselves and other primates, and possible reasons for
them, are evident if we compare baboons and chimpanzees. Baboons inhabit a diversity of
environments, but our most reliable and complete information comes from savanna-
adapted populations in central and east Africa. Within the baboon troop, the eldest males
have almost unimpeded access to food and sex, and they protect their privileges with
aggressive behavior. Younger males are allowed access to females only on the sufferance of
more dominant males, although they are constantly testing this dominance by attempting
to strike up meaningful relationships with concupiscent females. Often this will incite a
dominant male to charge and make threatening gestures. Similarly, when desirable but
limited food is available, such as fruit or a clutch of eggs, the dominant males and females
112   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      take what they want ﬁrst. A mother and child may share food, but there is no systematic
      food sharing between adult members of the group.
           When baboon troops move across savanna or open environments, they typically position
      members according to age and sex. Adolescent males are on the periphery, dominant adult
      males are in the front-center, adult females are behind the adult males, and dependent
      young are stationed near the adult females. This is of course an excellent defensive forma-
      tion, offering the best protection to the young and females, on whom the perpetuation of
      the group depends. There are many more adolescent males than necessary for reproduction,
      so although they would endure the most losses to predators, the stability of the group would
      not suffer much. Signiﬁcantly, when the baboon troop moves into more forested areas,
      the positioning becomes much more ﬂuid and dispersed, indicating, not too surprisingly,
      that terrain is an important determinant of behavior for baboons, and that savanna
      environments seem to put a premium on group cohesiveness and dominance hierarchies—
      although forest-dwelling chimpanzees, counterintuitively, perhaps, seem to exhibit more
      group hunting, tool-use, and forms of cooperation than savanna-dwelling chimpanzees.52
           Some baboon groups seem to construct dominance hierarchies on the basis of length
      of residence in the troop, and in general baboons seem somewhat more variable and
      adaptable in dominance hierarchies and aggression than previously thought.
           Thus, in trying to explain how culture-bearing individuals developed from our primate
      ancestors, we must look for factors or conditions that would work against these dominance
      hierarchies and promote the distinctive human family structure, with its food sharing,
      division of labor, and pair bonding.
           The relevance of baboons to our own ancestry may be somewhat limited because we
      are much more closely related to chimpanzees. Chimpanzees also inhabit diverse
      environments, and generalizations about their behavior are as dangerous as in the case of
      baboons. The most studied chimpanzees are those of the Tanzanian forests, especially those
      of the Gombe Stream area.53 In Gombe, many of these chimpanzee groups have been
      regularly fed by the people observing them, and since most groups are cut off by modern
      development from their complete range and interactions with more distant groups, we
      cannot expect these primates to be perfect reﬂections of chimpanzee behavior in the true
      natural state. But it is striking that the chimpanzees of this area behave very differently from
      the savanna-dwelling baboons. Access to food and sex is much less rigidly controlled, and
      the entire dominance hierarchy seems to be less in evidence. In one instance where a female
      was sexually receptive for a record 21 days, the males of the chimpanzee group, young and
      old alike, stood in line for her favors with only minor apparent bickering.54 This is not
      always typical behavior, and the adolescents were effectively barred from mating with some
      females in many cases, but compared to baboons, chimpanzees are absolute libertines in
      sexual matters. Strictly speaking, chimpanzees do not have true estrus cycles, but they do
      have periods of greater and lesser sexual receptivity.
           Similarly, there is also a diminution of territoriality. Chimpanzees run for kilometers
      along trails through the forests, often alone or with one or two others, and individuals
      frequently leave one small group to go live with another. So relaxed are chimpanzees, in
      fact, about sex and territoriality that they have aroused envious feelings in some human
      observers. “Chimpanzees, it seems, successfully achieve what Homo sapiens radicals only
      dream of: peaceful, non-competitive, non-coercive, non-possessive, egalitarian, jealousy-
      free, promiscuous, non-tyrannical communes.”55
                                                                      THE ORIGINS OF CULTURE       113


     This may be a somewhat idealized picture. Chimpanzees have elaborate threat rituals
and do menace each other according to a well-developed hierarchy. In addition, chimpanzees
are the only animals besides ourselves who regularly use objects as weapons—usually wooden
clubs or thrown rocks and debris.56 They ﬁght over food and females, and sometimes over
rank, and they are the only other primates known to practice cannibalism, having been
observed on several occasions eating young chimps alive.57
     Tanner notes that wild chimpanzees place nuts on ﬂat roots or stones and then break
them open by hitting them with sticks or rocks, suggesting that “a fairly intelligent ancestral
ape could have taken the step from such opportunistic tool use during foraging, to tool-
making and more regular use of tools in plant gathering.”58 She also notes that female
chimpanzees use tools more often than males in nut-cracking. Moreover, they generally use
tools in more complex ways than males, and they teach their daughters to use tools and
even supply them with tools.59
     In reviewing hunting and meat-eating by chimpanzees, Boesch and Boesch-
Achermann60 note that the frequency of hunting in wild chimpanzees is quite variable,
sometimes being dependent on group size and the number of adult males. There is also no
clear evidence that meat-sharing for sexual favors is more common when females are in
estrus. In addition, there seems to be a rudimentary sexual division of labor among
chimpanzees, with male chimpanzees more adept at hunting and female chimpanzees
spending more time nut-cracking or collecting termites and other invertebrates—a
prelude, perhaps, to the sharp division of labor in human hunting and gathering groups.


ETHNOLOGY AND THE STUDY OF EARLY HOMININ ECONOMIES
With the evidence from Gona, Olorgesailie, Olduvai Gorge, and the few other sites of this
time period (c. 2.6–1.0 million years ago), we must account for, among other develop-
ments: (1) the evolution of stone tool-use, (2) the approximate doubling of human brain
size, (3) increased stature and changes in facial architecture and other physical features, and
(4) the migrations of hominins throughout the warmer regions of the Old World.
      Great controversies have erupted over the explanation of these changes, particularly
about the economic basis of these transitions. What is at issue here is the very basis of almost
all human evolution, since we must assume that we are mainly the physical products of the
roughly two million years of natural selection on all the generations that connect us to the
hominins of Africa. Arguments on these issues have centered on whether or not early Homo
did no, some, or a lot of hunting, and how much like modern peoples they were in their
social relationships.61 It is not surprising, perhaps, that in trying to understand what those
selective forces and environments were, anthropologists have depended heavily on
ethnographic studies of people who until recently lived as hunter-foragers in the savannas
of southern and eastern Africa, particularly the Kalahari Bushmen. Some feel, however,
that the behavior of these modern-day hunter-gatherers may have almost nothing to tell
us about our hominin ancestors. Edwin Wilmsen,62 for example, suggests that almost every-
thing we know about these people is contaminated by Western misperceptions. But the
Kalahari hunter-gatherers and others at least illustrate some of the possibilities open to our
ancestors in this kind of environment.
      Studies of African savanna ecology suggest that scavenging could have been a signiﬁcant
part of early hominin repertoires. African savannas would seem to reward animals who are
114   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      opportunists and generalists when it comes to food: An early hominin might well
      have adopted the principle of “eat it if it moves, or has reasonably recently moved.”
      Schaller and Lowther spent a few days during the dry season on the Serengeti Plain
      and found a lot of edible meat in the form of a dead buffalo (which did not appear to
      have been killed by a predator), some lion kills, and a few incapacitated animals that
      could have been killed.63 Blumenschine and his colleagues found that scavenging would
      have been possible and even rewarding, presuming that our ancestors went for the
      brains and marrow of lion kills and other casualties.64 Small animals, such as juvenile
      Thompson’s gazelles, persisted as carcasses for only about a day before some scavenger
      totally consumed them, but larger animals, such as adult buffalo, remained as signiﬁcant
      food sources for about four days, after which even if they were not eaten by lions,
      hyenas, vultures, and so on, they were putrid to the point that their “market value” had
      plummeted.
           Even without scavenging, our ancestors may have developed a way to subcontract
      some of the effort and risk of hunting to lions in a way that is right in line with our later
      history as one of the most selﬁsh, exploitative, rapacious members of the animal family.
      O’Connell and his colleagues have shown that the Hadza, hunter-gatherers who live in
      northern Tanzania, sometimes scavenge simply by scaring lions away from kills by making
      a lot of noise.65
           The Kalahari hunter-gatherers keep their population densities low and thinly dis-
      tributed. The low level of productivity of their hot, arid environment, as manipulated by
      their simple technology (bows, arrows, digging sticks, and so forth), requires that they spend
      most of the year in groups of 25 people or less, often on the move from one camp to another.
      Most of their diet is made up of vegetable products, tortoises, and other small game, but
      occasionally giraffes and other large animals are killed, usually through cooperative hunt-
      ing by several males. Although females provide the bulk of the group’s food by gathering
      and processing plants and eggs, nestlings, turtles, and other small animals, men do all the
      hunting of large animals among most known remaining hunting-gathering societies,
      including the Bushmen and Australian Aborigines.
           Kalahari Bushmen also illustrate the value of division of labor. We all know that it is
      better, in complicated tasks, to work as an integrated group doing different things than for
      everyone to do every task, whether the task involves getting a football downﬁeld or building
      a supercomputer. The Kalahari split tasks into those that men do, those that women do,
      and those that everyone does, children included.
           Hunter-gatherer economic life is also dominated by the principle of reciprocity: Food
      and other resources are exchanged among kinsmen, balancing out the periodic shortages
      that may afﬂict any member or nuclear family in the band.
           Like most hunting and gathering societies, the Bushmen are at least somewhat
      territorial. They move often but always within a relatively restricted region, usually 25–30
      kilometers in all directions from a central water hole or home base. Clearly, some degree
      of territoriality is an advantage if resources are not uniformly distributed; it is efﬁcient to
      know where reliable sources of ﬂint, vegetables, game animals, and water are within one’s
      territory, and the group forced out of its territory is faced with unpredictable supplies and,
      perhaps, the hostility of the group on whose territory it is trespassing. Thus, any models or
      reconstructions we make regarding our early hominin ancestors should incorporate the
      assumption that they were probably at least loosely territorial.
                                                                    THE ORIGINS OF CULTURE      115


     Hunter-gatherer population densities are directly determined by resource availability
and are maintained by methods of population control that seem harsh to us. The aboriginal
population density of most of Australia (or at least these populations as they existed until
recent decades), for example, can be predicted with a high degree of accuracy simply from
the amount of average rainfall in the various areas. This balance between population and
resources is maintained mainly by marriage rules and female infanticide. Birdsell reports
that 15 to 30 percent of all babies are killed, usually by the grandmother, who places her
hand over the infant’s mouth and nose as it is born so that it never draws its ﬁrst breath.66
She acts out a group’s unstated decision that keeps a mother from carrying more than one
infant while she works.
     Studies of !Kung infant breast-feeding may reveal the powerful controls on fertility
rates that are available to a group simply through natural mechanisms. !Kung women
breast-feed their babies as often as 60 times every 24 hours, including during the night when
the mother is asleep, and there is some evidence that this frequency is necessary to produce
and maintain the hormonal levels that suppress ovulation; a study of women in Scotland
shows that they usually nurse their babies only six times in 24 hours and that this has less
effect in suppressing ovulation.67
     In her study of hunters and gatherers in New Guinea, Patricia Townsend observed that
although women produce over 90 percent of one group’s food, this society is strongly
patriarchal.68 Townsend found that the women in this group usually marry soon after
puberty and have about six children. Malaria and other diseases kill off about 43 percent
of the children early in life, but girls die from diseases at a much greater rate than boys,
probably from malign neglect. If thought necessary, unwanted girls are killed by
strangulation with a vine soon after birth.
     Most hunter-gatherers keep their numbers at a level far below what could be
supported in any average year, and it is the older people who remember the worst winters
and the longest droughts that must be accommodated by the group’s sizes. Someone said
that when an old person dies it is like a library burning down, and this is true also among
hunter-gatherers.
     In summary, the Kalahari Bushmen and other contemporary hunter-gatherers may
offer some general guidelines for interpreting the archaeological remains of our ancestors
in these areas of Africa—even though we know that in mentality and many other ways they
are profoundly different from early Homo.


MODELS OF CULTURAL ORIGINS

The distance is nothing; it is only the ﬁrst step
that is difﬁcult.
Marquise de Deffand (remarking on the legend that
St. Denis walked two leagues carrying his head in his
hands)

Having compared nonhuman primates to ourselves, let us look at several attempts to
formulate general explanations for the ﬁrst stages of the evolution of culture. Many people
have considered this problem, and it is a subject fraught with political implications, for it
116   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      involves the basic nature of humanity and the forces that produce cultural change. No
      explanation for cultural origins is complete or conclusive, but many have points of interest.
           A great difﬁculty in explaining the factors that produced humans out of a chimpanzee-
      like animal is that to do so one must try to reconstruct the patterns of natural selection that
      existed millions of years ago in ecosystems that no longer exist.
           Some years ago, Owen Lovejoy argued that bipedalism as an evolutionary product is
      essentially a matter of sex and the economics of foraging.69 As he notes, in some ways
      bipedalism seems an unlikely development; it is a slow method of movement, and an
      animal expends great amounts of energy just holding itself up. Also, because we evolved as
      a quadrupedal and semi-erect animal, bipedalism is in a sense an unnatural form of
      locomotion. Our spines evolved to serve as a cantilevered bridge-like structure, and even
      though this structure was successfully modiﬁed into a bipedal erect form, we are heirs to
      many problems, including slipped disks and other back problems, bunions, hernias, poor
      blood circulation in our legs and feet, and a shortened birth canal that means difﬁcult births
      for many mothers. If bipedalism is so bad, why should it appear? Lovejoy argues that all
      apes are potentially semi-erect animals by virtue of natural selection for “handedness”
      —the constant use of the hand to forage for food. And if one’s evolutionary niche does
      not reward great bursts of speed over the short run, bipedalism is quite effective for long
      periods of methodical hunting and gathering.
           Lovejoy notes that through the later history of the primates, there has been an
      evolution in the reproductive strategy. The trend has been toward decreasing the number
      of offspring a female has but increasing the parental investment in each one, so that they
      have a better chance to survive and in turn reproduce. (Ecologists call this a k-strategy, as
      opposed to the r-strategy of an animal like the houseﬂy, which has thousands of offspring,
      only a few of which survive.)
           The heart of Lovejoy’s argument is that bipedalism was selected over quadrupedalism
      in our ancestors because it was a way to increase reproductive success. It allowed our
      ancestors to have more offspring while maintaining a high level of parental investment in
      the form of food provision, protection, and training. This was accomplished by evolving
      an economic adaptation and social organization that allowed the mother to spend less of
      her energy getting her own food and more of her time taking care of offspring. Lovejoy
      argues that one way females could successfully raise several children born within a short
      time interval would be to induce the male to provide the female with food on a regular
      basis, to take part in other tasks of raising many children, and to do it all without competing
      with other males to the point that the group would break up into murderous, insanely
      jealous individuals. This meant that the dominance hierarchy and competition common
      in other primate groups had to be suppressed. One way in which this might occur is if
      individuals began to differ in perceived “attractiveness,” so that qualities of physical
      appearance and personality played a role in sexual desirability and feelings of “love.” The
      advantages of suppressed conﬂict in the human group might also be related to the fact that
      humans developed concealed ovulation and sexual receptivity.
           Many people have criticized Lovejoy’s model. As Kinzey notes, studies of chimpanzees
      show that it is the females, not the males, who most frequently share food with young
      chimps.70 Another problem is that substantial differences in size between males and females
      in primates seem to be associated with competition between males in polygamous mating
      patterns, whereas Lovejoy proposes monogamous patterns for early hominins.
                                                                     THE ORIGINS OF CULTURE        117


      But if one argues, as various scholars have,
that the negative aspects of bipedalism are com-
pensated for by the increased intelligence and
better tool-making abilities of our ancestors, how
was it possible for bipedalism to appear before any
signiﬁcant increase in brain size and—presumably
—intelligence took place? Recently, this question
of the origins of bipedalism has emphasized
several major avenues of research, including
biomechanics, energetics, and ecological contexts.
      Biomechanics71 is the study of motion and the
effects of forces on the body, for example, how
bones are shaped in part by the actions of muscles
on them. We know, for instance, that modern              FIGURE 3.11 The epigenetic development of the bicondylar
human babies are born with a femur (upper leg            angle in the human femur is shown in this growth sequence
bone) that has a bicondylar72 angle of zero degrees      from a seven-month fetus (right) to a seven-year-old child
(Figure 3.11). As a growing child learns to walk,        (left).
the femur begins to “knee-in” (develop the
bicondylar angle) as a result of how the muscles and ligaments interact (create a mechanical
load) on the condyles—by about eight years of age, a child achieves the adult bicondylar
angle of 8 to 11 degrees.73 This angle is important because it helps stabilize balance as a
human walks. Close examination of the form of fossil hominin bones therefore offers clues
as to whether or not they walked bipedally in the same way as modern humans.74 While
interpretations have varied, some researchers have suggested that the type of bipedalism
that australopiths such as “Lucy” had was not exactly the same as ours today. Such studies
are important in examining how bipedalism evolved in the hominins.
      Some researchers have examined the energetics of bipedality to assess whether this was
potentially signiﬁcant in the origins of this type of walking. Leonard and Robertson,75 for
example, propose that energy savings are important to reproductive success in early
hominins. Their model, which is based on a hypothetical reconstruction of “Lucy”
(Australopithecus afarensis), suggests that walking bipedally results in an energy savings of
4 percent over short day ranges (distances traveled in the search for food) and 15 percent
to 20 percent over large day ranges compared to nonhuman primates (monkeys and apes)
that walk quadrupedally (using all four limbs). These energy savings could be used for
growth and reproduction,76 thus echoing some of Lovejoy’s early ideas about the beneﬁts
of bipedalism.
      Still other researchers have concentrated on the ecological contexts that may have
facilitated the development of bipedalism. These studies often focus on the period of the
last common ancestor (LCA) to hominins and chimpanzees, in the period around 8 to 10
million years ago. Common to all of these is the observation that environmental changes
resulted in discontinuous habitats. That is, as open terrain in the form of wooded parklands
and savanna grasslands developed due to worldwide climatic drying trends, the continuous
forested areas in which the LCA lived were broken up by these more open contexts. Food
resources would become more scattered as a result.
      One explanation for the origins of bipedalism stresses that this context would lead to
increased competition for food and aggression both between groups and within groups.77
           118       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                 The development of bipedal displays, such as are seen in living
                                                 chimpanzees (Figure 3.12), is a mechanism for peacefully
                                                 resolving these conﬂicts, because actual attacks that lead to
                                                 death or injury tend to occur rarely in these situations. Instead,
                                                 the threat underlying the bipedal display is enough to prevent
                                                 an actual attack. Males that have bipedal display behavior
                                                 might thus be more successful in attracting mates, while
                                                 females with this behavior might have more access to food
                                                 resources as well as the ability to protect their young more
                                                 effectively. Over time, the juveniles in the group add the “play”
                                                 behavior of bipedal displays, and the wider spread use of this
                                                 behavior leads to changes in anatomy that facilitate walking
                                                 bipedally.
                                                      Other explanations for the origins of bipedalism in this
                                                 context emphasize having the hands free to gather as well as
                                                 carry food,78 or the adoption of one type of LCA social organ-
                                                 ization, the large group.79 Having a large group size, of course,
                                                 is one way to outcompete smaller groups for resources simply
                                                 by the force of sheer numbers and threat of aggression. The
                                                 disadvantage of a large group is that it will eat up the resources
                                                 in a given area at a much faster rate than a small group. This
                                                 means that a large group will have to cover more distance on
                                                 a daily basis in the search for food, and bipedalism is a strategy
FIGURE 3.12 Bipedal behavior in a bonobo.        to accomplish this extended travel. The evolutionary line
                                                 leading to chimpanzees, on the other hand, emphasized small
                 group size and less daily distance to travel, thus leading to the retention of quadrupedal
                 walking.
                      It is quite clear that bipedalism is very ancient, and that it originates long before stone
                 tool-use. But, what of other behavioral patterns that might have lead to or accompanied
                 the origins of culture? Food-sharing, for example, would tend to lengthen the period during
                 which a female was sexually responsive, if sex served as an inducement to food-sharing.
                 And this was an important evolutionary change in more ways than one. Human females
                 are fertile for only a relatively unpredictable three days a month, so intercourse at least a
                 few times a week would be necessary for successful fertility rates.
                      In an analysis of the link between sexual behavior and other aspects of culture, Donald
                 Symons has addressed the problem of human origins on the basis of a sustained com-
                 parison of sexuality in men and women.80 Symons summarizes the major differences
                 between men and women in this regard as follows. (1) Intrasexual competition generally is
                 much more intense among males than among females, and in preliterate societies
                 competition over women probably is the single most important cause of violence. (2) Men
                 incline to polygyny, whereas women are more malleable in this respect and, depending on
                 the circumstances, may be equally satisﬁed in polygamous, monogamous, or polyandrous
                 marriages. (3) Almost universally, men experience sexual jealousy of their mates. Women
                 are more ﬂexible in this respect, but in certain circumstances women’s experience of sexual
                 jealousy may be characteristically as intense as men’s. (4) Men are much more likely to be
                 sexually aroused by the sight of women and the female genitals than women are by the sight
                                                                         THE ORIGINS OF CULTURE       119


of men and the male genitals. (5) For men, physical characteristics, especially those associ-
ated with youth, are by far the most important determinants of women’s sexual attractive-
ness. For females, physical characteristics are somewhat less important determinants of
men’s sexual attractiveness; political and economic prowess are more important, and youth
is relatively unimportant. (6) Much more than women, men are predisposed to desire a
variety of sex partners for the sake of variety (although one is reminded here of Cornelia
Otis Skinner’s remark that “Women’s virtue is man’s greatest invention”). (7) Among all
cultures, copulation is considered to be essentially a service or favor that women render to
men, and not vice versa, regardless of which sex derives or is thought to derive greater
pleasure from sexual intercourse.81
      In the absence of evidence for a genetic basis for these supposed traits, however, and
given the fact that patriarchal societies have dominated human history, we cannot tell if
any of these traits are biologically based or are, instead, cultural constructions. Opinions on
this point vary. Admitting the great plasticity and potential for variability of human sexual
behavior, Symons thinks that there is a strong biological, genetic, profoundly evolutionary
basis to these apparent behavioral differences between males and females and these cultural
aspects of sexuality. And this is what one would expect, given our evolutionary origins. For
millions of years the evolutionary advantage has been with men who have had intercourse
with as many young women as they could—provided that the resulting progeny could
be raised to reproductive age. Lovejoy’s model was based on initial monogamous pairings,
but ethnographic evidence suggests that human mating patterns have been primarily
polygamous for millions of years.
      John Tooby and Irven DeVore have suggested that the various models of cultural
origins and subsequent human evolution seem most plausible if we assume that our
ancestors of several million years ago began to increase the time they spent hunting or
scavenging other animals.82
      They begin with male parental investment. As noted previously, it is highly unusual
among primates for males to invest signiﬁcant energy in providing their offspring with
food, yet humans do. Tooby and DeVore note that, whereas it is not economically efﬁcient
to carry low-calorie vegetable foods long distances back to one’s mate and offspring, meat
is a concentrated form of high-calorie nutrition, and thus would be more advantageous to
transport. Tooby and DeVore also point out that “male coalitions” may have developed
because of the advantages of group hunting. Reciprocity, sharing, and exchange, too, may
be linked to hunting. Tooby and DeVore argue that vegetable foods offer few evident
rewards to the kinds of exchange, sharing, and reciprocity typical of all human groups.
Vegetable foods come in many different forms and sizes, and animals tend to gather them
on the basis of energy costs and immediate needs. But meat, “unlike vegetable foods, comes
in discrete quantities: an entire animal is either captured or lost. . . . [V]ariability in hunting
success, and the fact that meat comes in chunked quantities often in excess of what the cap-
turers can readily consume, provides a ready explanation for food sharing, food exchange
and risk sharing through deferred reciprocation among the larger social group.”83
      Regarding the pronounced sexual division of labor among humans, Tooby and
DeVore suggest that extreme differentiation in the kinds of foods males and females gather
is not feasible without food exchange between males and females. “If males changed from
occasional to intensive hunting, one consequence would be the extreme sexual division of
labor found among humans, with females exploiting the more [ﬁxed, vegetable] food
120   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      sources.”84 Similarly, they see stone tool-use as probably an adjunct to the requirements of
      animal butchering and hunting.
           These forms of small-game hunting and scavenging would have rewarded group
      cooperation, reduced dominance hierarchies, improved communication systems, and
      encouraged the development of stone tools for processing meat and vegetable foods.
           In general summary of these models, we have seen that bipedalism, human sexuality,
      social networks, terrain, hunting/scavenging, and various other factors may all be related
      in complex patterns of interaction, resulting in the kinds of animals represented by “Lucy”
      and the other Hadar fossils. These hominins need not have been major tool-users to have
      been “cultural” in fundamental ways.


      Analyzing the Evidence
      How can we go about integrating all this ethnographic, archaeological, primatological, and
      paleontological evidence and use it to understand our origins? To begin with, in an
      evolutionary analysis we must concentrate on those factors that might have allowed some
      individuals and not others to have survived to pass on their genes, so that over time our
      brain size increased and all the other dimensions of the human animal were formed. And
      once we start examining differential reproduction, we must look directly at how food was
      procured, shared, and consumed.
           Initially, researchers vigorously debated whether early hominins hunted or scavenged
      animals based on observations of marks on animal bones and stone tools.85 One might
      think that the simple conjunction of stone tools amidst piles of animal bones, some of
      which show obvious cut marks from being hacked at with stone tools, irresistibly would
      lead one to the conclusion that our ancestors butchered and ate these animals. But one
      archaeologist’s stone-tool-cutting mark was another archaeologist’s hyena-bite mark, and
      when it came to the statistics of the extent and signiﬁcance of different kinds of bone
      alteration, entirely different interpretations arose.
           Since then, numerous studies have examined not only the marks on animal bones,
      but also the availability of animal carcasses in the landscape.86 These suggest that animal
      carcasses with plenty of remaining meat would have been especially available in the
      ecological niche along the woodlands margins (Figure 3.13). Unlike the open grasslands,
      where hyenas and other scavengers would make quick work of most existing carcasses
      including the bones, the woodland margins are not usually inhabited by these scavengers.
      Thus carcasses left behind by leopards that carry their prey up into the trees, or by other
      large cats, are more available in this setting. Additionally, the teeth of the large cats are
      not efﬁcient at stripping off all the meat, so that early hominins observing the cats could
      approach the carcasses once the cats left them behind. Stone tools therefore provided
      “sharp teeth” for hominins to strip meat from bones and clearly offered an advantage in
      these circumstances. Of course, it is entirely possible that hominins also scavenged bones
      from these carcasses and cracked them open with hammerstones to obtain the greasy and
      nutritious marrow.
           The stone tools of two million years ago include a diversity of forms, but most
      sharp-edged pieces are simple ﬂakes. They certainly are adequate for butchering animals,
      whether hunted or scavenged. The absence of “spear-points” or anything resembling
      them strongly suggests that these early hominins had no means of killing large animals,
                                                                           THE ORIGINS OF CULTURE         121

Ecological, zooarchaeological, and behavioral correlates of competition for larger mammal
carcasses, as documented in the Serengeti ecosystem of northern Tanzania.

                              Low competition                       High competition

Ecosystemic variable (N. Tanzania)
  Habitat                     Riparian woodlands                    Non-riparian or non-wooded
  Season and place            Dry in north, wet on plains           Wet in north? Dry on plains
     (Serengeti only)
  Type of competing           Flesh-eater                           Bone-cruncher
     carnivore
  Carnivore:ungulate ratio    Low (Serengeti)                       High (Ngorongoro)
  Stratum                     Arboreal                              Terrestrial
  Time of day                 Mid-day                               Dawn/dusk
  Cause of death              Mass drowning                         Predation by bone-crunching
                                                                      carnivore
Zooarchaeological traces
  Skeletal parts              Little differential destruction       Denser bones survive
                                                                      preferentially
  Portions                    High epiphysis:shaft fragment ratio   Low epiphysis:shaft fragment ratio
  Species                     Low carnivore:ungulate ratio;         High carnivore:ungulate ratio;
                                dominated by single species as        high species diversity?; more
                                in glut; more small species           large species
  Age (mortality)             High neonate:adult ratio              Low neonate:adult ratio
  Fragmentation               Low NISP:MNE or MNI                   High NISP:MNE or MNI
  Surface marks               Low incidence; single agent           High incidence; multiple agents
Behavioral strategy
  Timing of access            Planned search?; unrestricted         Opportunistic search?; access
                                access, including early in           restricted to end of resource life
                                resource life
  Processing/consumption      Energy limited?; complete             Time limited?; consumption of
                                consumption                           highest net yield available
Transport                     Process and consume where found       Transport easily removed parts to
                                                                      safe/concealed locale
Defense/pilfering             No strategies needed                  Cooperative and/or artificial
                                                                      techniques
Predation risk from           Lower                                 Higher
    competitors

FIGURE 3.13 Opportunities for scavenging carcasses in the East African landscape are assessed
using experimental and observational data.



although perhaps they could have used wooden spears—or, as noted earlier, they may not
have hunted.
     Why is it so important to know about the addition of meat to the diet? Here again we
are dealing directly with the factors that shaped us physically and to some extent mentally.
When anthropologists argue about the economy of early hominins they are arguing about
one of the driving forces of human evolution.
122   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      COULD EARLY PLEISTOCENE HUMANS SPEAK?
      Maybe. Academics are notorious for their maddening penchant for qualifying everything
      to the point of utter irresolution, but that’s the nature of human analysis, and when we ask
      a question such as this, the correct answer has to be that it depends in part on how one
      deﬁnes “speech.” Do chimpanzees, for example, speak? Clearly they communicate vast
      amounts of information to each other through noises they make, and they may well com-
      municate far more than we think they do. If we take the reasonable position that human
      abilities to convey meaning through speech can all be placed on a continuum between the
      abilities of a chimpanzee and Winston Churchill, then we can ask when abilities equal to
      our own ﬁrst evolved, and why.
            Various scholars87 believe that our contemporary ﬂuency of speech appeared only after
      about 50,000 years ago and in only a limited number of hominin species (perhaps only
      one); others believe that even the tool-makers of Olduvai Gorge could communicate vocally
      with much greater ﬂuency than chimpanzees. We’ll probably never know much more about
      this issue than we do now. The areas of the human brain most associated with speech, Broca’s
      and Wernicke’s areas, both of which are located on the left side of the brain, were almost
      certainly not as developed in early hominins, given that their brains were much smaller than
      ours. But speech is not simply a matter of brain size. Unlike the anatomy of other animals,
      the human larynx (air passageway in the throat) and the pharynx (food passageway in the
      throat) converge low in the throat, so that we cannot breathe and swallow at the same
      time—something most of us occasionally prove by choking on food swallowed “the wrong
      way.” The advantage to this odd conﬁguration is that it provides a relatively large chamber
      over the vocal cords, permitting sound production of great variety. Some estimates of the
      extent to which early hominins were evolving this human sound apparatus have been made
      on the basis of computer models, but we simply do not have adequate samples of the
      relevant anatomy of early hominins to be sure of their resemblance to us in this regard.
            Why would people have a better or worse chance of living and reproducing successfully
      based on their language abilities? Many possible reasons could be suggested. Just the know-
      ledge conveyed from one person to another, or from one group to another about resource
      availability in distant areas, conﬂict resolution, technological methods, or any number of
      other matters could improve the chances of survival and reproduction. If the !Kung Bushmen
      are any guide in this matter, language would be an extremely important adaptive tool even
      in this low-tech era—and it would greatly mitigate the crushing boredom of this way of life
      as well.


      SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

      We are but “pulvis et umbra,” Horace said, “dust and shadow,” and certainly this is true
      for the long line of fossils that connect us to our beginnings. Nor are the factors that have
      shaped our evolution entirely clear. Climate changes, scavenging, hunting, evolutionary
      change in the biology of our sexuality and mentality, bipedalism, tool-use—all these and
      many other factors seem to have been ingredients in the evolutionary experiment that is
      our past, but the evidence is far too slight to reduce us to some simple product of a few
      factors.
                                                                       THE ORIGINS OF CULTURE          123


      Even if we ﬁght through
all these issues of causation and
taxonomy and eventually reach
a consensus, we will be left
with an equally important and
profound question—the nature
of the mode and tempo of
human physical and cultural
evolution. The question is this:
Does evolution in such things
as human cranial capacity
(Figure 3.14), technological
efﬁciency, administrative cen-
tralization, urbanization, and
so forth, proceed gradually,
with approximately the same
rate of change, or are there long
periods of stability punctuated
by periods of rapid change? As
Robert McC. Adams phrased
it in the context of early states,
does the simile of a “ramp” or of
a series of “steps” best describe
our evolutionary history?88
      This simple question            FIGURE 3.14 The increase in cranial capacity over time in our ancestors was
involves some fairly murky            enormous and rapid by evolutionary standards, but the rate of increase has slowed
political issues. Some fear that      in the last 1,000,000 years, and we may have reached the limits allowed by the
to consider human behavior as         mechanics of human birth and locomotion.
largely an adaptation and the
result of natural selection means that human behavior is beyond social change, that
aggression, racism, and so forth may be genetically inherent. Some people think the
Marxian concept of dialectical development means that even in such matters as the physical
changes from the australopiths to ourselves, we should look for a developmental pattern
showing long periods of stability punctuated by periods in which physical characteristics
changed relatively rapidly. Thus, Gould and Eldredge say that “no gradualism has been
detected within any hominid taxon.”89 But J. E. Cronin and others who have analyzed the
measurements on fossil hominins from four million years ago to ourselves found no
evidence of “stasis” or “punctuation” and believe that the record of human evolution is best
seen as an example of gradual change with some periods of varying rates of evolution.90 To
have any kind of conclusive test of these competing ideas, we need the remains of hundreds
of early hominins, at least some of which fall in the time “gaps” for which we now have no
information.
      M. Henneberg has taken an interesting and novel approach to the lack of precise dates
and the problem of the rate at which human cranial capacities increased. He plotted the
estimated dates for a large group of human fossils from the past 3.5 million years against
the date for each of these fossils that would be predicted based on the assumption that the
124   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      increase in cranial capacity over time was gradual, at about the same rate—a rate estimated
      by a standard mathematical technique called regression.91 The results suggest that the
      increase over time in human cranial capacities was in fact gradual and at about the same
      rate—if one assumes that some fossils are incorrectly dated.
           As important as all these issues are, they are in a sense all just reﬁnements on a basic
      advance in human intellectual history: Whatever the tempo of human evolution, we now
      know its modes, its mechanisms, and its results more clearly than a person of a century and
      a half ago would ever have thought possible.


      BIBLIOGRAPHY
      Adams, R. McC. 1966. The Evolution of Urban Society. Chicago: Aldine.
      Alexander, R. D. 1975. “The Search for a General Theory of Behavior.” Behavioral Science 20:77–100.
      Anderson, P. 1983. “The Reproductive Role of the Human Breast.” Current Anthropology 24(1):25 – 45.
      Audette, R., and T. Gilchrist. 1999. Neanderthin: Eat Like a Caveman to Achieve a Lean, Strong, Healthy Body. New
                   York: St. Martin’s Paperbacks.
      Bartlett, T. Q., R. W. Sussman, and J. M. Cheverud. 1993. “Infant Killing in Primates: A Review of Observed Cases
                   with Speciﬁc Reference to the Sexual Selection Hypothesis.” American Anthropologist 95(4):958–990.
      Bergson, H. 1983. Creative Evolution (L’Evolution Creatrice), authorized translation by A. Miller. Lanham, MD:
                   University Press of America.
      Bertram, B. C. R. 1979. “Serengeti Predators and Their Social Systems.” In Serengeti: Dynamics of an Ecosystem,
                   ed. A. R. E. Sinclair and M. Norton-Grifﬁths. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
      Binford, L. R. 1981. Bones: Ancient Men and Modern Myth. New York: Academic Press.
      ———. 1985. “Human Ancestors: Changing Views of Their Behavior.” Journal of Anthropological Archaeology
                   4(4):292–327.
      ———. 1988. “Fact and Fiction About the Zinjanthropus Floor: Data, Arguments, and Interpretations.” Current
                   Anthropology 19(1):123–135.
      Birdsell, J. B. 1972. Human Evolution. Chicago: Rand McNally.
      ———. 1979. “Ecological Inﬂuences on Australian Aboriginal Social Organization.” In Primate Ecology and
                   Human Origins: Ecological Inﬂuences on Social Organization, ed. I. S. Bernstein and E. O. Smith,
                   pp. 117–151. New York: Garland STPM Press.
      Blumenschine, R. J. 1987. “Characteristics of the Early Hominid Scavenging Niche.” Current Anthropology
                   28(4):383–407.
      ———. 1995. “Percussion Marks, Tooth Marks, and Experimental Determinations of the Timing of Hominid
                   and Carnivore Access to Long Bones at FLK Zinjanthropus, Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania.” Journal of
                   Human Evolution 29:21–51.
      Blumenschine, R. J., J. A. Carvallo, and S. D. Capaldo. 1994. “Competition for Carcasses and Early Hominid
                   Behavioral Ecology: A Case Study and Conceptual Framework.” Journal of Human Evolution
                   27:197–213.
      Blumenschine, R. J., C. W. Marean, and S. D. Capaldo. 1996. “Blind Tests of Inter-Analyst Correspondence and
                   Accuracy in the Identiﬁcation of Cut Marks, Percussion Marks, and Carnivore Tooth Marks on Bone
                   Surfaces.” Journal of Archaeological Science 23:493–507.
      Boesch, C., and H. Boesch. 1981. “Sex Differences in the Use of Natural Hammers by Wild Chimpanzees: A
                   Preliminary Report.” Journal of Human Evolution 10:565–583.
      ———. 1984. “Possible Causes of Sex Differences in the Use of Natural Hammers by Wild Chimpanzees.” Journal
                   of Human Evolution 13:415–440.
      Boesch, C., and H. Boesch-Achermann. 2000. The Chimpanzees of the Taï Forest: Behavioural Ecology and
                   Evolution. New York: Oxford University Press.
      Boesch-Achermann, J., and C. Boesch. 1994. “Hominization in the Rainforest: The Chimpanzee’s Piece of the
                   Puzzle.” Evolutionary Anthropology 3(1):9–16.
      Brace, C. L. 1967. The Stages of Human Evolution: Human and Cultural Origins. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-
                   Hall.
      Brace, C. L., D. P. Tracer, L. Allen Yaroch, J. Robb, K. Brandt, and A. Russel Nelson. 1993. “Clines and Clusters
                   Versus ‘Race’: A Test in Ancient Egypt and of a Death on the Nile.” Yearbook of Physical Anthropology
                   36:1–31.
      Brain, C. K. 1981. The Hunters or the Hunted? Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
      Brooks, D. R., and E. O. Wiley. 1986. Evolution as Entropy: Toward a Uniﬁed Theory of Biology. Chicago: University
                   of Chicago Press.
                                                                                      THE ORIGINS OF CULTURE            125


Brown, F., J. Harris, and A. Walker. 1985. “Early Homo erectus Skeleton from West Lake Turkana, Kenya.” Nature
             316:788–792.
Bunn, H. T. 1981. “Archaeological Evidence for Meat-Eating by Plio-Pleistocene Hominids from Koobi Fora and
             Olduvai Gorge.” Nature 291:574 –577.
Bunn, H. T., L. E. Bartram, and E. M. Kroll. 1988. “Variability in Bone Assemblage Formation from Hadza
             Hunting, Scavenging, and Carcass Processing.” Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 7:412–457.
Bunn, H. T., and E. M. Kroll. 1988. “Reply to L. Binford ‘Fact and Fiction About the Zinjanthropus Floor: Data,
             Arguments, and Interpretations.’ ” Current Anthropology 29(1):135–149.
Cashdan, E. 1983. “Territoriality Among Hunter Foragers: Ecological Models and an Application to Four
             Bushman Groups.” Current Anthropology 24(1):47–66.
Clark, G. A. 1988. “Some Thoughts on the Black Skull: An Archaeologist’s Assessment of WT-17000 (A. boisei)
             and Systematics in Human Paleontology.” American Anthropologist 90(2):357–371.
Clarke, R. J., and P. V. Tobias. 1995. “Sterkfontein Member 2 Foot Bones of the Oldest South African Hominid.”
             Science 269:521–524.
Clutton-Brock, T. H. 1989. “Female Transfer and Inbreeding Avoidance in Social Mammals.” Nature 337:70–72.
Cohen, L. A. 1987. “Diet and Cancer.” Scientiﬁc American 257(5):42–48.
Conroy, G. C. 1990. Primate Evolution. New York: W. W. Norton.
Cook-Deegan, R. M. 1994. The Gene Wars: Science, Politics, and the Human Genome. New York: W. W. Norton.
Cordain, L. 2002. The PaleoDiet: Lose Weight and Get Healthy by Eating the Food You Were Designed to Eat.
             Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Cronin, J. E., N. T. Boaz, C. B. Stringer, and Y. Rak. 1981. “Tempo and Mode in Hominid Evolution.” Nature
             292:113–122.
Crook, J. H. 1972. “Sexual Selection, Dimorphism, and Social Organization in Primates.” In Sexual Selection and
             the Descent of Man 1871–1971, ed. B. Campbell. Chicago: Aldine.
Davis, E. 2005. “Science and Religious Fundamentalism in the 1920s.” American Scientist 93(3):253–260.
Devine, J. 1985. “The Versatility of Human Locomotion.” American Anthropologist 87:550–570.
Dunbaar, R. I. 1988. Primate Social Systems. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Eckhardt, R. B. 1988. “On Early Hominid Adaptation and Heat Stress.” Current Anthropology 29(3):493.
Farraro, G., Trevathan, W., and J. Levy. 1994. Anthropology. An Applied Perspective. New York: West Publishing.
Ferris, T. 1988. Coming of Age in the Milky Way. New York: William Morrow.
Fialkowski, K. 1986. “A Mechanism for the Origin of the Human Brain: A Hypothesis.” Current Anthropology
             27(3):288–290.
Finkel, D. J. 1981. “An Analysis of Australopithecine Dentition.” American Journal of Physical Anthropology
             55:69–80.
Fisher, E. 1979. Woman’s Creation. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Foley, R. 1987. “Hominid Species and Stone-Tool Assemblages: How Are They Related?” Antiquity 61:380–
             392.
Frisch, R. E. 1983. “Comment on P. Anderson, ‘The Reproductive Role of the Human Breast.’ ” Current
             Anthropology 24(1):25– 45.
Futuyma, D. J. 1992. “History and Evolutionary Processes.” In History and Evolution, ed. M. H. Nitecki and
             D. V. Nitecki. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Goodall, J. 1986. The Chimpanzees of Gombe. Cambridge, MA: Belknap (Harvard University Press).
Gould, S. J. 1977. Ever Since Darwin. New York: Norton.
Gould, S. J., and N. Eldridge. 1977. “Punctuated Equilibria: The Tempo and Mode of Evolution Reconsidered.”
             Paleobiology 3:115–151.
Grayson, D. K. 1983. The Establishment of Human Antiquity. New York: Academic Press.
Hamilton, M. E. 1984. “Revising Evolutionary Narratives: A Consideration of Alternative Assumptions About
             Sexual Selection and Competition for Mates.” American Anthropologist 86(3):651–662.
Harcourt-Smith, W. E. H., and L. C. Aiello. 2004. “Fossils, Feet and the Evolution of Human Bipedal
             Locomotion.” Journal of Anatomy 204(5):403–416.
Harding, R. S., and G. Teleki, eds. 1981. Omnivorous Primates. New York: Columbia University Press.
Harris, D. R., ed. 1980. Human Ecology and Savanna Environments. New York: Academic Press.
Harrison, T. 1978. “Present Status and Problems for Paleolithic Studies in Borneo and Adjacent Islands.” In Early
             Paleolithic in South and East Asia, ed. F. Ikawa-Smith. The Hague: Mouton.
Henneberg, M. 1989. “Morphological and Geological Dating of Early Hominid Fossils Compared.” Current
             Anthropology 30(4):527–528.
Hill, J. H. 1978. “Apes and Language.” Annual Review of Anthropology 7:89–112.
Hughes, A. R., and P. V. Tobias. 1977. “A Fossil Skull Probably of the Genus Homo from Sterkfontein, Transvaal.”
             Nature 65:310–312.
Ingold, T. 1988. The Appropriation of Nature. Iowa City: University of Iowa Press.
Isaac, G. 1977. Olorgesailie; Archaeological Studies of a Middle Pleistocene Lake Basin in Kenya. Chicago: University
             of Chicago Press.
126   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      Isbell, L. A., and T. P. Young. 1996. “The Evolution of Bipedalism in Hominids and Reduced Group Size in
                    Chimpanzees: Alternative Responses to Decreasing Resource Availability.” Journal of Human Evolution
                    30:389–397.
      Itzkoff, S. 1987. Why Humans Vary in Intelligence. Ashﬁeld, MA: Paideia.
      Jablonski, N. G., and G. Chaplin. 1993. “Origin of Habitual Terrestrial Bipedalism in the Ancestor of the
                    Hominidae.” Journal of Human Evolution 24:259–280.
      Jerison, H. J. 1983. “The Evolution of the Mammalian Brain as an Information-Processing System.” In Advances
                    in the Study of Mammalian Behavior, ed. J. F. Eisenberg and D. G. Kleinman, Special Publication
                    No. 7. The American Society of Mammologists.
      Johanson, D. C., and M. A. Edey. 1981. Lucy: The Beginnings of Humankind. New York: Simon and Schuster.
      Jolley, C. J. 1970. “The Seed-Eaters: A New Model of Hominid Differentiation Based on a Baboon Analogy.” Man
                    5:6–26.
      Kauffman, S. 1993. Origins of Order. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
      Kimbel, W. H., D. Johanson, and Y. Rak. 1994. “The First Skull and Other New Discoveries of Australopithecus
                    afarensis at Hadar, Ethiopia.” Nature 368:449–451.
      Kinzey, W. G., ed. 1987. The Evolution of Human Behavior: Primate Models. Albany: State University of New York
                    Press.
      Kramer, P. A. 1999. “Modelling the Locomotor Energetics of Extinct Hominids.” Journal of Experimental Biology
                    202:2807–2818.
      Krebs, J., and N. B. Davies. 1981. Introduction to Behavioral Ecology. Oxford: Blackwell.
      Kurland, J. A., and S. J. Beckerman. 1985. “Optimal Foraging and Hominid Evolution: Labor and Reciprocity.”
                    American Anthropologist 87(1):73–93.
      Leakey, M. G., C. S. Feibel, I. McDougall, and A. C. Walker. 1995. “New Four-Million-Year-Old Hominid Species
                    from Kanapoi and Allia Bay, Kenya.” Nature 376:565–571.
      Leakey, M. G., and R. E. Leakey, eds. 1978. Koobi Fora Research Project: Vol. 1, The Fossil Hominids and an
                    Introduction to Their Context, 1968–1974. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
      Leakey, R. E., and R. Lewin. 1977. Origins. New York: Dutton.
      Lee, R. B. 1979. The !Kung San. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
      Leonard, W. R., and M. L. Robertson. 1997. “Rethinking the Energetics of Bipedality.” Current Anthropology
                    38(2):304–309.
      ———. 2001. “Locomotor Efﬁciency and the Origin of Bipedality: Reply to Steudel-Numbers.” American Journal
                    of Physical Anthropology 116:174–176.
      Lewis, R. 1995. “The Rise of Antibiotic-Resistant Infections.” FDA Consumer Magazine Web posting.
      Lewontin, R. C. 1979. “Sociobiology as an Adaptationist Program.” Behavioral Science 24:5–14.
      Lieberman, L., and F. L. C. Jackson. 1995. “Race and Three Models of Human Origin.” American Anthropologist
                    97(2):231–242.
      Lieberman, P. E. 1991. Uniquely Human: The Evolution of Speech, Thought, and Selﬂess Behavior. Cambridge, MA:
                    Harvard University Press.
      ———. 1998. Eve Spoke: Human Language and Human Evolution. New York: Norton.
      Lieberman, P. E., E. S. Crelin, and D. H. Klatt. 1972. “Phonetic Ability and Related Anatomy of the Newborn and
                    Adult Human, Neanderthal Man, and the Chimpanzee.” American Anthropologist 74:287.
      Lovejoy, O. 1980. “Hominid Origins: The Role of Bipedalism.” American Journal of Physical Anthropology 52:50.
      Maddison, W. P., and D. R. Maddison. 1992. MacClade, Version 3, Analysis of Phylogeny and Character Evolution.
                    Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates.
      Marean, C. W., L. M. Spencer, R. J. Blumenschine, and S. D. Capaldo. 1992. “Captive Hyaena Bone Choice and
                    Destruction, the Schlepp Effect, and Olduvai Archaeofaunas.” Journal of Archaeological Science
                    19:101–121.
      Martin, K., and B. Voorhies. 1975. The Female of the Species. New York: Columbia University Press.
      McBrearty, S., and A. S. Brooks. 2000. “The Revolution That Wasn’t: A New Interpretation of the Origin of
                    Modern Human Behavior.” Journal of Human Evolution 39:453–563.
      McGrew, W. 1992. Chimpanzee Material Culture: Implications for Human Evolution. Cambridge: Cambridge
                    University Press.
      ———. 1998. “Culture in Nonhuman Primates?” Annual Review of Anthropology 27:301–328.
      McHenry, H. M., and K. Cofﬁng. 2000. “Australopithecus to Homo: Transformations in Body and Mind.” Annual
                    Review of Anthropology 29:125–146.
      O’Connell, J. F., K. Hawkes, and N. B. Jones. 1988. “Hadza Scavenging: Implications for Plio/Pleistocene Hominid
                    Subsistence.” Current Anthropology 29(2):356–363.
      Orchiston, D. W., and W. G. Siesser. 1982. “Chronostratigraphy of the Pleistocene Fossil Hominids of Java.”
                    Modern Quaternary Research in Southeast Asia 1:131–150.
      Parker, S. T., R. W. Mitchell, and M. L. Boccia, eds. 1994. Self-Awareness in Animals and Humans: Developmental
                    Perspectives. New York: Cambridge University Press.
                                                                                     THE ORIGINS OF CULTURE            127


Penny, D., L. R. Foulds, and M. D. Hendy. 1982. “Testing the Theory of Evolution by Comparing Phylogenic
             Trees Constructed from Five Different Protein Sequences.” Nature 297:197–200.
Peters, C. P., and R. J. Blumenschine. 1995. “Landscape Perspectives on Possible Land Use Patterns for Early
             Pleistocene Hominids in the Olduvai Basin, Tanzania.” Journal of Human Evolution 29:321–362.
Petraglia, M. D., and R. Potts. 1994. “Water Flow and the Formation of Early Pleistocene Artifact Sites in Olduvai
             Gorge, Tanzania.” Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 13(3):228–254.
Pianka, E. 1974. Evolutionary Ecology. New York: Harper & Row.
Pilbeam, D., and S. J. Gould. 1974. “Size and Scaling in Human Evolution.” Science 186:892–901.
Potts, R. 1987. “On Butchery by Olduvai Hominids.” Current Anthropology 28(1):95–96.
———. 1988. Early Hominid Activities at Olduvai. Hawthorne, NY: Aldine de Gruyter.
Potts, R., A. K. Behrensmeyer, and P. Ditchﬁeld. 1999. “Paleolandscape Variation and Early Pleistocene Hominid
             Activities: Members 1 and 7, Olorgesailie Formation, Kenya.” Journal of Human Evolution 37(5):747–
             788.
Quiatt, D. D., and V. Reynolds. 1993. Primate Behaviour: Information, Social Knowledge, and the Evolution of
             Culture. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Quiatt, D. D., and J. Itani, eds. 1994. Hominid Culture in Primate Perspective. Niwot: University Press of Colorado.
Relethford, J. H. 2000. The Human Species: An Introduction to Biological Anthropology, 4th ed. Mountain View,
             CA: Mayﬁeld.
Richmond, B. G., D. R. Begun, and D. S. Strait. 2001. “Origin of Bipedalism: The Knuckle-Walking Hypothesis
             Revisited.” Yearbook of Physical Anthropology 44:70–105.
Rose, K. D. 1994. “The Earliest Primates.” Evolutionary Anthropology 3(5):159–172.
Ruff, C. B., and J. A. Runestad. 1992. “Primate Limb Bone Structural Adaptations.” Annual Review of Anthropology
             21:407–433.
Ruvolo, M. 1997. “Genetic Diversity in Hominoid Primates.” Annual Review of Anthropology 26:515–540.
Salt, G. W., ed. 1984. Ecology and Evolutionary Biology. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Schaller, G. B., and G. R. Lowther. 1969. “The Relevance of Carnivore Behavior to the Study of Early Hominids.”
             Southwestern Journal of Anthropology 25:307–341.
Schrire, C., ed. 1984. Past and Present in Hunter-Gatherer Studies. New York: Academic Press.
Schwalbe, G. 1906. Studien zur Vorgeschichte des Menschen. Stuttgart: Scheizerbart.
Seaboook, J. 1994. “Building a Better Human.” The New Yorker, March 18, pp. 109–114.
Semaw, S. 2000. “The World’s Oldest Stone Artefacts from Gona, Ethiopia: Their Implications for Understanding
             Stone Technology and Patterns of Human Evolution Between 2.6–1.5 Million Years Ago.” Journal of
             Archaeological Science 27(12):1197–1214.
Sevink, J., E. H. Hebeds, N. Priem, and R. H. Verschure. 1981. “A Note on the Approximately 730,000-Year-Old
             Mammal Fauna and Associated Human Activity Sites Near Isernia, Central Italy.” Journal of
             Archaeological Science 8:105–104.
Shapiro, H. L. 1974. Peking Man. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Shefelbine, S. J., C. Tardieu, and D. R. Carter. 2002. “Development of the Femoral Bicondylar Angle in Hominid
             Bipedalism.” Bone 30(5):765–770.
Shipman, P. 2003. “We Are All Africans.” American Scientist 91(6):496–499.
Skelton, R. R., J. M. McHenry, and G. M. Drawhorn. 1986. “Phylogenetic Analysis of Early Hominids.” Current
             Anthropology 27(1):21–43.
Small, M. F. 1988. “Female Primate Sexual Behavior and Conception.” Current Anthropology 29(1):81–100.
———, ed. 1984. Female Primates: Studies by Women Primatologists. New York: A. R. Liss.
Smith, E. A. 1991. Inujjuamiut Foraging Strategies: Evolutionary Ecology of an Arctic Hunting Economy. Hawthorne,
             NY: Aldine de Gruyter.
Smith, K. C. 1992. “Neo-Rationalism Versus Neo-Darwinism: Integrating Development and Evolution.” Biology
             and Philosophy 7:431– 451.
Steudel-Numbers, K. L. 2003. “The Energetic Cost of Locomotion: Humans and Primates Compared to
             Generalized Endotherms.” Journal of Human Evolution 44(2):255–262.
Strum, S. C., and W. Mitchell. 1987. “Baboon Models and Muddles.” In The Evolution of Human Behavior: Primate
             Models, ed. W. G. Kinzey. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Speth, J., and D. Davis. 1976. “Seasonal Variability in Early Hominid Predation.” Science 192:441–445.
Swaicki, R. M. 1978. “Unusual Response of DDT-Resistant Houseﬂies to Carbinol Analogues of DDT.” Nature
             275:443–444.
Symons, D. 1979. The Evolution of Human Sexuality. New York: Oxford University Press.
Tanner, N. M. 1987. “The Chimpanzee Model Revisited and the Gathering Hypothesis.” In The Evolution of
             Human Behavior, ed. W. G. Kinzey. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Tattersall, I. 1992. “Species Concepts and Species Identiﬁcation in Human Evolution.” Journal of Human Evolution
             22:341–350.
———. 1994. “How Does Evolution Work?” Evolutionary Anthropology 3(1):2–3.
128   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      Teleki, G. 1981. “The Omnivorous Diet and Eclectic Feeding Habits of Chimpanzees in Gombe National Park,
                   Tanzania.” In Omnivorous Primates, ed. R. S. Harding and G. Teleki. New York: Columbia University
                   Press.
      Testart, A. 1982. “The Signiﬁcance of Food Storage Among Hunter-Gatherers: Residence Patterns, Population
                   Densities, and Social Inequalities.” Current Anthropology 23(5):523–537.
      Thomas, D. H. 1986. Reﬁguring Anthropology. Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press.
      Thorpe, S. K. S., R. H. Compton, M. M. Gunther, R. F. Ker, and R. M. Alexander. 1999. “Dimensions and Moment
                   Arms of the Hind- and Forelimb Muscles of Common Chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes).” American
                   Journal of Physical Anthropology 110:179–199.
      Tooby, J., and I. DeVore. 1987. “The Reconstruction of Hominid Behavioral Evolution Through Strategic
                   Modeling.” In The Evolution of Human Behavior: Primate Models, ed. W. G. Kinzey. Albany: State
                   University of New York Press.
      Toth, N. 1985. “The Oldowan Reconsidered: A Close Look at Early Stone Artifacts.” Journal of Archaeological
                   Science 12:101–120.
      Townsend, P. K. 1971. “New Guinea Sago Gatherers: A Study of Demography in Relation to Subsistence.” Ecology
                   of Food and Nutrition 1:19–24.
      Van den Berghe, P. L. 1972. “Sex Differentiation and Infant Care: A Rejoindor to Sharlotte Neely Williams.”
                   American Anthropologist 74:770–772.
      Van Lawick-Goodall, J. 1968. “The Behavior of Free-living Chimpanzees in the Gombe Stream Area.” Animal
                   Behavior Monographs 1:161–311.
      ———. “Some Aspects of Aggressive Behavior in a Group of Free-living Chimpanzees.” International Social
                   Science Journal 23:89–97.
      ———. 1973. “The Behavior of Chimpanzees in Their Natural Habitat.” American Journal of Psychiatry 130:1–12.
      Vertes, L. 1965. “Typology of the Buda Industry: A Pebble-Tool Industry from the Hungarian Lower Paleolithic.”
                   Quaternaria 7:185–195.
      Von Koenigswald, G. H. R. 1975. “Early Man in Java: Catalogue and Problems.” In Australopithecus
                   Paleoanthropology: Morphology and Paleoecology, ed. R. H. Tuttle. The Hague: Mouton.
      Watanabe, K. 1994. “Precultural Behavior of Japanese Macaques: Longitudinal Studies of the Koshima Troops.”
                   In The Ethological Roots of Culture, ed. R. A. Gardner, B. T. Gardner, B. Chiarelli, and F. X. Plooij,
                   pp. 81–94. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
      Wheatley, B. P. 1988. “Cultural Behavior and Extractive Foraging in Macaca fasciculris.” Current Anthropology
                   29(3):516–519.
      White, L. 1949. The Science of Culture. New York: Grove Press.
      Williams, M., D. Dunkerley, P. De Deckker, P. Kershaw, and J. Chappell. 1998. Quaternary Environments, 2nd ed.
                   New York: Oxford University Press.
      Wilmsen, E. 1989. Land Filled with Flies: A Political Economy of the Kalahari. Chicago: University of Chicago
                   Press.
      Wolpoff, M. 1994. “How Does Evolution Work?” Evolutionary Anthropology 3(1):4–5.
      Wolpoff, M., Xinzhi, Wu, and A. G. Thorne. 1984. “Modern Homo sapiens Origins: A General Theory of Hominid
                   Evolution Involving the Fossil Evidence from East Asia.” In The Origins of Modern Humans: A World
                   Survey of the Fossil Evidence, ed. F. H. Smith and F. Spencer. New York: A. R. Liss.
      Wood, B. 1987. “Who Is the ‘Real’ Homo habilis?” Nature 327:187–188.
      Wood, B., and B. G. Richmond. 2000. “Human Evolution: Taxonomy and Paleobiology.” Journal of Anatomy
                   196:19–60.
      Woodburn, J. 1982. “Egalitarian Societies.” Man (NS)17:431–451.
      Yellen, J. E. 1976. “Settlement Patterns of the !Kung: An Archeological Perspective.” In Kalahari Hunter-Gatherers:
                   Studies of the !Kung San and Their Neighbors, ed. R. Lee and I. Devore. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
                   University Press.
      Zeleznik, S., A. W. Grele, J. Pollack, and I. Aloni. 1989. “On Systematic Butchery by Plio/Pleistocene Hominids.”
                   Current Anthropology 29(1):151–153.



      NOTES
       1. Recent news stories have discussed Federal and ACLU lawsuits against various school districts to maintain
          the separation of church and state, as well as state legislature attempts in at least nine states to introduce the
          teaching of “intelligent design” into school curricula as an alternative to the theory of evolution.
       2. Bergson, L’Evolution Creatrice.
       3. Semaw, “The World’s Oldest Stone Artefacts form Gona, Ethiopia: Their Implications for Understanding
          Stone Technology and Patterns of Human Evolution Between 2.6–1.5 Million Years Ago.”
                                                                                    THE ORIGINS OF CULTURE           129


 4. Some researchers, for example, McGrew, “Culture in Nonhuman Primates?”, argue that differences across
    primate species may be a matter of degree rather than kind. This would mean that in a broad sense, species
    such as chimpanzees and humans both have culture, although the speciﬁcs of the cultures will differ.
 5. White, The Science of Culture.
 6. Wheatley, “Cultural Behavior and Extractive Foraging in Macaca fascicularis.” The Japanese macaque
    “cultural tradition” of washing sweet potatoes, and later wheat, in salt water, appears to have persisted
    over several generations; see, for example, Watanabe, “Precultural Behavior of Japanese Macaques:
    Longitudinal Studies of the Koshima Troops.”
 7. Brace, The Stages of Human Evolution, p. 51.
 8. See, for example, Alexander, “The Search for a General Theory of Behavior.”
 9. Alexander, “Evolution and Culture.”
10. Variously attributed.
11. These types of assumptions, however, must be viewed with some caution because they imply that chimpanzees
    have not evolved appeciably over the past several million years.
12. Grayson, The Establishment of Human Antiquity.
13. Dubois’s ﬁnds were eventually classiﬁed as Homo erectus.
14. Von Koenigswald, “Early Man in Java.” See also Harrison, “Present Status and Problems for Paleolithic Studies
    in Borneo and Adjacent Islands,” pp. 54–55.
15. Relethford, The Human Species: An Introduction to Biological Anthropology, is an up-to-date introduction to
    evolutionary theory as applied to people.
16. For the introductory student a good and well-illustrated introduction to evolutionary theory in anthropo-
    logical applications is in Farraro et al., esp. pp. 59–71.
17. There’s good reason to believe that Mendel falsiﬁed his data because his results are far too “perfect”
    mathematically and do not show the expected levels of “chance” variation, but this does not detract from his
    overall contribution. See Thomas, Reﬁguring Anthropology, pp. 288–291.
18. Birdsell, Human Evolution.
19. Brace et al., “Clines and Clusters Versus ‘Race’: A Test in Ancient Egypt and of a Death on the Nile.”
20. Crook, “Sexual Selection, Dimorphism, and Social Organization in Primates.”
21. See, for example, the exchange between Tattersall and Wolpoff, in Evolutionary Anthropology, 3(1), 1994.
22. Several examples of diet books based on presumed hunter-gatherer diets can be found, for example, Audette
    and Gilchrist’s Neanderthin: Eat Like a Caveman to Achieve a Lean, Strong, Healthy Body, and Cordain’s The
    PaleoDiet: Lose Weight and Get Healthy by Eating the Food You Were Designed to Eat.
23. Lewontin, “Sociobiology as an Adaptationist Program.”
24. Hamilton, “Revising Evolutionary Narratives: A Consideration of Alternative Assumptions About Sexual
    Selection and Competition for Mates.”
25. Rossetti was describing the day of Christ’s birth here in A Christmas Carol, not the Pleistocene.
26. Williams et al., Quaternary Environments.
27. Shipman, “We Are All Africans.”
28. Wood and Richmond, “Human Evolution: Taxonomy and Paleobiology.”
29. I (Wenke) am indebted to Dr. Thomas Morgan for some anecdotes on this point.
30. Attributed.
31. This taxonomy is quite recent and recognizes the close genetic links between chimpanzees and humans. The
    older terminology used the word “hominid” to mean humans and their ancestors. With the taxonomic
    revisions, hominid now applies to gorillas, chimpanzees, humans and their ancestors. The correct term for
    humans and their ancestors is “hominin.” See Wood and Richmond, “Human Evolution: Taxonomy and
    Paleobiology,” pp. 20–21.
32. Conroy, Primate Evolution.
33. There is some disagreement among scholars regarding the exact placement of several of the hominins. For
    example, some researchers prefer to classify Homo rudolfensis and Homo habilis as Australopithecus rudolfensis
    and Australopithecus habilis. Other researchers place Homo ergaster with Homo erectus.
34. Kimbel et al., “The First Skull and Other New Discoveries of Australopithecus afarensis at Hadar, Ethiopia.”
35. Leakey et al., “New Four-Million-Year-Old Hominid Species from Kanapoi and Allia Bay, Kenya.”
36. Clarke and Tobias, “Sterkfontein Member 2 Foot Bones of the Oldest South African Hominid.”
37. Toth, “The Oldowan Reconsidered: A Close Look at Early Stone Artifacts.”
38. Semaw, “The World’s Oldest Stone Artefacts from Gona, Ethiopia: Their Implications for Understanding
    Stone Technology and Patterns of Human Evolution Between 2.6–1.5 Million Years Ago.”
39. See Clark, “Some Thoughts on the Black Skull”; also McBrearty and Brooks, “The Revolution That Wasn’t:
    A New Interpretation of the Origin of Modern Human Behavior”; McHenry and Cofﬁng, “Australopithecus
    to Homo: Transformations in Body and Mind”; Wood and Richmond, “Human Evolution: Taxonomy and
    Paleobiology.”
40. Brown, Harris, and Walker, “Early Homo erectus Skeleton.”
130   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      41. Potts, Early Hominid Activities at Olduvai. See also Peters and Blumenschine, “Landscape Perspectives on
          Possible Land Use Patterns for Early Pleistocene Hominids in the Olduvai Basin, Tanzania”; Potts et al.,
          “Paleolandscape Variation and Early Plesitocene Hominid Activities: Members 1 and 7, Olorgesailie
          Formation, Kenya.”
      42. Petraglia and Potts, “Water Flow and the Formation of Early Pleistocene Artifact Sites in Olduvai Gorge,
          Tanzania.”
      43. Toth, “The Oldowan Reconsidered.”
      44. Tooby and DeVore, “The Reconstruction of Hominid Behavioral Evolution,” pp. 215–217.
      45. “Culture in Nonhuman Primates?”
      46. Crook, “Sexual Selection, Dimorphism, and Social Organization in Primates,” p. 235.
      47. Ibid.
      48. Pianka, Evolutionary Ecology.
      49. Anderson, “The Reproductive Role of the Human Breast.”
      50. Frisch, “Comment on Anderson, P. ‘The Reproductive Role of the Human Breast.’ ”
      51. Crook, “Sexual Selection, Dimorphism, and Social Organization in Primates,” p. 254.
      52. Bosch-Achermann and Boesch, “Hominization in the Rainforest: The Chimpanzee’s Piece of the Puzzle.”
      53. Goodall, The Chimpanzees of Gombe. Long-term studies of chimpanzees have also been undertaken in the
          Mahele Mountains National Park in Tanzania, in Bossou in Guinea, in the Kibale forest of Uganda, and
          in the Taï National Forest of Côte d’Ivoire; see Boesch and Boesch-Achermann, The Chimpanzees of the
          Taï Forest.
      54. Van Lawick-Goodall, “Some Aspects of Aggressive Behavior in a Group of Free-living Chimpanzees.”
      55. Van den Berghe, “Sex Differentiation and Infant Care: A Rejoinder to Sharlotte Neely Williams,” p. 772.
      56. Van Lawick-Goodall, “Some Aspects of Aggressive Behavior in a Group of Free-living Chimpanzees.”
      57. Van Lawick-Goodall, “The Behavior of Free-living Chimpanzees in the Gombe Stream Area”; idem., “Some
          Aspects of Aggressive Behavior in a Group of Free-living Chimpanzees”; idem., “The Behavior of
          Chimpanzees in Their Natural Habitat.”
      58. Tanner, “The Chimpanzee Model Revisited and the Gathering Hypothesis,” p. 20.
      59. Ibid., citing Boesch and Boesch, “Sex Differences in the Use of Natural Hammers,” and Boesch and Boesch,
          “Possible Causes of Sex Differences in the Use of Natural Hammers by Wild Chimpanzees.”
      60. The Chimpanzees of the Taï Forest, pp. 159–164, 204–205.
      61. Binford, “Human Ancestors.”
      62. Wilmsen, Land Filled with Flies: A Political Economy of the Kalahari.
      63. Schaller and Lowther, “The Relevance of Carnivore Behavior to the Study of Early Hominids.”
      64. Blumenschine, “Characteristics of the Early Hominid Scavenging Niche”; Blumenschine et al., “Competition
          for Carcasses and Early Hominid Behavioral Ecology: A Case Study and Conceptual Framework.”
      65. O’Connell et al., “Hadza Scavenging: Implications for Plio/Pleistocene Hominid Subsistence.”
      66. Birdsell, “Ecological Inﬂuences on Australian Aboriginal Social Organization.”
      67. Anderson, “The Reproductive Role of the Human Breast,” p. 31.
      68. Townsend, “New Guinea Sago Gatherers: A Study of Demography in Relation to Subsistence.”
      69. Lovejoy, “Hominid Origins: The Role of Bipedalism.”
      70. Kinzey, The Evolution of Human Behavior: Primate Models, p. x.
      71. Biomechanics uses physics to examine the action of forces on the body. In addition to statistical analyses,
          many of these studies use computer modeling and computer-generated simulations.
      72. The distal end of the femur (upper leg bone) articulates (meets) the proximal end of the tibia (large lower leg
          bone). At the distal end of the femur are lateral (toward the outside) and medial (toward the inside) condyles
          (rounded areas of bone that articulate with hollowed out areas on the proximal end of the tibia). In human
          bipedalism, the medial condyle grows at a faster rate than the lateral condyle, thus creating the bicondylar
          angle.
      73. Shefelbine et al., “Development of the Femoral Bicondylar Angle in Hominid Bipedalism.”
      74. For example, see Kramer, “Modelling the Locomotor Energetics of Extinct Hominids”; Ruff and Runestad,
          “Primate Limb Bone Structural Adaptations”; Thorpe et al., “Dimensions and Moment Arms of the Hind-
          and Forelimb Muscles of Common Chimpanzees (Pan Troglodytes)”; Harcourt-Smith and Aiello, “Fossils,
          Feet and the Evolution of Human Bipedal Locomotion.”
      75. Leonard and Robertson, “Rethinking the Energetics of Bipedality,” and “Locomotor Economy and the Origin
          of Bipedality: Reply to Steuden-Numbers.”
      76. Of course, not all researchers agree with Leonard and Robertson; see Steudel-Numbers, “The Energetic Cost
          of Locomotion: Humans and Primates Compared to Generalized Endotherms.”
      77. Jablonski and Chaplin, “Origin of Habitual Terrestrial Bipedalism in the Ancestor of the Hominidae.”
      78. Richmond et al., “Origin of Bipedalism: The Knuckle-Walking Hypothesis Revisited.”
      79. Isbell and Young, “The Evolution of Bipedalism in Hominids and Reduced Group Size in Chimpanzees:
          Alternative Responses to Decreasing Resource Availability.”
                                                                                THE ORIGINS OF CULTURE          131


80. Symons, The Evolution of Human Sexuality.
81. Ibid., pp. 27–28.
82. Tooby and DeVore, “The Reconstruction of Hominid Behavioral Evolution.”
83. Ibid., pp. 223–224.
84. Ibid., p. 224.
85. Binford, “Fact and Fiction About the Zinjanthropus Floor: Data, Arguments, and Interpretations”; Bunn and
    Kroll, “Reply to L. Binford ‘Fact and Fiction About the Zinjanthropus Floor: Data, Arguments, and
    Interpretations’ ”; Zeleznik et al., “On Systematic Butchery by Plio/Pleistocene Hominids.”
86. Blumenschine, “Percussion Marks, Tooth Marks, and Experimental Determinations of the Timing of
    Hominid and Carnivore Access to Long Bones at FLK Zinjanthropus, Oduvai Gorge, Tanzania”;
    Blumenschine et al., “Competition for Carcasses and Early Hominid Behavioral Ecology: A Case Study and
    Conceptual Framework”; Blumenschine et al., “Blind Tests of Inter-Analyst Correspondence and Accuracy
    in the Identiﬁcation of Cut Marks, Percussion Marks, and Carnivore Tooth Marks on Bone Surfaces”; Marean
    et al., “Captive Hyaena Bone Choice and Destruction, the Schlepp Effect, and Olduvai Archaeofaunas.”
87. Reviewed in Lieberman, Uniquely Human: The Evolution of Speech, Thought, and Selﬂess Behavior.
88. Adams, The Evolution of Urban Society.
89. Gould and Eldredge, “Punctuated Equilibria: The Tempo and Mode of Evolution Reconsidered.”
90. Cronin et al., “Tempo and Mode in Hominid Evolution.”
91. Henneberg, “Morphological and Geological Dating of Early Hominid Fossils Compared.”
4
The Origins of Homo sapiens sapiens

        And how am I to face the odds
        Of man’s bedevilment and God’s?
        I, a stranger and afraid
        In a world I never made.
                          A. E. Houseman1




    V       iewed from space, earth’s green and blue beauty is framed by the black inﬁnity of
            the universe. This perspective has compelled many astronauts to reﬂect on our
    common humanity. A similar contemplation of community should arise when we look
    back archaeologically through the millions of years of our common human ancestry and
    meditate on the evidence in the fragmented bones and crude stone tools of our primate
    ancestors.
         It is tempting to lapse into a sentimental vision of our ancestors pluckily ﬁghting
    their way up a long dangerous road, and ﬁnally to “succeed”—to become “us.” But human
    evolution was not like this. As in most evolutionary equations, the most intense
    competition was between individuals of the same species—we are all the progeny of people
    who “won,” in the sense that their genes made it through the unforgiving sieves of time and
    circumstance, to reside in us. But chance, randomness, seems to have affected the biological
    universe in profoundly incalculable ways since the beginnings of our planet; we seem to be
    here by virtue in part of a chain of improbable accidental events.2
         We can see traces of our origins in all the earth’s ancient life-forms, from the earliest
    marine creatures through early mammals that lived tens of millions of years ago to our later
    primate ancestors—but only in the crucial interval of two to one million years ago did our
    genus, Homo, become the dominant primate in the world; and not until just a few hundred
    thousand years ago did humans appear whom we accord the honor of calling them, too,
    Homo sapiens. We reserve the ultimate accolade of “people like us,” Homo sapiens sapiens,
    for only some of the humans who lived after about 150,000 years ago, and it was not until
    about 30,000 years ago that we alone came to constitute humanity.3
         To follow the Socratic dictum to know ourselves, we must ask, what were the forces
    and circumstances that produced us, modern humanity, from the pre-human forms of our
    ancestors, and what does this knowledge tell us about ourselves and our future?




                                                132
                                                         THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS            133


HUMAN EVOLUTION
AND RADIATION: 1.8?
                                                         10,000 years ago     First documented appearance of bows and arrows
MILLION TO CIRCA
300,000 YEARS AGO                                        14,000 years ago     Appearance of ﬁsh weirs

                                                      20–12,000 years ago  Appearance of Mesolithic and Epipaleolithic
When we left our African ancestors in                                      industries
chapter 3, at about 1.5 million years ago,               32,000 years ago  Neandertals become extinct
some of them had cranial capacities
approaching the low end of the normal                    36,000 years ago  Appearance of the Chatelperronian Upper
modern range, they could make and                                          Paleolithic industry
use a variety of efﬁcient stone tools,                   40,000 years ago  Appearance of the Aurignacian Upper
                                                                           Paleolithic industry
and some of them may have already
                                                     50–45,000 years ago   Appearance of Upper Paleolithic industries
been living far outside of Africa. Several
localities outside of Africa are beginning           60–50,000 years ago   Homo sapiens begins to colonize Australia
to show quite convincingly that early
hominins were able to leave the African                 100,000 years ago  Beginning of radiation of Homo sapiens
continent and disperse into at least                                       from Africa to Eurasia

some areas of Eurasia; by shortly after a               130,000 years ago  Neandertals well-established in Western
                                                                           Eurasia
million years ago, our ancestors had
                                                        160,000 years ago  Appearance of early forms of anatomically
colonized most of the southern edge of                                     modern humans (Homo sapiens) in Africa
the Old World, from Africa to Indonesia.                230,000 years ago  Appearance of early forms of Neandertals
These were the habitats—rich in ﬂora                                       (Homo neanderthalensis) in Europe
and fauna and with few seasonal differ-                 300,000 years ago  Appearance of Middle Paleolithic industries
ences in the availability of food—to
which we, as tropical animals, were best                800,000 years ago  Homo erectus grade present in Spain

adapted. But while our hominin ancestors
                                                 1.7–1.2 million years ago Homo erectus grade present in Israel,
were extending their range in the hot                                      Central Europe, and China
savannas of Africa and the warm margins              1.7 million years ago Beginning of radiation of Homo erectus
of Europe and Asia, great fertile tracts of                                grade from Africa to Eurasia
the world lay unknown and untouched                  1.8 million years ago Appearance of handaxes (bifaces) of the
by humans.                                                                 Lower Paleolithic

     At some time between about one                  1.8 million years ago Appearance of Homo erectus grade of
                                                                           hominins
million and half a million years ago,
however, humans were beginning to
colonize more temperate northern
environments. If there is any answer as
to why they would begin to move out of
the tropical environments they had
evolved in, it probably lies in the nature of the hunting-gathering band. Ethnographic
studies suggest that human hunting-gathering bands with primitive technologies need large
areas to support themselves, and also that one response to growing populations is for bands
to split and for “daughter” groups to establish themselves in open territories on the original
group’s boundary.
     Hundreds of thousands of years of this process of band division, coupled with slow
evolution in the efﬁciencies of tools, would have populated the warmer ranges of the
134   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY




           Atapuerca
                                               Dmanisi



                                  ’Ubeidiya




      FIGURE 4.1 Distribution of Homo erectus sites. Homo erectus was the ﬁrst hominin to invade
      temperate climates. Land bridges, now submerged, facilitated Homo erectus movements.




      Old World and positioned human groups for colonization of more temperate latitudes
      (Figure 4.1).
           Let us begin with the problem of which hominin actually did make the ﬁrst forays into
      the Middle East and Asia, and then into the north. The most likely candidate would seem
      to be the hominin that, until recently, was commonly known as Homo erectus. Individuals
      generally classed as Homo erectus averaged just over ﬁve feet feet tall (about 1.5 meters),
      walked fully erect (though its body and legs differed in various proportions and shapes from
      ours), and had a cranial capacity that ranged between about 850 and 1,300 cm3.4 Compared
      to us, these hominins had low foreheads, large brow ridges, thick cranial bones, and almost
      no chins (Figure 4.2).
           Alas, physical anthropologists have had a great crisis of faith with regard to the species
      designation of “Homo erectus”:
          Does Homo erectus exist as a true taxon or should it be sunk into Homo sapiens? Is it a
          palaeospecies that exists . . . as a segment of the line that emerged from Homo habilis and
          gave rise to Homo sapiens? Is Homo erectus an extinct form that had no part to play in the
                                                             THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS      135




FIGURE 4.2 The Homo erectus skull (A) was long and low, with heavy brow ridges, no chin, and
protruding jaws, compared to modern humans (B). In the transition from Homo erectus (C) to mod-
ern humans (D), the brain enlarged and the muscles controlling the head and neck were changed.



    evolution of Homo sapiens? Is Homo erectus a good example of a “stasis event” . . . with little
    or no change in its form during its existence? Is there a clear cut example of Homo erectus
    in the European fossil record of man? Finally, are the Asian forms so far removed from the
    evolution of Homo sapiens in Africa to call into question the existence of Homo erectus sensu
    stricto in Africa at all?5

In view of these and other problems, some anthropologists have hypothesized that Homo
erectus consisted of only the east Asian hominins who branched off from the main Homo
line in Africa at about 1.5 million years ago, and that the African humans of this period
should be called Homo ergaster.6 Others classify almost all Asian, African, and European
hominins of between about 1.5 and 0.5 million years ago as Homo erectus.
     In what follows here, all of the humans who lived between about 1.5 and 0.5 million
years ago are called Homo erectus, but this designation is likely to change as these
taxonomies are reﬁned.
           136       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                 Early Radiation and Migrations of Homo
                                   By 1.5 million years ago, “culture” by any deﬁnition was present. Hominins with
                                   brainsizes on the low end of our own range had a stone tool repertoire indicat-
                                   ing they could produce different forms for different purposes—often out of
                                   materials that had to be brought many kilometers to the place where the tools
                                   were made or used.
                                        The 11-year-old boy who died on the western shore of Lake Turkana in
                                   northern Kenya about 1.6 million years ago, and whose skull and nearly intact
                                   skeleton (known as KNM-WT 15000) represent one of the best preserved and
                                   earliest Homo erectus individuals, seems to tell us much about our ancestors of
                                   this age (Figure 4.3). He was 1.6 meters (5 feet, 3 inches) tall—taller than many
                                   modern 11-year-olds. His cranial capacity, however, was 880 c3, somewhat more
                                   than half our size, and his brow ridges were very thick. His skeleton appears very
                                   similar to ours, though, and this suggests that our ancestors developed a body
                                   much like ours long before their mentalities equaled ours.
                                        No stone tools were found with this individual, but Acheulian-style (named
                                   after the French site at St. Acheul) stone tools associated with Homo erectus in
                                   Europe at a much later date (c. 600,000 years ago at the earliest) were apparently
                                   already present in many other East African sites more than a million years ago.7
                                   For example, at Koobi Fora, on Lake Turkana in Kenya, Homo remains and
                                   animal bones with what seem to be butchering marks have been found in
                                   substantial numbers, and there are small clusters of stone tools, some in
                                   concentrations about 5 to 10 m in diameter with from about 10 to 100 artifacts.8
                                        The hand-axes and other stone tools associated with the early African
                                   Homo erectus are a major improvement on the tools associated with the
                                   australopiths of the previous million years, and this developing technology may
                                   have enabled hominins to radiate from warmer latitudes into colder, more
FIGURE 4.3 The Nariko-             demanding climates. The “Acheulian hand-axe” may not seem like a marvelous
tome boy (KNM-WT 15000)            bit of technological advance, but it has several features that seem to reﬂect
from West Turkana, Kenya,
                                   human intellectual evolution (Figure 4.4). First, it requires more processing—
a Homo ergaster hominin
(Homo erectus grade).
                                   more actual steps of manufacture—than did the Oldowan chopper-style tools.
                                   Again, this might not seem like some major technological breakthrough, but in
                                   a rather abstract sense the Acheulian hand-axe requires that the maker “see” the
                      possibilities of striking off numerous ﬂakes—a sort of intuitive feel for the physics and
                      geometry involved. Also, Acheulian hand-axes came in a variety of sizes and shapes. As we
                      shall see, in some cases the best use of basalt, quartzite, ﬂint, and other hard stones is to
                      knock off a series of ﬂakes, use them until the edges dull, and then strike off more ﬂakes.
                      In such a substantial tool it may have been functionally efﬁcient and effective to get the
                      proportions as close to the ideal size as possible. If one is simply going to smash open a cow
                      femur for marrow, any rock not too heavy to lift or too small to transmit much force would
                      be adequate, but one interpretation of Acheulian hand-axes suggests that they were
                      beginning to converge on functionally optimal proportions and overall size.
                           What these functions were, however, remains unclear. Possibly these tools were used
                      for a great variety of tasks, or they may have simply been cores to produce sharp-edged
                      ﬂakes; other archaeologists think they are specialized tools. Many are too heavy to have
                                                       THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS         137


been hafted (attached to a spear or other piece of wood) easily,
yet they are often found in association with animal bones. It is
barely possible that this association with animal bones is
accidental, but it seems more likely that one function of this
tool was as a primary butchering tool.
     Since Acheulian hand-axes are usually found with other
types of stone tools (and were presumably used with a wide
variety of wood and bone tools that did not preserve), and
although they may not have been the “Swiss Army” knives of
their generation, they were certainly an important tool. Their
distribution is particularly impressive. They have been found
(Figure 4.5) over most of western Europe, Africa, and India,
and are also occasionally reported from China.
     The economy of all humans of this time period remains
more a matter of speculation than hard evidence and continues
to be the source of sharply different interpretations. Some think
Homo erectus was primarily a hunter and that the demands
of the hunting way of life partially “drove” human evolution
toward ourselves; others doubt Homo erectus did much more
than scavenging and opportunistic hunting.                             FIGURE 4.4 Examples of Acheulian hand-axes
     An interesting site in this dispute is Olorgesailie, near         from the Abydos Survey for Paleolithic Sites
Nairobi, Kenya (Figure 4.6). Here many small concentrations            project, Egypt.
of stone tools and bones are spread out along a peninsula in
an extinct lake. Most of the tools are cleavers and hand-axes, and some show considerable
chipping and blunting wear. Mixed in with them are bones from several species of large
mammals, including a hippopotamus and, curiously, 63 individuals of an extinct species of
baboon (but no hominins). Potassium-argon dating of the Olorgesailie formation yields an
age of about 480,000 years.9
     Glyn Isaac suggested that ancient hominins encircled a troop of baboons here, perhaps
at night, spooked them by making a lot of noise, and then systematically clubbed them to
death as they tried to escape. Pat Shipman, too, has interpreted this site as the result of a
hunting episode.10 If Olorgesailie is a case of hominins hunting baboons, as some suggest,
we may have been underestimating the linguistic and physical prowess of Homo erectus. It
is instructive to try to imagine oneself about two-thirds our size, going out at night with
stones and clubs to kill 63 baboons.
     But Lewis Binford has questioned whether Olorgesailie—and most other early
hominin sites—were places where hominins killed and butchered animals.11 He suggests
that the evidence from Olduvai and Olorgesailie may well be remains left by hominins who
scavenged the kills of other animals, mainly for bone marrow, which they obtained by
smashing bones with stone tools. He sees no evidence that early hominins shared food in
complex patterns like humans or that they foraged from home bases.12
     Again, the non-anthropologist might wonder why anthropologists take so seriously
these debates about how people made a living in Africa half a million years ago, but from
a certain perspective, we really are what we eat, and not only that, as modern humans we are
very much a product of the natural selective forces that applied over the millions of years
of our past and especially to such basic matters as to how we and our ancestors got our food.
           138      PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                  The Invasion of
                                                                                  Temperate Ecozones
                                                                                 One of the most interesting
                                                                                 discoveries about these early
                                                                                 Homo, however, is that some
                                                                                 groups of them left Africa,
                                                                                 apparently very soon after they
                                                                                 ﬁrst appeared there.
                                                                                       Finds from Israel, the
                                                                                 Republic of Georgia, Pakistan,
                                                                                 China, Java, and Spain indicate
                                                                                 that hominins were distributed
                                                                                 across the warmer regions of
                                                                                 the world as early as 1.7 million
                                                                                 years ago. The lowered seas of
                                                                                 the Pleistocene would have
                                                                                 facilitated this, opening rich
                                                                                 coastal niches far out into the
                                                                                 Southeast Asian archipelagos.
                                                                                       At various times in the
                                                                                 past million years the climate
                                                                                 of northern Europe and Asia
FIGURE 4.5 The distribution of Acheulian and non-Acheulian traditions in the     was much warmer than it is at
Old World.                                                                       present. So warm were areas of
                                                                                 Germany and France about
                                               800,000 or 900,000 years ago that monkeys swarmed through
                                               dense forests there. But at other times the icy ﬁngers of glaciers
                                               drew down out of the Alps and other mountain ranges, and
                                               great expanses of northern Europe were tundra.
                                                    One can imagine human groups probing northward dur-
                                               ing warmer periods—some of which lasted tens of thousands
                                               of years—and then their descendants being faced with equally
                                               long-term cooling trends. Probably no individual was conscious
                                               of the change, since it was so gradual, but kilometer by kilometer,
                                               year by year, they would have had to retreat or adapt. For our
                                               ancestors to invade the more northern climates, and to survive
                                               there during periods of expanding glaciers, would have
                                               required some form of clothing, seasonal hunting, and perhaps
                                               the use of ﬁre.13 If these early hominins had the use of ﬁre, it
                                               could be used for keeping warm, cooking food, and evicting
                                               bears and other carnivores from caves and rock shelters—the
                                               safest and warmest places to live in northern latitudes.
                                                    Climate has had a strong impact on people physically and
FIGURE 4.6 Aerial view of Olorgesailie, Kenya, culturally until very recently, when modern technology began
an area with Early and Middle Stone Age sites. to moderate its direct effects. In the Pleistocene, moving into
                                                   THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS      139


northern climates depended on people becoming whiter and stouter over many tens of
millennia, through natural selection: Up to 80 percent of the energy value of food goes
simply to maintain body temperatures, and it is an inescapable fact of physics that spheres
lose heat more slowly than any another shape of equal volume. Even with the pervasive
migrations of people during the last century, the relationship between body shape and
mean temperature—as epitomized by the East African Watusi and the Arctic Inuit
(“Eskimo”)—is strong.14
     The white skins of northern peoples have to do most directly with their dependency
on vitamin D, which is present in some foods but can also be synthesized in humans by the
action of sunlight on skin. But whiter shades of skin are also more susceptible to cancer,
acne, and psoriasis than are darker tones, so for northern Europeans the selection for whiter
skins—necessary to maintain vitamin D production in the long dark northern winters—
was a mixed blessing.
     The problems of living in northern climates go beyond simply keeping warm. In winter
most of the plants suitable for human consumption die, and an animal like ourselves has
only two ways to get food: store it—or hunt, ﬁsh, or scavenge other animals who can ﬁnd
suitable nutrition. On the African savannas and in other warm environments, women
supply most of the food in hunting and gathering cultures, and even pregnant women,
children, and the aged can gather much of their own food all year long. But such self-reliance
would not have been possible in northern latitudes, where snow covered the ground for
ﬁve to six months of the year. Clearly, strong social systems in which food-sharing and
cooperative efforts were com-
mon would be important in
adapting to these demanding
temperate environments.15
     The best evidence for
hominins outside of Africa
before one million years ago is
found in four widely separated
areas: the Republic of Georgia,
China, Java, and Israel.
     Ongoing work at the site
of Dmanisi in the Republic
of Georgia has yielded a
treasure trove of early hominin
remains.16 The fossils (Figure
4.7) are very similar to the
African Homo ergaster rather
than Asian hominins. Numer-
ous animal bones (which
help provide a relative date for
the site) and some stone
tools similar to the Oldowan
industry (chopper-chopping
tradition) were also found, but      FIGURE 4.7 One of the Homo ergaster hominins from Dmanisi, Republic of
Dmanisi is not a “living site”       Georgia, dating to about 1.7 million years ago.
           140        PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                        —it represents materials that were redeposited from elsewhere in the landscape. Perhaps
                        the most surprising discovery is the age of the site—the fossils are in deposits that are age
                        bracketed between 1.77 and 1.85 million years ago. Dates for the underlying basalt layer
                        (1.85 million years ago) were obtained using the potassium argon method and
                        paleomagnetism (see chapter 2), which measures the magnetic ﬁelds of strata of rocks. The
                        earth’s magnetic ﬁeld is known to have reversed polarity several times and the irregular
                        timing of these events is well established. The overlying sediments at Dmanisi yielded
                        paleomagnetic information that can be correlated to a change in the earth’s magnetic poles
                        from normal to reversed polarity at 1.77 million years ago.
                             The recent discovery of the northern Chinese site of Majuangou shows that hominins
                        were present in this colder and drier area by 1.66 million years ago—thus making this site
                        nearly as old as the evidence from Dmanisi. 17 No hominin fossils were found, but
                        Majuangou was a lakeside site with stone tools such as cores and ﬂakes (a chopper industry
                        similar to the Oldowan), as well as animal bones including horse, hyena, rhinoceros, deer,
                        gazelle, and ostrich. Some of the horse and deer bones were broken open with stone tools
                        to extract the nutritious marrow.
                             The Homo erectus remains found in Java by Dubois are also comparably old. After
                        redating the sediments where the ﬁnds were supposedly made, plus some sediments that
                        had adhered to the fossils themselves, de Vos and colleagues are now conﬁdent that these
                        remains date to about 1.7 million years ago.18 But there will always be questions about these
                        dates because the exact location these ﬁnds were made is not known with absolute certainty,
                                                       and even sediments adhering to fossils might have come
                                                       from older formations that had nothing to do with the fossils
                                                       themselves. One of the most frustrating things about the
                                                       record of Homo erectus in Java is that not a single fossil of
                                                       this hominin has been found there in good association with
                                                       stone tools.
                                                            ‘Ubeidiya (Figure 4.8), 3 km south of the Sea of Galilee
                                                       in what is now Israel, comprised about 14 distinct archae-
                                                       ological assemblages, all probably dating to no later than
                                                       640,000 years ago, and perhaps much earlier, before 1.2
                                                       million years ago (and some dates on animal remains are as
                                                       high as 2 million years).19 The tools found here seem very
                                                       similar to those from Middle and Upper Bed II at Olduvai
                                                       Gorge, being mainly choppers, spheroids (rounded stones),
                                                       hand-axes, and used ﬂakes. Richard Klein notes that at dif-
                                                       ferent times in the Pleistocene, the eastern Mediterranean can
                                                       be considered part of Africa—in the sense that the climate and
                                                       animals there very closely resembled nearby areas of Africa.20
                                                            It is clear that early hominins were able to inhabit a great
                                                       diversity of environments—they were a successful genus,
                                                       expanding into new niches. The most conservative view and
                                                       probably the most accurate one is that hominins evolved
FIGURE 4.8 Ofer Bar-Yosef at the Lower                 bipedalism, then tool-using and other cultural behavior in
Paleolithic site of ‘Ubeidiya, Israel. Note the        Africa, and then spread out along the warmer margins of
extremely tilted stratigraphic deposit.                the Old World in a long slow process of population growth
                                                        THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS         141


and very gradual movements,
as groups split and moved
short distances away from one
another, until hominins could
be found from southern Africa
to Java.
     After one million years ago,
there is widespread evidence of
hominins in many areas out-
side of Africa, including, for the
ﬁrst time, in western Europe.
     If Homo had reached
northern China well before a
million years ago, there seems
to be no obvious environmental
reason why they could not have
invaded southern temperate
Europe as well. Klein notes           FIGURE 4.9 Excavations at the Lower Paleolithic Gran Dolina site at Atapuerca,
that some scholars believe that       Spain.
humans colonized most of
temperate Europe only after
500,000 years ago, but recent human fossils found in Spain, at Cueva Victoria and Gran
Dolina, “suggest that humans in fact arrived in Europe nearer to 1 million years ago.”21 At
Gran Dolina (a cave site at a place called Atapuerca; Figure 4.9), for example, Eudald
Carbonell and other Spanish scholars found what could be the oldest known European
humans.22 About 36 human bones, including cranial fragments, teeth, jaw, hand, and foot
bones were recovered, representing at least four individuals, including an adolescent and a
child. These fossils’ ages were estimated using paleomagnetic dating. The Atapuerca fossils
were found just below a magnetic reversal that is known to have happened 780,000 years ago.
     If this date is accurate—and many scholars consider it to be—these fossils raise many
questions. The bones do not seem to be very similar to Homo erectus. The Spanish
researchers who found the fossils say they do not closely resemble any known form of
human but could represent ancestors of the Neandertals (see later in this chapter). The
Atapuerca fossils may represent one of many unsuccessful attempts to colonize Europe, as
time after time people migrated into the area but did not persist, in the face of the severe
winters and other challenges of Pleistocene Europe.
     Another well-dated early European site is Isernia La Pineta, in central Italy, where
volcanic deposits overlie deposits of stone tools associated with animal bones. Stone
choppers, ﬂakes, and scrapers were found here amidst bones from elephants, bison, and
other animals, and the animals and volcanic deposits indicate a date of about 500,000 years
ago and possibly much earlier.23 A human thigh bone from Boxgrove in southern England
has also been dated to about 500,000 years ago, and various other sites in Europe date to
this age. For people to have colonized this far north, into England by 500,000 years ago, we
might expect that they began to move out of the Mediterranean area by 600,000 years ago
or earlier, and it is certainly possible, given the vagaries of preservation, that people were
in northern Europe in substantial numbers by 700,000 years ago, or earlier. But based on
142   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      the available evidence it seems likely people did not regularly and signiﬁcantly inhabit
      northern temperate Europe until about 500,000 years ago.
           If people were in Java 1.7 million years ago, however, we might expect dense
      concentrations along the routes out of Africa and along the southern coasts of Asia that
      date to this same period, but there is little evidence of this. A few stone tools found at Ban
      Mae Tha, Thailand, appear to date to 700,000 years ago, and the Lan-t’ien and Q’en-Xia-
      wo sites in central China contained fragments of Homo erectus that date to about 600,000
      years ago, but there simply is little other credible evidence of human occupation of these
      more southern areas before about 900,000 years ago. It is possible that such factors as the
      sea level rise at the end of the Pleistocene drowned most of the pre-1-million-year-old sites
      along the southern approaches to Java, but it is also possible that the 1.7-million-year-old
      dates for the Indonesian Homo erectus hominins are wrong.
           An important site for analyzing human colonization of temperate environments is
      Zhoukoudian (literally “Dragon Bone Hill”), a cave located 43 km southwest of Beijing.
      Using explosives, excavators managed to blast out and examine thousands of cubic meters
      of collapsed cave debris at the site between 1927 and 1937, and these excavations and later
      research revealed the remains of more than 40 hominins, as well as over 100,000 stone tools,
      countless animal bones, and many hearths and ash layers, all well stratiﬁed in a deposit
      that is an astonishing 50 m deep. Not all this was cultural debris—cave bears and other
      animals alternated with hominins in occupying the cave, and these other animals probably
      brought in many of the animals. But Zhoukoudian has more superimposed occupational
      layers than any other known Homo erectus site. Analysis of the fauna and hominins and
      various forms of dating (including ﬁssion track, uranium-thorium, paleomagnetism, and
      thermoluminescene) have produced conﬂicting age estimates. In a recent summary24 of
      these dates, Wu Rukang and Jia Lampo conclude that the uppermost layers date to 230,000
      years ago and the earliest levels to about 700,000 years ago.
           The 14 skullcaps, 6 skull bones, 10 jaw fragments, 147 teeth, and assorted arm, leg, and
      hand bones found at Zhoukoudian all appear to have come from Homo erectus. Brain
      volumes average about 1,040 cm3 and range between about 775 and 1,300 cm3—somewhat
      larger than the Homo erectus from Java—and teeth sizes fall between ourselves and
      australopiths (actually, they are only slightly larger than contemporary native Australian
      populations). Based on the few leg-bone fragments recovered, it is estimated that the
      Zhoukoudian hominins averaged about 5 feet, 1 inch in height—which may seem short,
      but is only an inch or two less than the average height of most people of just a few hundred
      years ago.
           Wu and Lampo note that every Homo erectus upper incisor found in China, including
      those from Zhoukoutian, Yuanmou, Yunxian, and Hexian, is “shovel-shaped”—that is, in
      cross section the tooth is curved like a shovel. They note that this feature is found in nearly
      as high frequencies in living Mongoloid populations, whereas it is at much lower
      frequencies elsewhere, and thus they conclude that the Chinese Homo erectus are the genetic
      ancestors of contemporary Chinese. This point is discussed at greater length later.
           About 100,000 stone tools were retrieved from Zhoukoudian, most of them simple
      ﬂakes and choppers made from quartz, but with some more specialized tools, as well,
      including ﬂakes, drills, and augers. Over the course of the site’s occupation, the simple
      chopper tools of the 700,000-year-old initial occupation were replaced by a variety of tools
      that included retouch and prepared core ﬂaking.25
                                                       THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS        143


     Zhoukoudian may have been a base camp from which hominins hunted and to which
they brought back their kills to be cooked and eaten. The site includes hundreds of
thousands of animal bones, mainly from deer, but also from elephants, rhinoceroses,
beavers, bison, boars, and horses. The large quantities of charred hackberry seeds found at
Zhoukoudian suggest that they were a dietary staple, and pollen analysis indicates that nuts
from walnut, hazelnut, and pine would have been available. Such ﬁnds remind us that we
see only a distorted picture of early hominin diets: They probably ate vastly greater
quantities of plant foods than meat, but only when they used ﬁre to cook plants do we ﬁnd
the traces of vegetable foods, and although pollen can show that some plants were available,
many plant foods simply were not preserved in archaeologically recognizable forms.
     Not a single skull from this site had an attached face, and the base of each skull was
broken, perhaps to get at the brains. But numerous scholars have questioned the idea that
these bone alterations indicate cannibalism.26 Arens, for example, also rejects the notion
that cannibalism was a common practice for very long in any culture, ancient or recent.27
He may well be right, since ecologically, systematic cannibalism is a poor food-
procurement strategy.28 Compared to almost any other animals, people are hard to catch
in relation to the amount of food they represent, and one risks depleting the stock extremely
quickly if cannibalism is at all frequent.
     Some of these questions about the Zhoukoudian humans could be answered if we still
had their bones, but all the hominin remains disappeared while being transferred from
Beijing to an American ship during the Japanese invasion of China prior to World War II.
Although there are some mysterious indications that they have survived, to date no progress
has been made in locating any of the fossils.29 Fortunately, at the time of their discovery the
great German anatomist Franz Weidenreich made excellent plaster casts of them all and
described them in superlative detail.
     Perhaps our best evidence of European adaptations hundreds of thousands of
years ago comes from Torralba
and Ambrona, located about
1.5 km apart in a deep valley
150 km northeast of Madrid
(Figure 4.10). Given the many
difﬁculties of discriminating
between human scavenging
and hunting, no single site can
be taken as a convincing evid-
ence of the general nature of
early human life in Europe.
But many regard Torralba and
Ambrona as evidence that at
least some groups in Middle
Pleistocene Europe engaged in
big-game hunting. Excavations
at Torralba in the early 1960s by
F. Clark Howell exposed about
300 m2 of stratiﬁed archaeolog-
ical deposits, from which were        FIGURE 4.10 Some important Homo erectus sites in Europe.
144   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      collected hundreds of pollen samples, several thousand stone tools, and countless animal
      bones (but no human remains). The kinds of pollen found in these remains have convinced
      some scholars that Torralba dates to about 400,000 years ago, but some think it is only
      about 200,000 years old. Pollen analysis indicates the area was a cool, swampy valley when
      the site was inhabited.30
           The remains of at least 30 elephants were found at Torralba, as well as about 25 deer,
      25 horses, 10 wild oxen, and several rhinoceroses. The original interpretation of activities
      at this site suggested that most of the animals here were killed and butchered by hominins,
      based on the presence of disarticulated skeletons, the lack of elephant skulls and other meat-
      bearing bones which could have been carried elsewhere, and charcoal—possible evidence
      of setting ﬁres to drive game—found mixed with bones and stone tools.
           The process of driving animals into the swamps and killing and butchering them would
      have been quite a spectacle, with great clouds of smoke, shrieking, demented animals, and
      running, shouting hominins. But how could these ill-equipped people have killed these huge
      animals? Not a single obvious stone spear-point was found at the site, but Freeman suggests
      that the animals were either stoned to death with the many fragments of rock found amid
      the bone or dispatched with wooden spears.31 It is a bit difﬁcult to envisage any human, let
      alone Homo erectus, about to stone three or four large elephants to death, or to kill them with
      long-since-rotted wooden stabbing spears,32 but if they did, it would have been a fantastic
      Hitchcockian scene played out in this Spanish valley hundreds of thousands of years ago.
           As intriguing a picture as this ancient hunt may be, our better understanding of
      taphonomic processes in the formation of sites (see chapter 3) has led to a reinterpretation
      of Torralba. Some of the patterns in the disarticulated bones are almost certainly the result
      of the actions of slow-moving water, and at least some of the smashed and split animal
      bones are due to scavenging animals such as hyenas. The widely scattered charcoal is most
      likely due to a naturally occurring brush ﬁre, not a ﬁre set to drive game into the swamps.
           That said, the stratigraphy at Torralba is complex, and the site may represent not one,
      but many different hunting episodes for some of the animals found there.33 Those animal
      bones with no signs of butchering may be natural deaths or deaths due to nonhuman
      predation. The few animals with evidence of butchering may be what remains to us from
      those occasional hunting episodes, added to the “background noise” of natural deaths and
      other predators in the landscape.
           Another important central European site is Vértesszöllös, a rock quarry west of
      Budapest, Hungary. A recent series of uranium dates put the site at about 185,000 years
      b.p.,34 but it could be as old as 350,000. When the site was ﬁrst occupied, it was on the banks
      of some hot springs, and several layers of human occupational debris have been found near
      these springs. Excavations in the 1960s uncovered about 3,000 stone tools, many smashed
      and burned animal bones, and the occipital bone from one hominin and a few teeth from
      another. The estimated cranial capacity of between 1,115 and 1,437 cm3 is large for a Homo
      erectus, and some consider this fossil to be an archaic form of Homo sapiens. No hearths
      have been found at the site, but burned bones here indicate the use of ﬁre.
           Nearly all the evidence reviewed to this point seems clear in indicating that some form
      of early Homo left Africa and colonized Europe and Asia between 1.7 and 0.5 million years
      ago; and most scholars see patterns of regional evolution, with some commonalties but also
      some differences appearing in human groups as they made their living in highly varied
      ways, exploiting small areas in a complex mosaic of adaptations that reached from England
      to southern Africa to Indonesia.
                                                          THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS         145


    This consensus of scholarly opinion on our ancestors up to about 300,000 years ago
evaporates, however, when the question of “what happened next?” is considered.



HOMO SAPIENS: MODELS OF ORIGINS

In their tool use, social systems, and economies, Homo of several hundred thousand years
ago, as we know them from Zhoukoudian, Torralba-Ambrona, and the other sites
described in the previous section, seem to have been similar to modern hunters and
gatherers in many ways, yet there is something alien about these creatures. We look for
artifacts expressing ritual or complex symbolism, but not a single ﬁgurine,35 wall painting,
rock carving, or even an elaborately made stone tool can be securely attributed to Homo
erectus. Later, beginning at least 40,000 years ago, people made exquisitely crafted stone
tools, some so delicately worked that even moderate use would ruin them—tools that must
have been made in part simply for the pleasure of creating something beautiful. But the
tools of Homo erectus are undeviatingly simple, efﬁcient, utilitarian objects.
     Perhaps even more revealing, there are no known Homo erectus burials or ritual
dispositions of corpses. For at least the last 30,000 years, death has almost everywhere been
an occasion for the outpouring of human emotion, and even the simplest hunters and
gatherers during this span usually disposed of their dead by digging a hole and placing a
few stone tools or bits of shell in with the body; but not a single Homo erectus anywhere in
the world appears to have been even intentionally buried, let alone sent off to the next world
with a few provisions and expressions of goodwill.
     These various absences of stylistic behavior among Homo erectus can be interpreted
in several different ways. Homo erectus, with his brain about two-thirds the size of our
own, may simply have lacked the mental equipment to generalize and symbolize his
experiences as we do. Homo erectus’s language skills, in particular, may have been quite
limited.36 On the other hand, Homo erectus may have had the potential for stylistic,
religious, and social impulses but lived in circumstances that did not elicit such expressions.
As Randall White has observed, the ethnographic record of material forms of represen-
tation like that of Pleistocene “art” suggests that these aesthetic expressions are about
political authority and social distinctions,37 and it may be that the social conditions in
which such distinctions are important were just beginning to appear in the Middle and
Late Pleistocene.
     It is difﬁcult to overstate the importance of the evolution of the capacity for aesthetic,
ritual, and social feelings, for as we will see, it was precisely these mental characteristics that
made possible the rise of great civilizations. Thus, we are particularly concerned in this
chapter with the conditions under which these feelings ﬁrst appeared (as reﬂected in the
archaeological record) and with their concurrent important cultural developments.
Richard Klein,38 for example, suggests that the “explosion” of art about 30,000 years ago,
in the form of ﬁgurines and highly stylized stone tools, as well as other evident cultural
change, reﬂects the migrations of anatomically modern peoples throughout the world—
the ﬁrst people, he suggests, to have these mental powers.
     The obvious question is: How were our ancestors changed by time and circumstance
in these highly signiﬁcant ways? To consider this question, we must turn to the contrasting
hypotheses about modern human origins.
                146      PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                         “I can’t believe that!” said Alice. “Can’t you?”
                         the Queen said. . . . “Try again: draw a long
                         breath, and shut your eyes.” Alice laughed.
                         “There’s no use trying,” she said: “one can’t
                         believe impossible things.” “I daresay you
                         haven’t had much practice,” said the Queen.
                         “When I was your age, I always did it for half-
                         an-hour a day. Why, sometimes I’ve believed as
                         many as six impossible things before breakfast.”
                         Lewis Carroll39

                                                                            The major contemporary “models” (that is,
                                                                            sets of linked assumptions, hypotheses, and
      Present         Europe           Africa        Asia
                                                              “Modern
                                                                            interpretations of data) about how we
                                                              humans”       changed from early African hominins into
                                                                            us, Homo sapiens sapiens, all require one to
                                                                            believe scenarios that, if not exactly
                                                                            impossible to believe, do require some
                                                                            dramatic leaps of faith.
       Time                                                                      Most models of modern human origins
                                                                            are variants of two basic contrasting
                                                                            hypotheses. One of these, which has become
                                                                            the majority view, is described variously as
                                                              “Archaic      the African Origins, Total Replacement,
                                                              humans”
(a)    Past           Europe           Africa        Asia
                                                                            Noah’s Ark, or Eve model.40 It stipulates that
                                                                            modern humans evolved ﬁrst and only in
      Present         Europe           Africa        Asia                   Africa and only a few hundred thousand
                                                              “Modern
                                                              humans”
                                                                            years ago or less, and then migrated to the rest
                                                                            of the world, replacing all other hominin
                                                                            forms, and with little or no genetic inter-
                                                                            change with these other forms (Figure 4.11).
                                                                                   An alternative model, commonly
       Time                                                                 known as the Continuity, Multiregional
                                                                            Evolution, or Candelabra model,41 traces all
                      Extinct                       Extinct
                                                                            modern populations back to what was
                                                                            ultimately an African source (but to a time
                                                              “Archaic      when people lived only there), through a
                                                              humans”       web whose genetic contributions to the
(b)    Past           Europe           Africa        Asia
                                                                            present varied from region to region and
FIGURE 4.11 Two models for the origins of modern humans.                    from time to time (see Figure 4.11).42 Thus,
a) Multiregional model. This model proposes that the ancestry of
                                                                            this model proposes that archaic humans in
modern humans is from both African ancestors and archaic human
populations outside Africa beginning about 150,000 years ago.
                                                                            Africa and outside Africa contributed to the
b) Replacement or out-of-Africa model. This model proposes that the         ancestry of modern humans. The basic idea
ancestry of modern humans is only from African ancestors about              of this hypothesis is that sometime between
150,000 years ago. All archaic humans outside of Africa became              about one and two million years ago a
extinct and African modern humans replaced these archaic                    generic Homo ancestor of ours spread out
populations in areas outside of Africa.                                     across the warmer latitudes of Africa, the
                                                     THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS      147


Middle East, Asia, and possibly the southernmost fringe of Europe. With the passage of the
millennia these groups began to diverge somewhat as they adapted to local and different
environments, but across the whole range of Homo they were evolving toward Homo
sapiens as a result of “genic exchange” (i.e., gene ﬂow through mating and migrations)
that connected all human groups to some extent; and because they were under
similar evolutionary selective forces, as generalized hunter-foragers, they all emerged in
the last 30,000 years as one species, Homo sapiens sapiens—but with some of the
physical differences that distinguish many modern Europeans, Africans, and Asians from
each other.
     These different views of the origins of modern humans have long histories. Louis
Leakey, for example, argued43 an African origins hypothesis in the 1960s against the then-
predominate multiregional view, such as that advanced in the 1930s by Franz Weidenreich.44
Weidenreich suggested that modern humans exhibit physical features that reﬂect
continued gene ﬂow throughout the world, but from at least four centers where the genetic
continuity was sufﬁcient to produce the differences observable in today’s major “races.”45
     These competing models require some difﬁcult assumptions. Since relatively few
nonhuman species have evolved from one species into another over a wide range in a
“convergent” fashion, for example, why would we expect humans to be different? One
answer might be that if humans actually did evolve in the convergent worldwide pattern
imagined by Weidenreich it was because they all shared a similar ecological niche—that is,
“culture.” If we ask how many migrants per generation would be required to sustain the
gene ﬂow to keep regional evolution convergent, estimates range as low as just one migrant
per generation, but many scholars doubt that migrations and matings and convergent
evolution were enough to produce Homo sapiens sapiens at about the same time and in
about the same form in such widely separated areas as, for example, northern China and
southern Africa.
     This presumed pattern of convergent human evolution over a wide area and through
great spans of time remains a problem for the Multiregional Evolution model, but, as we
shall see, the African Origins model also requires some assumptions.
     Whatever the ultimate accuracy of these models, different scholars using the same
data have come to very different conclusions about which of these models best ﬁts the data.
Resolution of intellectual debates sometimes comes as much from a change in perspective
(e.g., Darwin) as from additional data. Fundamental research continues on the nature of
evolutionary processes, and this research, along with discoveries of new fossils and tools,
will probably resolve these debates.


Molecular Biological Evidence of Modern Human
Origins
The skulls and skeletons of our ancestors may seem the most direct evidence to assess
hypotheses about human origins, but these bones are usually just mineral casts of formerly
living individuals, and arguments about the meaning of subtle differences in size and shape
of their features are endless and largely irresolvable. An alternative approach is to work
backward—in effect, to look at today’s people and see how their degree of biological
relatedness ﬁts various ideas about our origins.
           148       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                        Figure 4.12 presents
                                                                                   one such form of analysis:
                                                                                   It expresses the degree of
                                                                                   biological similarity among
                                                                                   contemporary peoples of the
                                                                                   world. How did such different
                                                                                   degrees of relatedness appear,
                                                                                   and when, and what do these
                                                                                   differences “mean”?
                                                                                        It is an inescapable fact
                                                                                   of genetics that all the people
                                                                                   alive in the world are geneti-
                                                                                   cally related and that at some
                                                                                   point an individual existed
FIGURE 4.12 (A) Analyses of DNA have been used to suggest genetic distances        whom we can all claim as an
among contemporary groups of people. In this ﬁgure the genetic distances between   ancestor. The only points of
groups is based on a sample of 600 individuals from eight groups. Between any two  debate are how long ago that
groups, the fewer the symbols the shorter the genetic distance and the closer the  ancestor lived, and where.
presumed relationship. In (B) these data are arranged in a family tree. These data
                                                                                   Some scholars have argued on
suggest all modern humans are genetic descendants of one small inbred group of
                                                                                   the basis of genetic evidence
prehistoric Africans.
                                                                                   that all of us alive today have a
                                                                                   common female ancestor who
                       lived less than about 200,000 years ago. This African Eve model is based on the study of
                       DNA taken from the mitochondria, which are features in human cells where energy to keep
                       the cell functioning is produced. The term “mtDNA” stands for mitochondrial DNA;
                       mtDNA is different from nuclear DNA in that it is all in the mitochondria of the mother’s
                       egg and therefore is not affected by the sperm’s contribution to genetic inheritance as
                       implanted during fertilization. Thus, mtDNA is inherited only through the mother.
                       MtDNA is subject to random mutations at a higher rate than nuclear DNA, and these are
                       expressed as minor mistakes in copying the genetic code that are then passed on to the next
                       generation. Thus, we would not even expect two people from, for example, the same small
                       isolated group of hunter-foragers in, for example, highland New Guinea to have identical
                       mtDNA. And we would expect that differences in mitochondrial DNA would increase the
                       longer any two people are separated in terms of a common ancestor, since the minor genetic
                       mutations in mtDNA accumulate over time.
                            An analogy to accumulation of changes in mtDNA is the fate of last names in many
                       Western cultures, where a child’s last name usually comes only from the father. If a man
                       does not have children or has only female children, his individual perpetuation of that last
                       name is “lost” (although, of course, there are usually many others with that last name).
                       Similarly, mtDNA is “lost” if a woman has no children or has only sons.46
                            In an early study to test the relatedness of contemporary human groups, Cann,
                       Stoneking, and Wilson collected the placentas of 147 women in the United States, Asia,
                       Europe, the Middle East, New Guinea, and Australia, and then separated the mtDNA from
                       these samples and compared them. They concluded that everyone living today is descended
                       from an African woman, a “mitochondrial Eve,” who lived between 140,000 and 290,000
                       years ago—probably about 200,000 years ago. They identiﬁed Africa as the home of this
                       woman because mtDNA is most variable in today’s Africa, and thus these mtDNA
                                                      THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS      149


differences appear to have been accumulating longest in Africa. If the estimate of about
200,000 years ago for a common maternal ancestor is correct, it is highly unlikely that the
people who lived in Europe and Asia before about 200,000 years had anything to do with
us, in terms of our biological ancestry. Since this study, other researchers have increased
the sample of people studied and used various other methods of calculating genetic
similarity (reviewed by Aiello47), and some have concluded that, indeed, the evidence shows
that everyone in the world today is descended from a few Africans who lived a few hundred
thousand years ago.
     But many scholars have questioned these mtDNA and related studies. For these
estimates to be accurate, at least three things must be true: (1) The generation time (i.e.,
the average number of years between mother and daughter’s ages) must be accurately
estimated; (2) the molecular “clock,” in the sense of the rate at which genetic differences
accumulate, must run equally as fast for us, the Hominini, as for other mammals; and (3)
nucleotide substitutions must be constant over time. Each of these assumptions has been
attacked by recent scholars, and, in any case, Don Melnick and Guy Hoelzer strongly
caution about the use of the mtDNA clock, suggesting that various problems with it “render
mtDNA unreliable for dating past evolutionary events.”48 Frayer and others49 also strongly
criticize assumptions about the mutation rate of mtDNA, and they argue that if the starting
date of the “clock” is pushed back to 800,000 years ago for the origins of the mtDNA we
now all share, then there would be a better ﬁt between the molecular evidence and the fossil
and archaeological records.
     The details of these debates about the interpretation of graphs of genetic relatedness
based on mtDNA are beyond the scope of this book—and beyond the grasp of those with-
out speciﬁc kinds of mathematical expertise. Various mathematical techniques are required
to measure similarity and to arrange these patterns of similarity in patterns that show
descent and genetic relatedness, and disputes about the appropriateness of these techniques
continue. Frayer and his colleagues50 conclude, for example, that “There is no statistically
reliable mtDNA evidence for an African, or any other single, geographically centered origin
for Eve.”
     Although these debates have raged on in the literature for a couple of decades now,
new genetic studies appear to be putting this argument to rest. Perhaps the best recent
genetic support for the “Out of Africa” scenario has come from studies of mtDNA recovered
from Neandertal (discussed later) fossils.51 These appear to show that Neandertals differ
from modern humans in more than 20 mtDNA mutations. Coupled with the mitochrondrial
clock for mutation rates, this degree of difference suggests that Neandertals cannot be
related to modern humans. If true, then Neandertals, and likely most other archaic Homo
forms outside of Africa, did not contribute to the gene pool that constitutes us.
     To evaluate these opposing models of human origins and interpretations of the genetic
evidence, we can at least consider the ambiguous and fragmentary record of their bones
and stone tools.

Fossil and Archaeological Evidence of Modern Human
Origins: Testing the Total Replacement Model
Let us consider the Total Replacement model to be a “null hypothesis,” in the sense that
we can attempt to demonstrate that it is not true. Although some of the most vocal
proponents of the Total Replacement model have recently questioned aspects of their
150   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      model,52 it at least has the virtue of clearly testable implications. If, for example, the Total
      Replacement model is accurate, we would expect to see various kinds of speciﬁc evidence.53
            First, the earliest known Homo sapiens sapiens should be found in Africa, and there
      should be evidence that “modern” humans lived only in Africa prior to their appearance
      in the rest of the world.
            A second testable implication of the Total Replacement model is that there should be
      no anatomical evidence of genetic mixing between the early modern Africans and the people
      they replaced. That is, except in Africa, there should be an absence of “intermediate” forms
      of humans—those whose physical forms appear as a blend of early Homo and Homo sapiens
      sapiens—in the period between about 400,000 and 30,000 years ago.
            Third, everywhere outside of Africa the earliest modern humans should resemble these
      African ancestors and not the local people who had lived there ﬁrst. Also, there should be
      evidence of a “rapid” change from early Homo to Homo sapiens sapiens in both the fossil
      and archaeological records as the replacement took place, and in a geographical pattern that
      reﬂects the routes they took out of Africa.
            Fourth, in areas outside of Africa there should be no evidence of anatomical continuity
      spanning the time period before and after the replacement occurred: That is, we should not
      expect to see a pattern of continuous similarity in the physical types who lived, for example,
      in China at Zhoukoudian 300,000 years ago, 50,000 years ago, and today.
            Fifth, we should look for some evidence as to why Africans were able to displace well-
      adapted hominins all over the Old World. We would expect some evidence in technology,
      skull size and shape, animal exploitation patterns, site densities and placement, or some
      other attribute of the archaeological record that would explain why this replacement was
      both rapid and complete. As Frayer and his colleagues note,54 even the European conquest
      of the Americas, involving as it did far superior technology and the introduction of
      numerous lethal diseases, left many indigenous Native American hunter-foragers, from
      Alaska to Tierra del Fuego, and some have persisted even into the present day. So, what
      evidence is there that the early African Homo sapiens sapiens possessed some advantage that
      allowed them to drive into extinction all other humans?
            It is important to note that all of these ﬁve categories of evidence are to some degree
      equivocal: What, for example, would an “intermediate” skull be, and what would “rapid”
      change look like in the archaeological record?55 Different scholars have different ideas about
      what these kinds of terms mean. Also, given the vagaries of preservation and differences in
      the intensity of archaeological research (much more work has been done in western Europe,
      for example, than, say, Pakistan), we could be easily misled by sample biases. Moreover,
      whatever advantages the early African Homo sapiens sapiens had that allowed them to
      replace other hominin forms, if in fact that is what happened, these advantages may not be
      visible in the archaeological record, given our current knowledge of that record. If early
      Africans, for example, simply had a slightly greater fertility rate, perhaps because of some
      genetic mutation and minor cultural adaptation to this mutation, and no other advantages,
      it is possible that they could have supplanted all other hominins in a few hundred thousand
      years—although we would still have to explain why no interbreeding by adjacent groups
      took place, since such gene ﬂow is the common pattern during the recent past. Finally, the
      basic logic of science stipulates that hypotheses cannot be “proven.” One attempts to
      disprove them and in the end all that science can aspire to is pointing us toward the current
      “best” model—“best” being deﬁned in terms of “ﬁt” to the data and parsimony.
                                                       THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS    151


    To “test” these ﬁve implications of the Total Replacement model requires that we
examine a complex array of evidence, and the reader is forewarned that this review ends
inconclusively: Reasonable scientists differ on interpretations of this evidence.

THE EVIDENCE FROM AFRICA
One implication of the Total Replacement model is that the earliest modern humans should
appear in Africa. Does this appear to be true? Recent fossil discoveries by Tim White and
his colleagues in Ethiopia suggest that this may be the case.56 Several hominin crania
recovered from Herto in the Middle Awash area—dated to between 160,000 to 154,000 years
ago—have features that are intermediate between archaic Homo in Africa and anatomically
modern humans. The combination of the age of these fossil hominins and their mor-
phology may be strong evidence that they are the ancestors of modern humans.
     Another example of early Homo sapiens sapiens is the fragmentary human remains
from the Klasies River Mouth caves in South Africa (Figure 4.13), found in association with
many stone tools, animal bones, and other evidence of repeated occupation.57




FIGURE 4.13 Overview of the Middle Stone Age site of Klasies River Mouth, South Africa.
152   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


           Uranium series dates and correlations with dates from marine cores seem to place
      these remains between 125,000 and 95,000 years ago. Only some elements of the crucially
      important facial morphology are preserved on just four of the individuals represented by
      these bones. The scholars who have analyzed the Klasies human remains come to startlingly
      different conclusions. Some scholars see archaic features in many elements of these bones
      and little evidence for the “modern” features they would expect if these individuals were part
      of the population that, according to the Total Replacement model, preceded the appearance
      of modern Homo sapiens sapiens elsewhere in the world. The excavators of this site, R.
      Singer and J. Wymer, add that the many stone points found at the site indicate substantial
      hunting with hafted spears.58
           Early hominin fossils of Homo sapiens have also been found at Bodo and Omo
      (Ethiopia); Laetoli (Tanzania); Kanjera (Kenya);59 Kabwe, or Broken Hill (Zambia); Border
      Cave (South Africa); and several other sites, but in every case at least some scholars con-
      sider the dating unreliable or disagree on the degree of modernity evident in these highly
      fragmented ﬁnds.60 Other scholars,61 however, see a pronounced modern appearance in the
      African human fossils that span the period between about 200,000 and 100,000 years ago
      and conclude that the evolution of Homo sapiens sapiens was slow and continuous and had
      nearly run its course in Africa by 70,000 years ago.
           But the Total Replacement model does not require that Homo sapiens sapiens appeared
      in East Africa as early as 100,000 years ago. Richard Klein has suggested that the Homo
      sapiens sapiens who actually replaced all other humans only appeared in Africa after 50,000
      years ago, and perhaps only shortly before 30,000 years ago, when we see the spread across
      the Middle East and Europe of “art,” in the sense of wall paintings, ﬁgurines, shell and bone
      ornaments, and beautifully crafted tools (see later), and when we also see standardized tool
      shapes and highly organized activity areas in the remains of archaeological sites:

          The fourth and most recent event occurred about 50,000 years ago and it was arguably the
          most important of all, for it produced the fully modern ability to invent and manipulate
          culture . . . a genetic mutation that promoted the fully modern brain. . . . [I]t allowed the
          kind of rapidly spoken phonemic language that is inseparable from culture as we know it
          today. . . . Fossil, archaeological, genetic, and linguistic evidence all point to Africa as the
          place where the 50,000-year-old behavioral breakthrough occurred. . . . Had the crucial
          mutation occurred ﬁrst in Europe, the earliest evidence for modern behavior would be
          there, and students of human evolution today would be Neandertals marveling at the
          peculiar people who used to live in African and then abruptly disappeared. 62

           One interesting implication of Klein’s hypothesis is that these Homo sapiens sapiens
      could also have replaced the supposedly modern-looking but much more ancient Homo
      sapiens, like those who lived at Herto, Klasies, Omo, and elsewhere in Africa 100,000 or
      more years ago (Figure 4.14). Klein suggests that the mutation that accounted for the ability
      of these Homo sapiens sapiens to replace all other forms after 50,000 years ago may have
      been just an increased ability to conceptualize and communicate—as perhaps is evident in
      “art” and the standardized tools they used and the way they organized their daily activities.
      Such changes may have had no reﬂections in the shape or size of human skulls and only
      very subtle reﬂections in the ways tools were made, used, and discarded.
           Is there any artifactual evidence in African sites after 100,000 or between 50,000 and
      30,000 years ago, as Klein suggests, for “art” and other improved conceptual skills?
      Tantalizing bits of evidence have been produced, but the evidence, as always, is ambiguous.
                                                       THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS                 153


                                  Smuggler’s Cave
                                   Jabel Irhand                                                            ASIA




           Atlantic                                                                                           Arabian
            Ocean                                                                                               Sea
                                                                                           Herto, Bodo

                                                                                             Omo-Kibish

                                                                                            Kanjera
                                                                           Katanda
                                                                                             LuKenya
                                                                                     Laetoli
                                                                                                         Indian Ocean


   SOUTH                   AFRICA
  AMERICA
                                                                         Mumbwa




                   0          800 mi
                                                                                     Border Cave
                                                                      Florisbad
                   0     800 km
                                                                     Klasies River Mouth


FIGURE 4.14 Early Homo sapiens sites in Africa. The dates of some sites are controversial. Most are thought to date
beween 160,000 and 60,000 years ago.


Allison Brooks and her group report that they have found sophisticated bone tools,
including barbed points that may have been used to spear catﬁsh in rivers in Zaire as early
as 90,000 years ago (Figure 4.15).63 Fishing in this way seems to have been a very late
development in Europe, so one might consider this as some evidence in support of the idea
that Homo sapiens sapiens evolved in Africa, and only in Africa. Perforated ostrich eggshell
ornaments, bones, stone points, and examples of the use of ochre (a mineral that is often
red or yellow in color)—perhaps as a pigment—have been found, but it is difﬁcult to argue
deﬁnitively on the basis of this evidence that there is a clear reﬂection of greater cognitive
powers than other humans outside of Africa at this time possessed.
      Thus, to some, the African evidence, in summary, is ambiguous. There are suggestions
of a transition from archaic Homo to Homo sapiens at 160,000 years ago, but it is not certain
that Africa is the only place this morphological change occurred, nor is there material
evidence of some advantage that explains why Africans might have been able to drive into
extinction all other hominins.


THE EVIDENCE FROM EAST ASIA AND AUSTRALIA
If the Total Replacement model is correct, at some point we should see a radical change in
the human physical types who lived on this far periphery of early human adaptations. That
          154       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                is, the people who almost
                                                                                certainly were in Indonesia
                                                                                and adjacent regions by about
                                                                                900,000 years ago, for example,
                                                                                would have been abruptly
                                                                                replaced by Homo sapiens
                                                                                sapiens of the African type
                                                                                after about 100,000 years ago
                                                                                (and possibly much later).
                                                                                Moreover, there should be no
                                                                                evidence here of hybridization
                                                                                of Africans and Asians, nor any
                                                                                patterns of continuity in the
                                                                                physical evolution of indigen-
                                                                                ous Asian humans toward
                                                                                modern Homo sapiens sapiens.
                                                                                We might also expect some
                                                                                evidence of replacement in the
FIGURE 4.15 Bone harpoons from the site of Katanda, Zaire.                      tools and other aspects of the
                                                                                archaeological record.
                      Consider ﬁrst the farthest periphery of the Late Pleistocene Old World—Australia.
                 There is now persuasive evidence that people arrived there at least by 50,000 years ago, and
                 possibly by 60,000 years ago.64 If the “total replacement” occurred at about 200,000 years ago,
                 then these early Australians might be expected to show little physical similarity to Chinese
                 and other Asians of the hundreds of thousands of years before this time, such as those at
                 Zhoukoudian and Java, because the Australians would have migrated to Australia as much
                 as 140,000 years after the replacement of the world’s population began. If, as Klein suggests,
                 however, the replacement occurred after 50,000 years ago, then these Australians may be a
                 mix of early and later peoples, some of whom were closely related to Africans of this period.
                      Some anthropologists think that the east Asian fossil and archaeological record
                 constitutes persuasive evidence for the rejection of the Total Replacement model. Pope,
                 Wolpoff, Thorne,65 and others see strong similarity between the early Australians and the
                 Javanese, for example, and all of them as very distinct from Africans of the same age (i.e.,
                 c. 400,000–50,000 years ago). They focus on physical traits such as the “shovel” shape of
                 the cross- sections of human incisors, which occurs in high frequency in Asian populations
                 and much lower frequencies in Africans.66 Frayer and his colleagues conclude that there is
                 a very distinctive combination of facial and cranial features in Java, for example, and that
                 this “unique combination of regional features . . . was stable for at least 700,000 years, while
                 other characteristics continued evolving. The more recent Java remains have expanded
                 brains that reached the modern range.”67 These patterns of anatomical continuity would
                 be expected on the basis of the Multiregional Evolution/Continuity hypothesis.
                      Advocates of the Multiregional Evolution/Continuity hypothesis also see strong
                 evidence of continuity in the physical forms of humans in northeast Asia, as well as gradual
                 regional evolution here of modern human brain capacities. Crania from Zhoukoudian,
                 Dali, Jinniushan, and Yunxian and fragmentary ﬁnds from elsewhere form the basic
                 evidence here.
                                                       THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS       155


     Advocates of the Total Replacement model disagree with these interpretations.68 Some
have suggested that claims that early Asian humans show evolution toward “modern”
Homo sapiens sapiens forms are based on a biased selection of only a few physical traits and
inappropriate statistical manipulation of these data. They also stress the fragmentary and
possibly biased record of fossils in Asia.
     There is little evidence in the east Asian archaeological record of some obvious
advantage in technology or other aspect of adaptation. From about 400,000 years ago
onward, Asian stone tools show strong similarities, and some contrasts between Asian and
African and European tools seem to go back far into prehistory. It is possible, of course,
that invading Africans adopted the lithic technology of the groups they replaced, but this
would seem unlikely.
     In summary of the Asian evidence, scholars disagree entirely on the extent to which
these data support the various hypotheses about human origins, and these debates turn on
abstractions of statistical analyses of scarce and fragmentary human fossils. The stone tools
of east Asia would seem to support the Multiregional Evolution/Continuity hypothesis in
that east Asian forms seem to show similarity over hundreds of thousands of years as well
as differences that distinguish them from those of other areas. But if replacement by Africans
occurred in east Asia after 50,000 years ago, as Klein suggests, then the archaeological evid-
ence becomes even more ambiguous. The few well dated and excavated sites of this period
show some minor indications of greater use of “style” in the form of pierced shells and other
artifacts. That these changes represent an African invasion, however, is far from clear.


THE EVIDENCE FROM WESTERN ASIA AND EUROPE
We know a great deal more about the prehistory of Europe and western Asia than of the
rest of the world. One might optimistically think this fact would result in a much more
uniform interpretation of this evidence, but in fact disagreements about the European and
western Asian evidence are even more intense than those for Africa and east Asia.
      About all scholars agree on is that (1) there were humans living in Europe and western
Asia by 500,000 years ago but they were not Homo sapiens sapiens; (2) a distinctive form of
human, the “Neandertals,” who were different from us in important anatomical ways, lived
in Europe and western Asia between about 130,000 and 30,000 years ago; and (3) by
30,000 –27,000 years ago all the Neandertals and other distinctive physical forms of
humans, except ourselves, Homo sapiens sapiens, had disappeared.69
     To review this evidence requires discussion of a bewildering array of site names, fossil
names, types of technologies, and so on. To focus all these data and to make them coherent,
one can consider again the kinds of evidence stipulated earlier as to be expected on the
basis of the Total Replacement model. That is, do we see various kinds of evidence in
the European fossil and archaeological record that Africans invaded western Asia and
Europe at some point after about 200,000 years ago and drove the indigenous people in
these areas into extinction by virtue of some advantage in intelligence, technology, or other
feature?
     To set the stage for an examination of the evidence bearing on this question, we must
go back to the beginning of human occupations in Europe and western Asia. As noted
earlier, a few sites in the Middle East date, perhaps, to more than 500,000 years ago (e.g.,
‘Ubeidiya, in Israel), and some fragmentary ﬁnds of human bones and archaeological sites
156   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      in Europe seem securely dated to before 500,000 years ago (see earlier). Other important
      hominin ﬁnds from the Middle East are discussed later in the context of the Neandertals.
            To begin with the physical types of hominins that made these transitions, Chris
      Stringer (and his colleagues) and Erik Trinkaus have arranged most of the fossils between
      500,000 and 30,000 into an order based on morphology.70 Grade 1 hominins may be as old
      as 500,000 years, but dating these fossils has proved difﬁcult in most cases. Some Grade 1
      fossil specimens come from Europe. Trinkaus notes that some of these have been classiﬁed
      as Homo erectus and others seem to have Neandertal traits (see later), but as a group they
      seem to be consistent with a gradual change toward modern human forms (e.g., increased
      size of the cranial vault and decreasing mean dimensions of molars).
           In Europe these Grade 1 hominins are followed by a group that seems to fall between
      the grades, in that they are quite archaic in some characteristics but also resemble slightly
      the Neandertals, who generally seem later in time than the Grade 1 group. A good example
      of these intermediate Grade 1–2 fossils is from Swanscombe, England, along the Thames
      River, not far from London. In 1935 workers in a cement plant uncovered a cranial bone
      from a gravel bank, and a year later another cranial fragment was found nearby that articu-
      lated perfectly with the ﬁrst bone. Later, during excavations connected with preparations
      for the 1944 Allied invasion of France, another bone from the same skull was found just
      25 m from the site of the ﬁrst ﬁnd. It is very possible, incidentally, that more hominin bones
      were included in the gravel used to make concrete for ﬂoating docks during the D-Day
      operation.
           In the same gravel layers that produced these bones, excavators recovered the bones of
      extinct forms of elephants, deer, rhinoceroses, and pigs, which, together with subsequent
      chemical analysis and geological evidence, dated the Swanscombe fossils to between
      400,000 and 250,000 years ago, when the abundance of horses, elephants, rhinoceroses, and
      other big-game species would have made England an ideal place for generalized hunting-
      and-gathering groups.71 Nor is there any problem explaining how these hominins would
      have gotten there, since Britain and Ireland were physically joined to Europe by a land
      bridge at various times during the Pleistocene.
           The Swanscombe cranial remains are probably those of a woman of 20–25 years of age,
      with a cranial capacity of about 1,325 cm3—well within the range of modern humans.72
      Hand-axes roughly similar to those of the Acheulian assemblages of France and Africa are
      among the most frequent tools in the level where the skull was found, but lower levels
      contain only ﬂakes and choppers. Similar ﬂakes and choppers have been found elsewhere
      in England and are commonly referred to as the Clactonian assemblage.73 A wooden object
      that looks like the shaped end of a spear was found at Clacton and is one of the earliest
      wooden artifacts recovered anywhere, dating to 400,000–200,000 years ago. Stone projectile
      points are not found at Swanscombe, Zhoukoudian, or any other site prior to about 150,000
      years ago, and thus the wooden spear fragment—if that is what it was used for—may be a
      clue to how these Middle Pleistocene peoples managed to kill animals. If animals were
      trapped in bogs, they could have been killed by multiple stab wounds with wooden spears—
      although it could not have been pleasant work.
           The Swanscombe hominin is usually considered part of a biological group that
      includes a fossil from Steinheim, Germany. This cranium, dated to about 250,000 years ago,
      probably belonged to a young woman whose brain size and facial features place her between
      Homo erectus and ourselves. Unfortunately, no artifacts were found with the Steinheim
                                                        THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS          157


skull, so we cannot compare the site with the material from
southern England. Nonetheless, the physical differences
between this individual and Homo erectus at least raise the
possibility that the transition from Homo erectus to Homo
sapiens was well underway by 300,000 to 250,000 years ago and
was taking place in more than one part of western Europe.
     Excavations in a cave site in the French Pyrenees unearthed
a skull (the Arago skull) and two mandibles (Figure 4.16) dated
to about 200,000 years ago that seemed to ﬁll the gap between
Homo erectus and the European Neandertals. 74 The skull
possesses some morphological characteristics of the east Asian
Homo erectus, but lacks the incipient keel at the top of the skull
usually found in these populations. The large size of the teeth and
mandible and the structure of the chin seem to foreshadow the
features of the “classic” (western European) Neandertal.
     Late Homo remains have also been found at Bilzingsleben
in eastern Germany, along with a somewhat atypical assemblage
of very small tools with much larger implements, all quite
different from the typical Acheulian assemblage. In fact,
Svoboda has argued that the many small tools found at Arago,
Vértesszöllös, and Bilzingsleben developed out of adapting to        FIGURE 4.16 The Arago skull from France.
cold, open landscapes and thus could be expected to be               This individual is now considered to be an early
different from the tools used in more forested environments.75       European Neandertal.
     In general, tool technology, diet, site locations, and average
group size in Europe about 200,000 years ago do not seem
much different from those of several hundred thousand years earlier, but clearly,
population densities were increasing, and as people moved into more diverse niches there
was an increasing variety in the stone tools associated with them.
     Until recently these various early European Homo sapiens were viewed as represen-
tatives of the changes that eventuated in us, Homo sapiens sapiens, but recent evidence raises
many questions about this interpretation. A key element in interpreting these archaic
Homo fossils is the Neandertals.


THE MIDDLE TO UPPER PALEOLITHIC PERIOD
(C. 300,000– 40,000 B.P.)

    I held it truth, with him who sings
       To one clear harp in divers tones,
       That men may rise on stepping-stones
    Of their dead selves to higher things.
                   Alfred, Lord Tennyson, from
                               In Memoriam76
    There are multiple ways in which Homo sapiens diverged physically and behaviorally
from pre-sapiens forms of Homo in the period between about 300,000–40,000 years ago.77
158   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      This is visible in many radical changes in human physical characteristics and material
      culture, including (1) an increase of average human brain size from about 1,100 to about
      1,450 cm3 (although local variability was high, and the modern range of normal brain
      functioning is at least 1,000 to 2,000 cm3); (2) changes in physical form such that modern
      Homo sapiens sapiens have less robust skeletons, a more prominent chin, smaller or absent
      brow ridges, smaller teeth, a higher rounded skull, and other physical characteristics;78
      (3) increased human population numbers and densities—again with considerable local
      variation; (4) many technological innovations, including the atlatl (throwing stick), bone
      and wood tools of diverse types, and techniques for extracting a relatively great amount of
      cutting edge from a given amount of stone; (5) increased aesthetic expression in ﬁgurines,
      usually of bone or stone, beautiful wall paintings and rock carvings, burial techniques, and
      objects used for personal adornment; (6) a shift from generalized hunting patterns to
      concentrations in some areas on gregarious herd mammals like deer, reindeer, and horses;
      and (7) the appearance of artifact styles and trade in exotic items that bespeak the ﬁrst
      manifestation of some sort of regional “ethnic” identity”79 that exceeds by a wide margin
      the local band society—in short, changes that may reﬂect the “total restructuring” of social
      relationships during the period from the Middle to Upper Paleolithic.80
           As noted earlier, the Total Replacement, African Origins, or Eve model contends that
      modern humans evolved ﬁrst and only in Africa and only a few hundred thousand years
      ago or less, and then migrated to the rest of the world, displacing all other hominin forms,
      and with little or no genetic interchange with them. If this is true, then, as interesting as
      these many European and Asian fossils and sites of hundreds of thousands of years ago are,
      the people who left these remains had almost nothing to do with us in terms of our physical
      or cultural heritage.
           This is a difﬁcult premise for many anthropologists to accept because so much of what
      we think we know about human evolution has been based on sites such as Zhoukoudian
      in China, Toralba-Ambrona in Spain, and so on. If the African Origins model is correct,
      however, these sites were created by a form of human that has virtually nothing to do with
      us genetically, and probably little to do with us culturally.
           Alternatively, the Multiregional Evolution, Continuity, or Candelabra models propose
      that sometime between about one and two million years ago a generic Homo ancestor of
      ours spread out across the warmer latitudes of Africa, the Middle East, Asia, and possibly
      the southernmost fringe of Europe; then, with the passage of the millennia, although these
      groups began to diverge somewhat as they adapted to local and different environments,
      across the whole range of Homo they were evolving toward Homo sapiens as a result
      of gene ﬂow that connected all human groups to some extent and because they were
      all under similar evolutionary selective forces as generalized hunter-foragers, so that
      they all converged at about 30,000 years ago as one species, Homo sapiens—but with the
      physical differences that distinguish modern Europeans from, for example, modern
      Chinese.
           For many archaeologists, one of the best test cases for resolving at least some aspects
      of the Total Replacement versus Multiregional Continuity ideas can be found in a relatively
      recent hominin group widely known to both archaeologists and the general public—the
      Neandertals. Our record of them is both abundant and long studied—Neandertals have
      provided one of the most numerous fossil bone assemblages for a hominin group, as well
      as more than 100 years of archaeological research on their sites.
                                                       THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS        159


The Neandertals
Nothing about the Neandertals seems simple. Evidence suggests they lived between about
130,000 and 30,000 years ago, but their precise period in history is difﬁcult to deﬁne. Most
of them seemed to have lived in Europe and western Asia, some as far east as central Asia
and in much of the Middle East. The “Classic,” or western, Neandertals were different from
us and from their contemporaries in Africa, east Asia, and Australia in various physical
characteristics, but scholars disagree on the extent and signiﬁcance of these differences.
Some think the Neandertals could speak with about as much ﬂuency as we do, others think
the Neandertals did not have the mentality or vocal apparatus for normal human speech.
Scholars disagree perhaps most heatedly about what “happened” to the Neandertals: That
is, are we descendants of the Neandertals, or did they lose out in competition with our
ancestors?
     Because they belonged to the ﬁrst pre-modern human identiﬁed, the Neandertals
received much of the initial hostility to the concept of human evolution. From the
beginning, anthropologists, clergy, and others held that the Neandertals were an aberrant
stage in human development, not directly related to our own—presumably superior—
ancestors. Some scholars, however, suspected that the Neandertals were the connecting link
between Homo erectus and at least some populations of Homo sapiens sapiens. In 1957 a
conference on the Neandertal produced evidence that Neandertal brain size on the average
was larger than that of some modern human groups and that there were no grounds for
concluding that their brains were structurally inferior or that they did not walk fully erect.
In fact, it was suggested that “if he could be reincarnated and placed in a New York
subway—provided that he were bathed, shaved, and dressed in modern clothing—it is
doubtful he would attract any more attention than some of its other denizens.”81
     Yet there are differences between ourselves and the
Neandertals (Figure 4.17). The characteristics most frequently
used to deﬁne them are (1) a receding or virtually absent
chin; (2) large cheekbones and prominent brow ridges curving
over the eye orbits and connecting across the bridge of the
nose; (3) prognathism (protruding lower face); (4) a strong
masticatory apparatus, including larger front teeth than are
found in most modern human populations; (5) a short
(average of perhaps 5 feet) but powerful stature, with thick and
slightly curved long bones; and (6) a cranial capacity within the
range of modern humans, though slightly larger on average for
the classic “Western” type.
     Erik Trinkaus has shown how the shapes and sizes of
Neandertal teeth and heads vary in many obvious and also
subtle ways from our own.82 He interprets the projecting
mid-face of the Neandertals as a feature selected by natural
selection in part “to facilitate the use of the anterior teeth as a
vise.”83 Neandertals would have had no problems with candied
apples or corn on the cob, had they been available.
     Based on their legs and lower bodies, Trinkaus suggested        FIGURE 4.17 A Neandertal skull from Shanidar,
that the overall impression of Neandertal locomotor anatomy          Iraq.
          160       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                               is “one of great strength, as with the upper
                                                               limb, but also one adapted for endurance for
                                                               prolonged locomotion over irregular terrain.”
                                                               Trinkaus concludes that the anatomy of their
                                                               legs “suggests that they spent a signiﬁcant
                                                               portion of their waking hours moving across the
                                                               landscape . . . far more than did early modern
                                                               humans.”84 The Neandertals would have been a
                                                               bit short to be good offensive football linemen,
                                                               but they would have made superstar wrestlers or
                                                               baseball catchers, given their tremendous arm
                                                               strength (though their ability to grip the ball
                                                               might have been less than ours).
                                                                    The Neandertals were adept stone tool-
                                                               makers. Most of their tools belong to the
                                                               Mousterian stone tool industry (named after
                                                               the site of Le Moustier in southern France),
                                                               which includes several distinctive stylistic and
                                                               functional elements (Figure 4.18). The scores of
                                                               Mousterian sites in the Dordogne region of
                                                               southwestern France include cave sites, rock
                                                               shelters, and “open-air” locations, and one of the
                                                               largest and most complex Mousterian sites here
                                                               is a cave in the Combe Grenal Valley, near the
                                                               Dordogne River. Francois Bordes uncovered
                                                               64 superimposed occupational levels in this
                                                               cave, spanning the period from about 85,000–
                                                               45,000 years ago, with few long periods of
FIGURE 4.18 Some typical tool types of the Mousterian period.  abandonment. The lowest levels contained
The Neandertals made effective stone tools for a variety of    tools resembling the Acheulian tools found
purposes.                                                      at Swanscombe, but all later levels had the
                                                               classic Mousterian tools usually associated with
                  Neandertals. More than 19,000 Mousterian implements were collected and analyzed from
                  this cave, and the tools from different levels contrast sharply. Some levels contained many
                  small ﬂake-like pieces of stone, while others had concentrations of scores of “toothed” or
                  “denticulated” tools. Moreover, analysis of the different levels revealed that certain types of
                  tools tended to be spatially associated with a number of other types. That is, levels
                  containing a relatively high number of points would usually contain relatively large
                  numbers of scrapers and ﬂakes—but few denticulates.
                       This diversity of tools may seem relatively unimportant, but it was the focus of a long
                  debate that involved issues fundamental to the development of the discipline of archaeology
                  and to contemporary views of human origins. The speciﬁc case of the Mousterian tools
                  became part of a larger question: How are we to measure and interpret variability in ancient
                  artifacts? For the Mousterian tools, François Bordes spent years in excavation and analysis
                  to establish a typology that has been the framework for much of the work done on this
                  period. Bordes classiﬁed all Mousterian tools into four categories, based on the relative
                                                       THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS        161


frequencies of certain types.85 Bordes considered various explanations of the diversity of
Neandertal tools, such as that this variability reﬂected different time periods, climates, or
seasons of the year. On the basis of the archaeological evidence, however, he rejected these
possibilities and eventually concluded that the four different clusters of tools are the
remains of four distinct cultural traditions, or “tribes,” which developed certain kinds of
tool manufacture and retained these distinctive expressions over the 100,000 years of the
Mousterian period. Bordes’s vision of the Mousterian was one in which different tribes of
Neandertals wandered much of the Old World for generation after generation, through
tens of thousands of years, each group maintaining its unique styles of tool manufacture
and meeting the others infrequently and usually with hostility.
      This vision was questioned by Lewis and Sally Binford, who assumed that Mousterian
tool variability was largely a reﬂection of the different tasks Neandertals had to perform to
meet successfully the demands of their environment.86 They tried to test their interpretation
by a statistical analysis of Mousterian tools from three widely separated sites: the Jabrud
Rock Shelter near Damascus, Syria; Mugharet es-Shubbabiq Cave in Israel; and an “open-
air” station near Houpeville, France. Each site contained several different levels, represent-
ing different occupations; the total number for all three sites was 16. Lithics from each site
were classiﬁed in terms of Bordes’s system and statistically analyzed for evidence that these
groups of tools were used for different economic activities, rather than simply representing
stylistic traditions. Factor analysis was the statistical method used to determine which of
the tool types were usually found in proximity to one another in the various levels of the
different sites. On this basis they deﬁned several different “tool
kits,” whose presumed functions included tool preparation,
wood-working, butchering, and various other tasks.
      But the exact nature of Neandertal tool-making variability
has remained a matter of dispute. A recent model proposed by
Harold Dibble, for example, suggests that most of the variab-
ility in types of scrapers is the result of how often Neandertals
resharpened these tools (Figure 4.19).87 Imagine that you need
a sharp-edged ﬂake for some task. You strike an appropriate
ﬂake off a core and use it, but the edge dulls. To continued using
the same piece, you resharpen (strike small ﬂakes off ) the dull
edge. You now have a single-edge sidescraper (in the Bordian
typology). You can continue to resharpen that same edge
several times, or you can choose to use and then resharpen the
opposite lateral side of the ﬂake. Once you resharpen that
second edge, you have a double sidescraper (in the Bordian
typology). Dibble’s model thus proposes that much of the
variability we see in Mousterian scrapers is simply the result of
how a stone artifact is resharpened, rather than linking those
scraper shapes to activities or different groups of Neandertals.


NEANDERTAL CULTURE AND SOCIETY                                      FIGURE 4.19 Dibble’s scraper reduction
                                                                    model shows how a single sidescraper is trans-
As if the slurs cast on Neandertal intelligence and posture by      formed into a transverse sidescraper simply
early archaeologists were not enough, some anthropologists          through the process of resharpening the tool.
162   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      have questioned whether or not Neandertals were able to produce the range of sounds
      necessary for normal human speech. P. Lieberman and E. Crelin reconstructed the vocal
      apparatus of Neandertals using a computer simulation based on the measurement of a
      classic Neandertal, and using the vocal tracts of chimpanzees and human infants for
      comparison, they concluded that western European Neandertals would not have been able
      to make some vowels, such as e, and perhaps some labial and dental consonants, such as
      b and d.88 Others doubt that the Neandertals could speak at all. Frayer and Wolpoff 89
      challenge the old idea that the size and shape of the hyoid bone and other Neandertal
      anatomy are sufﬁciently different from that of modern humans to be used as evidence that
      the Neandertals had any less linguistic ability than we do. Lieberman90 also has recently
      revised his earlier opinion about the speech of early hominins, contending that they likely
      did have language.
           Archaeologists have long believed that, whatever their verbal ﬂuency, the Neandertals
      were at least human enough to bury their dead. Excavations at La Chapelle-aux-Saints, in
      France, revealed a Neandertal corpse apparently laid out in a shallow trench, with a bison
      leg placed on his chest, and the trench ﬁlled in with bones, tools, and other debris—perhaps
      representing offerings of meat and implements. At La Ferrassie, France, a Neandertal
      “cemetery” was found, where a man, a woman, two children, and two infants seem to have
      been buried. A ﬂat stone slab was on the man’s chest, the woman was in a ﬂexed position,
      and, toward the back of the cave, the skull and skeleton of one of the children were buried
      in separate holes, about 1 m apart. At Teshik-Tash, in Siberia, a Neandertal child was buried
      in a grave with goat skulls whose horns seemingly had been jabbed into the ground. At
      Shanidar Cave in Iraq, the soil near a Neandertal’s body contained massive quantities of
      ﬂower pollen. Ralph Solecki, the excavator, and Arlette Leroi-Gourhan, the palynologist,
      concluded that the skeleton had been buried with garlands of ﬂowers.
           But in these and other cases the evidence is at least somewhat equivocal. Even in the
      best of circumstances, archaeological excavation is a messy, ambiguous business of judging
      the signiﬁcance of faint changes in the texture and color of sediments, and the Neandertal
      cave burials are notoriously difﬁcult to excavate and interpret. Such caves have been homes
      not just to people but to hundreds of thousands of generations of cave bears, rodents, and
      other animals, and the natural processes of roof fall and sediment accumulation make for
      a confusing stratigraphic sequence. Thus, where one excavator may see a Neandertal
      carefully buried in a pit with a rock slab placed on his chest, another may observe evidence
      of a Neandertal who simply expired and was covered with rocks falling from the cave roof
      and by other debris. Thus some scholars see no evidence that any Neandertals were
      intentionally buried, while others believe that the Neandertals invested death with human-
      like emotion and ritual.91 Richard Klein, for example, suggests that the Neandertals did in
      fact bury their dead, but probably only as a matter of hygiene and without any or much
      ceremony.92 Lawrence Straus concludes93 that Neandertal burial was a rare event, but he
      also makes the useful point that it is not at all clear than even Homo sapiens sapiens always
      buried their dead.
           There is good evidence that Neandertals were not insensitive to the plight of the
      handicapped. Some Neandertals evidently suffered terribly from arthritis or had lost limbs
      and so could not have contributed much to the group’s food supply. Yet, they must have
      been supported by the rest of their society. Despite these touching displays of societal
      concern, there is also some evidence that Neandertals killed, butchered, and perhaps ate
                                                       THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS       163


one another. At Krapina in Yugoslavia, excavations revealed 20 Neandertals—men, women,
and children—whose skulls and long bones had been smashed and split in suspicious ways.
But Trinkaus and others question whether cannibalism was actually practiced.94
     All Neandertals were apparently hunters and gatherers, but they must have varied
considerably throughout their range in the kinds of resources they exploited. The
archaeological record is no doubt biased because most Neandertal sites found and
excavated are those made evident by masses of animal bones associated with stone tools;
the remains of plant foods and wooden tools, of course, do not preserve nearly so well and
are not as easily found.
     Neandertal population densities appear to have been low, and it is likely that most
Neandertals lived with the same group of 25 or 50 people their whole lives, from time to
time meeting other bands for mate exchanges. They were skilled hunters, locked into
seasonal migrations with the animals they hunted, but in most habitats they probably
foraged widely for eggs, birds, plants, and other small resources. They competed quite
successfully with other predators for game, but must have occasionally lost out to the
zoological carnival of horrors whose ranges they shared. Giant cave bears, saber-toothed
cats, and wolves occasionally “selected out” an unfortunate Neandertal: “Some days you
eat the bear, some days the bear eats you” was probably no empty cliché to them.
     Trinkaus95 examined 40 nearly complete Neandertal skeletons as well as bones from
166 other Neandertals, from both Europe and the Middle East, and compared their
estimated age at death to the age at death for a variety of other groups, including ethno-
graphically observed groups like the Yanomamö hunter-gatherers of South America and
the !Kung Bushmen of southern Africa, as well as archaeologically retrieved skeletons from
North America, Japan, Mexico, and elsewhere. Noting all the biases and other problems in
estimating time of death and other factors, Trinkaus concluded that the Neandertals
experienced relatively high “young adult mortality”96—meaning that a higher percentage
of Neandertals died during their young adult years than did in these other groups. Trinkaus
suggests that these mortality patterns may be the result of various factors, including a
relatively high level of adaptive stress. Almost all Neandertals would have been required to
have a high degree of mobility, except infants in arms.


NEANDERTALS AND HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS
William Golding, in his novel The Inheritors, imagined a world of the past in which
peaceful, egalitarian, vegetarian Neandertals faced oblivion at the hands of villainous, meat-
eating, beer-drinking Homo sapiens sapiens. This literary version of the Total Replacement
model is studded with obvious symbolism intended to elevate this imaginary conﬂict into
a statement about the human condition, but it is an interesting anthropological scenario as
well, raising many questions. Throughout the ages, for example, humans have expressed
a ﬁne democratic and egalitarian spirit in few areas of life, but one of them—to some
extent, at least—is in sexual congress: Wherever different “races” have coexisted, they have
immediately and continually interbred. Did the Neandertals and other humans mate?
     Such a question brings us back to the contrasting models of human origins. As these
indicate, some scholars believe that no Neandertal genes are represented in contemporary
human populations, while others think that some or even a lot of Neandertal genetic
inheritance can be seen in contemporary European populations.
           164      PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                      Who is right? We begin
                                                                                 with the intriguing fact that
                                                                                 the Neandertals entirely “dis-
                                                                                 appeared” as a physical type
                                                                                 sometime after about 30,000
                                                                                 years ago. No Neandertal
                                                                                 bones have been found post-
                                                                                 dating this time, and in some
                                                                                 sites tool types widely believed
                                                                                 to be associated with Neandertals
                                                                                 are overlain with levels con-
                                                                                 taining tools different in style.
                                                                                 The Neandertals successfully
                                                                                 lived over much of Europe
                                                                                 and the Middle East for tens
                                                                                 of thousands of years—why
                                                                                 should they have vanished?
FIGURE 4.20 Overview of the Middle Paleolithic site of Qafzeh, Israel.                These and other ideas
                                                                                 about the relationship of
                                                                                 Neandertals to other early
                 Homo sapiens, and the relationship of both to ourselves, still cannot be tested systematically
                 and conclusively against the archaeological record because there are so many gaps and
                 biases in this record. But recent discoveries have at least given a sounder empirical basis for
                 some of these debates about the Neandertals. A key site here is Qafzeh (Figure 4.20). Helene
                 Valladas and her colleagues used thermoluminescence to date 20 burnt ﬂint tools from
                 Qafzeh, a cave near Nazareth, in Israel, in strata that contained the bones of a somewhat
                 modern-looking Homo sapiens.97 Other human remains have been found at Qafzeh, and
                 electron spin resonance dating was done on some of these.98 Various scholars have
                 concluded on the basis of this analysis that a primitive form of modern humans lived here
                 92,000 years ago, and perhaps earlier—but at least 30,000 years before Neandertals
                 inhabited this region. Valladas and her colleagues speculate that Neandertals came into the
                 Middle East about 60,000 years ago, perhaps migrating into the Mediterranean areas as
                 glaciers expanded during the Pleistocene. Thus, if modern humans evolved in Africa long
                 before they reached Qafzeh, as the DNA evidence might suggest, then the Qafzeh region
                 might have been a contact area between Neandertals and early modern humans—since the
                 Neandertals lived all over Europe 125,000 years ago.
                      The Qafzeh dates raise many questions. There is no molecular biological or genetic
                 evidence that modern people originated in the Middle East, so it is presumed that any early
                 modern Homo sapiens sapiens in this area would have descended from Africans. As Erik
                 Trinkaus noted, if early modern humans reached the Middle East 92,000 years ago, they
                 must have lived there in some relationship to the Neandertals for tens of thousands of years,
                 since Neandertal remains in the Middle East dating to the period between 60,000 and
                 36,000 are well documented.99
                      The human remains from Qafzeh must be understood in the context of evidence from
                 nearby sites, especially the cave sites of Skhul (early modern Homo sapiens sapiens), Tabun
                 (Neandertal), and Kebara (Neandertal). New dates from human remains at Skhul suggest
                                                        THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS        165


some of the individuals may have lived there as early as 100,000 years ago, and other ﬁnds
at Skhul and Tabun indicate repeated human occupations between about 60,000 and
40,000 years ago.
     So, who were these people in the Levant between 100,000 and 40,000 years ago, and
what do they have to do with us?
     Advocates of the Total Replacement model see these remains as belonging to two
different species, one (Homo sapiens sapiens) superior to the other (the Neandertals) and
in the process of replacing them, not mating with them. These scholars see “modern”
elements in the crania of some of these hominins and very little overlap between these
Levantine modern humans and the Neandertals in important elements of the post-cranial
skeleton, such as the length of the pubis. But other scholars see these humans as belonging
to the same general population and exhibiting anatomical variation that is “less, often
considerably less, than normally found in a modern city.”100
     If the replacement of other humans by Homo sapiens sapiens occurred after 50,000
years ago, however, then the earliest “modern” Homo sapiens at Qafzeh could have been
members of a population of archaic humans who were also replaced.
     Given these ambiguities of interpretations of anatomy, what about the tools? Even the
staunchest advocates of the original versions of the Total Replacement model have difﬁculty
seeing an intrusive culture in the Levantine artifacts. There seems to be great continuity in
the kinds of tools made, the species of game hunted, and other aspects of culture.101
     In some ways the eastern Mediterranean can be considered part of “Africa” during
periods of the Pleistocene,102 given its proximity and similarities of climate and ecology. We
might expect, then, these kinds of ambiguities in interpretations of what happened in the
eastern Mediterranean. But what about Europe?
     The major differences between Neandertals and ourselves are in head and face shapes
and sizes, but the Neandertal skeleton, especially the limbs and hip bones, is also different
in size and morphology from that of modern humans. The torsional strength of Neandertal
leg bones, for example, is about twice that of moderns.103 Tools may have had a role in
changing the selective pressures on the teeth, but how could tools or any other factor have
altered the skeletal parts?
     We know that Neandertals had a lengthy evolutionary history in Europe, and some
scholars have suggested that Neandertals became biologically adapted to resist the cold
conditions of glacial Europe. This involved natural selection for features that gave Neandertals
a reproductive advantage—“classic” western European Neandertals evolved their distinctive
features as part of adapting to cold climates and had so little genetic connection to people
living elsewhere in the world that they became distinctive.104 Eventually, however, they were
absorbed or displaced by more modern-looking humans. Other scholars, however,
maintain that the fossils from central European Neandertals all exhibit morphological
changes in the direction of modern hominins.105
     If the Neandertals were entirely replaced by modern Homo sapiens sapiens moving
out of Africa, it is possible that this extinction involved a social transformation, not just
some slight difference in tool-making ability or other skill. Olga Soffer, for example,
argues106 for the appearance of modern human family structure and the division of labor
by sex. She suggests that sites left by Neandertals are small and do not show the clusters of
distinct artifacts that we would expect if people in various age and sex groups were doing
different tasks in an integrated extended family. Perhaps most important, she sees no
           166       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                      evidence of symbolic abilities, as might have been expressed in ﬁgurines, cave painting, or
                      other media. In contrast, Soffer suggests that modern Homo sapiens sapiens left sites that
                      show substantial evidence of a society in which there was a clear division of labor by sex,
                      that they expressed themselves symbolically to a much greater degree, and, in general,
                      developed the sense of kinship that one ﬁnds as the basic organizing principle of all known
                      hunter-forager groups.
                           Determining the presence of a division of labor by sex or of kinship, of course, is very
                      difﬁcult given the types of cultural materials—mainly stone tools and animal bones at most
                      sites—we normally recover from the archaeological record. Much debate about the
                      Mousterian (Middle Paleolithic) and Upper Paleolithic in Europe has thus centered on the
                      types of stone tools characteristic of each tradition, as well as the addition of organic
                      technology, such as points made out of bone or antler, and personal ornamentation and
                      symbolism.
                           Unlike the sequence of tools at, for example, Qafzeh (in Israel) and Zhoukoudian (in
                      China), the European archaeological record does appear to show a relatively sudden change:
                      At many sites levels of “Mousterian” tools dating to the period when Neandertals were here
                      are overlain with occupational debris containing substantially different stone tools and
                      other remains that may or may not be the products of Homo sapiens sapiens.107 But does
                      this reﬂect replacement of one group by another?
                                                                                        Much of the debate on this
                                                                                   topic has to do with debates
                                                                                   about stone-tool technolog-
                                                                                   ies. The Aurignacian tool kit
                                                                                   (Figure 4.21) has been found
                                                                                   all over Europe and into the
                                                                                   Middle East in sites dated to
                                                                                   between about 40,000 to 30,000
                                                                                   years ago (some dates are
                                                                                   outside this range).108 To the
                                                                                   specialist, these Aurignacian
                                                                                   tools look completely differ-
                                                                                   ent from the Mousterian tools
                                                                                   traditionally associated with
                                                                                   Neandertals across this same
                                                                                   area, Europe and the Middle
                                                                                   East. Mousterian tools are pri-
                                                                                   marily made of ﬂakes, whereas
                                                                                   Aurignacian tools include a lot
                                                                                   of blades, bladelets, burins,
                                                                                   and other distinctive tools.
                                                                                   Often the people who made
                                                                                   Mousterian tools and those
                                                                                   who made the Aurignacian ones
FIGURE 4.21 European tool kits, 35,000–11,000 years ago. The more diversiﬁed       used the same sources of ﬂint
economies of the late Pleistocene are reﬂected in increasingly diverse tool kits   and they often hunted about
compared to earlier periods (not drawn to scale).                                  the same range of animals, but
                                                            THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS      167


these two stone-tool industries are made in very different ways and in radically different
shapes. There is no evidence that the Mousterian tools were gradually developed into
Aurignacian ones109—in many sites Aurignacian assemblages lie directly on top of levels
containing Mousterian tools. To some scholars, the lack of modern human fossils in
western Europe at the time of the appearance of the Aurignacian leaves open the possibility
that the earliest Aurignacian may be associated with Neandertals.
      Recently, Straus’s analysis of the results of intensely dating many Spanish Aurignacian
sites with both radiocarbon and uranium-series dates, and comparing them with those
from the Europe and the Middle East, revealed that “[f]ew if any other European
Aurignacian assemblages have been reliably shown to be as old as the Spanish ones.”110 This
pattern of dates may conﬂict with the idea that the Neandertals were driven into extinction
by people who radiated out of Africa and abruptly replaced Neandertals by virtue of a
superior technology—as might be represented by the Aurignacian tool kit. If that scenario
were accurate, we would expect the Spanish Aurignacian sites to be the youngest, not the
oldest, because presumably the modern Homo sapiens sapiens coming out of Africa arrived
ﬁrst in the Middle East, after which generations of their descendants and their descendants’
descendants moved through eastern Europe, and only eventually into southwestern-most
Europe, Spain. Alternatively, if people came out of Africa across the Straits of Gibraltar and
arrived in Europe ﬁrst in Spain, we would expect many Upper Paleolithic sites in southern
Spain, and there are virtually none. As Straus notes, “[g]iven the present chronometric
situation, it would be necessary for such a migration to have taken place virtually
instantaneously to account for the Spanish dates. No possible migration patterns can be
conﬁdently reconstructed on the basis of the available chronometric dates for early
Aurignacian sites.”111
      Another key site in these debates about the relationship of the Neandertals to ourselves
is in France at Saint-Cesaire.112 Human occupations here date to about 36,000 years ago—
precisely the period when Neandertals were disappearing from the archaeological record.
The problem is that, while the tools found at this site appear to be Upper Paleolithic in their
stylistic and functional attributes, the human body found with them appears to be a
Neandertal. As Trinkaus notes:

    If the Chatelperronian industry was produced solely by Neandertals and all the Aurignacian
    assemblages were the products of early modern humans . . . then there must have been
    temporal overlap of these two human groups in western Europe. . . . Even if a direct
    biological-industrial association cannot be assumed, it is still evident that Neandertals were
    present in western Europe less than [35,000 years ago] and that early modern humans were
    present there by at least [30,000 years ago].113

     The signiﬁcance of this is that 5,000 years is a very short time for the physical changes
observed between Neandertals and modern humans to have occurred. The oldest artifacts
associated with modern humans in Europe belong to the Aurignacian period. The lowest
levels in which Aurignacian-style tools were found at Abric Romaní, in Spain, yielded
radiocarbon dates of about 37,000 years ago, but uranium series dates put this site at about
40,000 years ago, and it shows an “abrupt” replacement of earlier levels containing
Mousterian remains.114
     But other anthropologists suggest that the Neandertals were simply evolving into
modern humans and that the association of Upper Paleolithic tools with the later forms of
           168       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                 Neandertals is exactly what one would expect if this
                                                                 regional evolution process took place, even if
                                                                 there continued to be gene ﬂow into Europe from
                                                                 outside. Fred Smith, for example, sees clear signs
                                                                 of reduction over time in the size of the brow-
                                                                 ridges of Neandertals at Krapina and Vindija in
                                                                 Yugoslavia, and at other central European sites.115
                                                                 Trinkaus and Duarte116 have even suggested that
                                                                 the child buried at Largo Velho in Portugal (Figure
                                                                 4.22) around 27,000 years ago is a hybrid between
                                                                 Neandertals and modern humans.
                                                                      Some scholars have focused on stature and
                                                                 body proportions in debates about the relationship
                                                                 of Neandertals to us. The European Cro-Magnon
                                                                 after 30,000 years ago appears to have, on average,
                                                                 much longer limbs than did the Neandertals.
                                                                 Relatively long limbs are associated with adapta-
                                                                 tions to heat (as with the Dinka of East Africa
                                                                 today), whereas short limbs are associated with
                                                                 cold adaptation, such as in Eskimos and other
                                                                 north Asians. But it is difﬁcult to make direct
                                                                 equations between stature and height, given that
                                                                 “culture,” in the form of clothes, ﬁre, and so on,
                                                                 modify the direct effects of climate. Still, there are
                                                                 many puzzling bits of evidence. The tallest of the
                                                                 post-Neandertal Pleistocene Europeans seem to
                                                                 appear just before 20,000 years ago, in the coldest
                                                                 period of the Pleistocene, when we might have
FIGURE 4.22 The Largo Velho rock shelter in Portugal             expected natural selection to favor a shorter,
yielded a burial of a child that some reseachers believe rep-    stockier body type; and then later, in warmer
resents a “hybrid” between Neandertals and modern humans.
                                                                 periods, stature seems to have declined—again, the
                                                                 opposite of what we might expect.117 Stature is so
                       directly related to diet and other factors, however, that we should not expect to see a clear
                       correlation between it and temperature in every case—except in the long term, and even
                       then the relationship is likely to be modiﬁed by migrations, differences in technology and
                       economy, and other factors.

                     Models of Modern Human Origins: Summary The most recent academic debates
                     about models of modern human origins reveal profoundly different conclusions, with
                     scholars disputing everything from the size and shape of particular characteristics of speciﬁc
                     fossil skulls to the nature of basic evolutionary processes. Some see the Neandertals as an
                     archaic form of human who made no signiﬁcant contribution to ourselves,118 some believe
                     that modern Europeans represent an admixture of African and Neandertal genes,119 and
                     some see evidence in the Neandertal fossil record of an evolution toward modern humans
                     and believe that the Neandertals became the modern humans of Europe through regional
                     evolution and genic exchange with other populations outside Europe.120
                                                       THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS        169


    It may be that these disputes are never resolved to everyone’s satisfaction on the basis
of evidence. For many, however, the recent genetic studies of Neandertal samples from
Europe121 are the ﬁnal “nail in the cofﬁn” for Neandertals as ancestors to modern humans.
The mtDNA differences between Neandertals and modern humans shown in these
studies would simply seem to be too numerous for Neandertals to be anything other than
extremely distant “cousins” who suffered the fate of many animal species throughout
time—extinction.
    One thing is absolutely certain. No one in the past 25,000 years has experienced the
wonder of encountering a hominin in the landscape who is not us—Homo sapiens sapiens.


Life, Art, and Ritual in the Upper Paleolithic
Writing about art is like dancing about
architecture.— Anonymous

In 1868, near the Spanish port of Santander, so the story goes, a hunter’s dog fell into a
crevice in some boulders, and in rescuing the animal the hunter moved some rocks,
revealing the opening of a cave. The owner of the land on which the cave (known as
Altamira) was located, a Spanish nobleman and amateur archaeologist, eventually began to
excavate the cave ﬂoor. He found some stone artifacts, but, according to the story, was
unaware of the paintings in the cave until his 12-year-old daughter visited the site and
glanced at the ceiling. In the glow of her lantern she saw beautiful visions of animals. The
central painting is of a group of about 25 animals, mainly bison, with a few horses, deer,
wolves, and boars (Figure 4.23). Roughly life-size, these paintings were done in rich browns,
yellows, reds, and blacks, and the natural conﬁguration of the cave ceiling had been used
to emphasize the shape of the animals. The rounded haunch of a bison, for example, was
painted over a natural bulge in the stone ceiling, creating a three-dimensional effect.122
     Scholarly reception to the Altamira discoveries was almost uniformly negative. Some
respected prehistorians even hinted that Don Marcelino, their discoverer, had hired an art
student to fake these paintings, while another scholar dismissed them as simply the expres-
sion “of a mediocre student of the modern school.” So abused
by critics was the Don that eventually he padlocked the cave,
and he died in 1888 without having seen his discoveries
accepted as true Paleolithic expressions. Years later, when
many more paintings and other art works had been discovered,
Altamira’s antiquity was ﬁnally acknowledged, and most of
these paintings are now given dates between about 17,000 and
12,000 years ago. Analysis shows that the colors were produced
by mixing natural mineral pigments, such as ocher and
manganese dioxide, with a binder (blood, urine, vegetable
juice, or something similar), and that they were either brushed
on with an implement made of animal hair or applied by
making a kind of crayon from the pigments and lubricant.
Some painting may also have been done by using a pipe to
blow the powdered pigments on a surface prepared with                FIGURE 4.23 A bison painted on the ceiling at
animal fat. Many of these paintings were executed in the dark        Altamira, Spain.
          170       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                              recesses of caves, by light provided by lamps made of stone
                                              bowls ﬁlled with animal fat, with a wick made of lichens, grass,
                                              or juniper.123
                                                   During World War II, paintings on a scale comparable to
                                              those of Altamira were discovered at Lascaux Cave, in France.
                                              Researchers estimate that the Lascaux paintings date to about
                                              17,000 years ago, but were done on many different occasions
                                              and perhaps over a much longer span. Many varieties of animals
                                              are depicted here, including some one hopes were imaginary.
                                              The animals are often painted as if they are in motion, and the
                                              general effect is very impressive (Figure 4.24). One of the many
                                              curious things about these and other Upper Paleolithic cave
                                              paintings is that while the animals are depicted in very real,
                                              very representational terms, the ﬁgures of humans are either
                                              simple stick drawings or else weird half-humans, half-animals.
                                                   The most stunning recent discovery has been the cave
                                              chambers at Chauvet in the Ardèche Valley of southern
                                              France, found by three spelunkers in 1994.124 The wealth of
                                              images include both animals commonly shown in cave art—
                                              horses, bison, mammoth, and aurochs (an extinct form of wild
                                              cattle)—as well as those that are less frequently depicted in the
                                              other cave art sites—musk ox, leopard, cave bear, cave lion,
FIGURE 4.24      A painted reindeer from      rhinoceros, and an owl (Figure 4.25). Incredibly, Chauvet
Lascaux, France.                              Cave is also the oldest of the cave art sites, dating to about
                                              32,400 years ago—it is some 15,000 years older than the cave
                                                                               art at Lascaux and Altamira.
                                                                                    We must accept at the
                                                                               onset that we can never really
                                                                               know the thoughts of these
                                                                               long-dead Paleolithic artists.
                                                                               The same might be said of
                                                                               Vincent Van Gogh or any
                                                                               other artist, of course, given
                                                                               that aesthetic expressions can
                                                                               never be fully, rationally com-
                                                                               prehended, even by the artist.
                                                                               But neither Van Gogh’s work
                                                                               nor Paleolithic art can be
                                                                               expected to be random with
                                                                               regard to theme, technique, or
                                                                               style. Art can be expected to tell
                                                                               us something about the artist.
                                                                               And in any case, there is some-
                                                                               thing profoundly unsatisfying
                                                                               about analyses of ancient
FIGURE 4.25 An engraved horse from Chauvet Cave, France.                       peoples based only on stone
                                                       THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS        171


tools, hut foundations, and other techno-environmental residues. Most people, including
archaeologists, wish to know the “minds” of ancient peoples, and in few ways do these seem
so accessible as in their art.
     People apply the term Paleolithic art to a great range of materials, including cave
paintings, rock carvings, sculpted and carved animal bones, ivory statuettes, and baked clay
objects. As Margaret Conkey noted,125 one should probably not imagine that all these
expressions were fundamentally aesthetic in nature, in the sense that we think of aesthetics
as removed from economic function. An early interpretation of the great cave paintings was
that they were expressions of sympathetic magic, done to ensure success in hunting and
other activities. By picturing animals with spears stuck in them or caught in traps, Upper
Paleolithic people may have thought they increased their chances of killing and trapping
these animals. Many of the paintings are in small, hidden passages where working con-
ditions were very cramped, suggesting that these pictures were not created for the pleasure
of the general viewing public. Then again, many paintings are superimposed on one, two,
or even more older ones, indicating perhaps that these efforts were ritual in nature, not
simply artistic. In fact, the most common themes of these Upper Paleolithic artists were
food and sex, with food receiving most of the attention.
     These interpretations of Paleolithic art were challenged by
Andre Leroi-Gourhan, who plotted the relative frequencies of
lions, mammoths, bison, reindeer, and other animals in caves
with many such representations; he concluded that these
paintings were invested with cosmological signiﬁcance—
reﬂecting in various ways the patterns in which Paleolithic
peoples ordered their world.126
     The disemboweled bulls, prancing deer, and other hunt-
ing scenes, plus the popularity of the penis and vulva motifs,
suggest to some that these earliest of Spanish and French
impressionists were men. But Elizabeth Fisher has argued that
students of cave art have concealed the high frequency of
female sex organs represented and thus the implication that
many of the artists were probably women.127 Line markings
that some archaeologists have considered calendrical devices,
Fisher thinks may be records of menstrual periods.
     In recent years various alternative explanations of
Paleolithic art have been suggested (Figure 4.26). Lewis-
Williams and Dowson have argued that much of Paleolithic
art was the product of people in “entopic,” or altered, states of
consciousness—either through drugs or meditation.128 They
note that ethnographic studies of contemporary hunter-
gatherers show wide use of hallucinogens, trances, and such
altered states to produce paintings and carvings. They also        FIGURE 4.26 Entopic forms are images seen
argue that it seems a feature of human neuroanatomy that           during trances and other states of altered con-
images perceived in altered states of consciousness include        sciousness. They are a widespread phenomenon
both “real” representational forms and fantastic nonrepres-        among modern human groups and have been
entational forms and that people tend to project these images      suggested as an explanation for some of the
on walls and ceilings in their minds. Thus, “Tracing projected     engraved and painted Upper Paleolithic images.
          172       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                    mental images with a ﬁnger in the sand or on the soft wall of a cave to experience them
                    more fully would have ‘ﬁxed’ them and would have been an initial step in the history of
                    art. They were merely touching them and marking what was already there.”129
                         The study of Paleolithic visual imagery and art is a demonstration of a point made well
                    by Hodder, that archaeology is not necessarily a neutral discipline in which analyses are
                    scientiﬁc and culture-free.130 Paleolithic art has often been a “Rorschach test,” in the sense
                    that modern-day observers have tried to read into it the mind and spirit of primitive
                    humans, but they perhaps have learned more about their own psyches than about the
                    primitives’. In any case, as Conkey notes, “‘paleolithic art’ [is] an extremely diverse and
                    abundant repertoire of material culture that cannot be accounted for by any inclusive
                    umbrella except perhaps as ‘cultural.’ ”131


                    HUMAN COLONIZATION OF THE WORLD:
                    CIRCA 30,000–10,000 YEARS AGO

                    One main factor in the upward trend of animal
                    life has been the power of wandering.
                    Alfred North Whitehead

                 Unless the earth is truly different from every other known celestial body, any humans left
                 on this lovely green-blue world in a few billion years will be converted to their component
                 atoms—along with the pyramids of Egypt, the Great Wall of China, and all other human
                 artifacts and natural features—and vaporized in a supernova such that they will spend
                 eternity as elements of a timeless universe.
                      Given our human history, however, we can anticipate that our descendants will have
                 long since colonized other worlds when that fateful day comes. However tenuous our links
                 to these distant successors may become, some portion of “us” may reverberate through
                                                                               space and time until the universe
                                                                               once again collapses on itself.
                                                                                    Thus, “in our beginning
                                                                               is our end,” perhaps. For our an-
                                                                               cestors have always wandered,
                                                                               always colonized. Generation
                                                                               after generation, they left
                                                                               Africa, probed Europe and
                                                                               Asia, settled the Americas,
                                                                               Australia, the farthest ends of
                                                                               the planet (Figure 4.27). Many
                                                                               of the readers of this book can
                                                                               expect to see human colonies on
                                                                               the moon and perhaps beyond
                                                                               in their lifetimes. Exponential
                                                                               functions are impressive aspects
                                                                               of our universe. In time a
                                                                               single mutated virus turns into
FIGURE 4.27 An early burial at Lake Mungo, Australia.                          uncountable billions and
                                                       THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS       173


disperses throughout a system. We may not like the analogy, but we may “infect” the
universe in the same way.
     All this may seem far from the sturdy human hunter-foragers of the past hundred
thousand years, but we are linked to them by the long-term growth functions of which we
are all a part.
     In various chapters of this book the focus is a major question about a particular human
development: Why did culture evolve, how did Homo sapiens sapiens emerge as the only
remaining hominins? If we ask “why” they colonized the world, we are left with the
“because it’s there” kind of answer Sir Edmund Hillary gave when asked why he climbed
Mt. Everest. Simple demographic models suggest that any population will colonize appro-
priate environments through growth and migration, and our own ancestors’ travels seem
adequately “explained” by such formulations. But it is also hard to deny a human “instinct”
for travel, an inherent desire to see what’s beyond the next hill or valley. Also, as we have
noted previously, maintaining genetic variability through genic exchange confers great
advantages in terms of long-term survival.
     If there is in fact an instinctive human urge to travel, it would be “adaptive” in an
evolutionary sense, for long-term evolutionary success comes with dispersal and variation.
Our ancestors accomplished both: They penetrated almost all of the world before the end
of the Pleistocene, and although they remained a single species, they developed great variety
in their physical forms and cultural adaptations.
     On the one hand, the superﬁcial variations our ancestors acquired as they colonized
the world are the most trivial in all of human evolution; on the other hand, these differences
of skin color, facial features, and other characteristics, and the cultural differences that
accompanied them, are of the greatest socioeconomic and political importance in today’s
world—for human variations are inextricably linked to the idea of “race.” Despite the
rejection of this concept by many scholars, the concept of “race” is likely to remain with
us until gene ﬂow is sufﬁcient that obvious differences in physical appearance all but
disappear. Most anthropologists do not like the concept of “race” because, aside from the
negative social problems associated with it, the characteristics used by most people to deﬁne
race appear to be superﬁcial, to be crude typologies imposed on a multidimensional
underlying variability, and to be poorly correlated in some ways with underlying genetic
relationships of various groups.132 “Black” skin tones, for example, are shared by Australian
Aborigines and west Africans—two groups of people whose degree of genetic relatedness
may be much less than that between west Africans and Scandinavians. Physical features
such as skin tones, degree of hair follicle “curl,” nose shape and eyelid shape, and so on,
tend to fall on geographic clines—that is, they exhibit variation over space and through
time that is continuous, not discrete. And often variations within groups (polymorphism)
is greater than that between groups (polytypy).133
     For good or ill, however, the migrations and radiations of our ancestors over the past
30,000 years have produced or continued group differences that remain an important part
of today’s cultural world.134


The World at 30,000 Years Ago
Soon after 30,000 years ago the world was inhabited by only one human species, Homo
sapiens sapiens—ourselves—and our ancestors had penetrated almost every environment
of the Old World, and perhaps the New World as well (see chapter 5). Across this great
174   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      expanse people had developed a great diversity of tools, in stone, bone, and other materials,
      much of which has probably long since disappeared from the archaeological record. The
      evidence of ﬁsh hooks and barbed spear-points suggests that many people had ﬁnally added
      ﬁsh to their diet—a seemingly obvious choice, but one that does not appear to have been
      made by many people until after 20,000 years ago. In many environments ﬁsh can greatly
      supplement other foods and thereby support much greater human populations with
      considerable reliability. Other technological advances, such as the atlatl, or throwing stick,
      probably also greatly extended the hunting prowess of many groups, and exploitation of
      plant foods was probably also rapidly improving in efﬁciency.


      Late Pleistocene Climates and Geography
      If we were ever fortunate enough to ﬁnd people of about 30,000 years ago well-preserved
      in some glacier, we would probably see few differences between them and us. Over much
      of the world human teeth have become smaller during the past 30,000 years and some
      subtle changes in other aspects of our form and physiology have occurred, but not much
      else about us physically is different from the people of 30,000 years ago. Human brain size
      was slightly larger for some of the people at that time, but it is unlikely that they were of a
      fundamentally different mentality.
           By 30,000 years ago people were living in almost every part of the Old World, and in
      Australia; their arrival in the Americas was certainly before 15,000 years ago, but the
      evidence for earlier occupations (see chapter 5) is controversial.
           Oscillating sea levels had some role in this dispersal, since in some periods land bridges
      allowed people to walk from Southeast Asia to many areas that are now Indonesian islands,
      such as Java, Sumatra, and Borneo. Rising sea levels may also have forced people into
      migrations, even though the rates at which these levels rose were likely slow enough that
      no single individual had a personal sense of them. Thiel argues that people on islands in
      danger of being submerged by rising waters made the colonizing trips to Australia 50,000
      or more years ago.135 Elsewhere, people had to abandon many other low-lying areas, such
      as the shores of the eastern Mediterranean and the broad plains that now lie under the
      English Channel.
           These climatic alterations and ensuing changes in geography and ecology can be thought
      of as giant engines, acting to mix and move human populations, offering adaptational
      challenges that elicited human ingenuity in various forms. But people were never simple
      passive victims of climatic and ecological happenstance: Humans not only developed the
      technology to make a living in the vast span of the world but also evolved the social systems
      that were an indispensable part of this adaptation.


      Late Pleistocene Europeans
      Between about 30,000 and 19,000 years ago, European climates began a long cooling
      trend, with some periods of extreme cold, but for most of the period the summers
      were cool and the winters relatively mild. The rich European grasslands and mixed forest
      habitats supported great numbers of herbivores, including reindeer, deer, bison, wild ox,
      ibex, woolly rhinoceros, and mammoths. France seems to have been densely occupied
      during this period, particularly near the conﬂuence of the Dordogne and Vezere rivers
                                                         THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS           175


(Figure 4.28). This lovely part
of the world is a well-watered,
heavily forested limestone for-
mation, honeycombed with
caves and rock shelters, which
offered excellent places to live.
Mammoths, horses, and many
other animals were hunted by
these Upper Paleolithic peoples,
but the reindeer was the staff
of life: At many sites 99 percent
of all the animal bones found
belonged to reindeer; reindeer
hides provided clothing and
coverings for shelters; reindeer
antlers were the hammers used
to produce the long elegant
blades for which these people       FIGURE 4.28 The Les Eyzies region of southern France is known for its concen-
are justly famous; and reindeer     tration of Upper Paleolithic cave and rock shelter sites, including many famous cave
bone was the raw material for       art sites.
ﬁsh gorges, needles, awls, and
other important tools.
      Reindeer travel long distances each year as they follow the grazing lands from one
climatic zone to another. Thus, through the reindeer herds Upper Paleolithic peoples of
southern France could exploit land they had never seen; the reindeer would browse their
way to the far north each year and then return to southern France for the winter, at which
time they could be harvested.
      Average human group size may have been relatively large during the Upper Paleolithic
in Europe, the Middle East, and other areas because of the requirements of hunting large
gregarious mammals such as reindeer, bison, horses, and wild cattle. With some of these
species, an efﬁcient hunting technique is the drive, where many people work together to
stampede a herd over a cliff or into a bog. Such mass slaughter also requires many people
to process the carcasses, and a large group would also have been advantageous in these
circumstances as a means of defending particularly favorable places along the animals’
migration routes.
      The overall population also increased in some parts of Europe—and probably much
of Eurasia—during the last millennia of the Pleistocene. Several factors were probably
important in this population growth. The stone-tool technology of this period, with its
indirect percussion and pressure techniques, was vastly more efﬁcient than previous
industries. Spear throwers, or atlatls, were also in common use—a very signiﬁcant
innovation considering the heavy reliance on big game, since an atlatl can increase the range
of a short spear from about 60 m, if thrown by hand, to about 150 m (Figure 4.29).
Eventually, the bow and arrow also added signiﬁcantly to hunting effectiveness. Some of
the earliest evidence of bows and arrows comes from the Stellmoor site, near Hamburg,
Germany, where about a hundred wooden arrows dating to approximately 10,000 years ago
were recovered. But the bow-arrow combination was probably invented independently and
           176       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                    perhaps long before 10,000
                                                                                    years ago, if small stone tools
                                                                                    called microliths were used as
                                                                                    arrowheads.
                                                                                         Life in the Upper
                                                                                    Paleolithic was somewhat more
                                                                                    severe than one might imagine.
                                                                                    From a sample of 76 Upper
                                                                                    Paleolithic skeletons drawn
                                                                                    from sites in Europe and Asia,
                                                                                    Vallois found that less than
                                                                                    half of these individuals had
                                                                                    reached the age of 21, that only
                                                                                    12 percent were over 40, and
                                                                                    that not a single female had
                                                                                    reached the age of 30.136 In fact,
                                                                                    the distribution of ages and
                                                                                    sexes represented by these
                                                                                    skeletons was not signiﬁcantly
                                                                                    different from what one might
FIGURE 4.29 The atlatl, or spearthrower, was an important new technology in the
                                                                                    expect from a comparable
Upper Paleolithic. Here, John Whittaker of Grinnell College demonstrates how an
atlatl is used.                                                                     sample of Neandertals.137 But
                                                                                    even worse, many skeletons
                                                                                    evidenced rickets, malnutri-
                      tion, and other diseases and deformities. Not content with nature’s provisions for
                      population control, Upper Paleolithic peoples seem also to have occasionally slaughtered
                      each other. At the site of Sandalja II (12,000 b.p.), near Pula, Yugoslavia, for example, the
                      skeletal remains of 29 people were found in a smashed and splintered condition. Elsewhere,
                      there is unmistakable evidence of wounds from arrows and spears.
                           By about 14,000 years ago, the people of western Europe had developed ﬁsh traps to
                      harvest the countless salmon that migrated up the rivers there each year. This relatively late
                      exploitation of ﬁsh in Europe has a parallel in prehistoric southeastern North America,
                      where Native Americans lived for thousands of years subsisting primarily on deer, mussels,
                      and a variety of plant foods, almost totally ignoring the myriad ﬁsh in nearby lakes and
                      streams. If salmon were present in great numbers in European rivers during the Mousterian
                      and early Upper Paleolithic, their exploitation may have been blocked by the terms of
                      human adaptation to reindeer and other animals. Reindeer and other game would have
                      been a more dependable resource for humans, in the sense that at least some of these
                      animals would have been available year-round, while the salmon would have been sharply
                      seasonal. Salmon runs, in fact, might have conﬂicted with the scheduling of reindeer
                      hunting, and as a consequence these peoples may have been far from the river, exploiting
                      different resources, at the time the salmon were most available. Perhaps even more
                      important, the successful exploitation of salmon would have required technological
                      readaptation on a major scale. Catching salmon one by one would not have been especially
                      productive: Their real utility probably came only after nets, ﬁsh weirs, drying racks,
                      smoking racks, and other largely nonportable technology came into common use.
                                                            THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS            177


     The slow growth of
worldwide human population
density through most of the
Pleistocene would seem to
suggest that Upper Paleolithic
populations were not in
any sense “driven” by popula-
tion pressures to exploit new
resources, such as reindeer and
salmon. Rather, it seems the
reverse: As people began to
devise ways to exploit rich
salmon streams, reindeer herds,
and other resources, larger
groups could be supported.
And just a slight increase in
fertility or the number of           FIGURE 4.30 The reconstruction of a 27,000-year-old settlement at Dolni
offspring who lived on the           Vestonice illustrates how people used shelters to colonize the frigid plains of eastern
average to reproductive age          Europe.
would in the long run produce
vastly greater population densities.
     And it was not just in France and the ecologically richer parts of Europe that populations
were growing in the late Pleistocene. Olga Soffer has documented, for example, the ingenuity
of generations of peoples as they adapted to the harsh winters of the central Russian Plain.138
One of the most amply documented Upper Paleolithic cultures in eastern Europe is the
Kostenki-Bershevo culture centered in the Don River Valley, about 470 km southeast of
Moscow. About 25,000–11,000 years ago, the Kostenki-Bershevo area was an open grassland
environment, with no rock shelters, caves, or other natural habitations, and with very little
wood available for ﬁres. People here left a variety of archaeological sites, including base camps,
where pithouses were constructed by digging a pit a meter or so deep, ringing the excavation
with mammoth bones or tusks, and then draping hides over these supports (Figure 4.30).
The savage winters of Pleistocene Russia must have required constantly burning ﬁres, and
the great quantities of bone ash found at these sites indicate that these ﬁres were often fed
with mammoth bones in lieu of very scarce wood. Some excavated pithouses were relatively
large, with many hearths, suggesting that several families may have passed the winter together.
The people of Kostenki subsisted primarily through big-game hunting, mainly of herd
animals such as horses, with an occasional mammoth, wild cow, or reindeer. Numerous
wolf and fox bones at these sites probably reﬂect the hunting of these animals for their fur
for clothing. Like their Upper Paleolithic counterparts elsewhere, the Kostenki people
manufactured a variety of decorative items, including “Venus” ﬁgurines (representations
of women, usually with exaggerated secondary sexual characteristics) (Figure 4.31).


Late Pleistocene Asians
Until recently, few Upper Paleolithic sites were known in East Asia. Excavations at
Zhoukoudian revealed levels dating to about 10,000 years ago containing approximately
           178       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                seven individuals—all of whom had been killed, but
                                                                apparently not eaten. One individual had clearly died
                                                                from an arrow or small spear wound to the skull, and
                                                                another had been beaten about the head with a large
                                                                stone. Elsewhere, two skulls have been retrieved from
                                                                Wadjak, in central Java, but dating these has proved
                                                                difﬁcult.
                                                                      Hundreds of late Pleistocene sites have been
                                                                found in Japan. Dating these sites is difﬁcult, but the
                                                                classic European Upper Paleolithic blade and burin
                                                                industries are well represented in Japan, particularly
                                                                in the northern areas across from Siberia.
                                                                      The earliest known stone tools from Southeast
                                                                Asia may be those of the Sonviian assemblage from
                                                                northern Vietnam, dating to about 23,000 b.p.,139 but
                                                                the Hoabinihian lithics of about 12,000 years ago
                                                                are the earliest widespread Upper Paleolithic lithic
                                                                industry in this area.
                                                                      One of the most intriguing problems in Asian
                                                                prehistory is the initial colonization of Australia.
                                                                One has to imagine that people who were living in a
                                                                world in which the Neandertals still had 15,000 years
                                                                of domination of Europe left somehow managed to
                                                                ﬂoat or sail. The geology seems to admit no other
                                                                possibilities, because even with the most extreme
                                                                estimates of the extent to which Pleistocene glaciers
                                                                lowered worldwide sea levels, people could not have
                                                                got to Australia except over some very deep water.
FIGURE 4.31 Cast of Venus ﬁgurine from Willendorf,              Nor is swimming a realistic possibility. Probably
Austria. These ﬁgurines are widespread across much
                                                                thousands of coastal ﬁsherfolk were washed out to
of Europe during the Gravettian Upper Paleolithic period,
suggesting a shared belief system.
                                                                sea and drowned in many millennia of typhoons and
                                                                ﬂoods, before some fortunate castaways ﬁnally made
                                                                it to Australia.
                             In any case, between 60,000 and 45,000 years ago, the ancestors of the Australian
                      Aborigines somehow managed to cross about 65 km of open ocean to reach Australia. And
                      while it is possible that an occasional boat of ﬁsherfolk was shipwrecked on the New
                      Guinea–Australia coast, computer simulations that take into account normal fertility rates
                      and the genetic diversity of modern populations suggest that more than just a boatload or
                      two of colonists founded that area’s present aboriginal population.140 Two distinct groups
                      of ancient people have been found there,141 which some scholars believe indicate coloniza-
                      tion by two different groups, one a more gracile type, by 50,000 years ago, the other a more
                      robust people, before 20,000 years ago. Like their contemporaries in America, the late
                      Pleistocene Australians lived at a time when many large and small animal species were becom-
                      ing extinct, and their possible role in this extinction pattern remains a matter of controversy.
                             The Australian Aborigines offer a wonderful subject for meditations on the nature of
                      humanity. Consider: These people lived in what may have been nearly complete isolation
                                                        THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS        179


for more than 40,000 years in an ecologically diverse continent, and when ﬁrst encountered
by Europeans in the seventeenth century, their technology hardly approached the sophistica-
tion of the Neandertals: just simple stone tools and rudimentary wooden implements. Yet
they evolved a kinship system and cosmology that most non-Aborigines can only
apprehend dimly after many years of study.



SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

We began this chapter with humans of about 1.5 million years ago spread out along the
warm margins of Africa and Asia, making a reasonable living with little more than crude
stone tools, intellectual abilities far poorer than our own, and probably only the rudiments
of human social organization. We end this chapter, in effect, with ourselves, in the form of
our late Pleistocene relatives of just 30,000 years ago. As to what happened in this period
of a million and a half years, we have a lot of data, but not enough to describe with certainty
some of the most important evolutionary patterns and dynamics. Every year anthropologists
meet in conferences around the world to discuss their research, and this year, like last year
and every previous year, they will debate the origins of modern humans. Like this chapter,
these debates will end with no real resolution. Some anthropologists are convinced that one
or another of these models of human origins is accurate, but no one really knows. Even
with a tenfold increase in ﬁnds of relevant human fossils, these debates would likely
continue for years to come. If Richard Klein is correct,142 for example, the origins of modern
humans may have arisen directly from a single mutation, perhaps in a single individual,
that allowed one group of East Africans to conceptualize time, space, and human possi-
bilities in a way superior to that of all other humans. Such a mutation could have occurred
and left no trace in fragmentary crania. If Frayer, Wolpoff, Thorne, Smith, and Pope—all
advocates of multiregional continuity in human evolution—are correct, they apparently
will need much additional data to convince their colleagues.
      Yet, as noted earlier, it is not necessarily pointless to review evidence and arguments
in unresolved debates. In these conﬂicting ideas about the nature and history of our origins
we can see how “science” operates and we can get a sense of the signiﬁcance of these intellec-
tual problems. Currently, hardly a day passes without the announcement of some new
breakthrough in identifying the genetic basis for some aspect of the human condition, from
our personalities to our susceptibility to disease. To the extent that we are expressions of our
genes, our history and fate, then, are in the selective forces of the past hundreds of thousands
of years. These forces and these genetic patterns are, of course, the basic data in these
debates about modern human origins.
      Given the pace of genetic research, it is not impossible that we will eventually be able
to re-create a Neandertal, but until we do and then give him or her the SATs, we will not
be able to resolve arguments conclusively about just who these people were, what they were
capable of, and how they relate to us.
      In searching for causes of the increasing brain size and other changes that took place
between 400,000 and 30,000 years ago, we might note that rates of evolutionary change
frequently seem to be higher along the margins of a species’ range. This may have been the
case with Homo, as bands of these hominins probed far into England, northern Europe,
180   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      and perhaps northern Eurasia, and began to specialize in various forms of hunting,
      scavenging, and gathering. The Swanscombe and Steinheim individuals, with their nearly
      modern brain size, may be reﬂections of these developments along the northern periphery.
      Gene ﬂow in most hunting-and-gathering societies is sufﬁciently high that these changes
      in brain size and facial architecture would probably have been quickly disseminated over a
      wide area.
           But the “margins” of a cultural animal like early humans can be culturally and
      technologically—not just geographically—deﬁned. As noted later, brain sizes may have
      increased most rapidly in Africa, not on the world’s cold periphery. Brain tissue has a
      relatively high “cost”: It consumes great amounts of energy and oxygen. Also, giving birth
      to large-brained offspring requires a pelvic bone structure that reduces maternal mobility.
      Since Homo erectus was obviously an efﬁcient hunter, forager, and tool-maker, perhaps the
      increased brain size was related to increasing emotional capacities rather than to
      improvements in the problem-solving abilities that were important in hunting or tool-
      making. Great advantages would accrue to a Pleistocene hunting-and-gathering group that
      could organize itself as part of a social network involving many different bands and
      hundreds of individuals, and perhaps the increasing brain size had to do with the selective
      advantage of being able to generalize emotions to scores of “kinsmen.”
           In any case, the great variability of cranial capacity among “normal” people today, and
      the fact that human brain size seems generally to have increased quite uniformly up to
      about 100,000 years ago, should warn against simplistic explanations of this phenomenon.
           To explain the relatively slow rate of technological change between 2 million and
      100,000 years ago, we must reﬂect on the fact that our ancestors of this period were many
      fewer than the large populations of humans that characterized the world even 10,000 years
      ago. Although technological innovation is not a simple product of the number of minds
      available to create new ideas, a strong relationship exists between population numbers and
      innovation in the simple hunting-gathering economies of the early and middle Pleistocene.
      Even as late as 500,000 years ago, there were probably only a million people in the entire
      world. Also, people of this era tended to live much shorter lives. Few survived past 30 years
      of age, and—although few adolescents of any age have believed it—people learn a great deal
      and retain considerable creativity past 30.
           Finally, if we look beyond the bones and stones and the practical analytical questions
      about our past, we might muse on the implications of the evidence presented here. It is
      worth noting that the facts and models about the dynamics of our ancestry recounted here
      and in chapter 3 all but killed a beautiful world- and life-view. The idea of “Nature, red in
      tooth and claw,” as the means by which we emerged from our reptilian past has appalled
      people since the dark truth of our origins was ﬁrst made evident by Darwin. It is thus
      appropriate to end this chapter with a beautifully somber expression of this mortally
      wounded world and life-view, by Alfred, Lord Tennyson, a contemporary of Darwin, and
      a man profoundly anguished by Darwin’s ideas.

          Are God and Nature then at strife,
            That Nature lends such evil dreams?
            So careful of the type she seems,
          So careless of the single life;
                                                              THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS            181


     That I, considering everywhere
       Her secret meaning in her deeds,
       And ﬁnding that of ﬁfty seeds
     She often brings but one to bear,
     I falter where I ﬁrmly trod,
        And falling with my weight of cares
        Upon the great world’s altar-stairs
     That slope thro’ darkness up to God,
     I stretch lame hands of faith, and grope,
        And gather dust and chaff, and call
        To what I feel is Lord of all,
     And faintly trust the larger hope.
     “So careful of the type?” but no.
        From scarpéd cliff and quarried stone
        She cries, “A thousand types are gone:
     I care for nothing: all shall go . . .”
     ...
     Man, her last work, who seem’d so fair,
      Such splendid purpose in his eyes,
      Who roll’d the psalm to wintry skies,
     Who built him fanes of fruitless prayer,
     Who trusted God was love indeed
      And love Creation’s ﬁnal law—
      Tho’ Nature, red in tooth and claw
     With ravine, shriek’d against his creed—
     Who loved, who sufferd countless ills,
       Who battled for the True, the Just,
       Be blown about the desert dust,
     Or seal’d within the iron hills?
     No more? A monster then, a dream,
       A discord. Dragons of the prime,
       That tare each other in their slime,
     Were mellow music match’d with him.
                    From In Memoriam, 1850


BIBLIOGRAPHY
Adcock, G. J., E. S. Dennis, S. Easteal, G. A. Huttley, L. S. Jermiin, W. J. Peacock, and A. Thorne. 2001.
            “Mitochrondrial DNA Sequences in Ancient Australians: Implications for Modern Human Origins.”
            Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 98(2):537–542.
Aiello, L. C. 1993. “The Fossil Evidence for Modern Human Origins in Africa: A Revised View.” American
            Anthropologist 95:73–96.
182   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      Aiello, L. C., and R. I. M. Dunbar. 1993. “Neocortex Size, Group Size, and the Evolution of Language.” Current
                   Anthropology 34:184 –192.
      Arens, W. 1979. The Man-Eating Myth. New York: Oxford University Press.
      Arensburg, B., and A. Belfer-Cohen. 1998. “Sapiens and Neandertals. Rethinking the Levantine Middle Paleolithic
                   Hominids.” In Neandertals and Modern Humans in Western Asia, ed. T. Akazawa, K. Aoki, and
                   O. Bar-Yosef, pp. 311–327. New York: Plenum Press.
      Arsuaga, J-L., I. Martinez, A. Garcia, J-M. Carretero, and E. Carbonell. 1993. “Three New Human Skulls from the
                   Sima de los Huesos Middle Pleistocene Site in Sierra de Atapuerca, Spain.” Nature 362:534 – 537.
      Asfaw, B., Y. Beyene, G. Suwa, R. C. Walter, T. D. White, G. WoldeGabriel, and T. Yemane. 1992. “The Earliest
                   Acheulean from Konso-Gardula.” Nature 360:732–735.
      Bafﬁer, D., and M. Julien. 1990. “L’Outillage en Os des Niveaux Châtelperroniens d’Arcy-sur-Cure (Yonne).” In
                   Paléolithique Moyen Récent et Paléolithique Supérieur Ancien en Europe, ed. C. Farizy, pp. 329 – 334.
                   Nemours: Mémoires du Musée de Préhistoire d’Ile de France 3.
      Bahn, P. G. 1994. “New Advances in the Field of Ice Age Art.” In Origins of Anatomically Modern Humans, eds.
                   M. H. Nitecki and V. Nitecki. New York: Plenum Press.
      Bahn, P., and J. Vertus. 1988. Images of the Ice Age. New York: Viking Press.
      Barham, L., and K. Robson-Brown, eds. 2001. Human Roots: Africa and Asia in the Middle Pleistocene. Bristol:
                   Western Academic & Specialist Press.
      Barton, C. M., G. A. Clark, and A. E. Choen. 1994. “Art as Information: Explaining Upper Paleolithic Art in
                   Western Europe.” World Archaeology 26(2):185–207.
      Bar-Yosef, O. 1994. “The Lower Paleolithic of the Near East.” Journal of World Prehistory 8:211–265.
      ———. 2002. “The Upper Paleolithic Revolution.” Annual Review of Anthropology 31:363 – 393.
      Bar-Yosef, O., and N. Goren-Inbar. 1993. “The Lithic Assemblages of ‘Ubeidiya: A Lower Paleolithic Site in the
                   Jordan Valley.’ ” Qedem (Jerusalem) 45:1–266.
      Bar-Yosef, O., and B. Vandermeersch. 1993. “Modern Humans in the Levant.” Scientiﬁc American (April):94 –
                   100.
      Bednarik, R. G. 1992. “Paleoart and Archaeological Myths.” Cambridge Archaeological Journal 2:27– 43.
      ———. 2003. “A Figurine from the African Acheulian.” Current Anthropology 44(3):405– 413.
      Bellwood, P. 1986. The Prehistory of the Indo-Malaysian Archipelago. Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
      ———. 1987. “The Prehistory of Island Southeast Asia: A Multidisciplinary Review of Recent Research.” Journal
                   of World Prehistory 1(2):171–224.
      Bender, M. 1983. “Comment on G. Krantz (CA 21:773 –79).” Current Anthropology 24(1):113.
      Berger, T. D., and E. Trinkaus. 1995. “Patterns of Trauma Among the Neandertals.” Journal of Archaeological
                   Science 22:841– 852.
      Bermúdez de Castro, J. M., J. L. Arsuaga, E. Carbonell, A. Rosas, I. Martínez, and M. Mosquera. 1997. “A Hominid
                   from the Lower Pleistocene of Atapuerca, Spain: Possible Ancestor to Neandertals and Modern
                   Humans.” Science 276:1392–1395.
      Binford, L. R. 1981. Bones: Ancient Men and Modern Myth. New York: Academic Press.
      ———. 1984. Faunal Remains from Klasies River Mouth. New York: Academic Press.
      ———. 1985. “Human Ancestors: Changing Views of Their Behavior.” Journal of Anthropological Archaeology
                   4(4):292–327.
      Binford, L. R., and S. Binford. 1966. “A Preliminary Analysis of Functional Variability in the Mousterian of
                   Levallois Facies.” In Recent Studies in Paleoanthropology (American Anthropologist special publication),
                   pp. 238 –295.
      Binford, L., and N. Stone. 1986. “Zhoukoudien: A Closer Look.” Current Anthropology 27(5):453– 475.
      Bischoff, J. L., R. Julià, and R. Mora. 1988. “Uranium-Series Dating of the Mousterian Occupation at Abric
                   Romani, Spain.” Nature 332:668 – 670.
      Bischoff, J. L., K. Ludwig, J. Francisco Garcia, E. Carbonell, M. Vaquero, T. W. Stafford, and A. J. T. Jull. 1994.
                   “Dating of the Basal Aurignacian Sandwich at Abric Romani (Catalunya, Spain) by Radiocarbon and
                   Uranium-series.” Journal of Archaeological Science 21:541–551.
      Boaz, N. T., R. L. Ciochon, Q. Xu, and J. Liu. 2000. “Large Mammalian Carnivores as an Taphonomic Factor in
                   the Bone Accumulation at Zhoudoukian.” Acta Anthropologica Sinica. Supplement to Vol. 19:224–234.
      Bocquet-Appel, J.-P., and P. Y. Demars. 2000. “Neanderthal Contraction and Modern Human Colonization of
                   Europe.” Antiquity 74:544 – 552.
      Bordes, F. 1961a. Typologie du paleolithique ancien et moyen. Bordeaux: Publication de l’Institut de Prehistoire de
                   l’Universite de Bordeaux.
      ———. 1961b. “Mousterian Cultures in France.” Science 134:803 – 810.
      ———. 1972. A Tale of Two Caves. New York: Harper & Row.
      Bordes, F., and D. de Sonneville-Bordes. 1970. “The Signiﬁcance of Variability in Paleolithic Assemblages.” World
                   Archaeology 2:61–73.
      Boule, M., and H. Vallois. 1932. Fossil Men. London: Thames and Hudson.
                                                                      THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS                 183


Bowdler, J. M., R. Jones, and A. G. Thorne. 1970. “Pleistocene Human Remains from Australia: A Living Site and
             Human Cremation from Lake Mungo, Western New South Wales.” World Archaeology 2:39 – 60.
Bower, B. 1988. “An Earlier Dawn for Modern Humans?” Science News 133:138.
Brace, C. L. 1975. “Review of Shanidar: The First Flower People. by R. Solecki.” Natural History 80:82 – 86.
Brace, C. L., D. P. Tracer, L. Allen Yaroch, J. Robb, K. Brandt, and A. Russel Nelson. 1993. “Clines and Clusters
             Versus ‘Race’: A Test in Ancient Egypt and of a Death on the Nile.” Yearbook of Physical Anthropology
             36:1–31.
Bräuer, G. 1992. “Africa’s Place in the Evolution of Homo sapiens.” In Continuity or Replacement: Controversies in
             Homo sapiens Evolution, ed. G. Bräuer and F. H. Smith. Rotterdam: A. A. Balkema.
Brennan, M. U. 1991. Health and Disease in the Middle and Upper Paleolithic of Southwestern France: A
             Bioarchaeological Study, Ph.D. Dissertation, New York University, New York.
Brooks, A. S., D. M. Helgren, J. S. Cramer, A. Franklin, W. Hornyak, J. M. Keating, R. G. Klein, W. J. Rink, H. P.
             Schwarcz, J. N. L. Smith, K. Stewart, N. E. Todd, J. Verniers, and J. E. Yellen. 1995. “Dating and Context
             of Three Middle Stone Age Sites with Bone Artifacts in the Upper Semliki Valley, Zaire.” Science
             268:548–552.
Brothwell, D. 1961. “Upper Pleistocene Human Skull from Niah Caves, Sarawak.” Sarawak Museum Journal 9:323.
Brown, K. A., and M. Pluciennik. 2001. “Archaeology and Human Genetics: Lessons for Both.” Antiquity
             75:101–106.
Brown, P., T. Sutikna, M. J. Morwood, R. P. Soejono, Jatmiko, E. Wayhu Saptomo, and R. Awe Due. 2004. “A
             New Small-Bodied Hominin from the Late Pleistocene of Flores, Indonesia.” Nature 431:1055–1061.
Cann, R. L., Rickards, O., and J. K. Lum. 1995. “Mitochondrial DNA and Human Evolution: Our One Lucky
             Mother.” In Origins of Anatomically Modern Humans, eds. M. H. Nitecki and V. Nitecki. New York:
             Plenum Press.
Cann, R. L., M. Stoneking, and A. C. Wilson. 1987. “Mitochondrial DNA and Human Evolution.” Nature
             325:31–36.
Caramelli, D., C. Lalueza-Fox, C. Vernesi, M. Lari, A. Casoli, F. Mallegni, B. Chiarelli, I. Dupanloup, J.
             Bertranpetit, G. Barbujani, and G. Bertorelle. 2003. “Evidence for a Genetic Discontinuity Between
             Neanderthals and 24,000-Year-Old Anatomically Modern Humans.” Proceedings of the National
             Academy of Sciences 100(11):6593 – 6597.
Carbonell, E., J. M. Bermudez de Castro, J. L. Arsuaga, J. C. Diez, A. Rosas, G. Cuenva-Bescos, R. Sala, M.
             Mosquera, and X. Rodríguez. 1995. “Lower Pleistocene Hominids and Artefacts from Atapuerca-TD6
             (Spain).” Science 269:826 – 830.
Carlisle, R. C., and M. I. Siegel. 1974. “Some Problems in the Interpretation of Neanderthal Speech Capabilities.
             A Reply to Lieberman.” American Anthropologist 76:319–322.
Carroll, L. 1920. Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland. Through the Looking Glass and the Hunting of the Snark. New
             York: The Modern Library.
Cavalli-Sforza, L. L., P. Menozzi, and A. Piazza. 1994. The History and Geography of Human Genes. Princeton, NJ:
             Princeton University Press.
Chase, P. G. 1986. The Hunters of Combe Grenal: Approaches to Middle Paleolithic Subsistence in Europe. Oxford:
             BAR International Series 286.
Chase, P. G., and H. L. Dibble. 1987. “Middle Paleolithic Symbolism: A Review of Current Evidence and
             Interpretations.” Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 6:263–294.
Clark, G. A., ed. 1991. Perspectives on the Past: Theoretical Biases in Mediterranean Hunter-Gatherer Research.
             Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
———. 2002. “Neanderthal Archaeology—Implications for Our Origins.” American Anthropologist 104:50 – 67.
Clark, G. A., and J. Lindly. 1991. “On Paradigmatic Biases and Paleolithic Research Traditions.” Current
             Anthropology 32:577–587.
Clottes, J. 2001. “France’s Magical Ice Age Art: Chauvet Cave.” National Geographic (August) 200(2):104 –121.
Clottes, J., A. Beltrán, J. Courtin, and H. Cosquer. 1992. “The Cosquer Cave on Cape Morgiou, Marseilles.”
             Antiquity 66:583–598.
Conkey, M. 1980. “The Identiﬁcation of Prehistoric Hunter-Gatherer Aggregation Sites: The Case of Altamira.”
             Current Anthropology 21:609 – 630.
———. 1987. “New Approaches in the Search for Meaning? A Review of Research in Paleolithic Art.” Journal of
             Field Archaeology 14(4):413 – 430.
Conway, B., J. McNabb, and N. Ashton, eds. 1996. Excavations at Barnﬁeld Pit, Swanscombe, 1968–72. London:
             British Museum.
Coon, C. S. 1962. The Origin of Races. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Davidson, I., and W. Noble. 1989. “The Archaeology of Perception: Traces of Depiction and Language.” Current
             Anthropology 30:125–155.
De Beaune, S. A. 1987. “Paleolithic Lamps and Their Specialization: A Hypothesis.” Current Anthropology
             28(4):569–577.
184   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      Dennell, H. M., H. M. Rendell, and A. E. Hailwood. 1988a. “Late Pliocene Artefacts from Northern Pakistan.”
                   Current Anthropology 29(3):495– 498.
      ———. 1988b. “Early Tool-Making in Asia: Two Million Year Old Artefacts in Pakistan.” Antiquity 62:98 –106.
      D’Errico, F., and A. Nowell. 2000. “A New Look at the Berekhat Ram Figurine: Implications for the Origins of
                   Symbolism.” Cambridge Archaeological Journal 10(1): 123 –167.
      D’Errico, F., J. Zilhão, M. Julián, D. Bafﬁer, and J. Pelegrin. 1998. “Neanderthal Acculturation in Western Europe?
                   A Critical Review of the Evidence and Its Interpretation.” Current Anthropology 39(2):S1–S44.
      Dibble, H. L. 1995. “Middle Paleolithic Scraper Reduction: Background, Clariﬁcation, and Review of the Evidence
                   to Date.” Journal of Archaeological Method and Theory 2(4):299 – 368.
      de Vos, J., P. Sondaar, and C. Swisher. 1994. “Dating Hominid Sites in Indonesia.” Science 266:1726 –1727.
      Dubois, E. 1921. “The Proto-Australian Fossil Man of Wadjak, Java.” Proceedings: Koninklijke Nederlandse
                   Akademie van Wetenschappen 23:1013.
      Falk, D. 1975. “Comparative Anatomy of the Larynx in Man and the Chimpanzee: Implications for Language in
                   Neanderthal.” American Journal of Physical Anthropology 43:123 –132.
      Falk, D., C. Hildebolt, K. Smith, M. J. Morwood, T. Sutikna, P. Borwn, Jatmiko, E. W. Saptomo, B. Brunsden,
                   and F. Prior. 2005. “The Brain of LB1, Homo ﬂoresiensis.” Science 308:243–245.
      Farizy, C. 1990. “The Transition from Middle to Upper Palaeolithic at Arcy-sure-Cure (Yonne, France):
                   Technological, Economic and Social Aspects.” In The Emergence of Modern Humans, ed. P. Mellars.
                   Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
      Ferraro, G., W. Trevatham, and J. Levy. 1994. Anthropology. An Applied Perspective. St. Paul, MN: West Publishing
                   Company.
      Fisher, E. 1979. Woman’s Creation. New York: McGraw-Hill.
      Frankel, D. 1991. Remains to Be See: Archaeological Insights into Australian Prehistory. Melbourne:
      Longman Cheshire.
      Frayer, D. W. 1986. “Cranial Variation at Mladec and the Relationship Between Mousterian and Upper Paleolithic
                   Hominids.” Anthropos 23:243–256.
      Frayer, D. W., and M. H. Wolpoff. 1993. “Comment on ‘Glottogenesis and Modern Homo sapiens’ (R. G. Milo
                   and D. Quiatt).” Current Anthropology 34(5):582–584.
      Frayer, D. W., M. Wolpoff, A. G. Thorne, F. H. Smith, and G. G. Pope. 1993. “Theories of Modern Human Origins:
                   The Paleontological Test.” American Anthropologist 95:14 –50.
      ———. 1994. “Getting It Straight.” American Anthropologist 96:424 – 438.
      Freeman, L. G. 1975. “Acheulian Sites and Stratigraphy in Iberia and the Maghreb.” In After the Australopithecines,
                   ed. K. W. Butzer and G. L. Isaac. The Hague: Mouton.
      ———. 1994. “Torralba and Ambrona: A Review of Discoveries.” In Integrative Paths to the Past: Paleoanthropolog-
                   ical Advances in Honor of F. Clark Howell, ed. R. S. Corruccini and R. L. Ciochon. Englewood Cliffs,
                   NJ: Prentice Hall.
      Freeman, M. 1971. “A Social and Economic Analysis of Systematic Female Infanticide.” American Anthropologist
                   73:1011–1018.
      Gabunia, L., and A. Vekua. 1995. “A Plio-Pleistocene Hominid from Dmanisi, Georgia.” Nature 373:509–512.
      Gabunia, L., A. Vekua, D. Lordkipanidze, C. C. Swisher III, R. Ferring, A. Justus, M. Nioradze, M. Tvalchrelidze,
                   S. C. Antón, G. Bosinski, O. Jöris, M-A. de Lumley, G. Majsuradze, and A. Mouskhelishvili. 2000.
                   “Earliest Pleistocene Hominid Cranial Remains from Dmanisi, Republic of Georgia: Taxonomy,
                   Geological Setting, and Age.” Science 288:1019 –1025.
      Gambier, D. 1989. “Fossil Hominids from the Early Upper Paleolithic (Auignacian) of France.” In The Human
                   Revolution: Behavioral and Biological Perspectives on the Origins of Modern Humans, ed. P. Mellars and
                   C. B. Stringer. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
      Gamble, C. 1994. Timewalkers: The Prehistory of Global Colonization. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
      Gargett, R. H. 1989. “Grave Shortcomings: The Evidence for Neanderthal Burial.” Current Anthropology
                   30(2):157–190.
      Garn, S., and W. Block. 1970. “The Limited Nutritional Value of Cannibalism.” American Anthropologist 72:106.
      Gee, H. 1995. “New Hominid Remains Found in Ethiopia.” Nature 373:272.
      Gisis, I., and O. Bar-Yosef. 1974. “New Excavations in Zuttiyeh Cave, Wadi Amud, Israel.” Paléorient 2:175 –180.
      Goebel, T. 1995. “The Record of Human Occupation of the Russian Subarctic and Arctic.” Byrd Polar Research
                   Center Miscellaneous Series M–335:41– 46.
      Goren-Inbar, N., S. Belitsky, K. Verosub, E. Werker, M. Kislev, A. Heimann, I. Carmi, and A. Rosenfeld. 1992.
                   “New Discoveries at the Middle Pleistocene Acheulian Site of Gesher Benot Ya’aqov, Israel.”
                   Quarternary Research 38:117–128.
      Gould, S. J. 1989. Wonderful Life. New York: W.W. Norton.
      Halverson, J. 1987. “Art for Art’s Sake in the Paleolithic.” Current Anthropology 28(1):63 – 89.
      Harpending, H. 1994. “Gene Frequencies, DNA Sequences, and Human Origins.” Perspectives in Biology and
                   Medicine 37:384 –394.
                                                                    THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS                185


Harrold, F. B. 1989. “Mousterian, Châtelperronian, and Early Aurignacian in Western Europe: Continuity or
             Discontinuity.” In The Human Revolution: Behavioral and Biological Perspectives on the Origins of
             Modern Humans, ed. P. Mellars and C. B. Stringer. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
———. 2000. “The Chatelperronian in Historical Context.” Journal of Anthropological Research 56:59 –75.
Harvati, K., S. R. Frost, and K. P. McNulty. 2004. “Neanderthal Taxonomy Reconsidered: Implications of 3D
             Primate Models of Intra- and Interspeciﬁc Differences.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
             101:1147–1152.
Hayden, B. 1993. “The Cultural Capacities of the Neandertals: A Review and Re-Evaluation.” Journal of Human
             Evolution 24:113–146.
Haynes, C. V. 1992. “Contributions of Radiocarbon Dating to the Geochronology of the Peopling of the New
             World.” In Radiocarbon After Four Decades, ed. R. E. Taylor, A. Long, and R. S. Kra. New York:
             Springer-Verlag.
Herrnstein, R. J., and C. Murray. 1996. The Bell Curve: Intelligence and Class Structure in American Life. New York:
             Simon and Schuster.
Hodder, I. 1986. Reading the Past: Current Approaches to Interpretation in Archaeology. Cambridge, England:
             Cambridge University Press.
Hoffecker, J. G., W. R. Powers, and T. Goebel. 1993. “The Colonization of Beringia and the Peopling of the New
             World.” Science 259:46 –53.
Holloway, R. L., Jr. 1989. “Comment on ‘On Depiction and Language.’” Current Anthropology 30(3):331–
             332.
Howell, F. C. 1961. “Isimila: A Paleolithic Site in Africa.” Scientiﬁc American 205:118 –131.
———. 1994. “A Chronostratigraphic and Taxonomic Framework of the Origin of Modern Humans.” In Origins
             of Anatomically Modern Humans, ed. M. H. Nitecki and V. Nitecki. New York: Plenum Press.
Hublin, J-J. 1990. “Les Peuplements Paléolithiques de’Europe: Un Point de Vue Géographique.” In Paléolithique
             Moyen Récent et Paléolithique Supérieur Ancien en Europe, ed. C. Farizy, pp. 29–37. Nemours:
             Mémoires du Musée de Préhistoire d’Ile de France 3.
Isaac, G. 1975. “Sorting Out the Muddle in the Middle—An Anthropologist’s Post-Conference Appraisal.” In After
             the Australopithecines, ed. K. W. Butzer and G. Isaac. The Hague: Mouton.
———. 1984. “The Archaeology of Human Origins: Studies of the Lower Palaeolithic in East Africa, 1971–1981.”
             Advances in World Archaeology 3:1– 89.
James, S. R. 1989. “Hominid Use of Fire in the Lower and Middle Pleistocene: A Review of the Evidence.” Current
             Anthropology 30(1):1–26.
Jelinek, A. J. 1982a. “The Tabun Cave and Paleolithic Man in the Levant.” Science 216:1369–1375.
———. 1994. “Hominids, Energy, Environment, and Behavior in the Late Pleistocene.” In Origins of Anatomically
             Modern Humans, ed. M. H. Nitecki and V. Nitecki. New York: Plenum Press.
Jones, R. 1990. “From Kakadu to Kutikina: The Southern Continent at 18,000 Years Ago.” In The World at 18,000
             BP: Low Latitudes, ed. C. Gamble and O. Soffer. London: Unwin Hyman.
Jorgensen, G. 1977. “A Contribution of the Hypothesis of a Little More Fitness of Blood Group O.” Journal of
             Human Evolution 6:741–744.
Klein, R. G. 1973. Ice-Age Hunters of the Ukraine. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
———. 1987. “Reconstructing How Early People Exploited Animals: Problems and Prospects.” In The Evolution
             of Human Hunting, ed. M. H. Nitecki and D. V. Nitecki. New York: Plenum Press.
———. 1999. The Human Career. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
———. 1995. “Anatomy, Behavior, and Modern Human Origins.” Journal of World Prehistory 9(2):167–198.
———. 2003. “Whither the Neanderthals?” Science 299:1525 –1527.
Klein, R. G., and B. Edgar. 2002. The Dawn of Human Culture. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Krings, M., C. Capelli, F. Tschentscher, H. Geisert, S. Meyer, A. von Haeseler, K. Grossschmidt, G. Possnert,
             M. Paunovic, and S. Pääbo. 2000. “A View of Neanderthal Genetic Diversity.” Nature Genetics
             26:144–146.
Krings, M., A. Stone, R. W. Schmitz, H. Drainitzki, M. Stoneking, and S. Pääbo. 1997. “Neanderthal DNA
             Sequences and the Origin of Modern Humans.” Cell 90:19 – 30.
Kuzmin, Y. V. 1994. “Prehistoric Colonization of Northeastern Siberia and Migration to America: Radiocarbon
             Evidence.” Radiocarbon 36:367–376.
Lahr, M. M. 1994. “The Multiregional Model of Modern Human Origins: A Reassessment of Its Morphological
             Basis.” Journal of Human Evolution 26:23–56.
Larichev, V., U. Khol’ushkin, and I. Laricheva. 1987. “Lower and Middle Paleolithic of Northern Asia:
             Achievements, Problems, and Perspectives.” Journal of World Prehistory 1(4):415 – 464.
Laville, H., Rigaud J.-P., and J. Sackett. 1980. Rock Shelters of the Perigord. New York: Academic Press.
Leakey, L. S. 1951. Olduvai Gorge, 1931–1951. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Leroi-Gourhan, A. 1968. “The Evolution of Paleolithic Art.” Scientiﬁc American 209(2):58 –74.
———. 1982. The Dawn of European Art. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
186   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      Leveque, F., A. M. Backer, and M. Guilband, eds. 1993. Context of a Late Neandertal: Implications of
                  Multidisciplinary Research for the Transition to Upper Paleolithic Adaptations at Saint-Cesaire, Charente-
                  Maritime, France. Madison, WI: Prehistory Press.
      Leveque, F., and B. Vandermeersch. 1980. “Les Decouvertes de Restes Humains dans un Horizon Castelperronien
                  de Saint-Cesaire (Charente-Maritime).” Bulletin de la Societe Prehistorique Francaise 77:35.
      Lewis-Williams, J. D., and T. A. Dowson. 1988. “The Signs of All Times: Entopic Phenomena in Upper Paleolithic
                  Art.” Current Anthropology 29(2):201–246.
      Lieberman, D. E. 1995. “Testing Hypotheses About Recent Human Evolution from Skulls.” Current Anthropology
                  36:159–197.
      Lieberman, L., and F. L. C. Jackson. 1995. “Race and Three Models of Human Origin.” American Anthropologist
                  97(2):231–242.
      Lieberman, P. E. 1991. Uniquely Human: The Evolution of Speech, Thought, and Selﬂess Behavior. Cambridge, MA:
                  Harvard University Press.
      ———. 2002. “On the Nature and Evolution of the Neural Bases of Human Language.” Yearbook of Physical
                  Anthropology 45:36 – 61.
      Lieberman, P. E., and E. S. Crelin. 1971. “On the Speech of Neanderthals.” Linguistic Inquiry 2:203 –222.
      Lieberman, P. E., E. S. Crelin, and D. H. Klatt. 1972. “Phonetic Ability and Related Anatomy of the Newborn and
                  Adult Human, Neanderthal Man, and the Chimpanzee.” American Anthropologist 74:287.
      Lindly, J. M., and G. A. Clark. 1990. “Symbolism and Modern Human Origins.” Current Anthropology 31:233–240.
      Littleﬁeld, A., L. Lieberman, and L. T. Reynolds. 1982. “Redeﬁning Race: The Potential Demise of a Concept in
                  Physical Anthropology.” Current Anthropology 23(6):641– 655.
      Lourandos, H. 1997. Continent of Hunter-Gatherers: New Perspectives in Australian Prehistory. New York:
                  Cambridge University Press.
      Lovejoy, O., and E. Trinkaus. 1980. “Strength of Robusticity of the Neanderthal Tibia.” American Journal of
                  Physical Anthropology 53:465 – 470.
      Lumley, H. de, and M. A. de Lumley. 1971. “Decouverte de restes humains anteneandertaliens dates du debut du
                  Riss la Caune de l’Arago (Tautavel, Pyrenees-Orientales).” Comptes Rendus de l’Academie des Sciences
                  de Paris 272:1739 –1742.
      Lumley, M. A. de. 1975. “Ante-Neanderthals of Western Europe.” In Australopithecus Paleoanthropology:
                  Morphology and Paleoecology, ed. R. H. Tuttle. The Hague: Mouton.
      Macaulay, V., C. Hill., A. Achilli, C. Rengo, D. Clarke, W. Meehan, J. Blackburn, O. Semino, R. Scozzari,
                  F. Cruciani, A. Taha, N. K. Shaari, J. M. Raja, P. Ismail, Z. Zainuddin, W. Goodwin, D. Bulbeck,
                  H.-J. Bandelt, S. Oppenheimer, A. Torroni, and M. Richards. 2005. “Single, Rapid Coastal Settlement
                  of Asia Revealed by Analysis of Complete Mitochondrial Genomes.” Science 308:1034 –1036.
      Marks, J. 1995. Human Biodiversity: Genes, Race, and History. Hawthorne, NY: Aldine de Gruyter.
      Marshack, A. 1976. “Some Implications of the Paleolithic Symbolic Evidence for the Origins of Language.” Current
                  Anthropology 17:274 – 282.
      McBrearty, S., and A. S. Brooks. 2000. “The Revolution That Wasn’t: A New Interpretation of the Origin of
                  Modern Human Behavior.” Journal of Human Evolution 39:453–563.
      Mellars, P. 1985. “The Ecological Basis of Social Complexity in the Upper Palaeolithic of Southwestern France”.
                  In Prehistoric Hunter-Gatherers: The Emergence of Cultural Complexity, ed. T. D. Price and J. Brown.
                  Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
      ———. 1989. “Major Issues in the Emergence of Modern Humans.” Current Anthropology 30:349–385.
      ———, ed. 1990. The Emergence of Modern Humans. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
      ———. 1992. “Cognitive Changes and the Emergence of Modern Humans in Europe.” Cambridge Archaeological
                  Journal 1:63–76.
      ———. 1993. “Archaeology and the Population-Dispersal Hypothesis of Modern Human Origins in Europe.” In
                  The Origin of Modern Humans and the Impact of Chronometric Dating, eds. M. J. Aitken, C. B. Stringer,
                  and P. A. Mellars. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
      Mellars, P., and C. Stringer, eds. 1989. The Human Revolution. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
      Melnick, D. J., and G. A. Hoelzer. 1993. “What Is mtDNA Good for in the Study of Primate Evolution?”
                  Evolutionary Anthropology 2(1):2–10.
      Meltzer, D. J. 1993. “Pleistocene Peopling of the Americas.” Evolutionary Anthropology 1:157–169.
      Mercier, N., and H. Valladas. 1994. “Thermoluminescence Dates for the Paleolithic Levant.” In Late Quaternary
                  Chronology and Paleoclimates of the Eastern Mediterranean. ed. O. Bar-Yosef and R. S. Kra. Tucson:
                  Radiocarbon.
      Milo, R. G., and D. Quiatt. 1994. “Language in the Middle and Late Stone Ages: Glottogenesis in Anatomically
                  Modern Homo sapiens.” In Hominid Culture in Primate Perspective, ed. D. Quiatt and J. Itani. Niwot:
                  University Press of Colorado.
      Mountain, J. L., A. A. Lin, A. M. Bowcock, and L. L. Cavalli-Sforza. 1993. “Evolution of Modern Humans:
                  Evidence from Nuclear DNA Polymorphisms.” In The Origin of Modern Humans and the Impact of
                                                                   THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS               187


            Chronometric Dating, ed. M. J. Aitken, C. B. Stringer, and P. A. Mellars. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
            University Press.
Nitecki, M. H., and D. V. Nitecki, eds. 1995. Origins of Anatomically Modern Humans. New York: Plenum Press.
O’Connell, J. F., K. Hawkes, and N. Blurton-Jones. 1988. “Hadza Scavenging: Implications for Plio/Pleistocene
            Hominid Subsistence.” Current Anthropology 29:356 – 363.
Olsen, J. W., and S. Miller-Antonio. 1992. “The Paleolithic in Southern China.” Asian Perspectives 31:129–160.
Olszewski, D. I. 1999. “The Early Upper Palaeolithic in the Zagros Mountains.” In Dorothy Garrod and the Progress
            of the Palaeolithic, ed. W. Davies and R. Charles, pp. 167–180. Oxford: Oxbow Books.
———. in press. “Issues in the Development of the Early Upper Paleolithic, and a ‘Transitional’ Industry from
            the Zagros Region.” In Transitional Industries in Europe and Western Asia, ed. J. Riel-Salvatore and
            G. A. Clark. British Archaeological Reports International Series. Oxford: Archaeopress.
Ovchinnikov, I. V., A. Götherström, G. P. Romanova, V. M. Kharitonov, K. Lidén, and W. Goodwin. 2000.
            “Molecular Analysis of Neanderthal DNA from the Northern Caucasus.” Nature 404:490 – 493.
Parés, J. M., and A. Pérez-Gonzalez. 1995. “Paleomagnetic Age for Hominid Fossils at Atapuerca Archaeological
            Site, Spain.” Science 269:830 – 832.
Pelcin, A. 1994. “A Geological Explanation for the Berkehat Ram Figurine.” Current Anthropology 35:674 – 675.
Petraglia, M. 1999. “The First Acheulian Quarry in India: Stone Tool Manufacture, Biface Morphology, and
            Behaviors.” Journal of Anthropological Research 55(1):39–70.
Pope, G. G. 1984. “The Antiquity and Palaeoenvironment of the Asian Hominidae.” In The Evolution of the East
            Asian Environment, ed. R . O. I. Whyte. Hong Kong: Center of Asian Studies, University of Hong Kong.
———. 1989. “Bamboo and Human Evolution.” Natural History 10(89):49–56.
Prideaux, T., and the Editors of Time-Life. 1973. Cro-Magnon Man. New York: Time-Life.
Relethford, J. H. 2001. “Absence of Regional Afﬁnities of Neandertal DNA with Living Humans Does Not Reject
            Multiregional Evolution.” American Journal of Physical Anthropology 115:95–98.
Renfrew, C. 1988. “Archaeology and Language.” Current Anthropology 29(3):437– 468.
Rice, P. C., and A. L. Paterson. 1985. “Cave Art and Bones: Exploring the Interrelationships.” American
            Anthropologist 87(1):94 –100.
Rightmire, P. 1990. The Evolution of Homo erectus. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
———. 1992. “Homo erectus: Ancestor of Evolutionary Side Branch?” Evolutionary Anthropology 1:43 – 49.
Rink, W. J., H. P. Schwarcz, F. H. Smith, and J. Radovcic. 1995. “ESR Ages for Krapina Hominids.” Nature
            387:173–176.
Roberts, D. F. 1953. “Body Weight, Race and Climate.” American Journal of Physical Anthropology NS 11:533–558.
Roberts, M. B., Stringer, C. B., and Parﬁtt, S. A. 1994. “A Hominid Tibia from Middle Pleistocene Sediments at
            Boxgrove, UK.” Nature 369:311–312.
Roberts, R. G., R. Jones, N. A. Spooner, M. J. Head, A. S. Murray, and M. A. Smith. 1994. “The Human
            Colonisation of Australia: Optical Dates of 53,000 and 60,000 Years Bracket Human Arrival at Deaf
            Adder Gorge, Northern Territory.” Quaternary Science Reviews 13:575–586.
Roe, D. A. 1981. The Lower and Middle Paleolithic Periods in Britain. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Roebroeks, W. 1994. “Updating the Earliest Occupation of Europe.” Current Anthropology 35:301– 305.
Roebroeks, W., and T. van Kolfschoten. 1994. “The Earliest Occupation of Europe: A Short Chronology.”
            Antiquity 68:489–503.
Ruff, C. B. 1993. “Climatic Adaptation and Hominid Evolution: The Thermoregulatory Imperative.” Evolutionary
            Anthropology 2:65–107.
Rushton, J. P. 1994. Race, Evolution, and Behavior: A Life History Perspective. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction
            Publishers.
Russell, M. D. 1987a. “Bone Breakage in the Krapina Hominid Collection.” American Journal of Physical
            Anthropology 72:373 – 380.
———. 1987b. “Mortuary Practices at the Krapina Neandertal Site.” American Journal of Physical Anthropology
            72:381–398.
Schick, K. 1992. “Geoarchaeological Analysis of an Acheulean Site at Kalambo Falls, Zambia.” Geoarchaeology
            7(1):1–26.
Schick, K. D., and D. Zhuan. 1993. “Early Paleolithic of China and Eastern Asia.” Evolutionary Anthropology
            2(1):22–35.
Schwarcz, H. P. 1994. “Chronology of Modern Humans in the Levant.” In Late Quaternary Chronology and
            Paleoclimates of the Eastern Mediterranean, ed. O. Bar-Yosef and R. S. Kra. Tucson: Radiocarbon.
Semino, O., G. Passarino, P. J. Oefner, A. A. Lin, S. Arbuzova, L. E. Beckman, G. De Benedicts, P. Francalacci, A.
            Kouvatsi, S. Limborska, M. Marcikiæ, A. Mika, B. Mika, D. Primorac, A. S. Santachiara-Benerecetti,
            L. L. Cavalli-Sforza, and P. A. Underhill. 2000. “ The Genetic Legacy of Paleolithic Homo sapiens in
            Extant Europeans: A Y Chromosome Perspective.” Science 290:1155–1159.
Serge, A., and A. Asconzi. 1984. “Italy’s Earliest Middle Pleistocene Hominid Site.” Current Anthropology
            25(2):230–235.
188   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      Sevink, J., E. H. Hebeda, H. N. Priem, and R. H. Verschure. 1981. “A Note on the Approximately 730,000-Year-
                   Old Mammal Fauna and Associated Human Activity Sites Near Isernia, Central Italy.” Journal of
                   Archaeological Science 8:105 –106.
      Shapiro, H. 1974. Peking Man. New York: Simon and Schuster.
      Shea, J. J. 1988. “Spear Points from the Middle Paleolithic of the Levant.” Journal of Field Archaeology
                   15(4):441– 456.
      ———. 2003. “Close Encounters: Neandertals and Modern Humans in the Middle Palaeolithic Levant.” The
                   Review of Archaeology 24(1):42 – 56.
      Sherry, S. T., A. R. Rogers, H. Harpending, H. Soodyall, T. Jenkins, and M. Stoneking. 1994. “Mismatch
                   Distributions of mtDNA Reveal Recent Human Population Expansions.” Human Biology 66:671– 675.
      Shipman, P. 1983. “Early Hominid Lifestyle: Hunting and Gathering or Foraging and Scavenging?” In Animals
                   and Archaeology: Hunters and Their Prey, ed. J. Clutton-Brock and C. Grigson. Oxford, England: British
                   Archaeological Reports.
      Shipman, P., and J. Rose. 1983. “Early Hominid Hunting, Butchering and Carcass-Processing Behaviors:
                   Approaches to the Fossil Record.” Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 2:57– 98.
      Singer, R., and J. Wymer. 1982. The Middle Stone Age at Klasies River Mouth in South Africa. Chicago: University
                   of Chicago Press.
      Singer, R., B. Gladfelter, and J. Wymer. 1993. The Lower Paleolithic Site at Hoxne, England. Chicago: University
                   of Chicago Press.
      Smith, F. H. 1982. “Upper Pleistocene Hominid Evolution in South-Central Europe: A Review of the Evidence
                   and Analysis of Trends.” Current Anthropology 23(6):667– 703.
      ———. 1994. “Samples, Species, and Speculations in the Study of Modern Human Origins.” In Origins of
                   Anatomically Modern Humans, ed. M. H. Nitecki and V. Nitecki. New York: Plenum Press.
      Smith, F. H., J. F. Simek, and M. S. Hamill. 1989. “Geographic Variation in Supraorbital Torus Reduction During
                   the Later Pleistocene (c. 80,000–15,000 bp).” In The Human Revolution: Behavioural and Biological
                   Perspectives on the Origins of Modern Humans, ed. P. Mellars and C. B. Stringer. Edinburgh: Edinburgh
                   University Press.
      So, J. K. 1980. “Human Biological Adaptation to Arctic and Subarctic Zones.” Annual Review of Anthropology
                   9:63 – 82.
      Soffer, O. 1985. The Upper Paleolithic of the Central Russian Plain. New York: Academic Press.
      ———. 1993. “Upper Palaeolithic Adaptations in Central and Eastern Europe and Man-Mammoth Interactions.”
                   In From Kostenki to Clovis, ed. O. Soffer and N. D. Praslov. New York: Plenum Press.
      ———. 1994. “Ancestral Lifeways in Eurasia—the Middle and Upper Paleolithic Records.” In Origins of
                   Anatomically Modern Humans, ed. M. H. Nitecki and D. V. Nitecki. New York: Plenum Press.
      ———, ed. 1987. The Pleistocene Old World: Regional Perspectives. New York: Plenum Press.
      Soffer, O., and C. Gamble, eds. 1990. The World in 18,000 B.P. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
      Soffer, O., and N. D. Praslov, ed. 1995. From Kostenki to Clovis: Upper Paleolithic–Paleo-Indian Adaptations. New
                   York: Plenum Press.
      Speth, J. D. 1990. “Seasonality, Resource Stress, and Food Sharing in So-Called ‘Egalitarian’ Foraging Societies.”
                   Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 9:148 –188.
      Spoor, F., B. Wood, and F. Zonneveld. 1994. “Implications of Early Hominid Labryinthine Morphology for
                   Evolution of Human Bipedal Locomotion.” Nature 369:645 – 648.
      Steegmann. A. T., F. J. Cerny, and T. W. Holliday. 2002. “Neandertal Cold Adaptation: Physiological and Energetic
                   Factors.” American Journal of Human Biology 14: 566 –583.
      Stoneking, M. 1993. “DNA and Recent Human Evolution.” Evolutionary Anthropology 2:60 –73.
      Straus, L. G. 1993/1994. “Upper Paleolithic Origins and Radiocarbon Calibration: More New Evidence from
                   Spain.” Evolutionary Anthropology 2(6):195–198.
      ———. 1995. Iberia Before the Iberians: The Stone Age Prehistory of Cantabrian Spain. Albuquerque: University
                   of New Mexico Press.
      Straus, W., and A. Cave. 1957. “Pathology and the Posture of Neanderthal Man.” Quarterly Review of Biology
                   32:348.
      Stringer, C., and G. Bräuer. 1994. “Methods, Misreading, and Bias.” American Anthropologist 96:416 – 424.
      Stringer, C., and C. Gamble. 1993. The Search for the Neanderthals. London: Thames and Hudson.
      Stringer, C., F. C. Howell, and J. K. Melentis. 1979. “The Signiﬁcance of the Fossil Hominid from Petralona,
                   Greece.” Journal of Archaeological Science 6:235 –253.
      Svoboda, J. 1987. “Lithic Industries of the Arago, Vertesszollos, and Bilzingsleben Hominids: Comparison and
                   Evolutionary Interpretation.” Current Anthropology 28(2):219 –227.
      Swisher, C., G. H. Curtis, T. Jacob, A. G. Getty, A. Suprijo, and Widiasmoro. 1994. “Age of the Earliest Known
                   Hominids in Java, Indonesia.” Science 263:1119 –1121.
      Taborin, Y. 1990. “Les Prémices de la Parure.” In Paléolithique Moyen Récent et Paléolithique Supérieur Ancien en
                   Europe, ed. C. Farizy, pp. 335 – 344. Nemours: Mémoires du Musée de Préhistoire d’Ile de France 3.
                                                                    THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS                189


Tchernov, E. 1988. “Age of ‘Ubeidiya Formation (Jordan Valley, Israel) and the Earliest Hominids in the Levant.”
            Paléorient 14(2):63 – 65.
———. 1994. “New Comments on the Biostratigraphy of the Middle and Upper Plesitocene of the
            Southern Levant.” In Late Quaternary Chronology and Paleoclimates of the Eastern Mediterranean,
            ed. O. Bar-Yosef and R. S. Kra. Tucson: Radiocarbon.
Thackeray, A. I. 1992. “The Middle Stone Age South of the Limpopo River.” Journal of World Prehistory 6:385–440.
Thiel, B. 1987. “Early Settlement of the Philippines, Eastern Indonesia, and Australia-New Guinea: A New
            Hypothesis.” Current Anthropology 28(2):236 –241.
Thieme, H. 1997. “Lower Palaeolithic Hunting Spears from Germany.” Nature 385:807– 810.
Thorne, A. 1980. “The Arrival of Man in Australia.” In The Cambridge Encyclopedia of Archaeology. New York:
            Crown Publishers/Cambridge University Press.
Thorne, A. G., and M. Wolpoff. 1981. “Regional Continuity and Australasian Pleistocene Hominid Evolution.”
            American Journal of Physical Anthropology 55:337– 349.
Torroni, A., H.-J. Bandelt, L. D’Urbano, P. Lahermo, P. Moral, D. Sellitto, C. Rengo, P. Forster, M.-L. Savontaus,
            B. Bonné-Tamir, and R. Scozzari. 1998. “mtDNA Analysis Reveals a Major Late Paleolithic Expansion
            from Southwestern to Northeastern Europe.” American Journal of Human Genetics 62:1137–1152.
Trinkaus, E. 1982. “Evolutionary Continuity Among Archaic Homo sapiens.” In The Transition from Lower to
            Middle Palaeolithic and Origin of Modern Man, ed. A. Ronen. Oxford: BAR International Series 151.
———. 1983. The Shanidar Neanderthals. New York: Academic Press.
———. 1985. “Cannibalism and Burial at Krapina.” Journal of Human Evolution 14:203 –216.
———. 1986. “The Neanderthals and Modern Human Origins.” Annual Review of Anthropology 15:193 – 218.
———. 1995. “Neanderthal Mortality Patterns.” Journal of Archaeological Science 22:121–142.
Trinkaus, E., and C. Duarte. 2003. “The Hybrid Child from Portugal.” Scientiﬁc American Special Edition: New
            Look at Human Evolution 13(2):32 – 33.
Trinkaus, E., and W. W. Howells. 1979. “The Neanderthals.” Scientiﬁc American 241:118 –133.
Trinkaus, E., and P. Shipman. 1992. The Neanderthals: Changing the Image of Mankind. New York: Alfred A.
            Knopf.
Turner, A. 1992. “Large Carnivores and Earliest European Hominids: Changing Determinants of Resource
            Availability During the Lower and Middle Pleistocene.” Journal of Human Evolution 22:109 –126.
Valladas, H., J. Clottes, M.-M. Geneste, M. A. Garcia, M. Arnold, H. Cachier, and N. Tisnérat-Laborde. 2001.
            “Evolution of Prehistoric Cave Art.” Nature 413:479.
Valladas, H., J. L. Reyss, J. L. Joron, G. Valladas, O. Bar-Yosef, and B. Vandermeersch. 1988.
            “Thermoluminescence Dating of Mousterian ‘Proto-Cro-Magnon’ Remains from Israel and the
            Origin of Modern Man.” Nature 331:614–616.
Vallois, H. 1961. “The Social Life of Early Man: The Evidence of the Skeletons.” In Social Life of Early Man, ed. S.
            Washburn. Chicago: Aldine.
Van Andel, T. J., and W. Davies, eds. 2003. Neanderthals and Modern Humans in the European Landscape During
            the Last Glaciation: Archaeological Results of the Stage 3 Project. Cambridge, England: McDonald
            Institute for Archaeological Research.
Vekua, A., D. Lordkipanidze, G. P. Rightmire, J. Agusti, R. Ferring, G. Maisuradze, A. Mouskhelishvili,
            M. Nioadze, M. Ponce de Leon, M. Tappen, M. Tvalchrelidze, and C. Zollikofer. 2002. “A New Skull
            of Early Homo from Dmanisi, Georgia.” Science 297:85 – 89.
Vértes, L. 1975. “The Lower Palaeolithic Site of Vérteszöllös, Hungary.” In Recent Archaeological Excavations in
            Europe, ed. R. Bruce-Mitford, pp. 287–301. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Villa, P. 1991. “Middle Pleistocene Prehistory in Southwestern Europe: The State of Our Knowledge and
            Ignorance.” Journal of Anthropological Research 47(2):193 –218.
———. 2001. “Early Italy and the Colonization of Western Europe.” Quaternary International 75:113 –130.
Walker, A., and R. E. Leakey, eds. 1993. The Nariokotome Homo erectus Skeleton. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
            University Press.
Warren, S. H. 1911. “Palaeolithic Wooden Spear from Clacton.” Quarterly Journal of the Geological Society
            (London) 67:cxix.
Weidenreich, F. 1946. Apes, Giants, and Man. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
White, J. P., and J. F. O’Connell. 1982. A Prehistory of Australia, New Guinea and Sahul. Sydney: Academic.
White, R. 1982. “Rethinking the Middle/Upper Paleolithic Transition.” Current Anthropology 23:169–191.
———. 1986. Dark Caves and Bright Visions. New York: American Museum of Natural History.
———. 1989. “Production Complexity and Standardization in Early Aurignacian Bead and Pendant
            Manufacture.” In The Human Revolution: Behavioral and Biological Perspectives on the Origins of
            Modern Humans, ed. P. Mellars and C. B. Stringer. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
———. 1992. “Beyond Art: Toward an Understanding of the Origins of Material Representation in Europe.”
            Annual Review of Anthropology 21:537– 564.
White, T. D. 1991. “The Question of Ritual Cannibalism at Grotta Guattari.” Current Anthropology 32(2):103–138.
190   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      White, T. D., B. Asfaw, D. Degusta, H. Gilbert, G. D. Richards, G. Suwa, and F. C. Howell. 2003. “Pleistocene
                  Homo sapiens from Middle Awash, Ethiopia.” Nature 423:742 –747.
      Windels, F. 1965. The Lascaux Cave Paintings. London: Faber and Faber.
      Wobst, H. M. 1977. “Stylistic Behavior and Information Exchange.” In For the Director: Research Essays in Honor
                  of James B. Grifﬁn, ed. C. Cleland. Ann Arbor: Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan,
                  No. 61.
      Wolpoff, M. 1968. “Climatic Inﬂuence on the Skeletal Nasal Aperture.” American Journal of Physical Anthropology
                  29:405 – 423.
      Wolpoff, M. H., J. Hawks, D. W. Frayer, and K. Hunley. 2001. “Modern Human Ancestry at the Peripheries: A
                  Test of the Replacement Theory.” Science 291:293 –297.
      Wolpoff, M., Xinzhi Wu, and A. G. Thorne. 1984. “Modern Homo sapiens Origins: A General Theory of Hominid
                  Evolution Involving the Fossil Evidence from East Asia.” In The Origins of Modern Humans: A World
                  Survey of the Fossil Evidence, ed. F. H. Smith and F. Spencer. New York: Alan R. Liss.
      Wolpoff, M. H., A. G. Thorne, F. H. Smith, D. W. Frayer, and G. G. Pope. 1994. “Multiregional Evolution: A
                  World-Wide Source for Modern Human Populations.” In Origins of Anatomically Modern Humans,
                  ed. M. H. Nitecki and V. Nitecki. New York: Plenum Press.
      Wu Rukang and Jia Lampo. 1994. “China in the Period of Homo habilis and Homo erectus.” In History of
                  Humanity, Vol. 1, ed S. J. De Laet. Londond: Routledge.
      Wymer, J. J. 1964. “Excavations at Barnﬁeld Pit, 1955 – 60.” In The Swanscombe Skull, ed. C.D. Ovey, pp. 19 – 61.
                  London: Royal Anthropological Institute.
      Yellen, J. E., A. S. Brooks, E. Cornelissen, M. J. Mehlman, and K. Stewart. 1995. “A Middle Stone Age Worked
                  Bone Industry from Katanda, Upper Semliki Valley, Zaire.” Science 268:553 –556.
      Zhu, R. X., R. Potts, F. Xie, K. A. Hoffman, C. L. Deng, C. D. Shi, Y. X. Pan, H. Q. Wang, R. P. Shi, Y. C. Wang,
                  G. H. Shi, and N. Q. Wu. 2004. “New Evidence on the Earliest Human Presence at High Northern
                  Latitudes in Northeast Asia.” Nature 431:559 – 562.



      NOTES
        1. Last Poems, 1922, no. 12.
        2. Gould, Wonderful Life.
        3. Although it will be interesting to follow developments in the recent discovery in Indonesia of Homo ﬂore-
           siensis (see Brown et al., “A New Small-Bodied Hominin from the Late Pleistocene of Flores, Indonesia”).
           These hominins, dubbed by some of their discoverers and in the popular press as “hobbits,” date to about
           18,000 years ago, and thus, at least in this isolated island context, are contemporary with modern forms of
           humans. Homo ﬂoresiensis stood only about 3 feet tall and had a brain size in the range of Australopiths,
           about 380 c3; it was obviously a quite different animal than us.
        4. Klein, The Human Career, pp. 283 – 295.
        5. Ibid., p. 409.
        6. Other names of early hominins include Homo antecessor (Spain), Homo heidelbergensis (Africa and Europe),
           Homo louisleakeyi (Africa), and Homo rhodesiensis (Africa). See Klein, The Human Career; McBrearty
           and Brooks, “The Revolution That Wasn’t: A New Interpretation of the Origin of Modern Human
           Behavior.”
        7. Reviewed in Klein, The Human Career, pp. 333 – 338.
        8. Isaac, “The Archaeology of Human Origins,” p. 60.
        9. Isaac, “Sorting Out the Muddle in the Middle – An Anthropologist’s Post-Conference Appraisal,” p. 504.
       10. Shipman, “Early Hominid Lifestyle.”
       11. Impressive numbers of hand-axes at sites could also be the result of taphonomic processes; see, for
           example, Schick, “Geological Analysis of an Acheulean Site at Kalambo Falls, Zambia.”
       12. Binford, Bones, Ancient Men and Modern Myth, p. 294; idem., “Human Ancestors.”
       13. Several claims have been made for the early use of ﬁre, perhaps as early as 1.4 million years ago in Africa,
           but closer analyses of these ﬁnds suggest instead that taphonomic processes are responsible. Natural brush
           ﬁres, for example, leave a scatter of charcoal across both sites and the surrounding region. See, for example,
           James, “Hominid Use of Fire.”
       14. Roberts, “Body Weight, Race and Climate.”
       15. Binford, “Human Ancestors: Changing Views of Their Behavior.”
       16. Gabunia et al., “Earliest Pleistocene Hominid Cranial Remains from Dmanisi, Republic of Georgia:
           Taxonomy, Geological Setting, and Age.”
       17. Zhu et al., “New Evidence on the Earliest Human Presence at High Northern Latitudes in Northeast Asia.”
       18. de Vos, Sondaar, and Swisher, “Dating Hominid Sites in Indonesia.”
                                                                    THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS                 191


19. Bar-Yosef and Goren-Inbar, “The Lithic Assemblage of ‘Ubeidiya: A Lower Paleolithic Site in the Jordan
    Valley”; Tchernov, “Age of ‘Ubeidiya Formation (Jordan Valley, Israel) and the Earliest Hominids in the
    Levant.”
20. Klein, “Anatomy, Behavior, and Modern Human Origins.”
21. Klein, ibid., p. 178.
22. These are the Homo antecessor remains. See Bermúdez de Castro et al., “A Hominid from the Lower
    Pleistocene of Atapuerca, Spain: Possible Ancestor to Neandertals and Modern Humans.”
23. Sevink et al., “A Note on the Approximately 730,000-Year-Old Mammal Fauna and Associated Human
    Activity Sites Near Isernia, Central Italy”; but see Villa, “Early Italy and the Colonization of Western Europe,”
    who raises questions about the very early date, as well as taphonomic issues in site formation.
24. Wu Rukang and Jia Lampo, “China in the Period of Homo habilis and Homo erectus.”
25. Ibid.
26. Boaz et al., “Large Mammalian Carnivores as a Taphonomic Factor in the Bone Acumulation at
    Zhoudoudian.”
27. Arens, The Man-Eating Myth.
28. Garn and Block, “The Limited Nutritional Value of Cannibalism.”
29. Shapiro, Peking Man.
30. Freeman, “Acheulian Sites and Stratigraphy in Iberia and the Maghreb,” p. 664.
31. Ibid.
32. Evidence for wooden throwing spears has been found elsewhere in Europe, at the site of Schöningen in
    Germany at 400,000 years ago (see Thieme, “Lower Palaeolithic Hunting Spears from Germany”), and pos-
    sibly in England at the site of Clacton-on-Sea (see Warren, “Palaeolithic Wooden Spear from Clacton”).
33. See Binford, “Human Ancestors,” for a scavenging interpretation; but for contrasting view, see Shipman and
    Rose, “Evidence of Butchery and Hominid Activities at Torralba and Ambrona.”
34. Vértes, “The Lower Palaeolithic Site of Vértesszöllös, Hungary.”
35. There are some controversial examples of possible ﬁgurines from, for example, Berkehat Ram in Israel (see
    Pelcin, “A Geological Explanation for the Berkehat Ram Figurine”; D’Errico and Nowell, “A New Look at
    the Berekhat Ram Figurine: Implications for the Origins of Symbolism”), and Tan Tan in Morroco (see
    Bednarik, “A Figurine from the African Acheulian”).
36. Bender, “Comment on G. Krantz (CA 21:773 –79).”
37. White, “Beyond Art: Toward an Understanding of the Origins of Material Representation in Europe,” p. 560.
38. Klein, “Anatomy, Behavior, and Modern Human Origins.”
39. Through the Looking-Glass.
40. Frayer et al, p. 16.
41. Ibid., p. 17.
42. Ibid., pp. 17–18.
43. Leakey, Olduvai Gorge.
44. Weidenreich, Apes, Giants, and Man.
45. See also Coon, The Origins of Races.
46. Ferraro et al., Anthropology, p. 129, presents a simpliﬁed description of this issue.
47. Aiello, “The Fossil Evidence for Modern Human Origins in Africa: A Revised View.”
48. Melnick and Hoelzer, “What Is mtDNA Good for in the Study of Primate Evolution?” p. 9.
49. Frayer et al., “Theories of Modern Human Origins: The Paleontological Test.”
50. Ibid., p. 39.
51. See Krings et al., “Neanderthal DNA Sequences and the Origin of Modern Humans”; Krings et al., “A View
    of Neanderthal Genetic Diversity”; Ovchinnikov et al., “Molecular Analysis of Neanderthal DNA from the
    Northern Caucasus”; and Caramelli et al., “Evidence for a Genetic Discontinuity Between Neandertals and
    24,000-Year-Old Anatomically Modern Europeans.”
52. See, for example, Bräuer, “Africa’s Place in the Evolution of Homo sapiens.”
53. The following points of evidence are adapted from Frayer et al., “Theories of Modern Human Origins: The
    Paleontological Test,” pp. 19 – 20.
54. Ibid.
55. Olszewski, “Issues in the Development of the Early Upper Paleolithic, and a ‘Transitional’ Industry from the
    Zagros Region.”
56. White et al., “Pleistocene Homo sapiens from Middle Awash, Ethiopia.”
57. McBrearty and Brooks, “The Revolution That Wasn’t: A New Interpretation of the Origin of Modern
    Human Behavior.”
58. Singer and Wymer, The Middle Stone Age at Klasies River Mouth in South Africa.
59. McBrearty and Brooks, “The Revolution That Wasn’t: A New Interpretation of the Origin of Modern
    Human Behavior.”
60. Frayer et al., “Theories of Modern Human Origins: The Paleontological Test,” pp. 19 – 20.
192   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


       61. McBrearty and Brooks, “The Revolution That Wasn’t: A New Interpretation of the Origin of Modern
           Human Behavior.”
       62. Klein and Edgar, The Dawn of Human Culture, pp. 23 – 26.
       63. Brooks et al., “Dating and Context of Three Middle Stone Age Sites with Bone Points in the Upper Semliki
           Valley, Zaire.”
       64. Jones, “From Kakadu to Kutikina: The Southern Continent at 18,000 Years Ago”; Frankel, Remains to Be
           Seen.
       65. Pope, “The Antiquity and Palaeoenvironment of the Asian Hominidae”; Wolpoff et al., “Modern Homo
           sapiens Origins: A General Theory of Hominid Evolution Involving the Fossil Evidence from East Asia”;
           Thorne, “The Arrival of Man in Australia.”
       66. See table 2 in Frayer et al., “Theories of Modern Human Origins: The Paleontological Test,” for their argu-
           ment that proponents of the Eve hypothesis have systematically misinterpreted the data from Africa with
           regard to shovelling.
       67. Frayer et al., “Theories of Modern Human Origins: The Paleontological Test,” p. 22.
       68. The one continuity exception that proponents of Total Replacement might allow is the recent discovery of
           Homo ﬂoresiensis on Flores Island, Indonesia (see endnote 3). Homo ﬂoresiensis is thought to be a descen-
           dant of the Asian Homo erectus.
       69. With the possible exception of Homo ﬂoresiensis, dated to as late as 18,000 years ago.
       70. Stringer et al., “The Signiﬁcance of the Fossil Hominid from Petralona, Greece”; Trinkaus, “Evolutionary
           Continuity Among Archaic Homo sapiens.”
       71. Conway et al., Excavations at Barnﬁeld Pit, Swanscombe, 1968 – 72; Wymer, “Excavations at Barnﬁeld Pit,
           1955–60.”
       72. Ibid., p. 22.
       73. Roe, The Lower and Middle Paleolithic Periods in Britain.
       74. de Lumley, “Ante-Neanderthals of Western Europe.”
       75. Svoboda, “Lithic Industries of the Arago, Vértesszöllös, and Bilzingsleben Hominids: Comparison and
           Evolutionary Interpretation.”
       76. Tennyson was alluding to Goethe here.
       77. White, “Rethinking the Middle/Upper Paelolithic Transition”; others have referred to this as a “revolution”
           (see Bar-Yosef, “The Upper Paleolithic Revolution”).
       78. Lieberman, “Testing Hypotheses About Recent Human Evolution from Skulls.”
       79. Wobst, “Stylistic Behavior and Information Exchange.”
       80. White, “Rethinking the Middle/Upper Paleolithic Transition.”
       81. Straus and Cave, “Pathology and the Posture of Neanderthal Man.”
       82. Trinkaus, “The Neandertals and Modern Human Origins.”
       83. Ibid., p. 203.
       84. Ibid., p. 205.
       85. Bordes, Typologie du Paleolithique Ancien et Moyen.
       86. Binford and Binford, “A Preliminary Analysis of Functional Variability in the Mousterian of Levallois
           Facies.”
       87. Dibble, “Middle Paleolithic Scraper Reduction: Background, Clariﬁcation, and Review of the Evidence to
           Date.”
       88. Lieberman and Crelin, “On the Speech of Neanderthals.”
       89. Frayer and Wolpoff, “Comment on ‘Glottogenesis and Modern Homo sapiens.’ ”
       90. Lieberman, “On the Nature and Evolution of the Neural Bases of Human Language,” p. 58.
       91. For a review of the evidence and dissenting comments on this topic, see Gargett, “Grave Shortcomings: The
           Evidence for Neandertal Burial”; Chase and Dibble, “Middle Paleolithic Symbolism”; Brace, “Review of
           Shanidar: The First Flower People, by R. Solecki,” p. 86.
       92. Klein, “Anatomy, Behavior, and Modern Human Origins.”
       93. Straus, Iberia Before the Iberians: The Stone Age Prehistory of Cantabrian Spain.
       94. Russell, “Bone Breakage in the Krapina Hominid Collection”; “Mortuary Practices at the Krapina Neandertal
           Site”; and Trinkaus, “Cannibalism and Burial at Krapina.”
       95. Trinkaus, “Neandertal Mortality Patterns.”
       96. Ibid., p. 121.
       97. Valladas et al., “Thermoluminescence Dating of Mousterian ‘Proto-Cro-Magnon’ Remains.”
       98. Schwarcz, “Chronology of Modern Humans in the Levant.”
       99. Trinkaus, quoted in B. Bower, “An Earlier Dawn for Modern Humans?” p. 138.
      100. Frayer et al., “Theories of Modern Human Origins: The Paleontological Test,” p. 37; see also Arensburg and
           Belfer-Cohen, “Sapiens and Neandertals: Rethinking the Levantine Middle Paleolithic Hominids.”
      101. Shea, “Spear Points from the Middle Paleolithic of the Levant”; summarized in Frayer et al., “Theories of
           Modern Human Origins: The Paleontological Test,” p. 20.
                                                                    THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS                193


102. Klein, “Anatomy, Behavior, and Modern Human Origins.”
103. Lovejoy and Trinkaus, “Strength of Robusticity of the Neanderthal Tibia.”
104. Ruff, “Climatic Adaptation and Hominid Evolution: The Thermoregulatory Imperative”; Steegmann et al.,
     “Neandertal Cold Adaptation: Physiological and Energetic Factors.”
105. Smith, “Upper Pleistocene Hominid Evolution in South-Central Europe: A Review of the Evidence and
     Analysis of Trends”; Wolpoff et al., “Modern Human Ancestry at the Peripheries: A Test of the Replacement
     Theory.”
106. Soffer, “Ancestral Lifeways in Eurasia – the Middle and Upper Paleolithic Records.”
107. Reviewed in Straus, “Upper Paleolithic Origins and Radiocarbon Calibration: More New Evidence from
     Spain.”
108. Ibid., p. 197.
109. Olszewski, “The Early Upper Palaeolithic in the Zagros Mountains.”
110. Ibid., p. 196.
111. Ibid.; but see Bocquet-Appel and Demars, “Neanderthal Contraction and Modern Human Colonization of
     Europe” for an alternate model using radiocarbon dates to show the “advancing wave” of Aurignacian-using
     modern humans.
112. Leveque and Vandermeersch, “Les Decouvertes de Restes Humains.”
113. Trinkaus, “The Neandertals and Modern Human Origins,” p. 198.
114. Bischoff et al., “Dating of the Basal Aurignacian Sandwich at Abric Romani (Catalunya, Spain) by
     Radiocarbon and Uranium-Series.”
115. Smith, “Upper Pleistocene Hominid Evolution in South-Central Europe: A Review of the Evidence and
     Analysis of Trends.”
116. Trinkaus and Duarte, “The Hybrid Child from Portugal.”
117. Frayer et al., “Theories of Modern Human Origins: The Paleontological Test,” p. 32.
118. Relethford, “Absence of Regional Afﬁnities of Neandertal DNA with Living Humans Does Not Reject
     Multiregional Evolution.”
119. Trinkaus and Duarte, “The Hybrid Child from Portugal.”
120. Wolpoff et al., “Multiregional Evolution: A World-Wide Source for Modern Human Populations.”
121. See endnote 51.
122. Prideaux et al., Cro-Magnon Man, pp. 93–94.
123. De Beaune, “Paleolithic Lamps and Their Specialization: A Hypothesis.”
124. Clottes, “France’s Magical Ice Age Art: Chauvet Cave.”
125. Conkey, “New Approaches in the Search for Meaning? A Review of Research in ‘Paleolithic Art.’ ”
126. Leroi-Gourhan, “The Evolution of Paleolithic Art.”
127. Fisher, Woman’s Creation.
128. Lewis-Williams and Dowson, “The Signs of All Times: Entopic Phenomena in Upper Paleolithic Art.”
129. Ibid., p. 215 (emphasis theirs).
130. Hodder, Reading the Past; also see Straus, Iberia Before the Iberians: The Stone Age Prehistory of Cantabrian
     Spain.
131. Conkey, “New Approaches in the Search for Meaning? A Review of Research in ‘Paleolithic Art,’ ” p. 422.
132. Marks, Human Biodiversity: Genes, Race, and History.
133. Ibid; Brace et al., “Clines and Clusters Versus ‘Race’: A Test in Ancient Egypt and the Case of a Death on the
     Nile.”
134. Current news stories (for example, the Philadelphia Inquirer of April 17, 2005) report on the start of the ﬁve-
     year Genographic Project that will analyze the DNA of 100,000 people worldwide in an effort to trace, in
     detail, the migrations of humans after modern humans left Africa. The North American center is at the
     University of Pennsylvania, under the direction of Dr. Theodore Schurr of the Department of Anthropology.
135. Thiel, “Early Settlement of the Philippines, Eastern Indonesia, and Australia-New Guinea: A New
     Hypothesis.”
136. Vallois, “The Social Life of Early Man: The Evidence of the Skeletons.”
137. Ibid.
138. Soffer, The Upper Paleolithic of the Central Russian Plain.
139. Bellwood, The Prehistory of the Indo-Malaysian Archipelago.
140. White and O’Connell, “Australian Prehistory: New Aspects of Antiquity.”
141. Thorne, “The Arrival of Man in Australia.”
142. Klein, “Anatomy, Behavior, and Modern Human Origins.”
5
The First Americans

    At break of day the shore was thronged with
    people all young . . . all of good stature, ﬁne
    looking. . . . I was anxious to learn whether
    they had any gold, as I noticed that some of the
    natives had rings hanging from holes in their
    noses. . . . I tried to get them to go for some, but
    they could not understand they were to go.
    Christopher Columbus (13 October 1492)




    C        olumbus and most “discoverers” of the New World were not surprised to ﬁnd
             “Indians” there because they thought they had landed in India, or perhaps Japan.
    But as soon as Europeans realized they were not in the Orient and became aware of the rich
    diversity of New World cultures, they began to struggle with the problem of the origin of
    the Native Americans. The Bible, the ﬁnal authority for most Europeans of this era, was
    strangely silent on the very existence of this “second-earth,” so Europeans began
    speculating on how the “Indians” could have reached the New World from the Garden of
    Eden, where they were assumed to have originated. Early explorers were greatly impressed
    by “similarities” between Egyptian and aboriginal American cultures, such as the great
    pyramids to be found in Egypt, Mexico, and the Mississippi Valley, and so some concluded
    that the Native Americans were descendants of Ham, one of Noah’s sons, who was
    also thought to have been the father of the Egyptians.1 Another popular idea was that the
    Native Americans were descendants of the “lost tribes of Israel,” Jews who had been evicted
    from Palestine by the Assyrians around 1100 b.c. The “lost tribes” idea eventually was
    incorporated into the doctrines of the Church of the Latter-Day Saints, whose Book of
    Mormon concludes that Native Americans were remnants of tribes of Israel that had come
    to the New World by ship hundreds of years before Columbus. Others believed that Native
    Americans were descendants of people who ﬂed Atlantis or other lost worlds that some
    think were destroyed thousands of years ago by volcanic eruption.
         But by a.d. 1590 a Spanish Jesuit, José de Acosta, had proposed that Native Americans
    had come from Asia, and by a.d. 1781 Thomas Jefferson could describe the peopling of the
    New World in terms most scholars today think are accurate:

         Late discoveries of Captain Cook, coasting from Kamschatka to California, have proved
         that if the two continents of Asia and America be separated at all, it is only by a narrow

                                                       194
                                                                             THE FIRST AMERICANS             195


     straight. So that from this side also,
     inhabitants may have passed into
     America; and the resemblance                         10,000 years ago      Beginning of development of later
     between the Indians of America                                             Paleoindian cultures in the Americas
     and the eastern inhabitants of Asia,                 10,500 years ago      Caverna da Pedra Pintada, Brazil, South
     would induce us to conjecture, that                                        America
     the former are the descendants                       11,500 years ago      Clovis culture, North and Central America
     of the latter, or the latter of the
     former: excepting indeed the                         11,600 years ago      Broken Mammoth, Mead, and Swan Point,
     Eskimaux, who, from the same                                               Alaska, North America

     circumstances of resemblance, and                    12,500 years ago      Monte Verde, Chile, South America
     from identity of language, must be
     derived from the Groenlanders,                16,900–10,900 years ago      Cactus Hill, Virginia, North America

     and these probably from some
                                                          19,600 years ago      Meadowcroft Rockshelter, Pennsylvania, North
     of the northern parts of the old
                                                                                America
     continent.2
                                                       20–15,000 years ago      Initial peopling of the Americas begins


In their search for clues to the origins of             25,000 years ago    Earliest known sites in Siberia
Native Americans, Jefferson and others
of his age were struck by the close
physical resemblance between Native
Americans and Asians: dark brown eyes;
black, coarse, straight hair; and relatively
widely spaced cheekbones (Figure 5.1). But differences were also apparent: Except for the
Eskimos and Aleuts, most aboriginal Americans had less pronounced epicanthic folds (part
of the eyelid) than those that distinguish east Asian populations, and many Native
Americans had relatively more prominent noses than east Asians.
     Europeans also noted that the New World included an impressive diversity of
languages—in some cases people who lived relatively close to one another spoke mutually
unintelligible languages—and that none of the languages of Native Americans bore any
obvious resemblance to Old World languages. Thus, it seemed certain that although the
aboriginal Americans were probably descendants of Asian peoples, they must have lived in
America for a long time for such physical and linguistic divergence to have occurred.
     That people have lived in the New World for at least 11,000 years has been evident for
a long time. In 1908 a cowboy riding along the edge of a gully in New Mexico, near the
town of Folsom, discovered some “arrowheads” and animal bones protruding from a layer
of soil about 6 m beneath the surface of the plain. Eventually, in 1925, his ﬁnds came to the
attention of J. D. Figgins, director of the Colorado Museum of Natural History, who began
a long series of excavations at this site.3 A primary ﬁnd was a long, “ﬂuted” (it had two long
strips removed near the base and parallel to the length of the point) “projectile point” that
was embedded in the ribs of a species of bison that had been extinct for about 10,000 years
(Figure 5.2). Since most archaeologists and others were skeptical of the idea that humans
had been in the New World that long, Figgins insisted on excavating the site with a
committee of archaeologists on hand to watch his every move so that no one could claim
the evidence had been faked.
     In 1932 another important ﬁnd was made, this time near the town of Clovis, New
Mexico (Figure 5.3). Here, too, large blade tools were discovered in association with extinct
          196      PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                          animals. But at this site artifacts somewhat different
                                                          from those at Folsom were found in a layer beneath
                                                          some “Folsom points.” Analysis suggested a date of
                                                          about 11,000 years ago for the earliest Clovis-style
                                                          artifacts, and within a few years artifacts similar in
                                                          size, shape, and style to the Clovis points were dis-
                                                          covered at many different places in North America.
                                                          Since then, stone points resembling Clovis artifacts
                                                          have been found in much of North and South
                                                          America, from the Arctic to the tip of South America.
                                                               Disputes about early Americans thus focus
                                                          on the question of whether or not anyone was
                                                          here before the Clovis cultures in existence about
                                                          11,500 years ago.
                                                               For many years, the majority of archaeologists
                                                          believed that the ﬁrst Americans came from Asia via
                                                          a land route. As we shall see, however, there is
                                                          increasing evidence suggesting that a coastal route
                                                          may also be a more viable explanation. Some have
                                                          even suggested a migration from Europe using
                                                          skin boats across the northern Atlantic, although
                                                          there are many dubious aspects of this particular
                                                          hypothesis. Thus, the term “Native American”
                                                          is something of a misnomer, for on the grand
                                                          chronology of the human species, the time differ-
                                                          ence between the arrival of the very ﬁrst humans in
                                                          the New World and that of Columbus is relatively
                                                          trivial. All Americans are immigrants, and evidence
FIGURE 5.1 An early photograph of a Native American.      suggests that some living Native Americans are
Physical resemblances between Americans and Asian
                                                          descendants of groups that came to the Americas
peoples reﬂect their common origins.
                                                          thousands of years after the ﬁrst immigrants.


                   ROUTES FOR THE INITIAL COLONIZATION OF THE
                   AMERICAS

                   Analyses of the initial colonization of the Americas usually focus on four related questions:
                   What Old World people were the ancestors of the ﬁrst Americans? When did the ﬁrst
                   people enter the New World and colonize subarctic and temperate zones? What routes did
                   they follow in colonizing North and South America? What kinds of technologies and
                   economies did these initial waves of colonists have?
                        These questions may seem to be rather simple empirical problems, subjects of
                   speculation studied on the basis of inadequate data about questions that may be
                   intrinsically important but without much wider signiﬁcance. Whether the ﬁrst Americans
                   arrived in the New World 30,000 years ago or 13,000 years ago would not seem to make
                   much difference in the grand scheme of things.
                                                                      THE FIRST AMERICANS       197


     But the colonization of the New World does have much
greater signiﬁcance than these simple questions might suggest.
Most important is the fact that the subsequent history of these
peoples in the New World was largely independent of
inﬂuences from the Old World. Whenever they ﬁrst arrived,
New World peoples give us a comparative case—a long and
rich cultural history that can be compared with that of the Old
World. Moreover, the colonization of the New World involves
one of the most complex issues in paleolithic archaeology, the
nature and processes of human adaptive radiation. All animal
species seem to radiate across the world “naturally” until they
reach the limits of their adaptation. Some tropical species,
such as the elephant, evolved cold-adapted subspecies that
allowed them penetrate into the far north of both the Old and
New Worlds, but even these evolutionary adaptations could
not produce an animal capable of supporting its huge bulk in
the icy extremes of the poles. Evolutionary change seems to be
                                                                   FIGURE 5.2 Some types of early American pro-
most rapid along the limits of adaptations, but measuring the      jectile points.
tempo of evolutionary change in extinct species is difﬁcult.
     Human patterns of migration and adaptive radiation are
a complex blend of evolving physical characteristics and culture. Thus, the New World
archaeological record provides us with an opportunity to study in detail a complex mosaic
of human adaptations across a gigantic and highly varied landscape.
     Why people came to the Americas has never been an issue. People, like other animal
species, seem to penetrate their entire available range “naturally.” The “budding-off”
process described in the previous chapter is probably applicable to the colonization of the
Americas. Ethnographic studies tell us that hunter-forager groups often increase to a
certain size level until friction
develops among some mem-
bers of the group, or resources
become too scarce, and then
the social unit splits, with some
members going off into new
territory. The long winter
nights of northern Asia doubt-
less offered ample opportunity
to brood on what a jerk one’s
cousin was, or to muse on what
Garden of Eden might lie over
the horizon, and as a result of
tens of thousands of years of
group-ﬁssioning, population
growth, and small group social
interactions, the world was
populated.
     There remains some doubt
about how people ﬁrst got to         FIGURE 5.3 The Clovis site in New Mexico.
           198       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                     North America because, as we saw in the previous chapter, people were certainly living in
                     Australia long before 30,000 years ago, and there seems no way they could have reached
                     there except by boat. Some archaeologists still believe that the evidence strongly suggests
                     that the ﬁrst Americans traveled there the old-fashioned way—they walked—although,
                     increasingly, researchers are more convinced that the earliest Americans came by boat.


                     The “Ice-Free Corridor”
                     Any explanation of the colonization of the New World from Asia must consider the kinds
                     of physical environments these colonists would have faced, and recent research has
                     challenged many traditional ideas on this point (Figure 5.4).
                          Today, Eskimos using skin boats easily cross the 90 km of open sea separating Siberia
                     and America, and recently an American woman slathered herself with grease and actually
                     swam from Alaska to Siberia. But such a sea crossing would not have been necessary during
                     much of the Pleistocene. During periods of glacial advance within the last million years,
                     enormous quantities of water were converted to ice, lowering the sea level sufﬁciently to
                     expose a 1500- to 3000-km-wide expanse of the ﬂoor of the Bering Sea. This land bridge—
                     usually referred to as Beringia (Figure 5.5)—was most recently available from about 25,000




FIGURE 5.4 Between 60,000 and 12,000 years ago, world climate warmed several times, opening routes between the Arctic
and more southern latitudes of the New World. Two possible periods of colonization are during the Mid-Wisconsin
Interglacial, about 40,000 years ago, and after the Late Wisconsin Glaciation, about 18,000 years ago.
                                                                            THE FIRST AMERICANS          199




                                                                                            Mead,
                                                                                          Swan Point,
                                                                                Nenana Broken Mammoth
                                                                                 Valley




Mal’ta, Afontova Gora




 Masterov
  Kliuch




FIGURE 5.5 Several archaeological sites in Siberia may be of cultures ancestral to the ﬁrst Americans.


to 14,000 years ago. And, for many decades, the majority of archaeologists believed that
walking across Beringia from Siberia to Alaska, and then south through Canada using the
“ice-free” corridor was the route for the peopling of the Americas.
     The kinds of resources Beringia would have offered hunter-foragers would have
depended on the period in which the migrants crossed. At various times, ocean currents
created an ice-free, tundra-covered connection from eastern Siberia across the land bridge
and into central Alaska. These conditions are reﬂected in the many non-Arctic-adapted
animal species that crossed from Asia to America during the Pleistocene. Prior to 10,000 years
ago, species of deer, bison, camels, bears, foxes, mammoths, moose, caribou, and even
rodents crossed from Siberia into the New World. Going the other way—from America to
Asia—were foxes, woodchucks, and, during the early Pleistocene, the ancestors of modern
forms of horses, wolves, and other animals.4 In some periods Beringia would not have been
particularly rich—there is even the possibility of dust storms, so dry and barren was most
of it.5 But at other times, migrants on the land bridge in the brief but warm summers of
some periods of the Pleistocene would have found musk-oxen and other large herbivores,
along with ﬁsh, birds, and sea mammals along the shore.
     Interior Alaska and Canada were relatively rich environments in the mid-Wisconsin
interglacial, and at times humans may have had a narrow but clear ice-free run all the way
from Alaska into the northern United States. Pollen cores from easternmost Beringia
suggest that from 30,000 to 14,000 years ago, the time when most archaeologists think the
ﬁrst Americans arrived, Beringia may have been relatively cool and dry, although some
reconstructions of the landscape suggest that it had a mosaic of steppe-tundra, covered
200   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      mainly in grasses and sedges, along with meadows in valleys. 6 Meadows, of course, would
      have been attractive grazing habitats for the large Pleistocene herd mammals—woolly
      mammoths, horses, long-horned bison—that people of this time period hunted.
           Southward migrations from Alaska may only have been possible during a few intervals
      because it is generally thought that for most of the Pleistocene the way would have been
      blocked by coalescing ice sheets (Figure 5.6). Even if these ice sheets did not completely
      bar the way south, it is not clear that the “ice-free” corridor would have been habitable for
      people until after 11,000 years ago.7 This date is relatively late—as we shall see—compared
      to the dates of some archaeological sites now known from areas south of the ice sheets, such
      as in Virginia and Chile. Traveling through the “ice-free” corridor thus remains a viable
      route, but perhaps it is not the route that the earliest people took to arrive in the Americas
      south of the glaciers (see later).
           The exact path the these early Americans may have taken is not known, but the most
      likely course would be along the southern coast of the Beringia, then into Alaska north of
      the Brooks Range, up the Yukon River Valley, then into the Mackenzie River Valley, and
      from there southward, along the eastern slopes of the Rockies and on into the Dakotas and
      then farther southward. Along the coast of Beringia were probably abundant resources in
      the form of ﬁsh, birds, eggs, invertebrates, and many plant foods. If groups did come this
      way, it is unlikely that we shall ever be able to document their journey archaeologically, for
      the rising seas of the post-Pleistocene era have submerged the ancient shoreline.
           If they came across the middle of the land bridge, a reliance on big-game hunting would
      have been essential, and the migrants were almost certainly not constantly on the move
      southward. The budding-off process described earlier is the usual one in cases when new
      species move into empty niches, and many thousands of years may have passed between
      the time the ﬁrst human set foot on the land bridge and the year the ﬁrst groups arrived in
      the mid-latitudes of North America.
           North winds blowing off the northern glacial ice sheets made the climate of Pleistocene
      North America much different from today’s climate. Much of Nevada and Utah was covered
      by Lake Bonneville, of which only a shrinking remnant (the Great Salt Lake) remains.
      Wyoming, Iowa, and other parts of the Great Plains were vast pine, spruce, and tamarack
      forests and lush open grasslands. To the south, the area between the Mississippi River and
      the Rockies was a verdant mosaic of grasslands, lakes, and birch and alder forests. In eastern
      North America huge expanses of coniferous forests stretched from the edge of the glacial
      ice sheets to the lower Ohio River Valley.
           The animals inhabiting this wilderness of 14,000–12,000 years ago closely approximate
      a modern hunter’s vision of paradise. Giant moose, 3 m and more in height, could be found
      in many of the wetter areas, along with Castoroides, a species of beaver as large as a modern
      bear (Figure 5.7). Along the woodland edges of the southeastern United States were large
      populations of giant ground sloths, ungainly creatures fully as tall as modern giraffes. In
      more open country were vast herds of straight-horned bison, caribou, musk-oxen, horses,
      and mammoths—some 4 m high at the shoulders. In the more forested areas of the east
      and south were the mammoth’s cousin, the mastodon, a more solitary animal than the
      mammoth and apparently a browser rather than a grassland grazer. Amid all these large
      creatures were rabbits, armadillos, birds, camels, peccaries, and other animals. And the
      carnivores that such a movable feast attracted were equally impressive. Packs of dire wolves
      roamed most of the New World, as did panthers as large as modern lions and two species
                                                                                                      THE FIRST AMERICANS   201




                                2    4

                                     3




                                1

                                             9

                                     10 16            14
                                                                               25
                                       8
                         12     11
                                                                                    30
                                                                           26
                                     6   7                      28
                                                 15
                                         5                 29

                                                      19                  27

                                                 13


                                                                     18
                                                                                               23
                                                                                         24
                                                                                                          21
                                                                                                                20




                                                                                                        22




                                                                                    17




     1 Ritchie-Roberts          9 Anzick                             17 Monte Verde           23 Taima Taim
     2 Dry Creek              10 Wilson Butte Cave                   18 El Bosque             24 El Jobo
     3 Blueﬁsh Caves          11 China Lake                          19 Lerma                 25 Dutchess Quarry Cave
     4 Old Crow               12 Santa Rosa Island                   20 Boqueirão of          26 Meadowcroft Rockshelter
     5 Naco                   13 Iztapan                                Pedra Furada          27 Little Salt Spring
     6 Lehner                 14 Dutton                              21 Caverna da            28 Lewisville
     7 Murray Springs         15 Clovis                                 Pedra Pintada         29 Levi Rockshelter
     8 Lamb Springs           16 Colby                               22 Alice Böer            30 Cactus Hill



FIGURE 5.6 Some of the earliest known American sites. Most of these sites range from 20,000 to
10,000 years ago.
           202        PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                             of saber-toothed cat, one about the size
                                                                             of a lion.8 Thus, the ﬁrst Americans were
                                                                             hardly entering an “empty niche,” since
                                                                             these ferocious predators no doubt
                                                                             provided stiff competition for people
                                                                             trying to specialize in hunting. Central
                                                                             and South America were also rich game
                                                                             preserves during and just after the
                                                                             Pleistocene.

                                                                             Coast Hopping from
                                                                             Beringia
                                                                              We might expect that if the immigrants
                                                                              crossed Beringia primarily along its
                                                                              southern coast, then the groups migrat-
                                                                              ing south would have retained some
                                                                              elements of the generalized hunting,
                                                                              ﬁshing, and foraging economies required
                                                                              in the intertidal zone. The idea that
                                                                              people used watercraft to “hop” along
                                                                              the coastline of what is now Canada at
                                                                              least as far south as the Columbia River
                                                                              —the boundary between the modern
                                                                              states of Washington and Oregon—and
                                                                              perhaps farther still, along the coast into
                                                                              South America, is not new.9 For many
                                                                              years, however, the main obstacles to
FIGURE 5.7 Some large mammals of Pleistocene America. The scale               accepting this route as a viable idea were
preserves relative size.                                                      a lack of evidence—because sites would
                                                                              lie deep beneath the current coastal
                         seas—and the assumption that the glacial ice sheets extended completely to the sea along
                         the Canadian coast, allowing no possibility for landfall.10
                              Sea waters have not receded in recent years, so why are archaeologists now more
                         willing to accept the coastal route as a better option than the “ice-free corridor?” This shift
                         in viewpoint, which is due to several lines of accumulating evidence, is a good example of
                         how the scientiﬁc process works—new data are used to correct, reﬁne, update, and,
                         sometimes, overturn the existing paradigm (model). These new data have come mainly
                         from two sources—securely dated early archaeological sites and paleoenvironmental
                         research.
                              Although there were occasional claims for early people living in the Americas before
                         about 12,000–15,000 years ago, the vast majority of these claims did not stand up to
                         rigorous scrutiny of either the contexts of the archaeological artifacts or the dating of the
                         sites.11 A few sites, however, such as Meadowcroft Rockshelter in Pennsylvania (see later),
                         offered tantalizing suggestions that people were in the Americas before the “ice-free”
                         corridor was available for travel between the two Canadian glacial sheets. Since then, several
                                                                          THE FIRST AMERICANS      203


other early sites, such as Cactus Hill in Virginia and Monte Verde in Chile (see later), have
been documented. These sites, although somewhat controversial when ﬁrst discovered,
have now been generally accepted as legitimate early sites by most archaeologists.
      The presence of these early sites south of the glaciers—in the case of Monte Verde,
thousands of kilometers south of the ice sheets—threw a harsh light of reality on the idea
that the “ice-free” corridor was the earliest route of entry. And, of course, archaeologists
have never had evidence for sites in the “ice-free” corridor area that dated before 11,000 years
ago, a fact that was not often mentioned by proponents of the “ice-free” corridor.12 At best,
the archaeology in the “ice-free” corridor was no older than the Clovis archaeological tra-
dition (see later)—long-thought to be representative of the earliest people in the Americas
and called the “Clovis-ﬁrst” model—or was younger than the Clovis phenomenon.
      The existence of legitimate pre-12,000-year-old sites south of the glaciers, however,
spurred further intensive work by geologists and paleoecologists on two fronts—the
context and conditions of the “ice-free” corridor itself and studies of the coastal areas and
continental shelf from Alaska to the Northwest coast of the United States. This research has
shown that the “ice-free” corridor was a feature created by the retreat of the glaciers. In the
period from 30,000 to 11,500 years ago, large parts of the corridor were blocked by glacial
ice, so that no one could have used this as a route of entry.13 Another important considera-
tion comes from paleoenvironmental reconstruction and modeling. These indicate that
even those portions of the “ice-free” corridor that might have been penetrated by early
Americans in the interval after 18,000 years ago could not have supported people. There
simply would have been too few animals to hunt and thus not enough available nutrition
to feed people.14
      These considerations—the late date for the availability of the “ice-free” corridor and
its ecological viability—shifted the peopling of the Americas research focus to coastal areas
as a route of entry (Figure 5.8). Several remarkable discoveries offer considerable support
for the coast-hopping route of entry. Through a combination of deep-sea cores into the
Northwest coast continental shelf and digital sounding mapping of the continental shelf to
a depth of 150 m below modern sea level, we have an emerging picture of portions of this
coast for the period when people may have been present. The deep-sea cores provide pollen
data allowing reconstruction of the vegetation of this previously exposed land surface, as
well as sediment information crucial to estimating the timing for when this land was
submerged by rising sea levels.15
      The areas of the now submerged coastlines so far investigated were characterized by
open tundra, including grasses, sedges, and dwarf willows. Mapping of the continental shelf
shows evidence for lakes, rivers, and beaches.16 Although glaciers would have extended all
the way to the sea in some parts of the coastline, other portions were unglaciated not long
after the maximum extent of the glaciers (23,000–19,000 years ago) and certainly after
16,000 years ago. These unglaciated locales are sometimes called coastal refugia—attractive
areas scattered up and down the northwestern coastline of the Americas that were suitable
for landfall in a coast-hopping model of entry, if not also for more extended periods of
human habitation. Quite signiﬁcantly, these coastal refugia were available to humans at
least 1,000–2,000 years before the “ice-free” corridor.17
      The coastal route into the Americas south of the glaciers would also have been much
more economically feasible for early people compared to the “ice-free” corridor. Coastal
regions provide many attractive resources, including shellﬁsh, marine ﬁsh, seals and other
           204        PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY



                                                  Arctic Ocean

                                    Be
                                      rin
                                         gi
        N O RTH                             a


       A MER I CA




                                                                                              Atlantic
                                                                                               Ocean



                    Pacific Ocean

            0         1.000 mi

            0    1.000 km


FIGURE 5.8 The coastal route into the Americas from Beringia. Many entry points are possible once south of the glaciated
region.



                      sea mammals, and possibly also migratory waterfowl.18 How far south did early Americans
                      travel via this route?
                           At the very least, the coastal route must have been used until somewhere in the vicinity
                      of Washington/Oregon. From this point, people could have moved inland, adopting
                      terrestrial hunting-and-gathering economies to replace coastal ﬁshing, hunting, and
                      gathering. Alternatively, some groups may have continued farther south along the coastal
                      route, with some models hypothesizing touchdown along the Isthmus of Panama19 and
                      others landfall in South America.20 However far south people may have used the coastal
                      route before traveling inland, one thing is certain. Within a couple of thousand years of
                      entry south of the glaciers, human groups were nearly everywhere in the Americas.
                           Despite the attractiveness of the coast-hopping model, however, there remains one
                      obstacle—the lack of an archaeological record. As we saw earlier, the drowning of ancient
                      coastal areas by rising sea levels at the end of the Pleistocene has been the limiting factor
                      for archaeological research. Mandryk and her colleagues, however, note, “Extremely rapid
                      sea-level rise beginning 10,300 bp . . . increases the chances of preservation of any early
                      archaeological sites from this period due to rapid burial.”21 We can anticipate that
                      continued research focused on the continental shelf of the northwest coast may eventually
                      yield this long-sought-after evidence for human presence.
                                                                           THE FIRST AMERICANS      205



                                                 Arctic Ocean


        N O RT H
       A MERICA




                                                                                             Atlantic
                                                                                              Ocean



                   Pacific Ocean

            0        1.000 mi

            0    1.000 km


FIGURE 5.9 The Atlantic route proposed for a Solutrean migration from Europe to the Americas.



Across the Atlantic from Europe
Another sea route idea has been recently proposed by Dennis Stanford and Bruce Bradley.22
They argue that the Americas were reached by people traveling by skin boats across the
northern Atlantic from Europe, although they don’t claim that these groups were
necessarily the ﬁrst people to arrive in the Americas. In fact, this model is directed explicitly
at explaining the origins of the Clovis tradition (see later) in the Americas.
     The Atlantic route proposes that permanent sea ice linked Ireland to the Grand Banks
area (near Newfoundland) during the period of the maximum extent of the last glacial period,
some 23,000–19,000 years ago (Figure 5.9). The presence of this ice front theoretically
created conditions that allowed a weak warm sea current that ﬂowed counter-clockwise from
the coast of Ireland toward the Grand Banks. Given the existence of maritime adaptations
in parts of western Europe, people using skin boats could eventually make the 2,500-km
journey along the ice front, hunting sea mammals and ﬁshing to provide food and oil for
heating and cooking.23
     What about archaeological evidence for this route? The primary line of evidence used
by Stanford and Bradley is the resemblance of Clovis stone artifacts in North America to
those of an Upper Paleolithic tradition from Spain and France called the Solutrean. They
note that the stone ﬂaked bifaces—points or spearheads—are very similar in appearance
           206       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                   and in the technological pro-
                                                                                   cesses used to manufacture
                                                                                   them (Figure 5.10). They also
                                                                                   point out that many artifacts
                                                                                   made of bone, antler, and
                                                                                   ivory are similar in Clovis and
                                                                                   Solutrean assemblages.
                                                                                        Stanford and Bradley also
                                                                                   cite genetic evidence (see later)
                                                                                   that may support their model.
                                                                                   This comes from the study of
                                                                                   mtDNA and shows the pre-
                                                                                   sence of the X haplogroup, a
                                                                                   European genetic lineage, in
                                                                                   some Native Americans popu-
                                                                                   lations.24 Stanford and Bradley
                                                                                   thus argue that the X haplo-
                                                                                   group entered the Americas via
                                                                                   Solutrean people traveling the
                                                                                   Atlantic route.
                                                                                         The Stanford and Bradley
FIGURE 5.10 Proponents of the Atlantic route suggest that there are similarities    model has been heavily criti-
between New World Clovis points (left) and Old World Solutrean points (right) (not
                                                                                    cized by archaeologists and is
drawn to scale).
                                                                                    not accepted as a feasible idea
                                                                                    by most. Why is this? It turns
                   out that there are many good arguments that can be made showing major ﬂaws in this
                   model; these have been recently summarized by Lawrence Straus.25
                         The ﬁrst of these arguments is based on the chronology of the Clovis and Solutrean.
                   Both traditions are well dated using the radiocarbon technique. Solutrean sites in France
                   and Spain fall into the interval between about 21,000 and 17,000 years ago, while Clovis
                   sites are dated to between 11,500 and 10,900 years ago.26 As Straus notes, the Solutrean
                   bifaces, as well as the techniques used to manufacture them, are about 5,000 radiocarbon
                   years older than their supposed counterpart in the Clovis tradition. There simply were no
                   Solutrean biface-making people in Europe at the time that Clovis appears in the Americas.
                   This same argument would apply to any potential similarities in artifacts made of antler,
                   ivory, or bone.
                         Straus also points out that at the height of the last glacial period, which is when
                   Stanford and Bradley propose that people crossed the Atlantic along the ice front, there is
                   no evidence for human occupation in Europe north of Paris.27 Additionally, while Solutrean
                   people are known to have exploited near-shore sea resources such as shellﬁsh, as well as the
                   salmon and trout found in rivers as well as the sea, there is no evidence that Solutreans had
                   adaptations to deep-water ﬁshing or the hunting of sea mammals.
                         The fact that some techniques used to make bifaces in the Solutrean and Clovis
                   traditions are similar could be no more than independent invention. Making stone artifacts
                   is a reductive process—the person making a stone tool can only fashion it by reducing it,
                   that is, by knocking pieces of stone off the artifact, and there are only so many ways in which
                                                                        THE FIRST AMERICANS      207


this can be done. Making a stone tool is thus quite unlike making pottery vessels, which is
an additive process, with all sorts of options ranging from types of handles to types of
decoration to types of temper added to ensure that the pots don’t break during ﬁring.
Similarities in stone artifact techniques are thus often due to the simple fact that there are
a limited number of options available to make a particular kind of stone artifact.
     Even the genetic evidence of the X haplogroup in some Native American groups can
be explained in ways that do not involve the crossing of the Atlantic Ocean by Solutreans.
In his discussion of this mtDNA lineage, Theodore Schurr summarizes another possibility:
“[T]he lack of haplogroup X mtDNAs in Asian and Siberian groups . . . suggests that these
haplotypes originated outside of eastern Siberia, perhaps taken through Beringia by an
ancient Eurasian migratory event distinct from the migration(s) that brought the other four
mtDNA lineages to the Americas.”28
     Although the coast-hopping model from Beringia to south of the ice sheets is not
perfect—and no model ever is—this route appears to be the most likely explanation for
how the ﬁrst people arrived in the Americas.


EVIDENCE FOR THE FIRST AMERICANS

With this sense of the possible entry routes, environments, and resources that the New
World offered, we can examine the biological ancestry of the ﬁrst Americans, the
chronology and geography of their colonization, and the economic and technological basis
of their colonization. To do this, we can appeal to several categories of evidence involving
(1) the biological anthropology of Native Americans and possible ancestral groups in the
Old World; (2) linguistic evidence—in the sense of those clues that indigenous New World
languages can provide us about the cultural origins, cultural relationships, and migration
patterns of the ﬁrst Americans; and (3) the archaeological records both of the New World
and of the areas in the Old World from which the colonists might have come.


Biological Anthropological Evidence
By 100,000 years ago, Old World peoples seem to have had all the skills at making clothes,
ﬁre, and tools that would have been necessary for the trek to the New World. But intensive
research has failed to turn up any New World human skeletons that cannot be ﬁtted comfor-
tably within our own species, Homo sapiens sapiens. And because the ﬁrst H. sapiens sapiens
appear in the Middle East and Europe about 35,000–40,000 years ago, we might assume
that the aboriginal Americans must have come over since then, but we do not know when
the ﬁrst Homo sapiens sapiens appeared in the east Asian areas—early Upper Paleolithic
assemblages including bone and antler tools appear in the region from Uzbekistan to
Siberian about 40,000–30,000 years ago, but there are no associated human fossils.29
     With regard to the Old World ancestors of Native Americans, the physical
anthropological data strongly suggest that they were, of course, east Asians, and were almost
certainly the Pleistocene peoples of the areas near Alaska. Earlier questions focused on
whether the genetic ancestors of these east Asian people were, for example, people from
coastal areas west of Japan, or north central Chinese, or western Asians who migrated east
               208             PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY



   R US S I A                                                                                                      ALASKA
                                                                                                                    (U.S.)
    0                 500 mi

    0        500 km                                      Arctic Ocean
  NORWAY
               SWEDEN


                 FINLAND
               EST.
           LATV.
   LITH.

   BELARUS




 UKRAINE



                                                     Altai region

  GEORGIA


    AZERB.
                                                                                               CHINA
                                  KAZAKHSTAN
                                                                                                                     JAPAN
IRAN            TURKM.         UZBEKISTAN                           MONGOLIA
                                                        CHINA                                           N. KOREA
FIGURE 5.11 The Altai region in Siberia, a possible origin area for populations entering the Americas based on genetic
data.



                               from northern Eurasia. Since then, accumulating genetic evidence suggests that the region
                               of the Altai Mountains in Siberia (Figure 5.11) may be the source for these early founding
                               populations.30
                                    Many scholars have analyzed the teeth, skulls, and other physical features of early and
                               current Native Americans in hopes of identifying their origins. It is uncertain when some
                               east Asian populations developed epicanthic folds, small noses, and relatively ﬂat facial
                               proﬁles, but in view of the prominent noses of most Native Americans and their non-
                               Mongolian eye shapes, it is apparent that these differences can be attributed to one or more
                               possibilities: The Americans are only distantly related to these populations, they emigrated
                               before the Asian populations developed their distinctive features, these different
                               characteristics existed in different Asian populations, and what we see in the contrasts of
                               Amerind populations are the results of successive migrations by different human groups.
                               We have very little evidence on which to estimate rates of evolutionary change in these
                               superﬁcial physical characteristics, and variations in them are thus difﬁcult to interpret.31
                                    Teeth preserve well, have morphological characteristics that are under relatively simple
                               genetic control, and seem to change relatively quickly under changing selective conditions.
                               Figure 5.12 indicates the relative frequency in various groups of incisor “shoveling”—the
                               degree to which the lingual surface of incisors is curled or ridged. On this trait alone, one
                                                                         THE FIRST AMERICANS        209




FIGURE 5.12 Variations in human teeth shapes reﬂect genetic ancestry. Incisor “shoveling”—the curved cross-sectional
shape of incisors—occurs most frequently in northeast Asian and New World peoples and distinguishes them from the
rest of the world. This evidence supports the view that the New World was colonized by three successive migrations
from Asia.



would clearly see north Chinese ancestry for Native Americans.32 Turner looked at many
different features of teeth, including shoveling, and variations in the number of roots of
premolars and molars. By comparing large samples of teeth on many different measurements,
Turner concluded that (1) New World groups are more like Asians than like Europeans,
(2) all New World groups resemble each other more than they do most Old World
populations, (3) dental variation is greater in North America than in South America, and
(4) there are three “clusters” of New World peoples.33
     As Turner notes, these characteristics seem to make sense if there were three distinct
migrations into the Americas. It is very difﬁcult, however, to estimate rates of change in
these kinds of physical features, and thereby to estimate how long ago the migrations to the
Americas began, but Turner’s calculations estimate a date of about 12,000 years ago for the
initial colonization of the New World, with two much later waves of colonizations.
     These separate migrations also seem to be reﬂected in a study by Steele and Powell,
who did a complex statistical analysis of measurements on the teeth, skulls, and skeletons
of the earliest known Americans and compared them to various other populations. Their
results indicate that the earliest Americans were different physically from more recent
Native Americans and northern Asians, having longer and narrower braincases and shorter
and narrower faces.34
210   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


           Just as DNA has been used to estimate the divergences that mark the early hominin
      record (see chapters 3 and 4), so too the genetic diversity of Native Americans has been
      considered as evidence concerning when the New World was colonized and who colonized
      it. Analyses of DNA from both Siberians and Native Americans have led some scholars
      to conclude that the original colonization of the Americas occurred sometime between
      34,000 and 17,000 years ago, but as always, these estimates are somewhat speculative and
      disputed.35 At the very least, this research shows that more than one “wave” of colonists
      came to the New World and that the earliest of these populations likely was from a
      population similar to that now found in the Altai Mountains region of Siberia, with
      contributions from East Asian areas such as Japan and Korea.36
           It is interesting to note that these various studies of Native American physical
      anthropology have some relevance for the problem of the origins of modern Homo sapiens
      sapiens (chapter 4). On the basis of their general dental morphology, Turner labeled
      north Asians and Americans as sinodonts and the eastern and southern Asians as
      sundadonts, and he noted that both are very different from Europeans. As we noted in
      chapter 4, some scholars see traces of these sinodont and sundadont patterns in humans in
      Asia going back many hundreds of thousands of years, and on that basis they argue against
      the idea that we are all today descended from Africans who replaced all these very early
      Asian peoples.


      Linguistic Evidence
      Various scholars have also tried to estimate the date and patterns of New World
      colonization by examining Native American languages. Just as the resemblances among
      English, Greek, Persian, and other languages point toward a common Indo-European
      original language, the Native American languages have been screened for signs of common
      origin. One analysis of this problem is made by Joseph Greenberg, who argues that New
      World languages reﬂect three periods of colonization—the earliest, which is associated with
      Amerind, then a group of what are called Na-Dene speakers, and ﬁnally, at a later time,
      Eskimo-Aleut speakers.37 Each of these three language groups probably originated from
      separate Old World language families, and there is some (controversial) evidence that all
      the world’s languages can be traced to a single language family.38 But like studies of teeth,
      estimates of the time of New World colonization on the basis of language changes must be
      considered quite speculative.


      Archaeological Evidence
      One might think that good, solid archaeological data—bones and stones—would be a ﬁrm
      basis for analyzing New World colonization. In fact, at this time there are a growing number
      of indications that people were in the New World and south of Alaska before about 12,000
      years ago. That they were there by 11,500 years ago and thereafter is certain, since scores of
      sites have been dated by many different methods to 11,500 years ago and later.
           But the evidence for occupations earlier than 15,000 years ago, and certainly for
      periods prior to 20,000 years ago, although intriguing, is far from convincing. One might
      think that, since hundreds of Asian sites have been securely dated to before 13,000 years
      ago, then, as weak as negative evidence is, this would suggest that there are no American
                                                                         THE FIRST AMERICANS      211


sites of comparably early age. But it is at least possible that people were in the New World
long before 13,000 years ago but simply left no traces that have been found yet. In the North
American East, for example, exposed land surfaces in what would have been resource-rich
areas of Tennessee, Alabama, and the Ohio Valley are extremely old, and artifacts found on
them are difﬁcult to date. Crude “pebble-tools” on these land surfaces could conceivably
be the only surviving traces of very early occupations here. These pebble-tools show simplicity
and extreme patination in comparison to other artifacts. The absence of projectile points
and the simplicity of these early artifacts may mean that the earliest immigrants were not
highly specialized big-game hunters, which suggests that they came over during the warmer
periods of the Pleistocene as generalized hunters and gatherers. We cannot be certain, of
course, because successful big-game hunters (like Homo erectus) used crude stone tools, but
these pebble–tools do not look as if they were specialized killing or butchering implements.
Nor have they been found with butchered animal bones or in environmental circumstances
suggesting specialized hunting.
     Except for this pebble-tool complex, however, to a large degree arguments about the
date of New World colonization come down to one’s belief in speciﬁc radiocarbon dates.
And although the radiocarbon dating method has been shown to be broadly accurate
around the world (see chapter 2), any single radiocarbon date can be misleading because
of any number of factors, ranging from natural contamination through oil seeps or coal
deposits to incompetent laboratory technicians. When the ﬁrst radiocarbon dates were
produced on Egyptian materials, for example, Egyptologists rejected these “scientiﬁc” dates
because they conﬂicted with a decidedly unscientiﬁc farrago of evidence from king-lists,
artifact styles, and so on. But the Egyptologists were right. Until archaeologists discovered
that radiocarbon dates had to be corrected for past ﬂuctuations in the amounts of
radiocarbon in the atmosphere, these radiometric dates were off by centuries.
     Because individual radiocarbon dates are sometimes suspect, archaeologists try to
work with suites of dates or with comparisons of Asian or Siberian artifact styles and sites
and the earliest New World sites and implements. But when we try to do this, we ﬁnd that
similarities between North Asian and early American stone tools are very much in the eye
of the beholder.


North Asian Evidence
We might expect to ﬁnd a long trail of archaeological sites stretching from northeastern
Siberia along the sea ﬂoor of the now-submerged land bridge into central Alaska, and then
southward. If these early immigrants were big-game hunters, we would expect many sites
to be concentrations of animal bones, hearths, and ﬂint tools appropriate for killing and
preparing these animals. Alas, the gap between the real and ideal—so persistent in all
archaeological research—is particularly great in this case. Some sites do ﬁt this pattern, but
the evidence is far from conclusive. First of all, it is only recently that adequate surveys of
northeastern Siberia have been undertaken. Aside from the rigors of the Arctic climate, the
politics of doing surveys amid intercontinental ballistic missile silos and radar stations has,
until recently, deterred most Western scholars. Russian archaeologists,39 nonetheless, have
done excellent research in these areas, and now that Siberia is opening to Western scholars,
collaborative research is beginning to clarify the cultural relationships of Pleistocene east
Asian and North American cultures.
212   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


           Present evidence suggests that before about 40,000 years ago, Siberia had extremely
      low population densities or was unsettled altogether—its great frigid interior swamps and
      forests may have barred human colonization, at least until huts had been developed. In any
      case, the earliest known sites in northeastern Siberia date to no more than about 25,000 years
      ago and reﬂect a life focused on the hunting of mammoths and other large animals. Projectile
      points, scrapers, and burins—tool types associated with big-game hunters all over the Old
      World—are the most frequent implements at Siberian sites, such as Mal’ta, Afontova gora
      II, and other sites of this period (see Figure 5.5). Perhaps most importantly, current
      paleoecological evidence suggests that human groups in Siberia shifted southward during
      the height of the last glacial period, and that it was only after 16,000 years ago that they
      were able to expand northward again and into Beringia.40
           Stone tools, for example, from Mal’ta in deposits radiocarbon-dated to 14,750 years
      ago do not include Clovis-style points but seem to show at least similarities to early
      American assemblages—although there do not appear to be many large, ﬁnely crafted
      projectile points.41 Haynes has even raised the possibility that Mal’ta represents an
      intermediate point in migrations of eastern European people across Siberia and into the
      New World—which he thinks is plausible because of the similarities between Clovis
      assemblages and late Pleistocene eastern European industries42—and which possibly could
      coincide with the introduction of the X haplogroup mtDNA lineage into the Americas
      (see earlier).
           N. Dikov’s work on the shores of Lake Ushki offers at least some evidence about
      possible links to the Americas. Dikov found the remains of what appears to be a large camp,
      in which people lived in hide or wood shelters. The center of one camp area was a deep
      burial pit in which the poorly preserved fragments of a body were found, along with about
      a thousand soft stone beads, some pendants of the same material, and some amber beads.
      The whole area of the burial was covered with red ocher, used probably to simulate blood
      or a living complexion on bodies.
           Radiocarbon dating places the Ushki sites about 11,000–12,000 years ago.43 For
      purposes of linking this site to the Americas, it is signiﬁcant that Dikov found stone points
      in the bifacial, leaf-shape form that resemble those from the North American Great Basin
      of about the same time period. This might suggest a widespread bifacial point tradition,
      although the Lake Ushki sites appear to be too late to represent people ancestral to the
      Clovis tradition in the Americas.
           Dikov reviewed the evidence for other sites on the way to what would have been
      Beringia and concluded that nothing “challenges the conservative view that the signiﬁcant
      population movements from Asia occurred after the peak of the last glaciation, which was
      some 18,000 years ago.”44


      North and South American Evidence
      The evidence is also somewhat sketchy on the American side of the land bridge. The Alaskan
      and northern Canadian climates make surveys very difﬁcult, and farther south the constant
      waxing and waning of the glacial ice sheets and the vast riverine systems that drained them
      have thoroughly chewed up much of the land along the Canadian corridor. No doubt many
      sites in these areas have long since been scoured away by ice or water. The oldest sites
      currently known in the Alaskan area date to about 11,600 years ago and include Broken
                                                                     THE FIRST AMERICANS       213


Mammoth, Mead, and Swan
Point.45 They are part of the
Nenana complex, with artifacts
such as “teardrop-shaped”
projectile points, endscrapers
and side scrapers, burins, and
lanceolate projectile points, as
well as the use of red ochre
(Figure 5.13). James Dixon
notes that all of the Nenana
complex sites are small and
appear to have been only brieﬂy
occupied. 46 They are found
mainly in high spots such as
bluff tops, giving a panoramic
view to the human groups using
the camps.
                                     FIGURE 5.13 Examples of Nenana Complex stone artifacts in Alaska.
      Ironically, the site with
perhaps the best claim to a pre-
12,000 years ago date in the
Americas is among the farthest
south, Monte Verde, in south
central Chile (Figure 5.14).
Here Tom Dillehay and his
crew have excavated a camp
site that has been radiocarbon-
dated to about 12,500 years
ago, and below the levels of
that age are layers of tools and
debris that may be much older,
perhaps up to 33,000 years
old.47
      Monte Verde is particularly
interesting because, unlike
most other sites of this age, it is
                                     FIGURE 5.14 Excavations at Monte Verde, Chile, yielded remains of ancient
not a cave or rock shelter. It is    dwellings dating to c. 12,500 years ago.
an open-air site located in a
cold, wet, forested area that
was covered by a peat bog and
thereby extremely well preserved. A piece of mastodon ﬂesh was found intact, plus a human
footprint, log foundations for huts, animal skins, numerous plant remains, and many other
remains. Almost all the bones from the site were from seven mastodons, which appear to
have been killed elsewhere and carried home in large segments. Scores of plants were eaten,
and remains of some plants with medicinal properties were found in the camp debris. Trade
with other groups was indicated by the presence of salt, bitumen, non-native plants, and
other commodities. Dillehay estimates that 30–50 people lived at Monte Verde at one time,
214   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      with an impressive degree of occupational specialization in wood-working, stone-tool
      manufacturing, and other skills.
           Monte Verde, is one of the most important sites in the New World. If people were here
      at 12,500 years ago, they must have been in the New World far earlier; if they lived in the
      almost sedentary communities that Monte Verde seems to represent, many models of
      hunting-foraging economies may not apply to much of the New World’s earliest
      populations. And if the layers of the site dated by radiocarbon methods to 33,000 years ago
      really are that old, then most of the debates about New World colonization have been beside
      the point.
           The evidence for extensive penetration of South America by 10,500 years ago, and
      perhaps as early as 11,500 years ago, is accumulating, even in difﬁcult environments like
      the interior of Brazil.48 Anna Roosevelt and her colleagues have recently described one of
      these early sites, the Caverna da Pedra Pintada at Monte Alegre, which is in the Amazon
      region of Brazil.49 Two strata in the cave contain Paleoindian occupations. These have
      hearths and carbonized seeds, as well as stone artifacts including triangular bifacial points
      with stems (Figure 5.15). There are also examples of painted rock art on the walls of the
      cave. The thousands of pieces of carbonized plants found in these layers show that humans
      at Monte Alegre gathered tree fruits as part of their diet. These are tropical rain forest




      FIGURE 5.15 Stone artifacts from Caverna de Pedra Pintada, Brazil, document human presence
      in interior South America before 10,500 years ago.
                                                                         THE FIRST AMERICANS         215


species, including Brazil nuts and various edible palm tree
fruits.50 Paleoindians here also made use of ﬁsh, freshwater
mussels, tortoise, and aquatic turtles. This type of gathering-
and-foraging subsistence economy, which Roosevelt believes
is contemporary with Clovis Paleoindians, is quite different
from the subsistence economies described for Clovis occupa-
tions in North America.
     One of the most controversial and potentially important
early New World sites is Meadowcroft Rock Shelter, near
Avella, Pennsylvania, where many layers of alluvial sediments
were deposited by a tributary of the Ohio River (Figure 5.16).
Interspersed in these alluvial sediments are many clear
indications of human occupation, including prismatic ﬂint
blades, basketry, and hearths. Millennia of reoccupation left a
16-foot-thick “layercake” of tools, bones, baskets, and other
debris. The question is, how far back does Meadowcroft’s
earliest occupation date? The site was excellently excavated,
and there is no question about the provenience of the artifacts.
A bit of charred basketry from near the bottom was
radiocarbon-dated to 19,600 +/− 2,400 and 19,150 +/− 800
years b.p. Charcoal from a level beneath the basketry dates to
                                                                    FIGURE 5.16 Meadowcroft Rockshelter, PA, is
as old as 37,000 years ago, but there were no associated
                                                                    one of several sites said to contain evidence for
artifacts. Unfortunately, there is some suggestion that the         pre-Clovis occupations in the New World.
samples may have been contaminated by groundwater and
that the site’s stratigraphy has been misunderstood.51 The
kinds of bones found at the site also pose some problems, in that they do not seem to be
from animals one would expect this close to the glaciers that would have pushed far down
into the northeastern United States in the late Pleistocene.
     The stone tools of Meadowcroft’s earliest levels are similar to the typical Clovis
assemblage of 11,500 years ago, but some blade sizes and types are different. Adovasio has
compared the Meadowcroft lithics to those from other sites and suspects that they may
represent a link between Old World tool industries and early North American cultures,
such as the Clovis.52
     But if the earlier dates for Meadowcroft are accepted, it means that people were in the
continental United States before the last glacial advance, which implies that the ice sheets
were in fact no barrier and that the scarcity of sites found is a matter of inadequate
searching, low population densities, and the post-depositional destruction of sites.
     If people entered the New World 30,000 or more years ago, it might seem surprising
that more archaeological sites have not been found dating to this period; after all, hundreds
of Old World sites date to this age. But population densities in Europe and other parts of
the Old World had been slowly building for hundreds of thousands of years before people
entered the New World. In addition, most European sites of this age are found in caves and
rock shelters, and there are relatively few of these along the probable route into the New
World. Alternatively, the ﬁrst Americans may have worked out adaptations to cold climates
that did not require caves. Indeed, their ancestors must have done this because there are
no caves along the Siberia-Beringia-Alaska route.
          216       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                      Another problem in locat-
                                                                                 ing early sites in eastern North
                                                                                 America is that in much of the
                                                                                 lower Mississippi area, alluvia-
                                                                                 tion has been so great that
                                                                                 many such sites would be buried
                                                                                 under tens of meters of soil.
                                                                                 And in the rest of the South
                                                                                 and East, where the glacial ice
                                                                                 sheets never extended, the
                                                                                 present land surface is millions
                                                                                 of years old. Thus, soft-drink
                                                                                 bottles and ancient artifacts
                                                                                 can be found in virtually the
                                                                                 same soil because accumula-
                                                                                 tion of soil over these areas
                                                                                 has been so slow for millions
FIGURE 5.17 The site of Cactus Hill, VA, has yielded a pre-Clovis horizon.       of years. Additionally, bones
                                                                                 and other datable materials do
                                                                                 not preserve well under these
                                                                                 humid, exposed conditions.
                        Still, there are suitable land surfaces in North America where pre-Clovis occupations
                  could have been preserved. One of these is the recently discovered site of Cactus Hill in
                  Virginia (Figure 5.17).53 The occupations here are on a relict sand dune and include both
                  a Clovis period occupation and, underneath that, a pre-Clovis horizon named “Blade” by
                  the site’s investigators because it yielded quartzite blades.54 Radiocarbon dates on natural
                  wood particles from the lowest sand deposit show that the sand dune was forming around
                  19,000 years ago or perhaps slightly earlier. Another date of around 16,900 years ago was
                  obtained from natural charcoal in sterile deposits immediately below the “Blade” occupa-
                  tion. The overlying Clovis horizon is radiocarbon dated to 10,900 years ago. These dates
                  form an age bracket for the “Blade” occupation, which must be somewhere in the interval
                  between 10,900 and 16,900 years ago.
                        David Whitley and Ronald Dorn evaluated hypothetical migration and fertility rates
                  for a population entering North America through Beringia and compared them with sites
                  whose ages are accepted by nearly all archaeologists, and they conclude that “it is impossible
                  to reconcile the Clovis-ﬁrst hypothesis with empirical evidence accepted by its own
                  advocates.”55

                    THE CALIBRATION OF PALEOINDIAN RADIOCARBON DATES
                    One of the signiﬁcant advances in research on Paleoindian complexes in recent years has
                    been the calibration or correction (see chapter 2) of radiocarbon dates for these
                    occupations. Stuart Fiedel has summarized the results, noting that the correction curves
                    indicate that radiocarbon dates for ages in the late Pleistocene are some 2,000 years too
                    young.56 Although we have used uncalibrated or uncorrected radiocarbon dates in the dis-
                    cussions in this chapter, in actual fact, Clovis period occupations date to between 13,400 and
                    13,000 calibrated radiocarbon years ago, and the pre-Clovis occupation at Monte Verde to
                                                                                THE FIRST AMERICANS       217


           14
cal BP       C bp     Climate           WESTERN                   EASTERN                  SOUTH
                                        NORTH AMERICA             NORTH AMERICA            AMERICA
 9,000      8,200
 9,500      8,500                                                 bifurcate points
            8,700
10,000      9,000                       PLANO
                                        COMPLEXES
10,500      9,400
            9,500                                                 KIRK
11,000
            9,900                                                 PALMER, KESSELL
11,500     10,200                       AGATE BASIN
                      –YD ends–
           10,300
12,000     10,500                                                 DALTON                   MONTE
                                                                                           ALEGRE
           10,500
12,500
           10,700                                                 MID-PALEO
           11,000     –YD begins–       FOLSOM                    Debert                   FELL I
13,000     11,100                         GOSHEN?
           10,300     —                 CLOVIS                    CLOVIS
           10,600     IACP
13,500     11,700
                      Allerød
           11,800
14,000     12,000     OD and ACR                   (biface/blade industries?)              Monte
           12,300                                                                          Verde
14,500
           12,600     Bølling begins
15,000

FIGURE 5.18 The calibration of radiocarbon dates shows that the ﬁrst people in the Americas
arrived 2000 years earlier than previously thought. However, pre-Clovis sites (earlier than 13,500 cal
bp) remain controversial. Monte Verde is the most widely accepted site of pre-Clovis occupation
(about 14,500 cal bp). However, a few scholars such as Stuart Fiedel (personal communication 2006),
noting the peculiarity of stone tools and discrepancies in the site reports, still question this site’s
authenticity and antiquity.


about 14,400 calibrated radiocarbon years ago (Figure 5.18). Gaining 2,000 years of time also
has implications for those researchers who have calculated the timing for the colonization
of the New World using genetic “clocks” or even “clocks” based on the length of time it is
thought to take for the development of the various Native American languages.57


EARLY PALEOINDIAN ECONOMIES

For many thousands of years after people reached mid-continental and southern latitudes
in the New World, population densities were probably extremely light, and most bands no
           218       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                            doubt stayed in the same general mixed forest and
                                                            grassland environments their ancestors had adapted to
                                                            in more northern areas. By about 11,000 years ago,
                                                            however, they began to display greater diversity in
                                                            subsistence strategies as they evolved adaptations to a
                                                            greater range of environments.
                                                                   Archaeologists think their reconstructions of
                                                            these early American cultures may be somewhat
                                                            inaccurate because of the nature of the archaeological
                                                            record these cultures left. The easiest archaeological
                                                            sites to ﬁnd are those with large stone tools and the
                                                            bones of large animals, and many early New World
                                                            sites are of this type: dozens of stone tools intermixed
                                                            with mammoth, bison, and other bones, often near
                                                            streams or bogs where hunters ambushed these
                                                            animals. But there may be many less obvious sites—
                                                            those not yet found because they are not marked by
                                                            masses of animal bones or impressive stone tools. In
                                                            1987, for example, a Clovis site in a Washington State
                                                            apple orchard (the Ritchie Roberts Site) was found
                                                            when holes were dug for new trees, and beautiful,
                                                            exceptionally large stone points were unearthed
                                                            (Figure 5.19). But if this had been an earlier site
                                                            containing only crude pebble tools, it is highly
                                                            improbable that it would ever have been recognized.
                                                            In short, extreme biases are likely in our recognition
                                                            of the early American archaeological record. Many
                                                            archaeologists question, for example, even the
FIGURE 5.19 An cache of extraordinary Clovis points         presumption that the Clovis and Folsom peoples were
including this example was recovered from the Richie-       mainly big-game hunters, although there is some
Roberts site, WA.                                           evidence that groups along the tundra zone, in New
                                                            York and Massachusetts, specialized in caribou. 58
                                                            Meltzer argues that in much of the southeast United
                     States, the people who left the many ﬂuted points in this area were generalized foragers who
                     probably used many of the points as hafted knives, not as spear points.59 And Dixon points
                     out that the “spectacular and well-publicized Clovis kill sites may be the least typical and
                     the least useful sites for interpreting . . . early New World adaptations.”60
                          Numerous surface ﬁnds of Clovis ﬂuted points are known from the northern part of
                     Mexico, especially from Sonora.61 These likely are of comparable age to Clovis occupations
                     in North America, that is, 11,000 years ago or older. But it is the area of Lake Texcoco in
                     the Basin of Mexico that has yielded sites showing an association of mammoths and stone
                     artifacts, indicating hunting and butchering events. The Paleoindians who were responsible
                     for the Lake Texcoco archaeological record, however, were not Clovis groups, but appear
                     to represent later complexes perhaps related to those of the American West.62 The
                     consistency with which mammoths are found in these sites may seem to reﬂect an economy
                     specialized in hunting large animals, but most of the people of Mexico at this time were
                                                                     THE FIRST AMERICANS       219


probably generalized hunters and gatherers, and only because of the great size and
preservation of the mammoth bones do we ﬁnd so many of these sites.
      But there is no question that some people did kill and eat big animals. Excavations at
Iztapan 2, in Mexico, yielded a mammoth skeleton with cut-marks made by stone tools.
The base of the skull was smashed, perhaps to get at the brain, a very nutritious resource.
A lanceolate and a leaf-shaped projectile point were found with this mammoth.63
      Perhaps the most direct way to demonstrate hunting of large animals by early Americans
is to ﬁnd residues of animal tissue on the tools themselves, and in a few cases this is possible.
At least one of the large ﬂuted points at the Ritchie Site in eastern Washington State was
found to have traces of blood on it—in fact, probably from a mammoth.
      The earliest distinctive and widely distributed tool complex found in the North
American East is distinguished by the presence of large stone projectile points. Most such
points are between 12 and 30 cm long and occasionally have been “ﬂuted.” Formerly, many
archaeologists thought these eastern points were imitations of the Folsom and Clovis
points, but it is now evident that these larger points occur as early—and probably earlier—
in the eastern woodlands as on the Plains and are
more numerous in the East: Alabama alone, for
example, has yielded more ﬂuted points than the
entire western half of North America.64
      Other evidence of hunting comes from Arctic
sites, such as Dry Creek, Trail Creek, and similar
occupations, most of which date to between 11,000
and 8,000 years ago. These sites seem to be hunting
camps in unglaciated areas and are marked by
bifacial knives, tiny blades, and the bones of horses,
bison, hares, ducks, and other animals. By this time,
these Arctic hunters may have been pursuing a
dying way of life, as the glaciers and the rich animal
life they supported were slowly withdrawing.65
      Shortly after 8,000 years ago at least some
groups in the American West were undoubtedly
specializing in hunting big game. They often
practiced “jump hunting,” in which many people
cooperated to stampede bison herds or other
animals over a precipice, killing them by the score.
Where there were no convenient precipices,
animals were driven into natural cul-de-sacs,
where they could be easily killed (Figure 5.20). In
sites reﬂecting these practices, archaeologists ﬁnd
the bones of hundreds of bison, many showing
clear butchering marks. These hunters took cuts of
meat from these animals in a way that showed a
shrewd appreciation of their nutritional value.66 By
drying the meat, these hunters could accumulate
large food reserves, and the skin, hide, and bones        FIGURE 5.20 Overview of the bison kill at the Olson-
of the bison had many uses.                               Chubbuck site, CO.
220   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


           A good example of the varied nature of early American adaptations is the Desert West.
      The Desert West refers to the area between the Rocky Mountains and the Sierra Nevada
      and Cascade Mountain range, extending from Canada to southern Mexico.67 About 12,000
      years ago, when the glacial ice sheets were still a kilometer high along the northern border
      of the United States, some of the Desert West was probably cooler and wetter than it is
      today and had many large lakes and marshes. Then, between 12,000 and 10,000 years ago,
      the lakes shrank, rivers ceased to ﬂow, and springs began to dry up.
           The Desert West has less diverse ﬂora and fauna than most other parts of North
      America, but for most of the last 10,000 years it has supported large populations
      of squirrels, rabbits, marmots, wood rats, peccaries, and other small animals, as well as
      localized herds of deer, bison, elk, and big-horn sheep. Sunﬂowers, pickleweed, yucca,
      piñon nuts, and other vegetable foods are available seasonally in most of this area. Resource
      diversity is particularly great as one moves up and down the hills and ridges of the Desert
      West: A single day’s climb can take one from a desert environment to Arctic-Alpine
      environments in the uplands. An especially important element in the subsistence of
      prehistoric peoples of the Desert West was the lakes and marshes probably present here
      during much of the Pleistocene. Fish, waterfowl, invertebrates, marsh plants, and many
      other resources were exploited as soon as colonization began and have played an import-
      ant part in determining human settlement here to the present. Generally, then, the
      Desert West offers archaeologists an opportunity to study the many ways prehistoric
      populations in this area have adapted their subsistence strategies, population densities,
      technologies, and seasonal movements to the nuances of a somewhat extreme physical
      environment.
           The earliest reliably dated sites are all between 12,000 and 10,000 years old, although
      remains of earlier occupations will probably be found when the archaeology of the Desert
      West is better known. Many of the rock shelters and caves in the Desert West were
      submerged by lakes during the late Pleistocene, so most of the early sites may be “open-
      air” sites and thus difﬁcult to ﬁnd and date.
           The ﬁrst well-documented Desert West cultures are represented by lithic artifacts very
      like the Clovis points that appeared in the Great Plains about 12,000 years ago. These
      artifacts have been found at many locations in the Desert West, but almost all were surface
      ﬁnds, with no associated animal or plant remains that could tell us much about either the
      age or the economy of these cultures. Often associated with these points are stone artifacts
      usually interpreted as gravers, borers, and other types of projectile points.
           From about 11,000 to 8,000 years ago, many of the Desert West peoples apparently
      organized their economies around the resources of lakes and marshes, while groups in more
      arid areas probably adopted a more generalized hunting-and-gathering strategy. Remains
      of pole-and-thatch huts have been found in some areas, but the size, location, and contents
      of most sites of this period suggest that for most of the year Desert West peoples lived in
      small bands and followed complex seasonal rounds, exploiting different resources as they
      became available.

      Pleistocene Extinctions
      The spread of human hunting-and-gathering societies over the New World after 12,000
      years ago, at the end of the last glacial period, coincides with the extinction of many animal
                                                                         THE FIRST AMERICANS      221


species, and by about 10,000 years ago, all or most of the mammoths, mastodons, long-
horned bison, tapirs, horses, giant ground sloths, dire wolves, camels, and many other
creatures had disappeared.68 Extinction is, of course, a natural evolutionary development
and can be accounted for by known biological processes. But the number of animal species
that became extinct in the New World and their apparently rapid rate of extinction has led
some to conclude that human hunters forced many New World animals into extinction
shortly after the Pleistocene.69
     But people may have had little or nothing to do with these extinctions. Donald Grayson
and David Meltzer note that only two animals that became extinct—the mammoth and the
mastodon—are known from Clovis kill sites, and of all the Clovis sites, only 14 have this
association between an extinct animal and Clovis artifacts.70 Perhaps even more signiﬁcant,
game species were not the only ones to die out. Grayson has shown that numerous species
of birds also became extinct at this time, and it is difﬁcult to believe that people could have
played any role in this.71 Also, some “big-game” species such as the mastodon lived in the
North American South and East while humans were there and are known to have died out
shortly after the end of the Pleistocene, but their bones have rarely been found in
association with evidence of human activities. Thus, it would seem that at least some larger
animals became extinct without much human assistance. Finally, we might also note that
there is no archaeological evidence that the hunting practices most likely to lead to animal
extinctions, such as drives and jumps, were ever used during the period, some 10,000–8,000
years ago, when most of the larger species became extinct.
     Kelly and Todd present an alternative to the overkill model, arguing that the Clovis
peoples were unlike most known hunter-foragers in that they may have had very little
processing technology for food storage, relying instead on proﬁcient hunting using high-
quality ﬂint bifacial tools, and shifting their range as they exhausted the resources of an
area.72 They suggest that the pattern of Pleistocene extinctions would have been similar even
if people had never entered the New World.
     If we rule out human hunting as the most important factor in these extinctions, what
alternative explanation can we give? Many have been suggested, but none is really very
satisfactory. Clearly, the immediate post-Pleistocene period was one of radical climate
change, and no doubt this was of some importance. Of 31 genera of mammals that became
extinct, however, only 7 had entered the New World during the last 70,000 years; all the
others had managed to adapt to the climatic changes of the previous interglacial periods,
which were fully as dramatic as those after the last glacial retreat. Why did they become
extinct after the last period?
     Some have suggested that New World animals might have been decimated by diseases
introduced from the Old World during one of the later intervals when the Bering land
bridge route was open—a situation reminiscent of the frightful casualties inﬂicted on
aboriginal Americans by smallpox, measles, and other diseases introduced by the
Europeans. Such epidemics, however, usually do not cause species to become extinct: They
decimate local populations over a large area but generally leave small pockets of resistant
individuals who eventually reestablish the species.
     As Grayson has pointed out, it is entirely possible that these Pleistocene extinctions
were the results of climatic changes and human interactions of fairly subtle and presently
unknown dimensions.73 Research directed toward this question will likely need to focus on
each separate animal and its ecological requirements.74
222   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


           Human population densities rose in many parts of the New World, and, as we will see
      in chapter 15, by 7,000 years ago some hunting-and-gathering societies were already in the
      process of domesticating plants and beginning the transition to the agricultural, complex
      cultures of late prehistoric America.


      SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

      Evidence for early sites, such as Monte Verde and Cactus Hill, has lent considerable support
      to the idea that initial peopling of the Americas was via a coastal route from Beringia to at
      least as far south as Washington and Oregon. This process seems to have been underway
      by about 13,500 years ago. Use of the “ice-free” corridor as an entry into what is now the
      United States was simply not feasible before 11,500 years ago because this corridor did not
      come into existence until then. It is only later human groups who were able to use this
      route—perhaps traveling in both directions.
           We know that people were here in substantial numbers by 11,000 years ago, and within
      a few thousand years they had occupied most of the more productive New World areas and
      were beginning to diversify culturally. It seems unlikely that the massive wave of extinctions
      of large animals after about 11,000 years ago had much to do with human activities.
           The initial colonization of the New World may seem to be an epochal development,
      but it was in fact just one aspect of the great radiation of the human species during the late
      Pleistocene. From Australia to South America to Siberia and the Arctic, people colonized
      the world and adapted to its many environments.


      BIBLIOGRAPHY
      Adovasio, J. M. 1993. “The Ones That Will Not Go Away: A Biased View of Pre-Clovis Occupation in the New
                  World.” In From Kostenki to Clovis: Upper Paleolithic Paleo-Indian Adaptations, ed. O. Soffer and N.
                  D. Praslov. New York: Plenum Press.
      Adovasio, J. M., and R. C. Carlisle. 1987. “The First Americans.” Natural History 95(12):20 –27.
      Adovasio, J. M., J. Donahue, and R. Stuckenrath. 1990. “The Meadowcroft Rockshelter Radiocarbon Chronology,
                  1975 –1990.” American Antiquity 55(2):348 –354.
      Adovasio, J. M., J. Donahue, J. D. Gunn, and R. Stuckenrath. 1981. “The Meadowcroft Papers: A Response to
                  Dincauze.” Quarterly Review of Archaeology 2:14 –15.
      Aikens, C. M. 1978. “Archaeology of the Great Basin.” Annual Review of Anthropology 7:71– 87.
      Anderson, D. G. 1995. “Recent Advances in Paleoindian and Archaic Period Research in the Southeastern United
                  States.” Archaeology of Eastern North America 23:145 –176.
      Anderson, D. G., and M. K. Faught. 1998. “The Distribution of Fluted Paleoindian Projectile Points: Update
                  1998.” Archaeology of Eastern North America 26:163 –187.
      ———. 2000. “Paleoindian Artifact Distributions: Evidence and Implications.” Antiquity 74:507–513.
      Anderson, D. G., and J. C. Gillam. 2000. “Paleoindian Colonization of the Americas: Implications from an
                  Examination of Physiography, Demography, and Artifact Distribution.” American Antiquity
                  65(1):43 – 66.
      Arnold, J. E., M. R. Walsh, and S. E. Hollimon. 2004. “The Archaeology of California.” Journal of Archaeological
                  Research 12(1):1–73.
      Aveleyra Arrowyo de Anda, L., and M. Maldonado-Koerdell. 1953. “Assocation of Artifacts with Mammoths in
                  the Valley of Mexico.” American Antiquity 18:332–340.
      Barnosky, A. D., P. L. Koch, R. S. Feranec, S. L. Wing, and A. B. Shabel. 2004. “Assessing the Causes of Late
                  Pleistocene Extinctions on the Continents.” Science 306:70 –75.
      Beaudoin, A. B., M. Wright, and B. Ronaghan. 1996. “Late Quaternary Landscape History and Archaeology in the
                  ‘Ice-Free’ Corridor: Some Recent Results from Alberta.” Quaternary International 32:113 –126.
                                                                                        THE FIRST AMERICANS          223


Beck, C. 1997. “The Terminal Pleistocene/Early Holocene Archaeology of the Great Basin.” Journal of World
             Prehistory 11(2):161–236.
Bettinger, R. L. 1977. “Aboriginal Human Ecology in Owens Valley: Prehistoric Change in the Great Basin.”
             American Antiquity 42:3 –17.
Boldurian, A. T., and J. L. Cotter. 1999. Clovis Revisited: New Perspectives on Paleoindian Adaptations from
             Blackwater Draw, New Mexico. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Museum.
Bonnichsen, R., and K. L. Turnmire, eds. 1991. Clovis: Origins and Adaptations. Corvallis: Center for the Study of
             the First Americans, Oregon State University.
Crawford, M. H. 1993. “DNA Variability and Human Evolution.” Evolutionary Anthropology 2(4):115.
Cwyner, L. C., and J. C. Ritchie. 1980. “Arctic Step-Tundra: A Yukon Perspective.” Science 208:1375 –1377.
DeJarnette, D. L. 1967. “Alabama Pebbletools: The Lively Complex.” Eastern States Archaeological Federation
             Bulletin 26.
Derev’anko, A. P. 1998. The Paleolithic of Siberia: New Discoveries and Interpretations. Urbana: University of
             Illinois Press.
Dikov, N. N. 1977. Monuments in Kamchatka, Chukotka, and the Upper Reaches of the Kolyma: Asia Joining America
             in Ancient Times. Moscow: Nauka.
———. 1987. “On the Road to America.” Natural History 97(1):12–15.
Dixon, E. J. 1993. Quest for the Origins of the First Americans. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
———. 2001. “Human Colonization of the Americas: Timing, Technology and Process.” Quaternary Science
             Reviews 20:277–299.
Dillehay, T. D. 1987. “By the Banks of the Chinchihuapi.” Natural History 96(4):8 –12.
———. 1997. Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile. Volume 2: The Archaeological Context and
             Interpretation. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
Dincauze, D. 1981. “The Meadowcroft Papers.” The Quarterly Review of Archaeology 2:3 – 4.
Fiedel, S. 1999. “Older Than We Thought; Implications of Corrected Dates for Paleoindians.” American Antiquity
             64:95–116.
Figgins, J. D. 1927. “The Antiquity of Man in America.” Natural History 27:229 –239.
Fladmark, K. 1979. “Routes: Alternate Migration Corridors for Early Man in North America.” American Antiquity
             44:55–69.
———. 1986. British Columbian Prehistory. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
———. 1987. “Getting One’s Berings.” Natural History 95(11):8 –19.
Frison, G. C., M. Wilson, and D. J. Wilson. 1976. “Fossil Bison and Artifacts from an Early Altithermal Period
             Arroyo Trap in Wyoming.” American Antiquity 41:28 –57.
Frison, G. C., R. L. Andrews, J. M. Adovasio, R. C. Carlisle, and R. Edgar. 1986. “A Late Paleoindian Animal
             Trapping Net from Northern Wyoming.” American Antiquity 51(2):352–361.
Goebel, T., M. R. Waters, and M. Dikova. 2003. “The Archaeology of Ushki Lake, Kamchatka, and the Pleistocene
             Peopling of the Americas.” Science 301:501–505.
Goebel, T., M. R. Waters, and M. N. Mescherin. 2001. “Masterov Kliuch and the Early Upper Palaeolithic of the
             Transbaikal, Siberia.” Asian Perspectives 39(1–2):47–70.
Grayson, D. K. 1977. “Pleistocene Avifaunas and the Overkill Hypothesis.” Science 195:691– 693.
———. 1987. “Death by Natural Causes.” Natural History 96(5):8 –13.
———. 1993. Desert’s Past: A Natural Prehistory of the Great Basin. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
Grayson, D. K., and D. J. Meltzer. 2003. “A Requiem for North American Overkill.” Journal of Archaeological
             Science 30:585–593.
Greenberg, J. H., C. G. Turner II, and S. L. Zegura. 1986. “The Settlement of the Americas: A Comparison of the
             Linguistic, Dental, and Genetic Evidence.” Current Anthropology 27(5):477– 497.
Guadalupe Sanchez, M. 2001. “A Synopsis of Paleo-Indian Archaeology in Mexico.” Kiva 67(2):119 –136.
Guthrie, R. D. 1980. “The First Americans? The Elusive Arctic Bone Culture.” The Quarterly Review of Archaeology
             1:2.
———. 1984. “Mosaics, Allelochemics, and Nutrients: An Ecological Theory of Late Pleistocene Megafaunal
             Extinctions.” In Quaternary Extinctions: A Prehistoric Revolution, ed. P. S. Martin and R. G. Klein,
             pp. 259–298. Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
Haag, W. G. 1962. “The Bering Strait Land Bridge.” Scientiﬁc American 206:112–123.
Hagelberg, E. 1993. “Ancient DNA Studies.” Evolutionary Anthropology 2(6):199–207.
Hall, R., D. Roy, and D. Boling. 2004. “Pleistocene Migration Routes into the Americas: Human Biological
             Adaptations and Environmental Constraints.” Evolutionary Anthropology 13:132–144.
Haynes, C. V., Jr. 1974. “Elephant Hunting in North America.” New World Prehistory: Readings from Scientiﬁc
             American, ed. E. Zubrow et al. San Francisco: Freeman.
———. 1987. “Geofacts and Fancy.” Natural History 97(2):4 –12.
Haynes, C. V., Jr., R. E. Reanier, W. P. Barse, A. C. Roosevelt, M. Lima da Costa, L. J. Brown, J. E. Douglas,
             M. O’Donnell, E. Quinn, J. Kemp, C. Lopes Machado, M. Imazio da Silveira, J. Feathers, and
224   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                   A. Henderson. 1997. “Dating a Paleoindian Site in the Amazon in Comparison with Clovis Culture.”
                   Science 275:1948 –1952.
      Hopkins, D. M., J. V. Matthews, Jr., C. E. Schweger, and S. B. Young. 1982. Paleoecology of Beringia. New York:
                   Academic Press.
      Jablonski, N. G., ed. 2002. The First Americans: The Pleistocene Colonization of the New World. San Francisco:
                   Memoirs of the California Academy of Sciences, No. 27.
      Jaffe, A. J. 1992. The First Immigrants from Asia: A Population History of the North American Indians. New York:
                   Plenum Press.
      Kelly, R. L., and L. C. Todd. 1988. “Coming into the Country: Early Paleoindian Hunting and Mobility.” American
                   Antiquity 53(2):231–244.
      Larichev, V., U. Khol’ushkin, and I. Laricheva. 1987. “Lower and Middle Paleolithic of Northern Asia:
                   Achievements, Problems, and Perspectives.” Journal of World Prehistory 1(4):415 – 464.
      ———. 1993. “The Upper Paleolithic of Northern Asia: Achievements, Problems, and Perspectives III:
                   Northeastern Siberia and the Russian Far East. Journal of World Prehistory 6(4):441– 476.
      Lively, M. 1965. “The Lively Complex: Announcing a Pebble Tool Industry in Alabama.” Journal of Alabama
                   Archaeology 11:103 –122.
      Lorenz, J. G., and D. G. Smith. 1996. “Distribution of Four Founding mtDNA Haplogroups Among Native North
                   Americans.” American Journal of Physical Anthropology 101:307–323.
      Lyell, C. 1863. Principles of Geology. London: Murray.
      Malouf, D. 1993. Remembering Babylon. New York: Pantheon Books.
      Mandryk, C. A. S., H. Josenhans, D. W. Fedje, and R. W. Mathewes. 2001. “Late Quaternary Paleoenvironments
                   of Northwestern North America: Implications for Inland Versus Coastal Migration Routes.”
                   Quaternary Science Reviews 20:301–314.
      Marks, J. 1995. Human Biodiversity: Genes, Race, and History. Hawthorne, NY: Aldine de Gruyter.
      Martin, P. S., and J. E. Guilday. 1967. “A Bestiary for Pleistocene Biologists.” In Pleistocene Extinctions: The Search
                   for a Cause, ed. P. S. Martin and H. E. Wright, Jr. New Haven: Yale University Press.
      Martin, P. S., and R. Klein, eds. 1984. Quaternary Extinctions: A Prehistoric Revolution. Tucson: University of
                   Arizona Press.
      Martin, P. S., and H. E. Wright, Jr., eds. 1967. Pleistocene Extinctions: The Search for a Cause. New Haven: Yale
                   University Press.
      Mehringer, P., Jr. 1977. “Great Basin Late Quaternary Environments and Chronology.” In Models in Great Basin
                   Prehistory: A Symposium, ed. D. D. Fowler. Desert Research Institute Publications in the Social Sciences
                   12:113–168.
      Meltzer, D. J. 1988. “Late Pleistocene Human Adaptations in Eastern North America.” Journal of World Prehistory
                   2(1):1–52.
      Meltzer, D. J., D. K. Grayson, G. Ardila, A. W. Barker, D. F. Dincauze, C. V. Haynes, F. Mena, L. Núñez, and D.
                   J. Stanford. 1997. “On the Pleistocene Antiquity of Monte Verde, Southern Chile.” American Antiquity
                   62(4):659 – 663.
      Moismann, J. E., and P. S. Martin. 1975. “Simulating Overkill by Paleoindians.” American Scientist 63:304 –313.
      Orquera, L. A. 1987. “Advances in the Archaeology of the Pampa and Patagonia.” Journal of World Prehistory
                   1(4):333 – 413.
      Osborn, G., and K. Bevis. 2001. “Glaciations in the Great Basin of the Western United States.” Quaternary Science
                   Reviews 20(13):1377–1410.
      Oviatt, C. G., D. B. Madsen, and D. N. Schmitt. 2003. “Late Pleistocene and Early Holocene Rivers and Wetlands
                   in the Bonneville Basin of Western North America.” Quaternary Research 60(2): 200–210.
      Pitulko, V. V., P. A. Nikolsky, E. U. Girya, A. E. Basilyan, V. E. Tumskoy, S. A. Koulakov, S. N. Astakhov, E. Y.
                   Pavlova, and M. A. Anisimov. 2004. “The Yana RHS Site: Humans in the Arctic Before the Last Glacial
                   Maximum.” Science 303:52–56.
      Roosevelt, A. C., M. Lima da Costa, C. Lopes Machado, M. Michab, N. Mercier, H. Valladas, J. Feathers, W.
                   Barnett, M. Imazio da Silveira, A. Henderson, J. Sliva, B. Chernoff, D. S. Reese, J. A. Holman, N. Toth,
                   and K. Schick. 1996. “Paleoindian Cave Dwellers in the Amazon: The Peopling of the Americas.”
                   Science 272:373 –384.
      Ruhlen, M. 1987. “Voices from the Past.” Natural History 96(3):6 –10.
      Schmitz, P. E. 1987. “Prehistoric Hunters and Gatherers of Brazil.” Journal of World Prehistory 1(1):53 –126.
      Schurr, T. G. 2000. “Mitochondrial DNA and the Peopling of the New World.” American Scientist 88(3):246 –
                   253.
      Stanford, D., and B. Bradley. 2002. “Ocean Trails and Prairie Paths? Thoughts About Clovis Origins.” In The First
                   Americans: The Pleistocene Colonization of the New World, pp. 255 –271. San Francisco: Memoirs of the
                   California Academy of Sciences, No. 27.
      Steele, D. G., and J. F. Powell. 1993. “Paleobiology of the First Americans.” Evolutionary Anthropology
                   2(4):138 –146.
                                                                                           THE FIRST AMERICANS           225


Stewart, T. D. 1973. The People of America. New York: Scribner’s.
Stone, A. C., and M. Stoneking. 1993. “Ancient DNA from a Pre-Columbian Amarind Population.” American
            Journal of Physical Anthropology 92:463 – 471.
Straus, L. G. 2000. “Solutrean Settlement of North America? A Review of Reality.” American Antiquity 65:219 –
            226.
Tankersley, K. B. 1997. “Variation in the Early Paleoindian Economies of Eastern North America.” American
            Antiquity 63:7–20.
Taylor, R. E., C. V. Haynes, Jr., D. L. Kirner, and J. R. Southon. 1999. “Radiocarbon Analyses of Modern Organics
            at Monte Verde, Chile: No Evidence for a Local Reservoir Effect.” American Antiquity 64:455 – 460.
Torroni, A., T. G. Schurr, M. F. Cabell, M. D. Brown, J. V. Neel, M. Larsen, D. G. Smith, C. M. Vullo, and D. C.
            Wallace. 1994. “Asian Afﬁnities and the Continental Radiation of the Four Founding Native American
            Mitochondrial DNAs.” American Journal of Human Genetics 53:563 –590.
Turner, C. G., II. 1987. “Tell-Tale Teeth.” Natural History 96(1):6 –10.
Vescelius, G. S. 1981. “Early and/or Not-So-Early Man in Peru: Guitarrero Cave Revisited.” Quarterly Review of
            Archaeology 2:8 –13, 19–20.
Wagner, D. P., and J. M. McAvoy. 25,004. “Pedoarchaeology of Cactus Hill, a Sandy Paleoindian Site in
            Southeastern Virginia, U.S.A.” Geoarchaeology: An International Journal 19(4):297–322.
Warren, C., and A. Ranere. 1968. “Outside Danger Cave: A View of Early Men in the Great Basin.” In Early Man
            in Western North America, ed. C. Irwin-Williams. Portales: Eastern New Mexico University Press.
Wheat, J. B. 1972. “The Olsen-Chubbuck Site: A Paleo-Indian Bison Kill.” Washington, DC: Memoirs of the Society
            for American Archaeology, No. 26, pt. 2.
Whitley, D. S., and R. I. Dorn. 1993. “New Perspectives on the Clovis vs. Pre-Clovis Controversy.” American
            Antiquity 58(4):626 – 647.
Yurtsev, B. A. 2001. “The Pleistocene ‘Tundra-Steppe’ and the Productivity Paradox: The Landscape Approach.”
            Quaternary Science Review 20:165–174.
Zegura, S. L. 1987. “Blood Test.” Natural History 96(7):8 –11.



NOTES
 1. Stewart, The People of America, p. 60.
 2. Quoted in Stewart, The People of America, p. 70; it should be noted that Jefferson thought it possible for reverse
    migration from the Americas into Asia and then back again.
 3. Figgins, “The Antiquity of Man in America.”
 4. Haag, “The Bering Strait Land Bridge,” p. 269.
 5. Cwyner and Ritchie, “Arctic Step-Tundra: A Yukon Perspective”; also see Dixon, Quest for the Origins of the
    First Americans.
 6. Yurtsev, “The Pleistocene Tundra-Steppe and the Productivity Paradox: The Landscape Approach.”
 7. Mandryk et al., “Late Quaternary Paleoenvironments in Northwestern North America: Implications for
    Inland vs. Coastal Migration Routes.”
 8. Martin and Wright, Pleistocene Extinctions: The Search for a Cause, pp. 32–33.
 9. Fladmark, “Routes: Alternate Migration Corridors for Early Man in North America”; Dixon, “Human
    Colonization of the Americas: Timing, Technology and Process.”
10. Fladmark, British Columbian Prehistory; idem., “Getting One’s Berings.”
11. One famous example of this is the site of Calico Hills in California. Among the proponents for the great
    antiquity of this site, which was claimed to be at least 30,000 years old, was Louis Leakey. Extensive exam-
    ination of the site’s context, however, has shown that while some of the artifacts are real, they are simply
    deposited on the surface of a very old Pleistocene terrace. In other words, the artifacts are younger than the
    context with which they are associated (Haynes, “Geofacts and Fancy”; Arnold et al., “The Archaeology of
    California,” p. 9).
12. Beaudoin et al., “Late Quaternary Landscape History and Archaeology in the ‘Ice-Free’ Corridor: Some Recent
    Results from Alberta.”
13. Mandryk et al., “Late Quaternary Paleoenvironments of Northwestern North America: Implications for
    Inland Versus Coastal Migration Routes,” pp. 303 –304.
14. Ibid.
15. Ibid., pp. 305–307; see also Fladmark, “Routes: Alternate Migration Corridors for Early Man in the Americas.”
16. Mandryk et al., “Late Quaternary Paleoenvironments of Northwestern North America: Implications for
    Inland Versus Coastal Migration Routes,” pp. 305 –307.
17. Ibid., p. 307.
18. Fladmark, “Routes: Alternate Migration Corridors for Early Man in the Americas,” p. 61.
226   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      19. Anderson and Gilliam, “Paleoindian Colonization of the Americas: Implications from an Examination of
          Physiography, Demography, and Artifact Distribution.”
      20. Dixon, “Human Colonization of the Americas: Timing, Technology and Process.”
      21. “Late Quaternary Paleoenvironments of Northwestern North America: Implications for Inland Versus
          Coastal Migration Routes,” p. 307.
      22. This idea was initially available and made widely public only in news stories, and therefore was not subject to
          peer review typical of professional journal publication (Straus, “Solutrean Settlement of North America? A
          Review of Reality,” p. 219). Since then, one paper by Stanford and Bradley (“Ocean Trails and Prairie Paths?
          Thoughts About Clovis Origins”) has been published in an edited volume.
      23. Stanford and Bradley, “Ocean Trails and Prairie Paths? Thoughts About Clovis Origins,” pp. 264 –265.
      24. A haplogroup is an mtDNA lineage that shares the same genetic variants; see Schurr, “Mitochondrial DNA
          and the Peopling of the New World.”
      25. Straus, “Solutrean Settlement of North America? A Review of Reality.”
      26. Dates given here are uncalibrated years ago; see Fiedel, “Older Than We Thought: Implications of Corrected
          Dates for Paleoindians,” for calibrated dates for Clovis and other Paleoindian traditions.
      27. Straus, “Solutrean Settlement of North America? A Review of Reality,” p. 221.
      28. “Mitochondrial DNA and the Peopling of the New World,” p. 253.
      29. Goebel et al., “Masterov Kliuch and the Early Upper Palaeolithic of the Transbaikal, Siberia”; Pitulko et al.,
          “The Yana RHS Site: Humans in the Arctic Before the Last Glacial Maximum.”
      30. Schurr, “Mitochondrial DNA and the Peopling of the New World.”
      31. Marks, Human Biodiversity: Genes, Race, and History.
      32. Turner, “Tell-Tale Teeth.”
      33. Turner, “Tell-Tale Teeth”; Greenberg et al., “The Settlement of the Americas: A Comparison of the Linguistic,
          Dental, and Genetic Evidence,” p. 484.
      34. Steele and Powell, “Paleobiology of the First Americans.”
      35. Crawford, “DNA Variability and Human Evolution”; Schurr, “Mitochondrial DNA and the Peopling of the
          New World.”
      36. Hall et al., “Pleistocene Migration Routes into the Americas: Human Biological Adaptations and
          Environmental Constraints”; Schurr, “Mitochondrial DNA and the Peopling of the New World.”
      37. Greenberg et al., “The Settlement of the Americas: A Comparison of the Linguistic, Dental, and Genetic
          Evidence.” Although Greenberg’s linguistic analysis was originally considered controversial, genetic evidence
          has provided some support for the later migration of the Na-Dene speakers (see Torroni et al., “Asian
          Afﬁnities and Continental Radiation of the Four Founding Native American mtDNAs”). Unlike Greenberg’s
          notion of three migration waves, however, many scholars believe that the picture is far more complex, with
          multiple waves of migrants into the New World.
      38. Ruhlen, “Voices from the Past.”
      39. See, for example, Larichev et al., “The Upper Paleolithic of Northern Asia: Achievements, Problems, and
          Perspectives III: Northeastern Siberia and the Russian Far East”; Derev’anko, The Paleolithic of Siberia: New
          Discoveries and Interpretations.
      40. Mandryk et al., “Late Quaternary Paleoenvironments of Northwestern North America: Implications for
          Inland Versus Coastal Migration Routes,” p. 310.
      41. Haynes, “Geofacts and Fancy,” p. 12.
      42. Ibid.
      43. Goebel et al., “The Archaeology of Ushki Lake, Kamchatka, and the Pleistocene Peopling of the Americas.”
          Radiocarbon dates in the text are given in uncalibrated radiocarbon years; in articles such as Goebel et al.,
          these ages are expressed in calibrated radiocarbon ages, in this case, to about 13,000 years ago for the earliest
          occupation at Ushki Lake.
      44. Dikov, “On the Road to America,” p. 15.
      45. Dixon, “Human Colonization of the Americas: Timing, Technology and Process,” p. 283.
      46. Ibid., p. 284.
      47. Dillehay, “By the Banks of the Chinchihuapi”; Meltzer et al., “On the Pleistocene Antiquity of Monte Verde,
          Southern Chile.”
      48. Haynes et al., “Dating a Paleoindian Site in the Amazon in Comparison with Clovis Culture.”
      49. Roosevelt et al., “Paleoindian Cave Dwellers in the Amazon: The Peopling of the Americas.”
      50. Other fruits come from trees such as the achuá, the muruci da mata, and the apiranga (ibid., p. 379).
      51. Dincauze, “The Meadowcroft Papers”; cf. Adovasio et al., “The Meadowcroft Papers: A Response to
          Dincauze.”
      52. Adovasio and Carlisle, “Pennsylvania Pioneers.”
      53. Wagner and McAvoy, “Pedoarchaeology of Cactus Hill, a Sandy Paleoindian Site in Southeastern Virginia,
          U.S.A.”
      54. Ibid., p. 297.
                                                                                         THE FIRST AMERICANS           227


55. Whitley and Dorn, “New Perspectives on the Clovis vs. Pre-Clovis Controversy.”
56. Fiedel, “Older Than We Thought: Implications of Corrected Dates for Paleoindians.”
57. Ibid., p. 110.
58. Meltzer, “Late Pleistocene Human Adaptations in Eastern North America.”
59. Ibid., p. 43.
60. “Human Colonization of the Americas: Timing, Technology and Process,” p. 294.
61. Guadalupe Sanchez, “A Synopsis of Paleo-Indian Archaeology in Mexico.”
62. Ibid., p. 129.
63. Aveleyra Arroyo de Anda and Maldonado-Koerdell, “Association of Artifacts with Mammoths in the Valley
    of Mexico.”
64. Anderson and Faught, “The Distribution of Fluted Paleoindian Projectile Points: Update 1998”; Anderson,
    “Recent Advances in Paleoindian and Archaic Period Research in the Southeastern United States.”
65. Hopkins et al., Paleoecology of Beringia.
66. Wheat, “The Olsen-Chubbuck Site: A Paleo-Indian Bison Kill.”
67. For surveys of Desert West archaeology, see Grayson, Desert’s Past: A Natural Prehistory of the Great Basin;
    Beck, “The Terminal Pleistocene/Early Holocene Archaeology of the Great Basin.”
68. Interestingly, the area around Lake Texcoco in Mexico may have been a refugia for at least some of these
    Pleistocene animals, as late types of Paleoindian points (post-11,000 years ago) are associated with now extinct
    mammoth and horses at these sites (Guadalupe Sanchez, “A Synopsis of Paleo-Indian Archaeology in
    Mexico,” pp. 129–130).
69. Martin and Wright, Pleistocene Extinctions; Haynes, “Elephant Hunting in North America”; Moismann and
    Martin, “Simulating Overkill by Paleoindians”; Martin and Klein, Quaternary Extinctions. A Prehistoric
    Revolution.
70. “A Requiem for North American Overkill,” p. 588.
71. Grayson, “Pleistocene Avifaunas and the Overkill Hypothesis.”
72. Kelly and Todd, “Coming into the Country: Early Paleoindian Hunting and Mobility.”
73. Grayson, “Death by Natural Causes.”
74. Grayson and Meltzer, “A Requiem for North American Overkill,” p. 591.
6
The Origins of Agriculture

    The greatest events come to pass without any
    design; chance makes blunders good. . . . The
    important events of the world are not
    deliberately brought about: they occur.
    George C. Lichtenberg




    A          n alien visitor to earth might understandably conclude that humans naturally and
               instinctively cultivate plants, for he, she, or it would see that almost every human
    residence and community, from the meanest third world hovel to the lush parks of the
    world’s richest metropolises, are adorned with ﬂowers and dependent for their very
    existence on the farming of plants. It would be manifestly obvious to such a visitor that
    human civilizations were largely the product of human abilities to extract energy from
    plants.
          The systematic cultivation of plants to create an artiﬁcial food supply, however, has
    never been an instinctive part of the human repertoire. In fact, it is a comparatively recent
    human activity, practiced for far less than 1 percent of the time our genus has existed.
    And it involved a radical alteration in the way people lived. The several million years
    separating the ﬁrst tool-using hominins of Africa and the French cave artists of just
    20,000 years ago encompassed a period of momentous change. Human brain size trebled,
    an impressive array of specialized tools replaced the crude stone implements of our
    Paleolithic forefathers, and people colonized most of the world. In one important respect,
    however, all Pleistocene societies, from the barely human hominins of two million years
    ago to the creative hunter-foragers of just 10,000 years ago, were alike: They made their
    living by gathering and hunting their food, not by producing it, in the sense that they
    did not “farm.”
          We can look back, perhaps even with a bit of pride, at the adaptability and sheer
    resilience of our ancient hunting-gathering forebears. Their generations spanned millions
    of years, in every kind of environment, from the high Arctic to the jungles of the Amazon.
    They survived and came to inhabit much of the world by means of a profound knowledge
    of environments, a sophisticated yet still portable technology, and ﬂexible small-group
    social structures that efﬁciently scaled human groups to available resources. As Robert Kelly
    noted, “There are no Gardens of Eden on earth, no single locales, that can provide for all
    human needs. Mobility . . . was the ﬁrst means humans used to overcome this problem.”1

                                                    228
                                                                                   THE ORIGINS OF AGRICULTURE          229


                     OLD WORLD                                                             NEW WORLD


        3,600 years ago     Appearance of domesticated soybeans
                1600 B.C.   in north China
                                                                              4,200 years ago     Domestication of potatoes in
                                                                                      2200 B.C.   South America
      6–5,000 years ago     Food-producing economies reach northern
             4–3000 B.C.    Europe
                                                                              5,500 years ago     Domestication of llamas and
                                                                                      3500 B.C.   guinea pigs in South America
        8,000 years ago     Beginning of spread of food-producing
                6000 B.C.   economies from the Near East into Europe
                                                                              5,500 years ago     Domestication of maize in
                                                                                      3500 B.C.   Mexico/Mesoamerica
        8,000 years ago     Appearance of domesticated pig in the
                6000 B.C.   northern Fertile Crescent
                                                                            6–5,000 years ago     Domestication of beans in
                                                                                    4–3000 B.C.   Mexico/Mesoamerica
        8,500 years ago     Appearance of domesticated millet in
                6500 B.C.   north China
                                                                              7,700 years ago     Domestication of beans in
                                                                                      5700 B.C.   South America
      9–8,000 years ago     Appearance of domesticated rice in
             7–6000 B.C.    south-central China
                                                                       10,700–9,800 years ago     Domestication of squash in
                                                                                8700–7800 B.C.    Mexico
        9,000 years ago     Appearance of domesticated cattle in
                7000 B.C.   the northern Fertile Crescent


     10–8,000 years ago     Appearance of domesticated goats and
             8–6000 B.C.    sheep in the eastern Fertile Crescent


 10,300–9300 years ago      Appearance of domesticated wheat in
         8300–7300 B.C.     the western Fertile Crescent


 10,500–7600 years ago      Early Neolithic food-producing economies
         8500–5600 B.C.

       12,000 years ago     Domestication of the dog
               10000 B.C.

12,500–10,500 years ago     Natufian culture
        10500–8500 B.C.

14,500–12,500 years ago     Geometric Kebaran culture
        12500–10500 B.C.

    22–14,500 years ago     Kebaran culture
           20–12500 B.C.

       22,000 years ago     Appearance of Epipaleolithic
              20000 B.C.    (post-Paleolithic) hunter-gatherers
230   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      Even today, a few hunter-gatherer societies persist on the margins of modern states. But
      the regions of the world where hunting-gathering was the primary basis of human life began
      to contract rapidly, soon after the ﬁrst farmers appeared. Just after 10,000 years ago, people
      in several widely separated areas of the world began to domesticate a few plant and animal
      species. At about the same time they built villages, began living in them year-round, and
      began to subsist mainly on plants they cultivated and animals they kept. In most environ-
      ments these agricultural economies have been able to produce much greater amounts of
      food than hunting and gathering could. Today, hunter-gatherers exist only in the Amazon
      Basin, the Arctic, and the few other places where hunting-gathering is still (or until recently
      was) more feasible than agriculture, and even in these few areas hunter-gatherers depend
      in part on their neighbors’ agricultural economies.
            Two curious facts emerge when we look at the history of human agriculture: First, all
      of the largest and most complex civilizations throughout history have been based on the
      cultivation of only a few genera—in fact, just six plant genera—wheat, barley, millet, rice,
      maize, and potatoes. Other plants, such as sorghum, beans, yams, taro, and thousands
      more, have been critical to the survival of many peoples, and domesticated animals have
      also been important sources of calories and power, but the six plant genera listed here have
      been the main caloric engines of “civilizations.” Second, one of the particularly striking
      characteristics of the “agricultural revolution” is that not only was it rapid and widespread,
      but it also happened independently in different parts of the world at about the same time.
      For millions of years our ancestors subsisted solely on the proceeds of hunting and
      gathering, yet within just a few thousand years, between about 10,000 and 3,500 years ago,
      people all over the world began growing crops and establishing agricultural economies
      based on, for example, potatoes in the Andes, maize in Mexico, wheat and barley in
      Southwest Asia, rice in China, and many other crops in many other places.
            The fact that very few species provide most of the world’s food, and that plants and
      animals were domesticated at about the same time at different places in the world, raises
      important questions. Is there something entirely special, for example, about these particular
      plants that they became the staples of people around the world, or do they represent chance
      associations between people and particular plant species at speciﬁc times? And why did
      people make the transition to a life based on these and other plants? Agriculture has had
      such tremendous importance in human affairs that one is tempted to the logical fallacy of
      assuming that the factors that ﬁrst produced agricultural economies must be equally
      momentous. They may have been; at this point we do not know. Perhaps only slight
      changes in climate, population density, or technology set off the “agricultural revolution.”
      We know approximately where and when the most important domesticates ﬁrst appeared
      but, as we shall see, the reasons why they appeared where they did and when they did are
      still not fully understood. Almost all general explanations of agricultural origins, as we shall
      see, appeal to the same three basic factors: climate changes, rising population densities, and
      improving technologies. Yet combining these factors into a compelling explanation of all
      the world’s agricultural origins remains difﬁcult.
            In this chapter we review some of the evidence of early domestication and farming and
      consider more abstract questions concerning why people become farmers after so many
      long years of hunting-foraging, why agriculture appeared in many different places in the
      world at about the same time, and how agricultural economies came to dominate the
      world.2
                                                                  THE ORIGINS OF AGRICULTURE       231


AGRICULTURE, DOMESTICATION, AND SEDENTARY
COMMUNITIES

Discussions of agricultural origins involve many specialized terms, and some of these are
rather vague and descriptive. The difference between a “crop” and a “weed,” for example,
is in a sense a cultural construct rather than a precise botanical concept. Luther Burbank,
the pioneering American botanist, deﬁned a weed as a plant whose uses to humanity
simply had not yet been discovered. Geneticists Blumler and Byrne deﬁne a weed as “an
uncultivated plant taxon that beneﬁts from human impacts or ‘disturbance’”;3 but they
note that it also has an economic deﬁnition in the sense of weeds as plants that reduce
crop yields. Even the species names given to speciﬁc plants and animals, as well as cultural
terms such as “farming” and “domesticated,” are attempts to impose static categories on a
dynamic and multidimensional underlying variability. The easy “opposites,” too, of
“hunter-forager”/“agriculturalist” and “wild”/“domesticated” camouﬂage underlying
continuous variability.4
     Thus, some precision in terminology is useful. The key concept in the notion of
agriculture involves human efforts to modify the environments of plants and animals to
increase their productivity and usefulness.5 By weeding, hoeing, watering, fashioning
scarecrows, penning pigs, and a thousand other farming activities, people over the
millennia have sought to get more food out of their labors. But hunter-gatherers also
modify the environments of plants and animals. Some of them, for example, set ﬁres to
open up habitats for certain plants and animals; others, simply by collecting and eating wild
species, modify the environments of others and have an effect on these gene pools.
Agriculture, however, usually involves systematic and purposeful modiﬁcation of plant and
animal environments with the goal of increasing productivity. This deﬁnition of agricul-
ture, like that of domestication, is relative. At the one extreme are the simple efforts a group
might make to suppress weeds near a stand of wild wheat; at the other are contemporary
agri-businesses where crops are grown on precisely leveled ﬁelds and treated with pesticides
and fertilizers and where chickens live out unremarkable lives in cages until a computer
determines that their ratio of food-consumption and growth has reached a critical—and
fatal—value.
     The term cultivation is often used in lieu of, or in combination with, the concept of
agriculture. Blumler and Byrne deﬁne cultivation as the “growing of plants from seeds,
bulbs, shoots, and so on.”6 They note that cultivated plants are not always domesticated
and that cultivation may have long preceded domestication in some cases.
     The essence of domestication in many deﬁnitions is mutualism. David Rindos, for
example, has deﬁned domestication as a “coevolutionary process in which any given taxon
diverges from an original gene pool and establishes a symbiotic protection and dispersal
relationship with the animal feeding upon it.”7 When people domesticate plants and
animals, they do so by active interference in the life cycles of these species in such a way
that subsequent generations of these organisms are in more intimate association with, and
often of more use to, people. By interfering in these life cycles, people have produced plants
and animals that are less “ﬁt,” in some ways, than their undomesticated relatives:
Domesticated maize, for example, no longer has an effective natural mechanism for seed
dispersal, because the seeds are all clustered on a cob that, without human intervention,
232   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      usually remains tightly attached to the plant. Similarly, a variety of sheep in Southwest
      Asia has been selectively bred over the last several thousand years so that its tail is a 5-
      to 8-pound mass of fat, making it necessary, it is said, for people to help some of these
      animals mate.
           In general, humans have intruded in the natural cycles in that they have altered these
      plants’ dormancy cycles, dispersal mechanisms, and physical and chemical defenses against
      the animals that eat them.8 People have altered animal genera in ways usually directed at
      exaggerating characteristics that are useful to humans, such as meat, milk production,
      ﬂeece, docility, traction power, environmental tolerance, and so forth. People have focused
      much of their domestication efforts on animals with genetically based aptitude for
      imprinting dominance hierarchies, such as sheep, cattle, and geese. By intruding on these
      hierarchical impulses, people have produced the docility that makes animal exploitation
      simple and efﬁcient.
           But the kinds of mutualistic relationships we think of as domestication and agriculture
      are not unique to humans and their plant and animal food, nor do they depend on human
      intellect. As Rindos notes, species of African cultivator ants “farm” fungi in a very real sense.
      They prepare special beds of plant debris and excrement, in special chambers in the ant
      nest. The ants are meticulous about growth conditions within the chamber; numerous
      ventilation passages are dug, and these are opened or closed to regulate both temperature
      and humidity. To construct the beds, the ants chew the substrate material to make a pulpy
      mass and deposit it in layers in the chamber. The bed is then planted with propagules from
      previously maintained beds. Constant care is given the beds. The ants remove alien fungi
      and add anal and salivary secretions, which apparently have a positive effect on the growth
      of the fungi. These cultivation activities encourage the production, by the fungus, of small
      whitish round bodies, the so-called kohlrabi structures. These structures are the principal
      food of the ant colony.9
            One does not see tiny scarecrows or silos among these ants, but Rindos’s point is well
      taken: In terms of their ecological relationship with the sustaining species, ants do not differ
      signiﬁcantly from us. And if this is true, the import of his observation is obvious: What we
      consider the uniquely human activities of domestication and agriculture are in fact
      somewhat common ecological relationships that can be “ﬁxed” by natural selection without
      regard to the intelligence or volition of the organism involved. In fact, “domestication” is
      to some extent a matter of perspective: If one looks at domestication from the cereals’ point
      of view, for example, people have proved to be excellent devices for cereals to conquer
      the world. Wheat, which in its undomesticated forms was limited to small areas of the
      Middle East, has managed to extend its range from South America to central Russia, all by
      “domesticating” humans in such a way that they became dependent on it. As much as we
      are the creators of modern plant and animal hybrid domesticates, then, we are their cre-
      ation; we are locked together in coevolutionary embrace. In these transitions to agriculture
      and sedentary life we see a subtle evolutionary dynamic in which people were physically
      changed as they physically changed the plants and animals on which they depended.10
      Agricultural economies allowed the evolution of epidemic diseases such as cholera that
      “selected out” untold millions of people with genetic susceptibilities to these diseases.
      Agricultural diets generally increase periodontal and dental diseases and relax selection for
      robust dentition, so that the spread of agriculture across the world has resulted in a gradual
      reduction in human teeth size and strength—and in dental health.
                                                                     THE ORIGINS OF AGRICULTURE           233


      This issue of the importance of human intentions remains a major point of contention
in studies of agricultural origins. We live in an age in which farmers are constantly and
intentionally manipulating plants and animals in order to effect desired changes in them,
so it is not surprising that some scholars think this same intentionality was a critical factor
in agricultural origins.11 People may have begun to domesticate many plant and animal
genera not out of the desire or intention of making these plants more useful to people, but
rather through making relatively minor and unintentional changes in the way they
exploited them. Any plant or animal species regularly eaten or used by people will reﬂect
this relationship in its genetic characteristics, and thus all through the Pleistocene hunters
and gatherers had some effect on the genetic makeup of various plant and animal species.
But the low population densities and mobile way of life of the period before about 10,000
years ago kept people from exploiting plant and animal populations with sufﬁcient
intensity to perpetuate the kinds of mutations represented by contemporary maize and
fat-tailed sheep.
      Domestication seems to have been in most cases a relatively long-term process, not
something that an occasional genius invented. As discussed later, for example, it took
several thousand years to change the wild ancestor of maize into something that looks like
an ear of corn. And domestication has usually taken place as a long-term process in which
the physical characteristics of plant and animal species change as these species’ relationships
to their human consumers change. Some scholars believe that domestication of wheat
and other plants may have happened over only a few years, while others contend that it
took centuries (Figure 6.1).
And human intentions to
domesticate plants and animals
are neither archaeologically
retrievable nor logically import-
ant to this notion of dom-
estication. As Rindos points
out: “People could not create
the variation [in plants and
animals] that would permit
domestication, they could only
select; and they could not have
known how important the
products of their selection
would become.”12 According
to this point of view, human
intentions and goal-oriented
behavior, while important, are
not archaeologically retriev-
able and in most cases must be
assumed to be constants: That         FIGURE 6.1 The world was forever changed by mutualistic relationships that
is, there is no reason to believe     evolved between people and large seeded grasses sometime before about 15,000 years
that agriculture appeared in          ago. Agriculture was only the last stage of the evolution of these relationships, but
one place and not another             the large and reliable harvests made possible by the domestication of wheat and
because in the latter case people     barley were the basis on which ancient and modern civilizations evolved.
234   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      just did not successfully analyze the situation and solve the problems of adaptation. And at
      another level, what people thought they were doing in making the adaptations that led
      to domestication and agriculture does not matter; it is what they actually did, in the sense
      of eating this or that kind of food, moving from one area to another seasonally, and so
      on, that is important. But other scholars disagree and see the origins of domesticates
      as processes in which human intentions “speeded-up” the process almost from the
      beginning.13
           As noted earlier, another issue in studying the problem of agricultural origins is
      determining why people chose the particular genera they did to domesticate and cultivate.
      We will examine this question later in this chapter with regard to the economic equations
      in speciﬁc areas of the world where agriculture appeared independently, such as Southwest
      Asia. But whatever the importance of human intentionality in producing agricultural
      economies, it is important to recognize that human food and taste “preferences” seem to
      have played little role in agricultural origins. In fact, food preferences and other cultural
      aspects of the diverse human interactions with the foods they eat are a fascinating example
      of the blend of economic forces and ideologies that govern human actions. One must
      recognize, for example, that maggoty meat, fresh cow blood, rotted ﬁsh-heads, charred
      goat-intestines, tuna noodle casserole, sheep eyes, pot roasts simmered in packaged onion
      soup—all these are today savored with as much gusto as anything from the restaurants of
      Milan or Paris. Economic conditions usually are the major determinants of food
      preferences and of food production. The reason local supermarkets offer special prices on
      New Zealand lamb and not Labrador retrievers has more to do with the economics of
      raising these animals (and the economic conditions of the ancient societies in which they
      were ﬁrst domesticated) and with the accidents of cultural ideologies than with the foods’
      intrinsic tastes. There are few more convincing demonstrations that food preferences are
      primarily “styles” and cultural constructs, rather than reﬂections of the inherent subtleties
      and complexities of tastes and textures, than the crowds of people of all nations who queue
      for hamburgers at a McDonald’s in Rome (near the Spanish Steps), less than 100 m from
      the competitively priced 37-item antipasto buffet at the Ristorante a la Rampa.
           As we shall see later, a complex set of factors seems to have determined why speciﬁc
      genera became domesticated and cultivated while others did not. In terms of historical
      impact, one of the most important things about agriculture is that it produces not just great
      amounts of food, it supplies reliable and predictable amounts of food, and thereby allows
      population densities to rise and people in many areas of the world to live year-round in the
      same place—in sedentary communities. Such communities probably ﬁrst appeared in
      Southwest Asia as much as 1,000 years before domesticated wheat or barley, while in
      Mesoamerica at least ﬁve plant species were in the process of domestication several
      thousand years before the ﬁrst sedentary or agricultural communities appeared. But in both
      cases the transition to agriculture provided strong pressures for permanent residence in one
      particular place.
           Sedentary life usually involves the construction of permanent structures. For a million
      years and more before agriculture, people built crude shelters and lived in caves, but in
      almost every case they moved to other camps for part of the year because they had to go to
      where their food was, and this changed continually as animals migrated, wild plants
      changed with the seasons, and so forth. In many areas of the world, people probably had
      to break up into seasonal groups and spend part of the year away from their kinfolk to thin
                                                                  THE ORIGINS OF AGRICULTURE       235


their population density to a level that could be supported in the leanest seasons of the year.
By 10,000 years ago, human societies were tied together by trade networks and, probably,
by social bonds that extended beyond the group that lived together for most of the year.
Traditionally, archaeologists have imagined the people of this period as egalitarian and
organized only in simple forms of bands and tribes. But we don’t really know if this was
true. As we shall see in later chapters, wherever there is plentiful and reliable food and other
resources, our ancestors have responded in one way, and one way only: They have social
systems that exaggerate differences among themselves and among their social groups in
access to wealth, power, and prestige.
     When our ancestors began living year-round in the same villages, a complex set of
relationships between people, plants, and animals was established that had never existed
before. Village life has many effects on the human community. Compared to hunting-
foraging societies, village communities usually have higher fertility rates, higher incidences
of epidemic diseases, and a basic economic unit based on the family, not the group. Village
life also allows the accumulation of material goods. There is a tremendous “inertia” in
village agriculture, once it is established. In only a few environments can people move easily
from agricultural to other kinds of economies, for the essence of agriculture is that one
concentrates one’s energies on a very limited number of species that are very reliable. In
most agricultural economies, activities that conﬂict with agricultural production are soon
abandoned. In Denmark, for example, analysis of human bone composition shows that in
one area along the ocean shore, people before 4,000 b.c. lived mainly on marine resources,
but after that time they subsisted almost entirely on agricultural products, even though
their villages were within a few hundred meters of the rich ﬁsh and other resources of
the shore.14
      The change to village life was a radical shift in the way people dealt with each other
and the world, and it produced a completely new social fabric. Here, too, it is probably a
mistake to think of these ﬁrst villagers in terms of consciously trying to identify all problems
they encountered in making a living in this new setting and organizing themselves socially,
or their developing a wide range of new behaviors to meet these new needs. People cannot
always be considered entirely rational consumers who put together economies that are
optimally efﬁcient, and we cannot explain agricultural origins simply as the natural
outcome of people who search through all the possibilities and put together the best
economy based on their technology. But everything cultural is subjected to natural selection
to some extent, and so we must consider agriculture to be the outcome, at least in part, of
behaviors that “worked.”


HYPOTHESES ABOUT THE ORIGINS OF DOMESTICATION,
AGRICULTURE, AND SEDENTARY COMMUNITIES

    Cursed is the ground for thy sake,
    in sorrow shalt thou eat of it all the days of thy life,
    Thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth to thee
    In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread.
                                          Genesis 3:17–18
236   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


           To begin with, we can dismiss the idea that people domesticated plants and animals
      because someone came from outer space and taught them how to do it, or because someone
      in ancient Syria had a brilliant idea and it spread around the world, or because people
      simply got sick of chasing animals and wanted an easier way to live.
           The roughly contemporary appearance of a vast variety of domesticates, from palm
      trees to potatoes, across the same approximate latitudes around the world, and the several
      millennia it took for hunting and gathering to give way to farming in most areas, make any
      of these scenarios improbable. And, although there is great variability, hunters and
      gatherers tend to have more leisure time than primitive agriculturists—farming is hard
      work, as even the suburban gardener knows full well. Moreover, hunters-foragers do not
      seem to spend their time in continual efforts to improve their lot—or designing cathedrals
      or composing string quartets. Studies of these groups around the world show that they
      spend almost all of their spare time talking or sleeping—skills, as Sharp notes, that most of
      them have already thoroughly perfected.15
           Even so, the idea that people became farmers because it was an easier way of life than
      hunting-foraging seems so plausible—particularly to most Westerners—that it is hard to
      discredit this myth.
           The worldwide origins of agriculture constitute a complex evolutionary and historical
      event, and thus cannot be expected to be analyzable in mechanical terms: That is,
      evolutionary sequences are by deﬁnition inherently unpredictable in terms of their
      speciﬁcs. After all, no one could have predicted the evolution of tigers—or of us—from the
      world’s fauna of 100 million years ago. Nothing that has a history in which natural selection
      has had an effect can be explained in mechanical deterministic terms like those of physics.
           But the origins of agriculture tempt one to look at it in somewhat mechanical and
      deterministic terms because it happened independently, in several places in the Old and
      New Worlds alike, and at about the same time and in similar environments. Anyone
      considering the problem of agricultural origins has to be impressed by three major
      categories of evidence; ﬁrst, we know that world climates changed greatly just before
      domestication and agriculture ﬁrst appeared in the Old World; second, world population
      densities had also been increasing for hundreds of thousands of years before agricultural
      origins; and third, human technology seems to have been improving in many ways over the
      whole history of our genus. Not surprisingly, climate change and population growth are
      included in most models of agricultural origins, and there is some suggestion in many
      hypotheses that the accumulation of knowledge about tool-making was an important
      element in the transition to agriculture.


      Early Hypotheses About Agricultural Origins
      Among the ﬁrst hypotheses about agricultural origins was the so-called Oasis Hypothesis,
      an idea associated with the Australian archaeologist V. Gordon Childe,16 who attempted to
      explain the origins of agriculture in terms of the climate changes associated with the end
      of the Pleistocene some 10,000 years ago. Childe and other advocates of this idea suggested
      that as the world became warmer and drier, people, animals, and plants would be forced
      into close conjunction and human communities would be under stress to ﬁnd new food
      sources, and out of this propinquity and need would arise animal domestication and then
      farming.17
                                                              THE ORIGINS OF AGRICULTURE       237


      Doubts about the accuracy of the Oasis Hypothesis appeared when it was
demonstrated that the wild ancestors of wheat and barley did not grow in the areas where
post-Pleistocene oases were thought to have been concentrated, and by evidence that
deserts and oases had not formed in most of Southwest and Central Asia at the time
domestication began. But more recently, various scholars have reassessed the evidence and
ﬁnd support for the general idea that post-Pleistocene changes in patterns of rainfall and
other climatic factors did have a role in the origins of agriculture (see later).18
      Another early idea about agricultural origins has been termed the Natural Habitat
Hypothesis. Harold Peake and Herbert Fleure suggested in 1926 that the ﬁrst domesticates
and agriculturalists would have appeared in the upper valley of the Euphrates River because
they knew that this is the “natural habitat” of wild species of wheat and barley. In the early
1950s Robert Braidwood of the University of Chicago organized a series of excavations to
evaluate post-Pleistocene climatic changes and to look for early farming communities. His
expeditions were among the ﬁrst to include specialists in botany, geology, and zoology as
well as archaeology, and this multidisciplinary approach has proven to be a highly
successful research strategy. This work redeﬁned the natural zone of plants to include many
areas outside the upper Euphrates Valley.
      Braidwood’s excavations at Jarmo, in the hill country of northern Iraq, revealed an
agricultural settlement dating to about 6500 b.c.—much earlier than had been found
elsewhere.19 Jarmo was a settlement of a few dozen mud-walled huts inhabited by people
who relied partly on wild plants and animals, such as snails, pistachios, and acorns, but
who also seem to have been involved in herding domesticated goats and, perhaps, sheep
(Figure 6.2). Braidwood also found at Jarmo the remains of partially domesticated wheat
in association with grinding stones, sickle blades, and storage pits. Braidwood suggested
that the cumulative effects of generations of interaction between people, plants, and
animals in these natural habitat zones led to agriculture.
      Braidwood’s research into agricultural origins was one of
the few systematic investigations into this problem at the time,
and he provided crucial evidence for the next stage of research
on this problem—trying to understand the precise mechanisms
by which agriculture appeared. Evidence that some of the
earliest agricultural communities had appeared, not in the
middle of the natural habitat, but on the margins or outside of
it20 raised the possibility that agriculture was not just a natural
result of people exploiting wild stands of wheat and barley.
      Also, a series of experiments was performed by botanist
Jack Harlan in eastern Anatolia in 1966 in which, using a
crude sickle made with ﬂint blades set in a wooden handle, he
was able to harvest wild emmer wheat at the rate of about
6.25 pounds per hour (Figure 6.3).21 A family of four or ﬁve
could probably have collected a year’s supply of grain with
only a few weeks’ labor, and this would seem to suggest that
the people who lived in the natural habitat of wheat and
barley had perhaps the least incentive to domesticate and             FIGURE 6.2 Aerial view of excavations at
farm it because they could collect more than enough from              Jarmo, Iraq, an important early farming
wild stands.                                                          settlement.
           238       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                          Population growth has
                                                                                     also been an important element
                                                                                     in most accounts of agricul-
                                                                                     tural origins. Mark Cohen, for
                                                                                     example, argues that “the nearly
                                                                                     simultaneous adoption of agri-
                                                                                     cultural economies throughout
                                                                                     the world could only be ac-
                                                                                     counted for by assuming that
                                                                                     hunting and gathering popula-
                                                                                     tions had saturated the world
                                                                                     approximately 10,000 years
                                                                                     ago and had exhausted all pos-
                                                                                     sible (or palatable) strategies
                                                                                     for increasing their food supply
                                                                                     within the constraints of the
                                                                                     hunting-gathering life-style.
                                                                                     The only possible reaction to
FIGURE 6.3 Prehistoric Near Eastern hunter-gatherers ﬁrst made use of seeds
from wild grass stands, such as those seen in this photograph.
                                                                                     further growth in population,
                                                                                     worldwide, was to begin arti-
                                                                                     ﬁcial augmentation of the food
                                                                                     supply.”22
                           A major problem in assessing any hypothesis based on ancient population densities is
                      the difﬁculty of estimating changes in these densities with any precision using archaeological
                      data. One has to locate all the relevant archaeological sites (of which many are certain to
                      have been destroyed or not found), then estimate the numbers of people at each site, and
                      then develop a chronology for these sites that is ﬁne enough to reconstruct changes over
                      fairly short periods of time. Consequently, most population estimates based on
                      archaeological data must be considered extremely speculative; and the relationship between
                      agriculture and demographic change remains complex and not well understood.
                           Marvin Harris has formulated an explanation of agricultural origins that resembles
                      Cohen’s in its stress on increasing human populations, declining worldwide availability of
                      large game animals, and the competition among groups for survival.23 In addition, Harris
                      considers a fascinating topic—food taboos. In trying to explain food taboos he has
                      illuminated some of the central problems of trying to understand human economic history.
                      Consider, for example, the humble pig. Eventually Islam, Judaism, and some Hindu
                      religions instituted complete bans on pork to the extent that, even today, riots ﬂare in some
                      parts of the world if pigs invade religious areas.
                           Pigs are one of the most efﬁcient converters of garbage, animal wastes, and other
                      materials discarded by farmers—better in many respects than goats, sheep, or cows. In
                      preindustrial economies and today around the world in Europe, America, and China, the
                      pig is used to convert grains that are not made into food or whisky into portable, storable
                      food. So why should the sturdy farmers of the Middle East reject such a good food source
                      after millennia in which the pig was a staple part of the diet?
                           Harris dismisses the notion that this prohibition has anything to do with the common
                      infection of pigs with trichinae, parasites that can kill people.24 Recent studies have shown
                                                                   THE ORIGINS OF AGRICULTURE       239


that pigs raised in hot climates seldom transmit this disease; moreover, Southwest Asian
farmers ate cattle, sheep, and goats, which carry anthrax, brucellosis, and other diseases as
dangerous or more so than anything pigs can transmit.
     Instead, Harris explains prohibitions of pork in terms of the cost-beneﬁt ratio of the
animal in early subsistence agricultural systems. Pigs, unlike sheep, goats, and cattle, cannot
subsist on husks, stalks, or other high-cellulose foods; their natural diet is tubers, roots,
nuts, and fruits. Also, pigs are native to woodlands and swamps and do not tolerate direct
sun and open country well. Thus, the clearing of land coincident with the spread of
agriculture in Southwest Asia greatly reduced the habitat and natural foods available to pigs,
and, increasingly, pigs had to be fed on grain, which brought them into competition with
people; they also had to be provided with artiﬁcial shade and considerable water. Moreover,
Harris points out that, in contrast to some other domesticates, pigs cannot be milked,
sheared, ridden, or used to pull a plow. In short, they lost their cost effectiveness relative to
sheep, goats, and cattle, and their eventual proscription made excellent economic “sense.”
     And, as in all instances, it is not important that people ever recognize their motives in
cases of such prohibitions: Natural selection “ﬁxes,” or perpetuates, economically sound
behaviors, regardless of what people think their motives are.
     Against Harris and his supporters are many people who believe that Harris is propagat-
ing a bastardized version of a misconception of Marxian theory.25 Sahlins, for example,
points to the United States, where millions of cattle are slaughtered every year but where
virtually every horse lives out its full life in relative luxury and, usually, enjoying consider-
able affection. Why, Sahlins asks, do Americans arbitrarily proscribe horsemeat and accept
beef? Sahlins answers his own question, arguing that it is because every culture creates its
own belief systems from its unique blend of economy, society, and ideology.
     All this is rather far from the poor abandoned pigs of Southwest Asia, but the point is
an important one. For if archaeologists must seek the causes of changes in the archaeological
record (like the succession of pig bones by sheep and goat bones in the levels of a site) in
the cultural mediation of “the mode of cultural organization,” they will have to apply
techniques of archaeological analysis currently not known or, possibly, not within the
capacities of any other than a Divine Intellect.


Contemporary Models of Agricultural Origins
Another general explanation of agricultural origins has been proposed by Brian Hayden.
He begins with the assumption that ancient hunters and gatherers were, like most people,
trying to maintain the reliability and stability with which they could get food.26 He suggests
that for the last several million years our ancestors diversiﬁed their “income” by eating a
wide range of plant and animal species and developing digging sticks, hand-axes, nets, and
all the other implements of pre-agricultural peoples. Rather than a constant drive from
population growth or “pressure” which forced these innovations and broadening of diets,
Hayden envisions great stability in the population-to-resources balance.
     But by the end of the Pleistocene 10,000 years ago, all the larger, more obvious animal
species had been exploited, and people faced with the same kinds of cyclical food shortages
that always had been humankind’s lot could only turn to grasses, seeds, ﬁsh, and mice—in
other words, the smaller, in some ways less desirable species. Hayden uses here a division
of the animal world according to reproductive “strategy”: “k”-selected species, like deer, are
240   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      long-lived, tend to have long maturation periods, have only one or a few offspring each
      reproductive cycle, and are susceptible to over-exploitation; “r”-selected species, on the
      other hand, like grasses, which reproduce in incalculably large numbers, are genetically
      plastic, live only a year, are extremely resistant to overexploitation, and quickly reestablish
      themselves after ﬂoods, ﬁres, and droughts.
           Switching to a diet of mainly “r”-selected species, Hayden argues, would have
      encouraged a sedentary way of life; stimulated the development of ground-stone tools,
      wooden implements, and other agricultural devices; stabilized the food supply; and
      lessened the need for group cooperation and common food storage. In Hayden’s view, the
      rise of agriculture is just a “natural and logical extension of the trends” that led to the late
      Pleistocene refocusing of exploitation strategies from big-game animals to smaller animals
      and plants.
           As for the timing and location of the ﬁrst agricultural economies:
          It is especially notable that domestication did not ﬁrst occur where the environments were
          rich enough to support sedentary, hunting-gathering-based ranked societies, with wealth
          competition and primitive valuables, such as those found in California, the Northwest
          Coast, Florida, and Palestine. According to my model, even though these areas had the
          highest population densities, their resource bases would have been much more stable and
          they would have experienced resource stress relatively infrequently. Because sedentism,
          wealth competition, and ranking in rich environments did not result in domestication in
          these areas, it is reasonable to conclude that such developments were not sufﬁcient, or
          perhaps even necessary, conditions for domestication. Instead, domestication can be more
          usefully linked to the same Paleolithic processes which gave rise to the Mesolithic and
          Archaic: the effort to increase resource reliability in areas of frequent stress.27
      Although climatic change does not play a large role in Hayden’s explanation for the rise
      of agriculture, other researchers such as Joy McCorriston and Frank Hole,28 and Andrew
      Moore and Gordon Hillman,29 have suggested that climatic events at the end of the
      Pleistocene were a critical factor—at least for the origins of agriculture in Southwest Asia,
      particularly the Levant (Syria, Lebanon, Jordan, and Israel).
           Between about 22,000 and 16,000 years ago, glaciers expanded over many areas of
      America and Eurasia, altering climates around the world. Southwest Asia was generally
      cooler and drier in this period, but there were shorter cycles of climate change, periods of
      several thousand years in which the climates became relatively warmer or cooler, drier or
      wetter.30 For most of this period, the sea coasts expanded as ocean levels fell. Forests covered
      coastal areas around the northern and eastern Mediterranean, but many higher areas of
      Southwest Asia were dry steppe or grasslands.
           Then between about 16,000 and 11,000 years ago, as the glaciers retreated, most of
      Southwest Asia became warmer. Between about 14,500 and 11,000 years ago the eastern
      Mediterranean appears to have experienced a period of relatively high rainfall, but then
      between 11,000 and 10,000 years ago there were periods of growing aridity.31 The rising sea
      levels of these warmer periods would have submerged from 10 to 20 km of coastal plains
      around much of Southwest Asia, perhaps forcing people into new areas. The average annual
      rise would have been only 7–8 mm, so one should not imagine late Pleistocene hunter-
      foragers scurrying in front of unexpected ﬂoods.32
           It is against this backdrop of climatic change that we can examine the archaeological
      record to see how patterns of people-plant-animal interactions changed in ways that might
                                                                THE ORIGINS OF AGRICULTURE      241


explain agricultural origins in this period. Since there were many previous glacial ﬂuctu-
ations and climatic changes in this area that did not produce agriculture, these climatic
variations are obviously not a complete explanation of agricultural origins; but it is not
without signiﬁcance for the timing and location of agricultural origins that they coincided
with these environmental changes. Subtle changes in seasonality, maximum heat and cold,
and other factors have complex impacts on ecologies, and it is difﬁcult to sort these out for
periods in the distant past.
     Joy McCorriston and Frank Hole,33 for example, argue that about 10,000 years ago, as
the Pleistocene ended, the climates of the Jordan Valley and adjacent areas of the Middle
East became much more arid and more sharply seasonal. They suggest that the climate
changes of this period encouraged the growth and spread of annual species of cereals and
legumes, and that because the summers were hyper-arid and there were few resources
available, people began to store more of their food, which in turn required them to become
more sedentary—to stay near their stored foods. They note that these climate changes
resulted in the establishment of agriculture because at the time they occurred, people in
this area had developed tools for processing wild cereals and had partially depleted their
environments of some of the wild plants and animals that had sustained Pleistocene
hunter-foragers here.
     Andrew Moore and Gordon Hillman34 offer a broadly similar argument, although they
focus on the period just prior to the end of the Pleistocene. This climatic episode—known
as the Younger Dryas—occurred between 11,000 and 10,000 years ago and represented a
return to the cooler and drier settings typical of the last glacial period. After beneﬁting
from the gradual improvement in climate that occurred after 16,000 years ago, a return
to conditions more typical of glacial periods was a rude shock to human foraging groups.
The consequences are reﬂected in stresses on their systems of foraging and also in their
settlement patterns. People who had been sedentary—at least to some extent—either
became more mobile in their search for food resources or developed new and novel ways
of exploiting foods such as the wild cereal grasses. The development of these new
subsistence systems gave rise to the transition between hunting-gathering and farming
about 10,000 years ago.
     But there were many periods of climatic alteration in the past hundreds of thousands
of years in which agriculture did not emerge, and domestication and agriculture appeared
in an extremely diverse range of environments, from cold valleys high in the Andes to the
plains of southern Palestine to the humid lowlands of Southeast Asia. If climate change was
such a powerful force for agricultural origins, how could it have affected such a diverse
range of habitats to produce the same results?
     A novel explanation for this phenomenon has been proposed recently by Peter
Richerson, Robert Boyd, and Robert Bettinger.35 Theirs is also a climate-based hypothesis,
but one that looks beyond the evidence of selected single regions, such as Southwest Asia,
to explain the transition to farming economies throughout the world. Using climatic
information derived from ice and ocean cores, as well as mathematical modeling of
population and innovation dynamics, Richerson and his colleagues argue that the
Pleistocene was, quite simply put, “hostile to agriculture.”36 The data from the cores
indicate that the Pleistocene was arid, had low atmospheric CO2—which impacts plant
photosynthesis—and had highly variable short-term climatic ﬂuctuations—human groups
could not afford to become dependent on a single food resource under these conditions.
           242       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                          The advent of the Holocene—the geological epoch in which we live today—
                     signiﬁcantly altered these relationships. Climatic ﬂuctuations became less variable37 and
                     rainfall and atmospheric CO2 increased, thus expanding opportunities for plant abundance
                     and reliability. Richerson and his colleagues point out that human groups who adopt the
                     use of efﬁcient subsistence systems that focus on plants will, over the long run, be more
                     successful than other human groups who are less efﬁcient.38 This is thus the context in
                     which agricultural systems independently came into existence in many different
                     geographical areas, although offset in timing by several millennia in some cases.
                          And in a quite sobering reﬂection, Richerson and his colleagues end with the following
                     thoughts:

                         Those who are familiar with the Pleistocene often remark that the Holocene is just the
                         “present interglacial.” . . . Sustaining agriculture . . . would be a considerable technical
                         challenge. At the very best, lower CO2 concentrations and lower average precipitation
                         suggest that world average agricultural output would fall considerably. . . . [T]he intrinsic
                         instability of the Pleistocene climate system, and the degree to which agriculture is likely
                         dependent upon the Holocene stable period, should give one pause (Broecker 1997).39

                     With regard to theories of agricultural origins, it is at least plausible that more powerful
                     explanations of this phenomena must somehow take into account social and ideological
                     factors. As Barbara Bender40 has noted, many groups around the world in the period just
                     before agriculture seem to be different from their predecessors in intriguing ways. They
                     were trading more extensively, and their burials and other artifacts seem to suggest a
                     growing sense of ethnic identity and status differentiation (Figure 6.4). These may have
                     stimulated intensiﬁed production and exchange in ways that affected the transition to
                     agriculture. It is tempting to see these changes as reﬂections or results of the economic
                                                                                   changes, but societies are
                                                                                   integrated functional units in
                                                                                   which change is not easily
                                                                                   explained strictly in terms of
                                                                                   clearly identiﬁable causes and
                                                                                   effects.
                                                                                        Along these lines, Brian
                                                                                   Hayden has suggested that ritual
                                                                                   feasting was an important
                                                                                   driving factor in early complex
                                                                                   foraging groups.41 Control of
                                                                                   production by corporate groups
                                                                                   in complex hunter-gatherer
                                                                                   societies—kinship groups in
                                                                                   this case—leads to surpluses
                                                                                   that can be used for acquiring
                                                                                   labor through marriage, for
                                                                                   producing or obtaining prestige
FIGURE 6.4 Natuﬁan hunter-gatherers sometimes buried people in elaborately         items, or for hosting feasts to
decorated clothing. Note the marine shell beads adhering to the skull. These were  enhance power and prestige.
probably sewn onto a cap or hat.                                                   Once human groups become
                                                                   THE ORIGINS OF AGRICULTURE       243


invested in political organization that emphasizes competition between groups, any
impacts on acquiring surpluses—such as those caused by climatic change—may lead to the
origins of agriculture as people seek methods to acquire surpluses and to maintain these
power structures. Hayden’s feasting model therefore suggests that agriculture potentially
begins not in marginal areas, but in resource-rich regions.
      Finally, Ian Hodder has also offered a social explanation for the origins of agriculture.42
He juxtaposes the notions of nature and culture, with humans acting as the agents of
transformation from wild (nature) to domesticated (culture).43 This is a symbolic transition
that facilitated competition between groups, and as some people became more sedentary,
some aspects of everyday practical activities took on symbolic roles in society. Hodder
argues, for example, that the household—the domus—and the activities within it became
“a metaphor for the domestication of society.”44 People’s fears, emotions, and feelings
helped create long-term dependencies that were acted out in a drama that sought to
manipulate and control the “wild.”45 Social control of nature is therefore a mechanism to
facilitate storage, food processing, food exchange, feasts, and so forth.
      In the rest of this chapter we examine in detail two cases of the transition to agriculture
—Southwest Asia and Mesoamerica—and attempt to match this evidence to these and
other ideas about agricultural origins.


EARLY DOMESTICATION AND AGRICULTURE:
THE POST-PALEOLITHIC BACKGROUND

We must assume that, to some extent, the causes of agriculture are to be found in the
thousands of years of hunting-gathering that immediately preceded the ﬁrst agricultural
societies. A critical interval may be the period between 22,000 and 8,000 years ago—a time
of major climatic changes for much of the world.
     In Western Europe, population densities shifted as the herds of reindeer and horses
that once supported many hunting bands moved northward with the retreating glaciers.
Some people moved with them, but others worked out subsistence strategies stressing
plants, smaller game, and ﬁsh. Salmon became especially important in Europe as traps,
drying racks, and other tools were developed to make salmon exploitation a reliable way to
make a living. In Southwest Asia, parts of Africa, and parts of the Americas, some late
Pleistocene and early post-Pleistocene peoples began to eat more small game, ﬁsh, waterfowl,
clams, wild cereals, and similar foods; elsewhere, big-game hunting specializations persisted.
In North America, for example, some groups centered their lives around vast bison herds.46
     Where a shift to smaller, more varied resources was made, technologies also changed.
The bow and arrow and throwing stick were important innovations, and new tools were
developed to dig plants, trap wild fowl, and prepare and cook this broader diet (Figure 6.5).
Small, simple, geometric stone tools predominated in many areas. The world about 12,000
years ago was relatively diverse culturally, as some groups remained big-game hunters while
others took up ﬁshing, intensive foraging, and other pursuits. Thus, a great diversity of
plants and animals was being exploited with varying intensities and technologies in a wide
range of climates. Out of this vast mixture of peoples, plants, animals, and places the ﬁrst
domesticates and farmers appeared (Figure 6.6).
            244        PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                                 But which of these groups
                                                                                            became agriculturalists and
                                                                                            why? Although all the people
                                                                                            before about 10,000 years
                                                                                            ago were hunter-gatherers,
                                                                                            this term covers a wide range
                                                                                            of economies. 47 Much of the
                                                                                            variability in hunter-gatherer
                                                                                            adaptations seems to be linked
                                                                                            to food storage.48 Alain Testart
                                                                                            notes that some hunter-
                                                                                            gatherers store large amounts
                                                                                            of food, others do not, and that
                                                                                                  storing hunter-gatherer
                                                                                                  societies exhibit three
                                                                                                  characteristics—sedent-
                                                                                                  ism, a high population
                                                                                                  density,      and      the
FIGURE 6.5 After about 10,000 years ago, people all over Europe began to exploit                  development of socioe-
a much greater diversity of plants and animals than did their Pleistocene                         conomic inequalities
predecessors. This shift is reﬂected in Mesolithic ﬁshing and hunting equipment:                  —which have been
(1) limpet hammer; (2) bone ﬁsh-spear with microlith barbs, southern Sweden;                      considered typical of
(3) barbed point in red deer antler, c. 7500 b.c., Star Carr, Yorkshire; (4) leister              agricultural societies and
prongs of Eskimo ﬁshermen (shows how the barbed point may have been used);                        possible only with an
(5) net-making needle (?) and (6) bone ﬁsh hook, Denmark; (7, 8) microliths or                    agricultural way of life.
transverse arrowheads, one found in peat hafted in wood with sinew binding,                       Furthermore, their eco-
Denmark; (9) core-ax with transversely sharpened edge, Sussex; (10) ﬂake-axe,                     nomic cycle—massive
Denmark.                                                                                          harvest and intensive
                                                                                                  storage of a seasonal
                                                                                                  resource—is the same as
                             that of societies based on the cultivation of cereals. The difference between storing hunter-
                             gatherers and agriculturalists lies in whether the staple food species are wild or
                             domesticated: this proves to be only a minor difference, since it does not affect the main
                             aspects of society. Agriculturalists and storing hunter-gatherers together are neatly in
                             opposition to non-storing hunter-gatherers. The conclusion to be drawn is that it is
                             certainly not the presence of agriculture or its absence which is the relevant factor when
                             dealing with such societies, but rather the presence or absence of an economy with intensive
                             storage as its cornerstone.49

                            Thus, in looking for causes of agricultural economies, we must consider kinds of
                       adaptations where storage is a potential factor. This relates directly to certain types of foods.
                       Cereals store well, but many tubers do not. Sheep, pigs, barnyard fowl, and other animals
                       can also be considered a form of food storage, since one simply feeds them excess or
                       unwanted foods until the need arises to eat them.
                            In looking for the origins of agriculture, we can look for environments where food
                       storage was an early and important option. It is probably also signiﬁcant, as Kent Flannery
                       notes, that the major seed crops that supported the ﬁrst farmers and remain the basis of
                       modern economies, including wheat, barley, millet, and rice, appear to have derived from
                                                                    THE ORIGINS OF AGRICULTURE        245




FIGURE 6.6 Early archaeological occurrences of some important Old World and New World
domesticates. Domestication is a process, not an event, and these speciﬁc sites represent only some
early occurrences of species domesticated over wide areas. Many other species have been
domesticated.


wild ancestors that were “third-choice” foods: plants that were usually more difﬁcult to
gather and process than other wild plants and thus were probably ﬁrst eaten in quantity
because people had to do so, not because they wanted to.50 On the other hand, most of these
third-choice foods are easily storable, plentiful, easy to grow, and, as annuals, genetically
malleable—altering the selective forces on them each year can quickly change them
genetically.
     Aspects of the shift to cereals and other resources may help explain how agriculture—
once it was in its initial stages—changed human demographic patterns. In hunting-
gathering societies, fertility rates are suppressed signiﬁcantly simply by maternal mobility:
A pregnant woman’s chances of spontaneous abortion go up considerably if she walks a lot
and works heavily. Thus, those late Pleistocene groups that became less mobile, perhaps
246   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      because they began to concentrate on salmon runs or wild cereal patches, might have
      experienced a rise in fertility rates. Also, a direct correlation exists between the amount of
      carbohydrates in the diet and fertility rates. Studies have shown that it is almost impossible
      for a woman to become pregnant until she has about 27,000 calories, or 20–25 percent
      of her body weight, stored as fat51 (the authors assume no liability for the accuracy of this
      statistic). Nursing a child requires about 1,000 calories a day, and in many hunter-gatherer
      societies, the rigors of mobility and their high-protein diet can mean that nursing itself
      prevents sufﬁcient fat build-up for a successful subsequent pregnancy for about three years.
      But with the change to a high-carbohydrate, cereal-based diet and restricted mobility of
      sedentary life, fertility rates may well have risen rapidly.52


      THE ORIGINS OF DOMESTICATION, AGRICULTURE, AND
      SEDENTARY COMMUNITIES IN SOUTHWEST ASIA

      The best known and perhaps the world’s ﬁrst case of the origins of domestication and
      agriculture occurred in Southwest Asia and involved peoples and environments ranging
      from Afghanistan to Greece over a time period of at least 14,000 years. From this region
      came domesticated sheep, goats, cattle, pigs, wheat, barley, and many other crops on which
      much of the world today depends.
           The environment in which this transition took place is extremely complex. Millions of
      years ago movements of the earth’s crust forced the Arabian Peninsula toward the stable
      Iranian Plateau, compressing the land in between so that it is pleated like the folds of an
      accordion. At the end of the Pleistocene, the uplands of the Fertile Crescent (Figure 6.7)
      supported large herds of wild sheep, goats, and cattle and, in many areas, dense stands of




                                    Abu Hureyra




                                      Ohalo II

                                      Jericho
                                                   Ain Ghazal




      FIGURE 6.7    The “Fertile Crescent” and some important early pre-agricultural and agricultural
      sites.
                                                                  THE ORIGINS OF AGRICULTURE       247


wild wheat and barley. In lower elevations and wetter regions, lakes and streams had
abundant supplies of waterfowl and ﬁsh.


Southwest Asian Domesticates
To understand the origins of agriculture in Southwest Asia, we have to understand the
domestication of wheat, barley, cattle, sheep, and goats, for these have been the primary
food sources in this area from about 10,000 years ago to the present day. Lentils and other
legumes may have been domesticated here earlier,53 and pigs were more important than
cattle, sheep, and goats in some areas and places, but in general it was wheat and barley and
cattle, sheep, and goats that supported Southwest Asia’s cultural evolution.
     If you were a peasant agriculturalist forced to farm the wild ancestors of wheat and
barley, you would have had a hard time. Wild wheat, for example, has many limitations as
a food crop: Its distribution is sharply limited by temperature, soil, and moisture. As a
result, stands of these grains can be widely scattered and therefore difﬁcult to harvest. Much
greater efﬁciency could be attained if these plants could be adapted to a greater variety of
temperature, soil, and moisture ranges—especially to the torrid summers of the lowlands,
where the rivers offered the potential of irrigation agriculture.
     Also, the rachis, the segment of the stalk to which the kernels of wheat or barley are
attached, becomes extremely brittle as wild wheat ripens. This brittleness is essential to the
successful propagation of these plants because it allows the seeds to be separated from
the plant and dispersed by the merest touch of an animal or simply the force of the wind.
The head of the plant becomes brittle gradually, from top to bottom, and seed dispersal is
spread over one to two weeks. Although this is advantageous for the plant because it
prevents the seeds from sprouting in a dense mass of competing seedlings, it poses problems
for the human collector. If the grain is gathered when quite ripe, the slightest contact will
cause the rachis to fall off, so harvesting with a sickle is difﬁcult—although holding the stalk
over a basket and tapping it with a stick works. If, on the other hand, the grain is harvested
before it is fully mature, excess moisture in the unripe kernels will cause them to rot in
storage. A plant with a tougher rachis and on which the kernels ripen at about the same
time would clearly be more useful to people.
     Another problem with wild wheat is that the kernels are enclosed in very tough
protective husks, called glumes. These protect the seeds from frost and dehydration, but
primitive threshing often will not separate the seeds from the glumes, and the human
digestive tract cannot break down their tough ﬁbers. Thus a cereal with less tough and less
developed glumes would be more digestible.
     Also, each stalk of wild grain has only two rows of kernels. Domesticated varieties have
six rows, rendering them much more productive as a food resource, and wild species had
to change in this direction before it was proﬁtable to invest energy in sowing, cultivating,
and harvesting wheat and barley in many areas—particularly in those areas where natural
conditions were not optimal for wild cereals.
     To base your economy on wheat and barley would also require some specialized tools,
for cutting, transporting, threshing, storing, milling, and baking. A full-time cereal farmer
is best off living year round in a village or town because of the costs of moving large
quantities of grain and because successful harvesting requires that collectors be near stands
at very precise times. In contrast to many plants, wild grain can be collected only during
           248       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                    the few days when the plants
                                                                                    are ripening, and even then
                                                                                    there is considerable com-
                                                                                    petition from birds and other
                                                                                    predators. Another considera-
                                                                                    tion is that women and
                                                                                    children in cereal-gathering
                                                                                    societies could contribute a
                                                                                    great deal to the food supply,
                                                                                    whereas in many societies spe-
                                                                                    cializing in hunting, women
                                                                                    and children have less direct
                                                                                    economic return.
                                                                                         Given all these liabilities
                                                                                    and required cultural adjust-
                                                                                    ments, one might wonder why
                                                                                    and how these cereals were
                                                                                    domesticated. In fact, this
                                                                                    seems to have been a relatively
                                                                                    rapid process in Southwest
                                                                                    Asia, occurring within a few
                                                                                    thousand years (and perhaps
                                                                                    much less [Figure 6.8]), in
                                                                                    several native grasses, includ-
FIGURE 6.8 Domestication of wheat, one of the world’s most important crops,
                                                                                    ing wild barley (Hordeum
involved both human manipulation and natural hybridization between related
genera. Human intervention appears to have been aimed at producing free-            spontaneum), wild einkorn
threshing, nonshattering varieties. The simplest wheats are “diploid,” meaning that (Triticum boeoticum), and
they have two sets of seven chromosomes. Hybridization with related species         wild emmer wheat (Triticum
produced tetraploid wheats, with six sets of chromosomes, which occur only in       dicoccum), each with different
cultivated species of wheat. By mixing genetic material from various species, early habitats and characteristics.
farmers produced forms of wheat that could adapt to diverse habitats.                    At the same time these
                                                                                    plants were being domestic-
                       ated about 10,000 years ago, sheep, goats, pigs, and cattle were also being domesticated. In
                       some areas, such as the southern Mesopotamian alluvial plain, permanent settlement was
                       not possible until domesticated animals were available to supply the fats and proteins that
                       were not readily obtainable from any other source. Domesticated animals also provided a
                       way of converting highland grasses, weeds, shrubs, surplus grain stubble, and other plants
                       into storable, portable, high-quality foods and other usable products. Later, some animals,
                       such as cattle, horses, and donkeys, provided draught and transport power.
                            Each of the economically most important animals domesticated in Southwest Asia
                       involved somewhat different patterns of change. Cattle, for example, became smaller,
                       perhaps as an adaptation to two factors: the problem of keeping cool in the torrid lowlands
                       where most of the farms eventually were located and the relatively poor diet that was
                       available to cattle there in the leanest seasons. Sheep were bred over time to have a thick
                       multilayered ﬂeece that both protected them from intense temperatures and provided an
                       important product—wool.
                                                                      THE ORIGINS OF AGRICULTURE           249


The Archaeological
Record of Plant
and Animal
Domestication
in Southwest Asia

Archaeological sites through-
out Southwest Asia during the
late Upper Pleistocene, from
about 22,000 to 16,000 years
ago, are often concentrations
of stone tools, ash, and the
bones of large, hoofed mammals
(Figure 6.9). Almost all the
meat eaten by people came
from just a few species of
ungulates (hoofed mammals),           FIGURE 6.9 The Upper Paleolithic site of Ain al-Buhayra, Jordan, is on the
mainly       gazelles,    equids      hillside on the left. The whitish deposits on this hillside represent a fossil spring,
(onagers), and aurochs (extinct       while the whitish deposits in the left background are lake bottom sediments.
wild cattle). Based on the tools
and other artifacts from South-
west Asian sites of this period, it appears that the basic social unit was a band of about
15 or 20 people comprising several families who season after season moved through this
area hunting animals and gathering plants.
     To understand how these age-old patterns of human adaptation were displaced in just
a few thousand years by farmers, we must look in detail at a variety of evidence. The best
known archaeological record of this transition is that of the Levant, the area that extends
from southeastern Anatolia into the Sinai Peninsula, and east into what is now western
Syria and Jordan.
     The Levantine cultures of between 22,000 and 14,500 years ago belong to a tradition
called Kebaran (named, as so many ancient peoples are, after stone tools from a particular
site), followed from about 14,500 to 12,500 years ago by the Geometric Kebaran cultures, and
from 12,500 to 10,500 years ago by the Natuﬁan cultures.54 One aspect that distinguishes
each of these is the type of small stone tools—microliths. Kebaran cultures have non-
geometric forms, Geometric Kebaran cultures have geometric forms such as triangles and
trapezes, and Natuﬁan culture has lunates (half-moon shaped) forms.
     If the Kebaran peoples were doing something that inexorably led their remote
descendants to become farmers, it is not usually obvious in their archaeological traces. Such
traces are almost all small concentrations of bones and stone that reﬂect a people skilled
principally in hunting deer and other large grazing animals. One possible exception to this
pattern is the site of Ohalo II— near the Sea of Galilee—which has been radiocarbon–dated
to about 19,000 years ago (Figure 6.10). This Kebaran site was wonderfully preserved when
it was buried by rising lake levels; a period of low water levels exposed the site in the late
1980s and early 1990s, and it was excavated then. Ohalo II is notable for the preservation
of the remains of several brush structures and, most importantly, large quantities of charred
           250       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                     plant foods. 55 We therefore
                                                                                     know that people living at
                                                                                     Ohalo II were exploiting
                                                                                     cereals such as wild barley and
                                                                                     wild emmer wheat. They also
                                                                                     collected and ate wild almonds,
                                                                                     wild olives, wild pistachios,
                                                                                     and wild grapes. 56 Ohalo II
                                                                                     shows without a doubt that
                                                                                     Levantine hunter-gatherer
                                                                                     groups used wild cereals as
                                                                                     food thousands of years before
                                                                                     the advent of agriculture. But
                                                                                     Kebaran use of these cereals
                                                                                     did not result in the develop-
                                                                                     ment of agricultural lifeways
                                                                                     during this period.
FIGURE 6.10 The Early Epipaleolithic site at Ohalo II, Israel, has excellent organic      Studies of Kebaran sites
preservation because the site was submerged when lake levels in the Sea of Galilee   and  those of later periods led
rose.                                                                                several scholars to the conclu-
                                                                                     sion that there was a “broad
                      spectrum revolution” between 20,000 and 10,000 years ago, in which people in Southwest
                      Asia and many other parts of the world began eating a broader range of foods.57 In addition
                      to the wide range of plant and animal species found in some sites toward the end of this
                      period, the variety and efﬁciency of tools used seems to have increased as these millennia
                      passed. Not only do grinding stones appear in quantity, but also barbed spears and arrows,
                      bows, knives made by setting ﬂint ﬂakes into bone or wood, and other tools indicate a
                      greater range of subsistence activities. Some animal species were exploited systematically
                      for the ﬁrst time, and the grinding stones, “sickles,” and other new tools indicate that
                      vegetable foods, including wild cereal grasses, likely were important parts of the diet. Minor
                      local trade in seashells was carried on, and substantial huts appeared in some areas.
                           But in some ways, the broad spectrum revolution and the agricultural revolution may
                      together form an example of that “great tragedy of Science—the slaying of a beautiful
                      hypothesis by an ugly fact,” as Thomas Huxley put it. In a long and thorough review of the
                      evidence from Southwest Asia, archaeologist Donald Henry came to two conclusions:
                          First, the proposal of a gradual broadening of the economy leading to a more secure
                          subsistence base, the emergence of sedentary communities, and a growth in population can
                          be rejected. Such a trend is not indicated by the pre-Natuﬁan subsistence evidence.
                          Secondly, the emergence of large sedentary communities, as represented by the Natuﬁan,
                          can best be explained by the intensive exploitation of cereals and nuts. Specialization, as
                          opposed to diversiﬁcation, characterized the Natuﬁan economy. Although small animal
                          species did form a larger portion of the diet in Natuﬁan times than earlier, these food
                          sources furnished an exceedingly small, almost negligible, part of the overall diet. Instead
                          the specialized hunting of gazelle and the intensive collection of cereals and nuts
                          contributed the greatest part of the subsistence base.58
                     Some evidence of the specialized gazelle hunting that Henry mentions has been provided
                     by Legge and Rowley-Conwy, who have shown that around 11,000 years ago, in the
                                                                   THE ORIGINS OF AGRICULTURE      251


Euphrates Valley in Syria, at the site of Tell Abu Hureyra
people intensively hunted gazelles.59 Of the 60,000 identiﬁable
animal bones found at this site, about 80 percent are from
gazelles—and from gazelles of all sizes and ages and both sexes.
Near the site are the traces of stone enclosures, and Legge and
Rowley-Conwy have concluded that for thousands of years the
people of Tell Abu Hureyra drove herds of gazelle into these
enclosures and killed them all. Many of these enclosures have
been found and it is possible that eventually the gazelle were
driven so close to extinction that people turned to sheep and
goats, and in the process domesticated them.
                                                                      FIGURE 6.11 Lunates (a type of microlith) are
                                                                      common stone tools found during the Natuﬁan
THE NATUFIAN CULTURE                                                  period in the Levant.

In the archaeological record of the Natuﬁan period, from
about 12,500 to 10,500 years ago, in the Levant, we see clear
evidence of agricultural origins. The stone tools of the Natuﬁans include many lunate (i.e.,
shaped like a segment of the moon) ﬂakes of chert (Figure 6.11), but there is also something
new: They used “sickle blades” that show a pattern of wear characteristic of harvesting
cereals, rushes, and reeds. Also, querns (milling stones), mortars, pestles, pounders, and
other ground stone tools occur in abundance at Natuﬁan sites, and many such tools show
signs of long, intensive use. There is also evidence that these heavy grinding stones were
transported long distances, more than 30 km in some cases,60 and this is not something
known to have been done by people of preceding periods. Fish hooks and gorges and net
sinkers attest to the growing importance of ﬁsh in the diet in some areas. Stone vessels
indicate an increased need for containers. Studies of attrition—dental wear—of the teeth
of Natuﬁans also strongly suggest that these people specialized to some extent in collecting
cereals,61 or at the very least, in eating stone-ground plant foods. But they were also still
hunter-foragers, who intensively hunted gazelle and deer in more lush areas and wild goats
and equids in more arid zones.
     The Natuﬁans had a different settlement pattern from that of their predecessors. Some
of their “base-camps” are far larger (over 1,000 m2) than any of the earlier periods, and they
may have lived in some of these camps for half the year or even more. In some of the camps
people made foundations and other architectural elements out of limestone blocks. Trade
in shell and other commodities seems to have been on the rise, and we suspect that
exchange of perishables, such as skins, foodstuffs, and salt, was also increasing. Salt
probably became for the ﬁrst time a near necessity: People who eat a lot of meat get many
essential salts from this diet, but diets based on cereals can be deﬁcient in salts. Salt was
probably also important as a food preservative in early villages.
     While some of the later Natuﬁan peoples retained a mobile way of life, others
established sedentary communities, such as at Ain Mallaha, near Lake Huleh, Israel,
which between 12,000 and 10,500 years ago comprised about 50 huts, most of them
circular, semi-subterranean, rock-lined, and from 2.5 to 9.0 m in diameter (Figure 6.12).
Mortars and pestles litter the site and occur in most huts (Figure 6.13), and storage pits
were found both in individual huts and in the compound’s interior. These people may have
been simply collecting wild cereals instead of cultivating them, but the pattern quickly
changed.
           252       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                         As always, there is more to
                                                                                    a major cultural change than
                                                                                    simply a shift in economics.
                                                                                    The Natuﬁans made (and
                                                                                    presumably wore) beads and
                                                                                    pendants in many materials,
                                                                                    including marine shells that
                                                                                    had to be imported from the
                                                                                    Red Sea and from the Mediter-
                                                                                    ranean, and it is possible this
                                                                                    ornamentation reﬂects a grow-
                                                                                    ing sense of ethnic identity
                                                                                    and perhaps some differences
                                                                                    in personal and group status.
                                                                                    Cleverly carved ﬁgurines of
                                                                                    animals and other subjects
                                                                                    occur in many sites. 62 More
                                                                                    than 400 Natuﬁan burials have
                                                                                    been found, most of them
                                                                                    simple graves. Grave goods are
FIGURE 6.12 Simpliﬁed plan of an early settlement at Ain Mallaha (Israel).         infrequent, but some burials
Compounds of circular huts such as those at Ain Mallaha were widespread in         indicate concern with the
Southwest Asia after about 8000 b.c., but by 6000 b.c. had been superseded largely  philosophical implications of
by villages of rectangular huts.                                                    death: At Ain Mallaha one
                                                                                    elderly person was buried with
                                                                                    a young canid—perhaps a
                       puppy (Figure 6.14).63 In the late Natuﬁan period, some Natuﬁans began burying the body
                       and head of selected people in different but prepared graves. As Belfer-Cohen notes, these
                       burials may reﬂect an ancestor cult and a growing sense of community emotional ties and
                       attachment to a particular place, and toward the end of the Natuﬁan period people in this
                       area were making a strict separation between living quarters and burial grounds. Compared
                       to the earlier Pleistocene cultures of the Levant, there appears to have been considerable
                       social change in the Natuﬁan.
                            The question of why the Natuﬁans differed in these and other ways from their
                       predecessors, and why they made these ﬁrst steps toward the farming way of life, remains
                       unclear. There were climate changes, of course, and growing aridity and rising population
                       densities may have forced them to intensify exploitation of cereals, which in turn might
                       have stimulated the development of sickles and other tools and the permanent com-
                       munities that make agriculture efﬁcient. But precisely how these factors interacted with
                       others is poorly understood.


                     THE SOUTHWEST ASIAN NEOLITHIC
                     The earliest farmers of the Middle East appear to have been simultaneously domesticat-
                     ing plants and animals, but animal domestication may have begun slightly earlier and
                     been a longer process than that of cereals. Hillman and Davies,64 for example, estimate that
                                                                   THE ORIGINS OF AGRICULTURE          253


wheat and barley could have
been domesticated in parts of
the Middle East in 200 years
or less.
     So we begin with the
animals. The dog65 is no doubt
the oldest animal domesticate
in Southwest Asia, probably
having been fully domestic-
ated between 22,000 and
10,000 years ago. Hunters and
gatherers the world over are
known to have remarkably
unsentimental ideas about
pets, and we should probably
see the early domestication of
dogs as a result of a symbiotic,
utilitarian relationship. Dogs
probably served as watchdogs,
assisted in the hunt, and were
eaten as a starvation food.
     But in economic terms,
the most important domestic-
ated animals in Southwest Asia       FIGURE 6.13 Common implements for grinding and preparing grain in Iraq,
are sheep and goats. Beginning       between 7000 and 4000 b.c. The ceramic husking tray (above) was used to strip grain
about 8,000 years ago to the         from chaff; the heavy stone quern and round pestle (below) were used to grind grain
present, most meat, milk, and        to ﬂour.
hide products used in the
region have come from these animals.
     Detecting the process of animal domestication on the basis of archaeological data is a
complex matter on which archaeologists disagree, but the concept of domestication in an
archaeological sense usually involves four classes of evidence.66 Just the presence of an
animal species outside its natural range, such as the presence of highland species of sheep
in lowland environments, may indicate herding. Second, in most animals, morphological
changes occur as domestication progresses. In sheep and goats, the size and shape of horns
are major factors in reproductive success, since the larger males ﬁght with their horns to
establish breeding hierarchies. As humans domesticated these animals, however, they
relaxed selective pressures for large, strong horns (Figure 6.15), and the size and shape of
horns changed (morphological changes can also occur at the microscopic level). A third
indication of domestication may be evidence of abrupt increases in the number of some
species relative to others, which cannot be accounted for by natural causes (e.g. 5 at many
Southwest Asian sites the proportion of sheep and goat bones increased dramatically,
relative to other animals, at about 8,000 years ago). Finally, age and sex ratios that differ
from those of wild herds may also be evidence of domestication.
     Early evidence of sheep domestication may be the presence of sheep bones in Neolithic
(c. 11,000–8,000 years ago) settlements in the Jordan Valley. These bones reﬂect no
           254       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                     morphological changes in the direction of domestication, but
                                                     since sheep and goats are not native to this area, their presence
                                                     here probably reﬂects intentional introduction.
                                                          Ethnographic studies of modern pastoralists suggest that
                                                     they typically sell or eat 50 percent or more of the animals born
                                                     each year. Those animals sold or eaten are principally the
                                                     males, since the females can be kept for reproduction and only
                                                     a few males are required to service the breeding population.
                                                     Once a male has reached two years of age, any further invest-
                                                     ment of food or time in him yields little additional return.
                                                     Even before the distortions introduced by modern urban
                                                     markets, the economic importance of sheep and goats was
                                                     mainly in the milk, cheese, yogurt, and wool obtained from
                                                     these animals. A well-kept animal can supply many times its
                                                     own weight in nutritious, storable foods each year for several
                                                     years, so only young males are regularly slaughtered for meat.
                                                          Evidence from two sites near Zawi Chemi Shanidar in
                                                     Iraq indicates that similar selective slaughtering may have
                                                     been underway as early as 10,000 years ago. Prior to 14,000
                                                     years ago, only about 20 percent of the animals killed and
                                                     eaten at one of the sites were immature, but by 10,000 years
                                                     ago, 44–58 percent of the sheep and 25–43 percent of the goats
                                                     eaten were immature when butchered.67
FIGURE 6.14 This Natuﬁan burial from Ain
                                                          At Ganj Dareh, in the mountains of western Iran, there is
Mallaha, Israel, has an elderly person buried with
a young canine, possibly a puppy (upper left).       evidence  that by 10,000 years ago, goats were being herded and
                                                     managed with selective culling of the subadult males,68 and
                                                     there is much other evidence that all over Southwest Asia,
                       sheep, goats, cattle, pigs, and other animal species were well into the process of being
                       domesticated and integrated into a cereal-based farming way of life.
                             Some of the earliest evidence for domesticated grain cultivation in the Levant comes
                       from the lower levels of Jericho (c. 10,300–9,300 years ago), next to the springs in the center
                       of this oasis. At some time during this period domestic forms of wheat and barley were
                       cultivated in quantity here. Neither wild wheat nor barley appears to have been native to
                       the arid wastelands that surround the site, so these grains were probably brought down
                       from the uplands of the Jordan Valley and grown at Jericho, perhaps as wild species initially.
                       No domestic animals were used in this period, but wild gazelles, goats, cattle, and boars
                       were intensively hunted. Two thousand or more people probably lived at Jericho at any
                       time between 10,300 and 9,300 years ago, and although the earlier communities were
                       apparently unwalled, around 9,300 years ago the inhabitants built a massive stone wall,
                       3 m thick, 4 m high, and perhaps 700 m in circumference—perhaps to protect the
                       settlement from ﬂoodwater erosion. Asphalt, sulfur, salt, and a little obsidian seem to have
                       been traded, but in moderate quantities.
                             And people living in the northern Levant were making the transition to sedentary
                       communities based on intensive plant collection.
                             One of these communities was at Tell Abu Hureyra, on the Euphrates River east of
                       Aleppo, Syria. The late Epipaleolithic settlement here consisted of a series of hut pits
                                                                       THE ORIGINS OF AGRICULTURE         255




FIGURE 6.15 The essence of archaeological interpretation is to discern patterns of change in the
archaeological record over time. Here, the goat horn cores found at some sites in western Iran indicate
that the shape of these horns was changing rapidly between 7500 b.c. and 3700 b.c. One explanation
is that in the process of domestication the selective forces that kept these horns quadrilateral—and
therefore relatively strong—were being relaxed, probably as a result of the domestication process.
Farmers kept goats in herds and selectively bred them, and the strength of the horns apparently was
no longer an important determinant of the reproductive success of these goats.


excavated into the virgin subsoil (Figure 6.16). Abu Hureyra is located at the intersection
of two vegetation zones—the riverine forest and the woodland-steppe—while a third major
zone—the park-woodland—is not far away. Large quantities of charred plant remains were
recovered from the site, including wild rye, wild wheat, feather grasses such as Stipa
           256       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                       —which have edible seeds—club-rush with edible nutlets,
                                                       other small grasses that yield edible seeds, and chenopod
                                                       seeds. Other plant food resources might have included
                                                       almonds and acorns, although remains of these were not
                                                       actually found at the site. Interestingly, Gordon Hillman and
                                                       Susan College have identiﬁed a few grains of domesticated rye
                                                       that have been AMS radiocarbon-dated to about 11,000 years
                                                       ago. Although whether these represent rye that has been
                                                       domesticated by people or those grains that represent the
                                                       genetic variation within the rye gene pool might be an open
                                                       question for some, Hillman states that the available evidence
                                                       leads him to conclude that the inhabitants of Abu Hureyra had
                                                       domesticated rye.69
                                                            At the same time that agricultural economies were evolv-
                                                       ing in the Levant, specialized nomadic economies were also
FIGURE 6.16 Epipaleolithic hunter-gatherers            probably developing.70
constructed several pit-like structures at Tell Abu         Kent Flannery has noted that many contemporary
Hureyra, Syria.                                        African peoples live in compounds of circular huts and that
                                                       most such societies share several characteristics: (1) Only one
                       or two people are usually housed in each hut; (2) many of the huts are not residential, but
                       are used for storage, kitchens, stables, and the like; (3) huts are often placed in a circle
                       around a cleared space; (4) food space is usually open and shared by all occupants; and
                       (5) perhaps most important, the social organization of the typical compound, like that of
                       hunting and gathering groups, usually consists of six to eight males, each associated with
                       from one to three women and their respective children, and includes a strong sexual
                       division of labor.71
                             Flannery argues that settlements of adjacent rectangular buildings—which he calls
                       villages—have advantages over settlements of circular buildings—which he calls
                       compounds. The former are more easily enlarged because rooms can simply be added on,
                       whereas increasing the number of circular residences rapidly increases the diameter of the
                       settlement to an unwieldy size.
                             Villages are also more defensible than compounds for a number of reasons. But the
                       primary difference is in their respective capacities for intensiﬁcation of production. In
                       compounds, storage facilities are open and shared, and the basic economic unit is the
                       group; but in villages the basic unit is the family, which maintains its own storage of
                       supplies and thus has greater incentives for intensiﬁcation of production—the seeds, in
                       other words, of private enterprise and the ﬁrst steps toward capitalist economies.72
                             If Flannery is correct, the transition that occurred between 11,000 and 9,000 years ago
                       from compounds of circular structures to villages of rectangular rooms is a reﬂection of
                       changes in social organization, with the nuclear family gradually replacing the hunting-and-
                       gathering group as the unit of economic production. And although the circular-building
                       tradition continued for several thousand years in parts of Southwest Asia (Figure 6.17), it
                       was eventually entirely supplanted by rectangular-unit villages.
                             These kinds of changes appear to be particularly clearly reﬂected at an early agricultural
                       Levantine community, Beidha, in Jordan. Nine thousand years ago there was a farming
                       community here, set amidst grasslands in adjacent valleys, with forests on the slopes above it.
                                                                 THE ORIGINS OF AGRICULTURE        257


This community was occupied
for hundreds of years, and, as
Brian Byrd 73 notes, changes
over time in the architecture of
the village reﬂect fundamental
changes in social organization,
economy, and many other
aspects of life (Figure 6.18). In
the earliest phases, people lived
in small semi-circular build-
ings with few interior features
other than posts. The debris
in these houses suggests that
many activities of daily life
(such as sleeping, tool-making,
preparing and eating food, etc.)
were done in the same interior
spaces. Storage appears to have     FIGURE 6.17 The base of a Neolithic hut structure at Wadi Jilat 23, Jordan.
been communal, as the store-
room is not associated with any
particular house. Over time
this village organization gave
way to one in which people
lived in larger rectangular
buildings that were subdivided
into areas where specialized
activities were done. Some
of the houses were two-story
buildings, with the ﬂoors
divided into what appear to be
separate sleeping areas, tool-
making rooms, storage rooms,
and so forth. Also, in these later
phases, large buildings were
constructed that were centrally
located and appear to have been
public settings for special com-
munity activities, or “formal       FIGURE 6.18 An overview of the Neolithic site of Beidha, Jordan.
venues for events that integrated
the community as a whole.”74
     Soon after 10,000 years ago, sedentary communities and domestic plants and animals
had appeared at several places along the ﬂanks of the Zagros. At Ali Kosh, situated on the
arid steppe of western Iran, at about 9,500 years ago, people hunted gazelles, onagers (wild
asses), and pigs; ﬁshed in the Mehmeh River; collected shellﬁsh; and snared wild fowl. They
also collected vetch and other plants, and between 10,000 and 8,500 years ago they began
growing domestic, two-rowed, hulled barley and emmer wheat. These early farmers lived
           258       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                      in crude clay huts furnished with reed mats, stone bowls, and a few other small household
                      goods, but this settlement was neither rich nor impressive. Possibly the people came here
                      only in the winter, since summers in the region are unearthly hot and the cooler mountains
                      would have provided many plant and animal products. Wild wheat is not native to the Ali
                      Kosh area, but wild barley is available within a few kilometers, and the people here may
                      have been growing grains that had been domesticated elsewhere.75
                           Archaeologists used to think that the earliest communities of farmers in Southwest Asia
                      and elsewhere remained egalitarian societies for centuries, perhaps millennia, after full-time
                      farming became the subsistence base, but if we look at the early agricultural communities
                      in Southwest Asia, we see very early signs of a changing social world (see also chapter 8).
                      At Jericho, in Jordan, soon after 9,000 years ago, the populace built a stone wall some 1.5 m
                      thick and more than 3.5 m high around a complex of mudbrick houses, even though the
                      populace was still hunting and gathering wild resources to complement their primitive agri-
                      culture. If an essential element in cultural complexity is activity specialization to the point
                      that large populations are socially and economically interdependent, Jericho was not a com-
                      plex community; but the construction of the wall indicates that its people were beginning
                      to direct their energies in a way quite different from that of most hunters and gatherers.
                           The disposal of the dead, usually an excellent reﬂection of changing cultural
                      complexity, suggests that people at Jericho and other early Neolithic sites throughout the
                      Levant were much different socially from their predecessors. Forty headless adult bodies
                      were found buried beneath one room at Jericho, and further excavations revealed a cache
                      of skulls that had been reconstructed with plaster, painted, and then decorated with “eyes”
                                                     made from seashells (Figure 6.19). Whether these represent
                                                     ancestor worship, war trophies, or some other ritual will
                                                     probably never be known.
                                                          The importance of the bulldozer as an archaeological
                                                     tool was demonstrated in the late 1970s, when one cut a
                                                     roadway through a hill in Amman, Jordan, exposing a huge
                                                     archaeological site. In 1982 archaeologists began excavating
                                                     this site, now called ’Ain Ghazal (“spring of the gazelles”), one
                                                     of the largest known Neolithic sites in the Middle East.76 The
                                                     ﬁrst major period of occupation at ’Ain Ghazal began at about
                                                     9,400 years ago, and it was probably occupied most or all of
                                                     the time until about 7,000 years ago. Covering approximately
                                                     30 acres, ’Ain Ghazal is about three times larger than Jericho,
                                                     but it is unclear how much of the site was occupied at any one
                                                     time. It probably had at one point at least several hundred
                                                     inhabitants, who lived in mudbrick buildings of various sizes
                                                     and shapes. For its early age, the community of ’Ain Ghazal
                                                     has impressive art. Large plaster ﬁgures of people were found
                                                     under house ﬂoors. Numerous ﬁgures of people and animals
                                                     have been unearthed (Figure 6.20), and in one cache two clay
                                                     ﬁgures of cattle had ﬂint blades stuck into their heads, necks,
FIGURE 6.19 The people of Neolithic Jericho          and chests.
removed the skulls from some bodies and formed            The diet of the early inhabitants of ’Ain Ghazal is
human features on them in plaster.                   impressive in its diversity. Goats were probably both hunted
                                                                 THE ORIGINS OF AGRICULTURE        259


and herded, and sheep, pigs, gazelles, birds, and many other
species were exploited, along with some wheat and barley,
peas, lentils, and many wild plants. But toward the end of its
occupation, the people of ’Ain Ghazal seem to have fallen on
hard times. Late in its history, it seems to have been occupied
only seasonally by pastoral peoples.
     By 8,000 years ago there is evidence of domestic sheep and
goats at sites all over Southwest Asia and even into Greece and
southern Europe, and it appears that once domestication was
well advanced, the spread of sheep- and goat-raising was very
rapid. Most farming villages have hedgerows, patches of weeds
and thorny plants, clippings, and stubble that are perfectly
acceptable to the rather undiscriminating sheep and goats.
     Domestic cattle were herded on the Anatolian Plateau
(central Turkey) by about 7,800 years ago and were probably
present in the Balkans by 8,500 years ago. As with sheep and
goats, cattle domestication seems to have been a widespread
phenomenon, probably beginning sometime after 9,000 years
ago and occurring in many areas from China to western
Europe. Across this vast area, ancient farmers seem to have
bred cattle for reduced size, increased docility and milk
production, and increased tolerance of climatic conditions. An
important step in the evolution of civilizations was the process
by which cattle were adapted to the hot lowlands of the river
valleys. The cattle found there today are thin, small animals
that seem woefully scrawny by comparison to European cattle,
but these Mesopotamia varieties are extraordinarily hardy.
The late shah of Iran tried to “improve” the cattle in the hot
lowland of Iran by importing Dutch and Danish cows that               FIGURE 6.20 Figurines from the early agricul-
were about four times the size of local varieties and produced        tural village of Ain Ghazal, Jordan.
vastly more milk and meat—until they strolled out into the hot
plains (which we [Wenke] were surveying for archaeological remains), where most of them
were felled by heat stroke. These European cattle had to be kept in air-conditioned barns
to be productive, whereas the local varieties could do perfectly well on the hottest day,
eating poor quality foods that would have killed the larger cattle.
     Cattle were probably especially important to the ﬁrst settlers on the southern
Mesopotamian alluvial plain. During the dry, hot summers in this region, few reliable
protein sources are available to primitive agriculturalists, and cow meat and milk
apparently provided a crucial nutritional component. Oxen (castrated bulls) may also have
been used to pull plows and sledges. In many areas of Southwest Asia where rainfall is
sufﬁcient for cereal cultivation, plowing is essential because natural vegetation is thick.
Later, the horse, donkey, and mule were also used as draught animals, and there is evidence
of the use of domesticated horses in the Levant by at least the late fourth millennium b.c.77
     Another important domesticated animal was the pig, whose bones have been recovered
from sites all over Southwest Asia. By 8,000 years ago and even as late as 4,700 years ago,
pig bones represented 20–30 percent of all mammal remains at many large sites.
260   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


           By 8,000 years ago agricultural villages spread over much of Southwest Asia, most of
      them comprising just a few score mud huts, a few hundred people, and the same essential
      economic functions. From Greece to Afghanistan, these villages looked very much alike
      and, taken on the basis of their archaeological remains, they were not impressive in their
      material wealth. Even sites like Jericho and Çatal Hüyük (see chapter 8), which were larger
      than most and had relatively impressive art and architecture, were self-sufﬁcient
      communities without many economic, political, or social ties outside their region. And the
      vast majority of these villagers were simple farmers without great aesthetic, religious, or
      social diversions.
           As unremarkable as these villages were, however, their inhabitants were the ﬁrst to
      focus their lives on agricultural products and to live in the sedentary communities that
      even today are the basic component of Middle Eastern settlement patterns. And as early as
      8,000 years ago, the processes that were to transmute these villages into states and empires
      were already underway.



      OTHER OLD WORLD DOMESTICATES

      The domesticates and allied agricultural economies developed in Southwest Asia proved so
      successful that within centuries of their appearance they had spread far outside the Fertile
      Crescent. By 7,000 years ago farmers at Argissa-Maghula in Greek Thessaly were sub-
      sisting on cultivated emmer wheat and barley as well as domestic cattle and pigs. Recent
      recalibration of carbon-14 dates for scores of early European sites reveals that the basic
      wheat-barley/cattle-pigs-sheep complex diffused at the rate of about a mile a year, reaching
      Bulgaria about 7,500 years ago, southern Italy about 7,000 years ago, and Britain and
      Scandinavia between 6,000 and 5,000 years ago.78 To the east, domestic wheat and barley
      reached the Indus Valley by at least 7,000 years ago (and probably much earlier), and by
      about 2,500 years ago, domestic wheat was in cultivation in northeastern China.
           The processes by which these domesticates and their associated agricultural techniques
      replaced hunting-and-gathering economies in much of the Old World are not well
      known but appear to have involved both the replacement of hunters and gatherers by
      agriculturalists and the conversion of hunters and gatherers to agricultural ways of life
      (see chapter 12).
           The grasslands and forests of temperate Europe and Eurasia contrast sharply with the
      steppes and arid plains of the Fertile Crescent, and the spread of agriculture northward and
      westward required new strains of plants and animals and different social and technological
      adaptations. Methods had to be developed to clear the dense northern forests, and in some
      areas the rich hunting, gathering, and ﬁshing resources formed such a productive food base
      that there was considerable “resistance” to the introduction of agriculture. Despite its long-
      term productivity in most areas, primitive agriculture in even fertile areas of the world was
      probably marked by famine in seasons of bad harvests and by heavy labor—compared to
      hunting-foraging—in the best of times.
           One interesting aspect of the spread of agriculture may have been the spread of Indo-
      European languages and culture. Colin Renfrew, in a highly controversial analysis,79 has
      suggested that Indo-European languages and culture spread into Europe from Turkey and
                                                                 THE ORIGINS OF AGRICULTURE       261


came with agriculture, which seems to have been established in much of Turkey at least
8,000 years ago. This would explain much about why many of the languages of South and
northwest Asia appear to have shared a common ancestry with almost all the native
languages of Europe.
      Egypt’s initial transition to agriculture was based on introductions of wheat, barley,
sheep, and goats from outside the Nile Valley, probably both from the Middle East and
from North African desert and coastal areas.80 In the Sudanese part of the Nile Valley,
sorghum seems to have been the basis of initial agriculture—although the evidence for its
use is scanty.81
      Many herbs, fruits, and other plants were domesticated in India and Southeast Asia,
but it was rice and millet that provided the majority of the food energy for the great Asian
civilizations. Imprints from rice-grain husks have been found in potsherds from sites such
as Hujiawuchang and Pengtoushan—in the middle Yangtze River Valley of south-central
China—by about 8,900 to 8,000 years ago.82 Additionally, the site of Bashidang—also in
the Middle Yangtze and radiocarbon-dated to 8,400–7,700 years ago—yielded more than
10,000 rice grains.83 The Yangtze River region documents an independent transition to
cultivation and agriculture at about the same time that similar events were occurring in the
Fertile Crescent of the Near East.
      Vegeculture of tubers and other crops probably has a long history in the moist
lowlands of Asia. In vegeculture, plants are propagated not from seeds, but from cuttings
taken from leaves, stems, or tubers of plants like yams and taro. Bellwood disputes the
notion that vegeculture generally preceded cereal agriculture in much of tropical Southeast
Asia, but root-crop cultivation may have been the earliest kind of farming in areas like
New Guinea.84
      One of the world’s most important cereals—millet—was apparently domesticated and
ﬁrst cultivated on the great Yellow River ﬂood plain in north China (see Figure 6.6). The
alluvial soils in this area are extremely fertile and sufﬁciently arid so that there was little
vegetation to clear for agriculture in many areas. By about 8,500 years ago scores of villages
existed in north China, most of them subsisting on millet and a few other domesticates and
a considerable amount of hunted and gathered food. These villages usually contained about
200 or 300 inhabitants, who lived in wattle-and-daub houses that looked very much like
the circular houses and compounds marking the evolution of agricultural communities in
Southwest Asia.
      Another crop of considerable importance in north China was soybeans; several wild
varieties are native to this area. The little evidence available suggests soybeans were in
cultivation by at least 3,000 years ago. Soybeans are a remarkably versatile and nutritious
crop, and are also good “green manure,” enriching the soils on which they grow through
nitrogen ﬁxation. The substitution of soybeans for milk and meat in early Chinese diets
explains why many Asian populations never evolved the enzymes necessary to digest milk
products, causing them to suffer intestinal upsets if they eat these foods. Similar
intolerances are found in Africa and South America.
      The establishment of agricultural economies in Japan had some similarities to the
pattern in Europe. In both areas, rich northern forested environments supported dense
populations of hunter-foragers, and, when agriculture came, it supplanted the ancient
hunting-foraging economies at different rates in different areas—slowly in areas heavily
dependent on marine resources, more quickly in others.85
262   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      AGRICULTURAL ORIGINS IN THE NEW WORLD

      In the New World, the most important domesticates were maize, beans, squash, peppers,
      potatoes, turkey, guinea pigs (as a food source), and llamas (although some people would
      add to this list cacao, from which chocolate is derived). Like their Old World relatives, New
      World peoples complemented their staple domesticates with a wide range of other plants,
      including avocados, manioc, sunﬂowers, amaranth, gourds, and cotton, as well as socially
      valued plants like coca (from which cocaine is derived) and tobacco.
            New World peoples, however, did not domesticate any large draught animals suitable
      for plowing or riding perhaps because there were no suitable native species (although the
      Rocky Mountain sheep would seem to have possibilities). This fact alone may explain
      much of the difference between the later cultural histories of the Old and New Worlds:
      Plowing, even the simple, single blade of a wood plow, opens up many areas to agriculture
      that cannot be farmed otherwise. In the Old World, human and material transport was
      dependent from a very early time on domesticated donkeys and, later, horses, and both
      of these allowed warfare and trade to expand enormously. The llama of South America
      certainly was an important transport animal, but it does not compare to either donkeys or
      horses for transport or military uses. Also, no animals equivalent to the Old World pig or
      sheep were domesticated in the New World.
            There were two major centers of plant domestication in the New World, one in
      Mesoamerica, where maize, beans, squash, and sweet potatoes became the most important
      crops, and a second center in the Andean highlands, where potatoes and other root crops
      were grown and llamas were domesticated. But, as in the Old World, these processes of
      domestication and the transition to agriculture were long-term and occurred over a wide
      area, involving many different peoples and species. And just as in the Old World, we see
      the emergence of a very limited range of species as the primary crop plants. Native North
      Americans, for example, domesticated sunﬂowers and other plants, and some of these
      remain commercially important crops even today, but the efﬁciencies of maize, beans,
      squash, and potatoes are such that they were—separately or in combination—the basis of
      life all over the New World when the European colonists ﬁrst arrived.


      Mesoamerica and Central America
      The background of New World domestication, like that of the Old World, is many
      millennia of hunting, gathering, and foraging. Kent Flannery has suggested, for example,
      that the foods the aboriginal Mexican foragers relied on, such as maguey cactus, prickly
      pear, and rabbit, were species that could withstand intensive human consumption for many
      millennia without changing much in their physical characteristics as genera, and that
      because of the nature of these foragers’ seasonal movements, they rarely exerted great
      pressure on these resources for any length of time.86 For example, cactus-fruit collecting
      had to be done during a two- to three-week period, and during this time rabbits would not
      be hunted. This seasonal concentration on resources kept groups small and dispersed for
      most of the year, and one wonders why the Spanish found Mesoamerica (roughly from
      northern Mexico to southern Guatemala) to be a world of cities and farms instead of a
      domain of hunters and gatherers.
                                                                  THE ORIGINS OF AGRICULTURE       263


     Despite effective mechanisms that maintained the hunting-and-gathering way of life for
so long in Mesoamerica, sometime after 8000 b.c. these people—probably unintentionally
—began to domesticate maize, beans, squash, peppers, avocados, and other plant species.
Why and how this happened is not clear. Climate changes, increasing population densities,
and other factors may have been involved, and ecological analyses suggest that in the
beginning the shift to agriculture may have involved only a slight change in the way people
in Mesoamerica hunted and foraged.87
     Robert Reynolds’s computer simulation 88 of dietary changes reﬂected in the
archaeological record of Guilá Naquitz Cave, in Oaxaca, southern Mexico, between 8750
and 6670 b.c. suggests a subtle pattern of adaptations to the changing conditions in this
period. People who lived here eventually focused on a particularly reliable and productive
mix of plant and animal foods, one that Reynolds’s simulation model linked to complex
calculations about travel distances, seasonal availability, and many other factors. He
concluded that cultivation here may have begun as a way to increase the density of certain
plants and to mitigate the effects of wet-year/dry-year ﬂuctuations, increasing human
population densities, and other circumstances.
     Eventually maize was domesticated out of millennia of such manipulations and
cultural ecological contexts. Domesticated maize was the most important food through
much of later Mesoamerican prehistory, and at present it is the only domesticated plant
from this area whose evolutionary history we know in any detail. A few fragments of early
forms of beans, squash, and peppers have been found, but not enough to reconstruct recent
changes in their morphological characteristics. Occasionally there are claims that maize was
either brought to or from the Old World at a very early date, usually based on ancient
sculptures or other art,89 but no trace of ancient corn plants has ever been found in the
Old World.
     Most of our evidence about early plant cultivation in Mesoamerica comes from dry
caves in Tamaulipas,90 Tehuacán, and Oaxaca, so we must immediately suspect biases in
preservation: There is little reason to believe that just because the earliest known maize
comes from thesesites that these sites were the earliest places to domesticate maize. Also,
as Gayle Fritz has noted,91 there is some evidence that for many years scholars have greatly
overestimated the age of maize domestication and agriculture in the New World. Scholars
used to believe that maize domestication evolved out of the hunting-foraging groups who
lived in this area between 10,000 and 5000 b.c. But more recent evidence and dates92 raise
the possibility that domestication and agriculture ﬁrst appeared shortly before 3500 b.c.
and evolved out of hunter-foragers who had become much less mobile than their ancestors,
moving only a few times a year, if at all, and concentrating their efforts on the wild ancestors
of plants they eventually domesticated.
     Until about 1970 the most widely accepted view of maize domestication was advanced
by a geneticist, Paul Mangelsdorf, who argued that domesticated maize evolved from a
“wild maize,” now extinct, with small cobs topped by small tassels. This would have been a
“pod-corn”—that is, the individual kernels would have been enclosed in chaff rather than the
cup-like fruit-case of domesticated varieties. Mangelsdorf explains the extinction of this wild
maize as the result of two factors: overgrazing by European-introduced cattle and genetic
“swamping” from continual hybridization with emerging species of domesticated maize.93
     In the early 1960s, Richard MacNeish excavated several dry caves near Tehuacán,
Mexico, and his ﬁndings clariﬁed some aspects of Mesoamerican agricultural origins.
           264        PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                        Recent radiocarbon dating
                                                                                        results suggest that the plant
                                                                                        remains from different strata
                                                                                        of Tehuacán were mixed, and
                                                                                        thus the site might be less a
                                                                                        record of early maize domestica-
                                                                                        tion than originally thought.
                                                                                        The earliest maize cobs (four
                                                                                        samples) are now dated to about
                                                                                        4,700 years ago or younger
                                                                                        —much younger, as Gayle
                                                                                        Fritz notes,94 than the ﬁfth and
                                                                                        sixth millennium b.c. dates
                                                                                        originally ascribed to these
                                                                                        remains (Figure 6.21). Despite
                                                                                        these revisions and new and
                                                                                        interesting evidence from else-
                                                                                        where, the Tehuacán sequence
                                                                                        remains the best archaeolog-
                                                                                        ical reﬂection of the sequences
                                                                                        of changes in cultural behavior
                                                                                        that were involved in the period
                                                                                        of the origins of agriculture in
FIGURE 6.21 The evolution of maize cob size at Tehuacán, from the smallest cob          Mesoamerica. 95 During the
(left), which dates to about 3500 b.c., to the cob on the far right, an entirely modern
                                                                                        Ajuereado phase (c. 10,000–
variety dating to about b.c./a.d.
                                                                                        7000 b.c.96), people apparently
                                                                                        lived in small mobile groups
                        and exploited many wild plants. But they also depended heavily on hunting, exploiting wild
                        horses, antelopes, and jack rabbits at ﬁrst, and then shifting to deer and cottontail rabbits
                        as post-Pleistocene climates and environments changed, supplementing these resources
                        with gophers, rats, turtles, and birds. In the succeeding El Riego phase (c. 7000–5000 b.c.),
                        people appear to have lived much the same nomadic life in bands, but the groups may have
                        been somewhat bigger, and there is evidence that they were exploiting wild squash, chiles,
                        avocados, and other plants that were later domesticated. In the Coxcatlán phase (5000–
                        3400 b.c.) the size of the groups that made repeated and probably seasonal visits to
                        Tehuacán seems to have grown signiﬁcantly, and they exploited more plants and did less
                        hunting. In the Abeja phase (c. 3400–2300 b.c.), MacNeish believes that the area was
                        occupied by “central-based bands,” people who lived for long periods, and perhaps most
                        of the year, in large camps and relied heavily on cultivated plants. In succeeding periods
                        these Tehuacános used pottery and began to subsist mainly on domesticated maize, beans,
                        squash, and the other staples of Mesoamerica.
                             The Tehuacán botanical remains seemed to conﬁrm Mangelsdorf’s hypothesis: The
                        earliest corn cobs found were very small, and the tassels did indeed emerge from the tops
                        of the fruits. But the early maize found by MacNeish seemed to have many morphological
                        similarities to another wild perennial grass common in the semi-arid, subtemperate regions
                        of Mesoamerica, a grass called teosinte (Zea mexicana), and some botanists questioned
                                                                 THE ORIGINS OF AGRICULTURE       265


Mangelsdorf’s reconstruction, partially because the supposed placement of kernels on a cob
such as wild and domesticated maize would seem a very inefﬁcient mechanism for seed
dispersal.
      In 1972 plant geneticist George Beadle reasserted his argument of some decades
previous: that there had never been a “wild maize,” that domesticated corn instead was a
descendant of teosinte.97 Teosinte is a tall (up to 2 m) annual grass found throughout the
semi-arid and subtropical zones of Mexico and Guatemala, where it thrives in disturbed
areas and rapidly invades open areas such as abandoned cornﬁelds. Teosinte can be found
growing in ﬁelds that also include wild beans and squash, sometimes with the beans twining
around the teosinte stalk. Thus, the three staffs of life for Mesoamerica—maize, beans, and
squash—are a “natural” association.98 Teosinte plants look like maize, except for the seed
structure, where instead of maize’s heavy husk-covered cobs of many rows of kernels,
teosinte has just two rows of 6 –12 triangular kernels enclosed in a very hard covering.
Although these seeds look quite different from maize kernels, Beadle was able to produce
reasonably good popcorn and mock “Fritos” from teosinte kernels.
      Chemical analyses of teosinte and maize and studies of their genetic characteristics
support Beadle’s view of teosinte as the major ancestor of maize—although Mangelsdorf
mounted a spirited counterattack.99
      Domesticated maize shares several characteristics with teosinte. As Emily McClung
de Tapia notes,100 these include: (1) Teosinte and maize frequently and freely hybridize
under natural conditions; (2) they have the same chromosome number, 10, and these
chromosome appear nearly identical in structure; (3) maize and teosinte look very much
alike in anatomy and morphology; and (4) pollen from maize and teosinte are quite similar
in size. She notes, however, that pinpointing where teosinte was transformed into maize, if
this did indeed occur, has proven difﬁcult. The type of teosinte that seems most closely
related genetically to maize is the Chalco-type (Zea Mexicana ssp. mexicana), which is
native to the Basin of Mexico (modern Mexico City and environs), but this may a result of
hybridization.
      If teosinte is the ancestor of domesticated maize, the primary changes in the
domestication process were (1) the development of a less brittle rachis, followed by the
evolution of the cob; (2) the development of a soft fruit-case, so that the kernels could be
shelled free of the cob; and (3) the evolution of larger cobs and more rows of kernels. A
single gene—the so-called tunicate allele—controls to some extent both the brittleness of
the rachis and the toughness of the fruit case, and thus these features could easily have been
produced by direct selection of mutants with these characteristics. The third change,
increased cob size, was very gradual and probably differed sharply from area to area. If the
new dates for the Tehuacán maize remains are accurate (see earlier), maize cobs in this area
were selected for larger and larger size in such a way that the average length grew from a
little less than 2 cm in length to about 13 cm in length between about 3500 b.c. and a.d. 1500.
      Stephen J. Gould accepts Beadle’s claim for the derivation of maize from teosinte, but
he rejects Beadle’s hypothesis of a slow process of gradual genetic change.101 Gould notes
that the Tehuacán maize cobs are smaller than modern varieties, but at least they are cobs,
and we do not ﬁnd intermediate stages between the teosinte “ears,” which botanically
are radically different from the maize ears. Also, as Gould notes, maize and teosinte are
extremely similar genetically, and one would expect that a slow process of domestication
toward maize would have resulted in some major genetic differences.
266   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


           Instead Gould champions Hugh Iltis’s hypotheses about maize domestication. Iltis’s
      argument is a complex botanical and genetic scenario that cannot be examined in detail
      here, but its basic assumption is that there was a small genetic change in teosinte that
      produced what Iltis called a “catastrophic sexual transmutation.”102 Some minor genetic
      mutations could transmute male teosinte tassel spikes to female corn ears. This kind of
      change accords well with Gould’s conception of evolution as a series of sudden changes,
      not the accumulation of gradual changes. But Iltis’s scheme requires that people recognize
      the potential of the “hopeful monsters” a mutant teosinte plant would represent, for it is
      unlikely this mutant would be able to reproduce easily. In this case, human intentions are
      an important part of the overall equation of domestication.
           While maize is an excellent food source, it is deﬁcient in a number of important
      proteins and vitamins, and the evolution of agricultural economies in Mesoamerica derived
      considerable impetus from the domestication of other plant species, the most important of
      which were beans and squash. In fact, the evidence suggests that beans, squash, pumpkins,
      and other plants may have been cultivated before maize. Three species of beans (common
      beans, runner beans, and tepary beans) have wild ancestors in Mesoamerica, and changes
      in their morphological characteristics began to appear at about the same time as those of
      maize. But the earliest known domesticated beans did not make their appearance until
      between 4000 and 3000 b.c.
           The domestication of beans seems to have involved (1) increased seed permeability, so
      that the beans need not be soaked so long in water before being processed; (2) a change
      from a corkscrew-shaped, brittle pod that shatters easily to a straight, limp, non-shattering
      pod; and (3) in some cases, a shift from perennial to annual growth patterns.103 The primary
      importance of beans is that they are rich in lysine, which maize is deﬁcient in; thus the two
      are nutritionally complementary.
           The domestication of squash and pumpkins, members of the genus Cucurbita, seems
      to have been aimed at improving the seeds (rather than the ﬂesh) since wild cucurbita have
      ﬂesh so bitter or thin that they have little food value. Squash and pumpkin seeds, on the
      other hand, like most large seeds are veritable vitamin pills, as they include complex plant
      starches and other nutrients. Squash and pumpkin seeds, in fact, remain a favorite snack
      food, especially in less developed countries. The earliest cultivated squash seeds known are
      from Guilá Naquitz Cave in Oaxaca and date to 8750 to 7840 b.c.104
           Like all other early farmers, the ancient Mesoamericans were domesticating a variety
      of other plants, only some of which were eventually developed into staple food sources.
      Chili peppers, avocados, foxtail grass, “goosefoot” (Chenopodium), various kinds of cactus,
      several root crops, and many other plants were combined in a reliable and highly
      productive agricultural economy (Figure 6.22).
           The species of maize that eventually became the staple crop of North and South
      America seems to have been derived from species indigenous to central Mexico, perhaps
      the area around Mexico City, but the stimulus for the adoption and spread of the
      agricultural and village way of life may also have involved coastal areas. There, rich
      resources in the littoral/terrestrial interface may have provided sufﬁcient food for non-
      agricultural but sedentary communities.105 In time, these sedentary communities could
      have incorporated the new domesticated plants into their “pre-adapted” economies and
      social organizations, forming the ﬁrst agricultural communities. From that point on, the
      superior productivity of village-based agriculture would have ensured its rapid spread over
                                                               THE ORIGINS OF AGRICULTURE        267


all the areas where these crops
could be grown successfully. Cur-
rently we do not have sufﬁcient
data to evaluate this reconstruction
rigorously, but some evidence
indicates it may be correct. Large
mounds of shellﬁsh remains,
cracked rock, and stone tools have
been found on both the Gulf and
Paciﬁc coasts of Mesoamerica, but
few have been excavated or ﬁrmly
dated. Many groups of people lived
in the rich terrestrial/marine niches
along Mexico’s coasts after 3000
b.c., and some of them may have
lived in villages and farmed some
maize and other crops, but the
evidence for substantial farming
and the spread of villages in Mexico
is scanty until shortly after 2000
b.c.106
     With regard to the question
of why agriculture appeared in
Mesoamerica when and where it
did, we are left with the rather          FIGURE 6.22 Some areas of early American domestication and agriculture.
unsatisfactory models discussed           Other areas may be buried under coastal waters or undiscovered in dense
                                          coastal vegetation zones.
earlier in this chapter. The sole
single factors that seem to have
affected most centers of agricultural
origins, from China to Mesoamerica, are the changes in plant, animal, and human
communities that resulted from the change in climates as the glaciers retreated at the end
of the last Pleistocene period. If we then pose the standard challenge to the importance of
these climate changes—speciﬁcally, that they happened many times previously in the
Pleistocene without the same effects—we are left with either accepting the Richerson and
colleagues, explanation or with the surmise that there was something different about the
demography, technological capacities, or some other aspect of human communities 10,000
years ago, compared to earlier groups.


South America
How and when Mexican varieties of domesticated maize spread into Central and South
America are not well known. There are some interesting bits of evidence, however, that
suggest maize may have been cultivated in Ecuador, Peru, Argentina, and Chile as early as
3000 b.c., and perhaps earlier.107
     Physical remains of crops would, of course, be the best evidence for the spread of
agriculture, but the botanical record of early South American cultivation is poorly known.
268   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      Only at sites dated after about 900 b.c. are maize remains commonly found. Deborah
      Pearsall suggests that maize did not become an important crop until after 1500 b.c.108
           Maize was just one of the important food crops in Andean South America, and in some
      areas, potatoes, beans, and quinoa (pronounced “keen-wa”) were the staffs of life. There is
      some evidence that beans may have been domesticated before 8000 b.c., based on a few
      remains from Guitarrero Cave, and there are fairly secure ﬁnds of beans there dating to
      about 5700 b.c.,109 but the evidence of the earliest stages of the domestication of beans and
      many other plants is scanty. The origins of potato domestication, too, are poorly preserved.
      Domesticated potatoes were found in sites in Peru’s Casma Valley in occupations dating to
      2250–1775 b.c.,110 and there are traces of cultivation that may go back as early as about 8000
      b.c.111 This proliﬁc plant, which today is grown in hundreds of varieties in Peru, may not
      store as well as cereals, but it can be grown in wet cold soils where cereals do not do well—
      as evidenced by its popularity in Ireland and northern Europe. The ancient South Americans
      developed a method of storing potatoes by freeze-drying them, and the potato is
      intrinsically very nutritious, and so this plant could provide the stability and reliability of
      production for South Americans that cereals did in many other places.
           It is an interesting footnote to Peruvian plant domestication that quinoa is becoming
      increasingly popular in North America. The seeds of this plant can be milled into a ﬂour
      that has one of the highest protein contents of any plant (but made a miserable chocolate
      chip cookie in one experiment), and health food enthusiasts are using this plant in growing
      numbers.
           The role of animal domestication in early Peru is unclear, but llamas and guinea pigs
      were certainly domesticated in central Peru by 3500 b.c. As in Mexico, however, hunting
      continued to play an important role in many areas until quite late.112
           The relationship of plants and animals, agriculture, and sedentary communities in
      northwestern South America in general suggests that domestication and sedentary
      communities may have preceded specialized agricultural economies in some areas by many
      centuries, particularly on the coast, where small sedentary communities of ﬁshers, foragers,
      and part-time bean and squash cultivators were established before maize cultivation was of
      any importance.
           Deborah Pearsall113 has broken the South American “center” of agricultural origins
      into three complexes. The origins of the Lowland Complex are poorly understood because
      the remains of some of the most important early plants that may have been native to the
      tropical forests, such as manioc (Manihot esculenta) and sweet potatoes (Ipomoea batatas),
      do not preserve very well archaeologically. Maize eventually became a dominant crop in
      the lowlands, but it was preceded and eventually complemented by a wide range of other
      plant foods, ranging from ﬂavoring foods (such as chili peppers) to squash to fruits
      (including avocado and, later, papaya and pineapple). Pearsall’s Mid-Elevation Complex,
      which includes areas between about 1,500 and 3,000 m of elevation, includes amaranths,
      peanuts, jicama, various beans, and other plants, including coca. Here, too, maize
      cultivation eventually relegated many of these crops to the status of supplemental foods,
      but the range of genera domesticated across the Andes and into the lowland coasts and
      forests underscores just how pervasive and ecologically diverse the domestication process
      was. Pearsall’s High-Elevation Complex is found in areas over about 3,000 m of elevation.
      In this cold and agriculturally demanding zone, potatoes and various other tubers provided
      the dietary staple, in combination with meat from domesticated llamas and alpacas.
                                                                 THE ORIGINS OF AGRICULTURE      269


Certainly other plants were cultivated, including quinoa and chenopods, but few traces of
these and other plant remains have been found.


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

Generally, we have no evidence that people of the immediate post-Pleistocene era
experienced recurrent periods of starvation, or that they “invented” domesticates and
agriculture as a way of addressing their immediate food supply problems. Instead, the
situation may well have been one in which, as population densities slowly rose, people
gravitated into various niches where the exploitation of wild wheat and barley, teosinte,
and other third-choice plants was marginally increased. Even if they were not forced into
these areas by expanding population densities and were not under the dire threat of
imminent starvation (so that they radically increased their consumption of these third-
choice foods), the plasticity of some of these species was such that minimal changes in
selective pressures might have quickly and directly rewarded this increased exploitation.
      In this sort of reconstruction it does not seem likely that the timing of wheat and
barley domestication, for example, was the result mainly of “lucky” mutations. All over the
post-Pleistocene world so many diverse animal and plant species were domesticated that
explaining them all in terms of “lucky” mutations would require coincidences of a highly
unlikely nature. Nor was this a technological revolution: The ﬁrst intensive cereal collectors
required only minimal tools—implements certainly no more complex or imaginative than
the ﬁsh traps and bows and arrows of the late Pleistocene.
      Finally, for the individual with too few things to worry about, we might note that there
is a certain danger in the fact that almost all the world’s population now depends for most
of its subsistence on only about 20 genera of plants. As hybrid strains are replacing local
varieties at an ever-increasing rate, the chances for truly catastrophic mutations of new crop
diseases are growing, particularly with expected worldwide changes in climate. The Irish
potato famine was largely the result of a whole country becoming dependent on a single
crop that was cloned from a small genetic population and therefore subject to almost
complete destruction by disease. Eventually the world may be at the same risk. The
transition to economies based on domesticated plants and animals thus is a process still in
operation and one whose future direction is unclear.
      Against this uncertain future seed “banks” have been established, such as the one at
Washington State University, where seeds of more than 1,700 plant species are kept in
special conditions against the day when their genetic resources might be useful. Every
species is a unique and complex product of evolution, whose members are in a sense
chemical factories able to synthesize the most complex compounds from only air, water,
and soil. Not only food but also medicines and many other products are mainly made from
plant materials, and we have every reason to believe that the continuing destruction and
extinction of plant communities in the Amazon Basin and elsewhere in the developing
world will eventually be recognized as irremediable catastrophes. As we have noted
previously, in the evolutionary game in which all of earth’s life-forms participate, there is
usually great advantage to the maintenance of genetic variability. We are so mutually
interdependent with plants and animals that loss of variety in the nonhuman biological
world will almost certainly come back to haunt us.
270   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


           Perhaps we might also ask ourselves if Jared Diamond is correct in his appraisal of the
      origins of agriculture:
           Archaeologists studying the rise of farming have reconstructed a crucial state at which we
           made the worst mistake in human history. Forced to choose between limiting population
           or trying to increase food production, we chose the latter and ended up with starvation,
           warfare, and tyranny. Hunter-gatherers practiced the most successful and longest-lasting
           life style in human history. In contrast, we’re still struggling with the mess into which
           agriculture has tumbled us. . . . [W]ill the plight of famine-stricken peasants gradually
           spread to engulf us all? Or will we somehow achieve those seductive blessings that we
           imagine behind agriculture’s glittering façade.114
           Or has an agricultural way of life resulted in changes that led to better distribution of
      products and access to resources so that life expectancy is now higher and in fact mortality
      rates lower—at least for ﬁrst world nations within the last 100 years or so?


      BIBLIOGRAPHY
      Aitkens, C. M., K. M. Ames, and D. Sanger. 1986. “Afﬂuent Collectors at the Edges of Eurasia and North America:
                  Some Comparisons and Observations on the Evolution of Society Among North Temperate Coastal
                  Hunter-Gatherers.” In Prehistoric Hunter-Gatherers in Japan, ed. T. Akazawa and C. M. Aikens. Tokyo:
                  University of Tokyo Press.
      Akazawa, T., and C. M. Aikens, eds. 1986. Prehistoric Hunter-Gatherers in Japan. Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press.
      Ammerman, A. J., and L. L. Cavalli-Sforza. 1984. The Neolithic Transition and the Genetics of Population in Europe.
                  Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
      Anderson-Gerfaud, P. C. 1990. “Experimental Cultivation and Harvest of Wild Cereals: Criteria for Interpreting
                  Epipalaeolithic and Neolithic Artifacts Associated with Plant Exploitation.” In Préhistoires de
                  L’Agriculture: Nouvelles Approches Experimentales et Ethnographiques, ed. P. C. Anderson-Gerfaud.
                  Valbonne: Monographies du Centre de Recherches Archéologiques.
      Aurenche, O., P. Galet, E. Régagnon-Caroline, and J. Évin. 2001. “Proto-Neolithic and Neolithic Cultures in the
                  Middle East—The Birth of Agriculture, Livestock Raising, and Ceramics: A Calibrated 14C Chronology
                  12,500 –5500 cal BC.” Radiocarbon 43(3):1191–1202.
      Bar-Yosef, O. 1991. “The Early Neolithic of the Levant: Recent Advances.” The Review of Archaeology 12(2):1–18.
      Bar-Yosef, O., and A. Belfer-Cohen. 1992. “From Foraging to Farming in the Mediterranean Levant.” In
                  Transitions to Agriculture in Prehistory, ed. A. B. Gebauer and T. D. Price. Ann Arbor: Prehistory Press.
      Bar-Yosef, O., and F. R. Valla, eds. 1990. The Natuﬁan Culture in the Levant. Ann Arbor: Monographs in
                  Prehistory, Archaeological Series 1.
      Barlow, K. R., and M. Heck. 2002. “More on Acorn Eating During the Natuﬁan: Expected Patterning in Diet and
                  the Archaeological Record of Subsistence.” In Hunter-Gatherer Archaeobotany: Perspectives from the
                  Northern Temperate Zone, ed. S. L. R. Mason and J. G. Hather, pp. 128 –145. London: Institute of
                  Archaeology, University College London.
      Barnard, A. 1983. “Contemporary Hunter-Gatherers: Current Theoretical Issues in Ecology and Social
                  Organization.” Annual Review of Anthropology 12:193 –214.
      Beadle, G. W. 1972. “The Mystery of Maize.” Field Museum of Natural History Bulletin 43:2–11.
      ———. 1980. “The Ancestry of Corn.” Scientiﬁc American 242:112–199.
      Belfer-Cohen, A. 1991. “The Natuﬁan in the Levant.” Annual Review of Anthropology 20:167–210.
      Bellwood, P. 1986. The Prehistory of the Indo-Malaysian Archipelago. Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
      ———. 2001. “Early Agriculturalist Population Diasporas? Farming, Languages, and Genes.” Annual Review of
                  Anthropology 30:181–207.
      Bender, B. 1978. “Gatherer-Hunter to Farmer: A Social Perspective.” World Archaeology 10:204 –222.
      ———. 1985. “Emergent Tribal Formations in the American Midcontinent.” American Antiquity 50(1):52 – 62.
      Binford, L. R. 1968. “Post-Pleistocene Adaptations.” In New Perspectives in Archaeology, ed. S. R. Binford and
                  L. R. Binford. Chicago: Aldine.
      Bird, R. M. 1990. “What Are the Chances of Finding Maize in Peru Dating Before 1000 b.c.?: A Reply to Bonavia
                  and Grobman.” American Antiquity 55(4):828 – 840.
      Blumler, M. A., and R. Byrne. 1991. “The Ecological Genetics of Domestication and the Origins of Agriculture.”
                  Current Anthropology 32(1):23 –54.
                                                                              THE ORIGINS OF AGRICULTURE             271


Boserup, E. 1965. The Conditions of Agricultural Growth. Chicago: Aldine.
———. 1981. Population and Technology. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Boyd, B. 2004. “Agency and Landscape; Abandoning the ‘Nature/Culture’ Dichotomy in Interpretations of the
             Natuﬁan and the Transition to the Neolithic.” In The Last Hunter-Gatherers in the Near East, ed. C.
             Delage, pp. 119 –136. Oxford: Archaeopress, British Archaeological Reports International Series 1320.
Braidwood, R. J. 1960. “The Agricultural Revolution.” Scientiﬁc American 203:130 –141.
Braidwood, R. J., and L. S. Braidwood, eds. 1983. Prehistoric Archaeology Along the Zagros Flanks. Chicago: The
             Oriental Institute.
Brocker, W. S. 1997. “Thermohaline Circulation, the Achilles Heel of Our Climate System: Will Man-Made CO2
             Upset the Current Balance?” Science 178:1582–1588.
Byrd, B. F. 1989. “The Natuﬁan: Settlement Variability and Economic Adaptations in the Levant at the End of the
             Pleistocene.” Journal of World Prehistory 3:159 –197.
———. 1994. “Public and Private, Domestic and Corporate; The Emergence of the Southwest Asian Village.”
             American Antiquity 59(4):639–679.
———. 2005. “Reassessing the Emergence of Village Life in the Near East.” Journal of Archaeological Research
             13(3):231–290.
Byrne, R. 1987. “Climatic Change and the Origins of Agriculture.” In Studies in the Neolithic and Urban
             Revolutions: The V. Gordon Childe Colloquium, Mexico, 1986, ed. L. Manzanilla. British Archaeological
             Reports International Series 349.
Carneiro, R., and D. Hilse. 1966. “On Determining the Probable Rate of Population Growth During the
             Neolithic.” American Anthropologist 68:177–181.
Caton-Thompson, G., and E. W. Gardner. 1934. The Desert Fayum. London: Royal Anthropological Institute.
Cavalli-Sforza, L. L., and M. W. Feldman. 1981. Cultural Transmission and Evolution: A Quantitative Approach.
             Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Childe, V. 1952. New Light on the Most Ancient East, 4th ed. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Clark, J. G. D. 1980. Mesolithic Prelude. The Paleolithic-Neolithic Transition in Old World Prehistory. Edinburgh:
             Edinburgh University Press.
Clark, J. D., and S. A. Brandt, eds. 1984. From Hunters to Farmers. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Cohen, N. M. 1977. The Food Crisis in Prehistory. New Haven and London: Yale University Press.
Cohen, N. M., and G. J. Armelagos. 1984. Paleopathology at the Origins of Culture. New York: Academic Press.
Cowan, C. W., and B. D. Smith. 1993. “New Perspectives on a Wild Gourd in Eastern North America.” Journal
             of Ethnobiology 13:17–54.
Cowan, C. W., and P. J. Watson, eds. 1992. The Origins of Agriculture: An International Perspective. Washington,
             DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
Crawford, G. W., and G.-A. Lee. “Agricultural Origins in the Korean Peninsula.” Antiquity 77:87–95.
Crawford, G. W., and C. Shen. 1998. “The Origins of Rice Agriculture: Recent Progress in East Asia.” Antiquity
             72:858–866.
Crites, G. D. 1993. “Domesticated Sunﬂower in Fifth Millennium B.P. Temporal Context: New Evidence from
             Middle Tennessee.” American Antiquity 58:146 –148.
Davis, S., and F. R. Valla. 1978. “Evidence for Domestication of the Dog 12,000 Years Ago in the Natuﬁan of
             Israel.” Nature 276:608 – 410.
Delage, C., ed. 2004. The Last Hunter-Gatherers in the Near East. Oxford: British Archaeological Reports
             International Series 1320, Archaeopress.
Diamond, J. 1991. “The Worst Mistake in the History of the Human Race.” In Applying Cultural Anthropology,
             ed. A. Podolefsky and P. J. Brown, pp. 72–75. Mountain View, CA: Mayﬁeld Publishing.
———. 1997. Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies. New York: W. W. Norton & Company.
Diener, P., and E. E. Robkin. 1978. “Ecology, Evolution, and the Search for Cultural Origins: The Question of
             Islamic Pig Prohibition.” Current Anthropology 19:493 –540.
Doebley, J. F. 1990. “Molecular Evidence and the Evolution of Maize.” In New Perspectives on the Origin and Evolu-
             tion of New World Domesticated Plants, ed. P. K. Bretting. Economic Botany 44 (Supplement): 28–38.
Doebley, J. F., and H. H. Iltis. 1980. “Taxonomy of Zea [Gramineae]. I. A Subgeneric Classiﬁcation with Key to
             Taxa.” American Journal of Botany 67:982–993.
Dyson-Hudson, R., and N. Dyson-Hudson. 1980. “Nomadic Pastoralism.” Annual Review of Anthropology
             9:15–61.
Ekholm, G. F. 1964. “Transpaciﬁc Contacts.” In Prehistoric Man in the New World, ed. J. D. Jennings and
             E. Norbeck. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Ellen, R. 1982. Environment, Subsistence and System. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Feldman, M., and E. R. Sears. 1981. “The Wild Gene Resources of Wheat.” Scientiﬁc American 244:102–113.
Fieldel, S. J. 1987. Prehistory of the Americas. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Flannery, K. V. 1968. “Archeological Systems Theory and Early Mesoamerica.” In Anthropological Archeology in
             the Americas, ed. B. J. Meggers. Washington, DC: The Anthropological Society of Washington.
272   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      ———. 1972. “The Origins of the Village as a Settlement Type in Mesoamerica and the Near East: A Comparative
                   Study.” In Man, Settlement and Urbanism, ed. P. J. Ucko, R. Tringham, and G. W. Dimbleby. London:
                   Duckworth.
      ———. 1973. “The Origins of Agriculture.” Annual Review of Anthropology 2:271–310.
      ———. 1997. “In Defense of the Tehuacán Project.” Current Anthropology 38(4):660 – 672.
      Flannery, K. V., and M. D. Coe. 1968. “Social and Economic Systems in Formative Mesoamerica.” In New
                   Perspectives in Archeology, ed. S. R. Binford and L. R. Binford. Chicago: Aldine.
      Friedman, J. 1974. “Marxism, Structuralism, and Vulgar Materialism.” Man 9:444 – 469.
      Frisch, R., and J. McArthur. 1974. “Menstrual Cycles: Fatness as a Determinant of Minimum Weight for Height
                   Necessary for Their Maintenance or Onset.” Science 185:949 –951.
      Frison, G. C. 1978. Prehistoric Hunters on the High Plains. New York: Academic Press.
      Fritz, G. J. 1994. “Are the First American Farmers Getting Younger?” Current Anthropology 35(3):305 –309.
      Galinat, W. C. 1971. “The Origin of Maize.” Annual Review of Genetics 5:447– 478.
      ———. 1985. “The Missing Links Between Teosinte and Maize: A Review.” Maydica 30:137–160.
      Garrod, D. 1957. “The Natuﬁan Culture. The Life and Economy of a Mesolithic People in the Near East.”
                   Proceedings of the British Academy 43:211–217.
      Gebauer, A., and T. D. Price, eds. 1992. Transitions to Agriculture in Prehistory. Madison, WI: Prehistory Press.
      Gould, S. J. 1985. The Flamingo’s Smile. New York: W. W. Norton.
      Grigson, C. 1993. “The Earliest Domestic Horses in the Levant.” Journal of Archaeological Science 20(6):645 – 655.
      Grun, P. 1990. “The Evolution of Cultivated Potatoes.” In New Perspectives on the Origin and Evolution of New
                   World Domesticated Plants, ed. P. K. Bretting. Economic Botany 44 (Supplement): 28 –38.
      Haaland, R. 1987. Socio-Economic Differentiation in Neolithic Sudan. Oxford, England: British Archaeological
                   Reports, International Series 350.
      Halperin, R. 1980. “Ecology and Mode of Production: Seasonal Variation and the Division of Labor by Sex among
                   Hunter-Gatherers.” Journal of Anthropological Research 36:379 –399.
      Harlan, J. R. 1967. “A Wild Wheat Harvest in Turkey.” Archaeology 20:197–201.
      ———. 1989. “The Tropical African Cereals.” In Foraging and Farming: The Evolution of Plant Exploitation, ed.
                   D. R. Harris and G. C. Hillman. London: Unwin Hyman.
      ———. 1992. “Indigenous African Agriculture.” In The Origins of Agriculture: An International Perspective, ed.
                   C. Cowan and P. Watson. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
      Harlan, J., and D. Zohary. 1966. “Distribution of Wild Wheats and Barley.” Science 153:1074 –1080.
      Harner, M. 1970. “Population Pressure and the Social Evolution of Agriculturalists.” Southwestern Journal of
                   Anthropology 26:67– 86.
      Harpending, H., and H. Davis. 1976. “Some Implications for Hunter-Gatherer Ecology Derived from the Spatial
                   Structure of Resources.” World Archaeology 8:275 –286.
      Harris, D., and G. Hillman, eds. 1989. Farming and Foraging. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
      Harris, M. 1974. Cows, Pigs, Wars, and Witches. New York: Random House.
      ———. 1977. Cannibals and Kings. New York: Random House.
      Hassan, F. A. 1980. Demographic Archaeology. New York: Academic Press.
      Hayden, B. 1981. “Research and Development in the Stone Age: Technological Transitions Among Hunter-
                   Gatherers.” Current Anthropology 22:519 –548.
      ———. 1990. “Nimrods, Piscators, Pluckers, and Planters: The Emergence of Food Production.” Journal of
                   Anthropological Archaeology 9:31– 69.
      ———. 2001. “Fabulous Feasts: A Prolegomenon to the Importance of Feasting.” In Feasts: Archaeological and
                   Ethnographic Perspectives on Food, Politics, and Power, ed. M. Dietler and B. Hayden, pp. 23 – 64.
                   Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
      ———. 2004. “Sociopolitical Organization in the Natuﬁan: A View from the Northwest.” In The Last Hunter-
                   Gatherers in the Near East, ed. C. Delage, pp. 263 –308. Oxford: Archaeopress, British Archaeological
                   Reports International Series 1320.
      Helback, H. 1964. “First Impressions of the Çatal Huyuk Plant Husbandry.” Anatolian Studies 14:121–123.
      Henry, D. 1989. From Foraging to Agriculture: The Levant at the End of the Ice Age. Philadelphia: University of
                   Pennsylvania Press.
      Higham, C., and T. L.-D. Lu. 1998. “The Origins and Dispersal of Rice Cultivation.” Antiquity 72:867 – 877.
      Hillman, G., and M. S. Davies. 1990. “Measured Domestication Rates in Wild Wheats and Barley Under Primitive
                   Cultivation, and Their Archaeological Implications.” Journal of World Prehistory 4:157–222.
      Ho, P. 1969. “The Loess and the Origin of Chinese Agriculture.” American Historical Review 75:1–36.
      Hodder, I. 1990. The Domestication of Europe: Structure and Contingency in Neolithic Societies. Cambridge, MA:
                   Blackwell.
      Hole, F. 1971. “Comment on ‘Origins of Food Production in Southwestern Asia’ by G. Wright.” Current
                   Anthropology 12:472 – 473.
      ———. 1984. “A Reassessment of the Neolithic Revolution.” Paléorient 10:49 – 60.
                                                                               THE ORIGINS OF AGRICULTURE             273


Hole, F., K. V. Flannery, and J. A. Neely. 1969. Prehistory and Human Ecology of the Deh Luran Plain. Ann Arbor:
             Memoirs of the Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan, No. 1.
Iltis, H. 1983. “From Teosinte to Maize: The Catastrophic Sexual Mutation.” Science 222:886 – 894.
———. 1987. “Maize Evolution and Agricultural Origins.” In Grass Systematics and Evolution, ed. T. R.
             Soderstrom, K. W. Hilu, C. S. Campbell, and M. E. Barkworth. Washington, DC: Smithsonian
             Institution Press.
Johannessen, C. L. 1988. “Indian Maize in the Twelfth Century B.C.” Nature 332:587.
Johnson, F., ed. 1972. The Prehistory of the Tehuacan Valley, Vol. 4. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Just, P. 1980. “Time and Leisure in the Elaboration of Culture.” Journal of Anthropological Research 36:105 –115.
Kaufman, D. 1986. “A Reconsideration of Adaptive Change in the Levantine Epipaleolithic.” In The End of the
             Paleolithic in the Old World, ed. L. G. Straus. Oxford: British Archaeological Reports International
             Series 284.
Keene, A. S. 1981. “Optimal Foraging in a Nonmarginal Environment: A Model of Prehistoric Subsistence
             Strategies in Michigan.” In Hunter-Gatherer Foraging Strategies, ed. B. Winterhalder and E. A. Smith.
             Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Kelly, R. L. 1992. “Mobility/Sedentism: Concepts, Archaeological Measures, and Effects.” Annual Review of
             Anthropology 21:43 – 66.
Kirkbride, D. 1968. “Beidha: Early Neolithic Village Life South of the Dead Sea.” Antiquity 42:263–274.
Kirkby, A. 1973. The Use of Land and Water Resources in the Past and Present Valley of Oaxaca, Mexico. Memoirs
             of the Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan, No. 5.
Kislev, M. E., and O. Bar-Yosef. 1988. “The Legumes: The Earliest Domesticated Plants in the Near East?” Current
             Anthropology 29(1):175 –178.
Kislev, M. E., D. Nadel, and I. Carmi. 1992. “Epipalaeolithic (19,000 bp) Cereal and Fruit Diet at Ohalo II, Sea of
             Galilee, Israel.” Review of Palaeobotany and Palynology 73:161–166.
Köhler-Rollefson, I. 1989. “Changes in Goat Exploitation at ’Ain Ghazal between the Early and Late Neolithic: A
             Metrical Analysis.” Paléorient 15(1):141–146.
Kuijt, I., ed. 2000. Life in Neolithic Farming Communities: Social Organization, Identity, and Differentiation. New
             York: Plenum.
Lange, F. W. 1971. “Marine Resources: A Viable Subsistence Alternative for the Prehistoric Lowland Maya.”
             American Antiquity 73:619 – 639.
Legge, A. J., and P. A. Rowley-Conwy. 1987. “Gazelle Hunting in Stone Age Syria.” Scientiﬁc American (August):
             88–95.
Lippe, R. N., R. M. Bird, and D. M. Stemper. 1984. “Maize Recovered at La Ponga, an Early Ecuadorian Site.”
             American Antiquity 49(1):118 –124.
Lynch, T. F. 1980. Guitarrero Cave: Early Man in the Andes. New York: Academic Press.
MacNeish, R. S. 1983. “Mesoamerica.” In Early Man in the New World, ed. R. Shutler, Jr. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage
             Publications.
———. gen. ed. 1970. The Prehistory of the Tehuacan Valley: Chronology and Irrigation, Vol. 4. Austin: University
             of Texas Press.
Mangelsdorf, P. 1974. Corn: Its Origin, Evolution, and Improvement. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
———. 1983. “The Mystery of Corn: New Perspectives.” Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society
             127(4):215 –247.
Martin, L. 2000. “Gazelle (Gazella spp.) Behavioural Ecology: Predicting Animal Behaviour for Prehistoric
             Environments in South-West Asia.” Journal of Zoology London 250:13 –30.
McClung de Tapia, E. 1992. “Origins of Agriculture in Mesoamerica and Central America.” In Origins of
             Agriculture: An International Perspective, ed. C. W. Cowan and P. J. Watson, pp. 143 –171. Washington,
             DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
McCorriston, J., and F. Hole. 1991. “The Ecology of Seasonal Stress and the Origins of Agriculture in the Near
             East.” American Anthropologist 93:46 – 69.
Meggers, B. 1975. “The Transpaciﬁc Origins of Mesoamerican Civilization: A Preliminary Review of the Evidence
             and Its Theoretical Implications.” American Anthropologist 77:1–27.
Mellaart, J. 1975. The Neolithic of the Near East. London: Thames and Hudson.
Milisauskas, S., and J. Kruk. 1989. “Neolithic Economy in Central Europe.” Journal of World Prehistory
             2(3):403–446.
Miller, N. 1996. “Seed Eaters of the Ancient Near East: Human or Herbivore?” Current Anthropology
             37(3):521–528.
Molleson, T. 1989. “Seed Preparation in the Neolithic: The Osteological Evidence.” Antiquity 63(239):356 –362.
Moore, A. M. T., and G. C. Hillman. 1992. “The Pleistocene to Holocene Transition and Human Economy in
             Southwest Asia: The Impact of the Younger Dryas.” American Antiquity 57(3):482– 494.
Moore, A. M. T., G. C. Hillman, and A. J. Legge. 2000. Village on the Eyphrates: From Foraging to Farming at Abu
             Hureyra. New York: Oxford University Press.
274   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      Mortensen, P. 1972. “Seasonal Camps and Early Villages in the Zagros.” In Man, Settlement and Urbanism, ed.
                  P. Ucko, R. Tringham, and G. W. Dimbleby. London: Duckworth.
      Munchaev, R. M., and N. Y. Merpert. 1971. New Studies of Early Agricultural Settlements in the Sinjar Valley.
                  Belgrade: VIII Congress International des Sciences Prehistoriques et Protohistoriques.
      Nadel, D. 1995. “The Organization of Space in a Fisher-Hunter-Gatherers Camp at Ohalo II, Israel.” In Nature et
                  Culture, ed. M. Otte, pp. 373 –388. Liège: E.R.A.U.L. 68.
      Nesbitt, M. 2002. “When and Where Did Domesticated Cereals First Occur in Southwest Asia?” In The Dawn of
                  Farming in the Near East, ed. R. Cappers and S. Bottema, pp. 113 –132. Studies in Early Near Eastern
                  Production, Subsistence, and Environment 6. Berlin: ex oriente.
      Olsen, S. 1985. Origins of the Domestic Dog. Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
      Olszewski, D. I. 1993. “Subsistence Ecology in the Mediterranean Forest; Implications for the Origins of
                  Cultivation in the Epipaleolithic Southern Levant. American Anthropologist 95(2):420 – 435.
      ———. 2004. “Plant Food Subsistence Issues and Scientiﬁc Inquiry in the Early Natuﬁan.” In The Last Hunter-
                  Gatherers in the Near East, ed. C. Delage, pp. 189 –209. Oxford: British Archaeological Reports
                  International Series 1320, Archaeopress.
      Pearsall, D. M. 1992. “The Origins of Plant Cultivation in South America.” In The Origins of Agriculture, ed.
                  C. W. Cowan and P. J. Watson. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
      Pearsall, D. M., and D. R. Piperno. 1990. “Antiquity of Maize Cultivation in Ecuador: Summary and Reevaluation
                  of the Evidence.” American Antiquity 55:324 –337.
      Perkins, D., Jr., and P. Daly. 1968. “A Hunter’s Village in Neolithic Turkey.” Scientiﬁc American 210:94 –105.
      Piperno, D. R. and D. M. Pearsall. 1998. The Origins of Agriculture in the Lowland Neotropics. New York: Academic
                  Press.
      Price, T. D. 1987. “The Mesolithic of Western Europe.” Journal of World Prehistory 1(3):225 –305.
      Price, T. D., and A. B. Gebauer, eds. 1995. Last Hunters First Farmers. Santa Fe, NM: School of American Research.
      Pryor, F. L. 1986. “The Adoption of Agriculture: Some Theoretical and Empirical Evidence.” American
                  Anthropologist 88(4):879 – 897.
      Pumpelly, R. 1908. Explorations in Turkey, the Expedition of 1904: Prehistoric Civilization of Anau. Vol. 1.
                  Washington, DC: Publications of the Carnegie Institution, No. 73.
      Redding, R. W. 1988. “A General Explanation of Subsistence Change: From Hunting and Gathering to Food
                  Production.” Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 7:59 –97.
      Renfrew, C. 1987. Archaeology and Language. London: Jonathan Cape.
      Reynolds, R. G. 1986. “An Adaptive Computer Model for the Evolution of Plant Collecting and Early Agriculture
                  in the Eastern Valley of Oaxaca.” In Guilá Naquitz: Archaic Foraging and Early Agriculture in Oaxaca,
                  Mexico, ed. K. Flannery. New York: Academic Press.
      Richards, M. 2003. “The Neolithic Invasion of Europe.” Annual Review of Anthropology 32:135 –162.
      Richerson, P. J., R. Boyd, and R. L. Bettinger. 2001. “Was Agriculture Impossible During the Pleistocene but
                  Mandatory During the Holocene? A Climate Change Hypothesis.” American Antiquity 66(3):387–
                  411.
      Rick, J. W. 1980. Prehistoric Hunters of the High Andes. New York: Academic Press.
      Rindos, D. 1980. “Symbiosis, Instability, and the Origins and Spread of Agriculture: A New Model.” Current
                  Anthropology 21:751–772.
      ———. 1984. The Origins of Agriculture: An Evolutionary Perspective. New York: Academic Press.
      Rollefson, G. O. 1983. “Ritual and Ceremony at Neolithic Ain Ghazal (Jordan).” Paléorient 9(2):29 –38.
      ———. 1986. “Neolithic Ain Ghazal (Jordan): Ritual and Ceremony II.” Paléorient 12(1):45 –52.
      Roosevelt, A. 1980. Parmana. Prehistoric Maize and Manioc Subsistence along the Amazon and Orinoco. New York:
                  Academic Press.
      Rosen, S. A. 1988. “Notes on the Origins of Pastoral Nomadism: A Case Study from the Negev and Sinai.” Current
                  Anthropology 29(3):498 –506.
      Rosenberg, M. 1990. “The Mother of Invention: Evolutionary Theory, Territoriality, and the Origins of
                  Agriculture.” American Anthropologist 92(2):498 –506.
      Rosenberg, M., and M. K. Davis. 1992. “Hallan Çemi Tepesi, An Early Aceramic Neolithic Site in Eastern
                  Anatolia.” Anatolica VXIII:1–18.
      Sahlins, M. 1976. Culture and Practical Reason. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
      Simmons, A. H., I. Köhler-Rollefson, G. O. Rollefson, R. Mandel, and Z. Kafaﬁ. 1988. “’Ain Ghazal: A Major
                  Neolithic Settlement in Central Jordan.” Science 240:35 –39.
      Smith, B. D. 1994. “The Origins of Agriculture in the Americas.” Evolutionary Anthropology 3(5):174 –184.
      ———. 1997. “Reconsidering the Ocampo Caves and the Era of Incipient Cultivation in Mesoamerica.” Latin
                  American Antiquity 8(4):342–383.
      Smith, P. E. L. 1967. “New Investigations in the Late Pleistocene Archaeology of the Kom Ombo Plain (Upper
                  Egypt).” Quaternaria 9:141–152.
      ———. 1972. “Ganj Dareh Tepe.” Iran 10:165 –168.
                                                                              THE ORIGINS OF AGRICULTURE             275


———. 1976. “Early Food Productions in Northern Africa as Seen from Southwestern Asia.” In Origins of African
             Plant Domestication, ed. J. R. Harlan, J. M. J. de Wet, and A. Stemler. The Hague: Mouton.
Solecki, R. L. 1981. “An Early Village Site at Zawi Chemi Shanidar.” Bibliotheca Mesopotamica. Vol. 13.
Solecki, R. S., and R. L. Solecki. 1980. “Paleoecology of the Negev.” Quarterly Review of Archaeology 1:8, 12.
Spuhler, J. 1985. “Anthropology, Evolution, and ‘Scientiﬁc Creationism.’ ” Annual Review of Anthropology
             14:103–133.
Stark, B., and B. Voorhies, eds. 1978. Prehistoric Coastal Adaptations: The Economy and Ecology of Maritime Middle
             America. New York: Academic Press.
Stothert, K. E. 1985. “The Preceramic Las Vegas Culture of Coastal Ecuador.” American Antiquity 50(3):613 – 637.
Takamiya, H. 2001. “Introductory Routes of Rice to Japan: An Examination of the Southern Route Hypothesis.”
             Asian Perspectives 40(2):209 –226.
Tauber, H. 1981. “13C Evidence for Dietary Habits of Prehistoric Man in Denmark.” Nature 292:332 –333.
Testart, A. 1982. “The Signiﬁcance of Food Storage Among Hunter-Gatherers: Residence Patterns, Population
             Densities, and Social Inequalities.” Current Anthropology 23(5):523 –527.
Thorpe, I. J. 1996. The Origins of Agriculture in Europe. New York: Routledge.
Tringham, R., D. Drstić, T. Kaiser, and B. Voytek. 1980. “The Early Agricultural Site of Selevac, Yugoslavia.”
             Archaeology 33(2):24 –32.
Turnball, P. F., and C. A. Reed. 1974. “The Fauna from the Terminal Pleistocene of Palegawra Cave.” Fieldiana
             (Chicago Field Museum of Natural History) 63(3):81–146.
Ugent, D., S. Pozorski, and T. Pozorski. 1984. “New Evidence for Ancient Cultivation of Canna edulis in Peru.”
             Economic Botany 38(4):417– 432.
Unger-Hamilton, R. 1989. “The Epi-Palaeolithic Southern Levant and the Origins of Cultivation.” Current
             Anthropology 30:88 –103.
Upham, S., et al. 1987. “Evidence Concerning the Origin of Maize de Ocho.” American Anthropologist
             89(3):410– 419.
Valla, F. 1988. “Les premiers sédentaires de Palestine.” La Recherché 19:576 –584.
Van Zeist, W., and J. A. H. Bakker Heeres. 1986. “Archaeobotanical Studies in the Levant. Late Paleolitic
             Mureybit.” Palaeohistoria 26:171–199.
Webster, G. S. 1986. “Optimization Theory and Pre-Columbian Hunting in the Tehuacan Valley.” Human Ecology
             14(4):415– 435.
Wenke, R. J., J. E. Long, and P. E. Buck. 1988. “Epipaleolithic and Neolithic Subsistence and Settlement in the
             Fayyum Oasis of Egypt.” Journal of Field Archaeology 15(1):29 –51.
Wilcox, G. 2002. “Geographical Variation in Major Cereal Components and Evidence for Independent
             Domestication Events in Western Asia.” In The Dawn of Farming in the Near East, ed. R. Cappers and
             S. Bottema, pp. 133 –140. Studies in Early Near Eastern Production, Subsistence, and Environment 6.
             Berlin: ex oriente.
Wills, W. T. 1992. “Plant Cultivation and the Evolution of Risk-Prone Economies in the Prehistoric American
             Southwest.” In Transitions to Agriculture in Prehistory, ed. A. B. Gebauer and T. D. Price. Madison:
             Prehistory Press.
Winterhalder, B., and E. A. Smith, eds. 1981. Hunter-Gatherer Foraging Strategies. Chicago: University of Chicago
             Press.
Wright, G. 1971. “Origins of Food Production in Southwestern Asia: A Survey of Ideas.” Current Anthropology
             12:447–477.
Wright, H. T. 1993. “Environmental Determinism in Near Eastern Prehistory.” Current Anthropology 12:447– 478.
Zeder, M., and B. Hesse. 2000. “The Initial Domestication of Goats (Capra hircus) in the Zagros Mountains 10,000
             Years Ago.” Science 287:2254 –2257.
Zevallos, M. C., W. C. Galinat, D. W. Lathrup, E. R. Leng, J. G. Marcos, and K. M. Klumpp. 1977. “The San Pablo
             Corn Kernel and Its Friends.” Science 196:385 –389.
Zohary, D. 1989. “Pulse Domestication and Cereal Domestication: How Different Are They?” Economic Botany
             43:31–34.
Zohary, D., and M. Hopf. 1988. Domestication of Plants in the Old World. Oxford: Oxford University Press.



NOTES
  1. Kelly, “Mobility/Sedentism: Concepts, Archaeological Measures, and Effects,” p. 60.
  2. For detailed recent reviews of agricultural origins around the world, see Cowan and Watson, eds., The
     Origins of Agriculture: An International Perspective.
  3. Blumler and Byrne, “The Ecological Genetics of Domestication and the Origins of Agriculture,” p. 24.
  4. Price, “The Mesolithic of Western Europe.”
276   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


        5. R. C. Dunnell is among the ﬁrst we know to use this deﬁnition.
        6. Blumler and Byrne, “The Ecological Genetics of Domestication and the Origins of Agriculture,” p. 24.
        7. Rindos, The Origins of Agriculture, p. 143.
        8. Blumler and Byrne, “The Ecological Genetics of Domestication and the Origins of Agriculture,” p. 24.
        9. Rindos, “Symbiosis, Instability, and the Origins and Spread of Agriculture: A New Model,” p. 754.
       10. Cohen and Armelagos, eds., Paleopathology at the Origins of Agriculture.
       11. Blumler and Byrne, “The Ecological Genetics of Domestication and the Origins of Agriculture.”
       12. Rindos, The Origins of Agriculture.
       13. Others, e.g., Blumler and Byrne, “The Ecological Genetics of Domestication and the Origins of Agriculture,”
           disagree; Rosenberg, “The Mother of Invention: Evolutionary Theory, Territoriality, and the Origins of
           Agriculture.”
       14. Tauber, “13C Evidence for Dietary Habits of Prehistoric Man in Denmark.”
       15. See, e.g., Price and Gebauer, eds., Last Hunters First Farmers; Harris and Hillman, Farming and Foraging.
       16. Childe, New Light on the Most Ancient East.
       17. Pumpelly, Explorations in Turkey, the Expedition of 1904: Prehistoric Civilization of Anau, pp. 65–66; Childe,
           New Light on the Most Ancient East.
       18. McCorriston and Hole, “The Ecology of Seasonal Stress and the Origins of Agriculture in the Near East”;
           Moore and Hillman, “The Pleistocene to Holocene Transition and Human Economy in Southwest Asia: The
           Impact of the Younger Dryas.”
       19. Braidwood, “The Agriculture Revolution.”
       20. See Hole, Flannery, and Neely, Prehistory and Human Ecology of the Deh Luran Plain; see also Hole,
           “Comment on ‘Origins of Food Production in Southwestern Asia’ by G. Wright.”
       21. Harlan and Zohary, “Distribution of Wild Wheats and Barley.”
       22. Cohen, The Food Crisis in Prehistory, p. 279.
       23. Harris, Cannibals and Kings; Harris, Cultural Materialism.
       24. Harris, Cows, Pigs, Wars, and Witches.
       25. See, for example, Friedman, “Marxism, Structuralism, and Vulgar Materialism”; Sahlins, Culture and
           Practical Reason.
       26. Hayden, “Research and Development in the Stone Age: Technological Transitions Among Hunter-
           Gatherers.”
       27. Ibid., p. 530.
       28. McCorriston and Hole, “The Ecology of Seasonal Stress and the Origins of Agriculture in the Near East.”
       29. Moore and Hillman, “The Pleistocene to Holocene Transition and Human Economy in Southwest Asia:
           The Impact of the Younger Dryas.”
       30. Henry, From Foraging to Agriculture: The Levant at the End of the Ice Age; McCorriston and Hole, “The
           Ecology of Seasonal Stress and the Origins of Agriculture in the Near East”; Moore and Hillman, “The
           Pleistocene to Holocene Transition and Human Economy in Southwest Asia: The Impact of the Younger
           Dryas.”
       31. Byrd, “The Natuﬁan: Settlement Variability and Economic Adaptations in the Levant at the End of the
           Pleistocene,” p. 170; McCorriston and Hole, “The Ecology of Seasonal Stress and the Origins of Agriculture
           in the Near East”; Moore and Hillman, “The Pleistocene to Holocene Transition and Human Economy in
           Southwest Asia: The Impact of the Younger Dryas.”
       32. Spuhler, “Anthropology, Evolution, and ‘Scientiﬁc Creationalism,’ ” p. 115.
       33. McCorriston and Hole, “The Ecology of Seasonal Stress and the Origins of Agriculture in the Near East.”
       34. Moore and Hillman, “The Pleistocene to Holocene Transition and Human Economy in Southwest Asia: The
           Impact of the Younger Dryas.”
       35. “Was Agriculture Impossible During the Pleistocene but Mandatory During the Holocene? A Climate
           Change Hypothesis.”
       36. Ibid., p. 387.
       37. There are a few well-known exceptions, such as the “Little Ice Age” that occurred between a.d. 1300 and
           1850.
       38. “Was Agriculture Impossible During the Pleistocene but Mandatory During the Holocene? A Climate
           Change Hypothesis,” p. 404.
       39. Ibid.
       40. Bender, “Emergent Tribal Formations in the American Midcontinent.”
       41. See, for example, “Sociopolitical Organization in the Natuﬁan: A View from the Northwest”; “Fabulous
           Feasts: A Prolegomenon to the Importance of Feasting”; “Nimrods, Piscators, Pluckers, and Planters: The
           Emergence of Food Production.”
       42. Hodder, The Domestication of Europe.
       43. As Boyd points out, however, this opposition of nature and culture is a Western concept that comes from
           the Renaissance (“Agency and Landscape: Abandoning the ‘Nature/Culture’ Dichotomy in Interpretations
                                                                               THE ORIGINS OF AGRICULTURE             277


    of the Natuﬁan and the Transition to the Neolithic,” p. 119). How valid is it to apply a modern Western
    idea to ancient people’s ways of conceptualizing the world around them?
44. Hodder, The Domestication of Europe, p. 41.
45. Ibid.
46. Frison, Prehistoric Hunters on the High Plains.
47. Barnard, “Contemporary Hunter-Gatherers.”
48. Ellen, Environment, Subsistence and System.
49. Testart, “The Signiﬁcance of Food Storage Among Hunter-Gatherers,” p. 530.
50. Flannery, “The Origins of Agriculture,” p. 307.
51. See, for example, Frisch and McArthur, “Menstrual Cycles: Fatness as a Determinant of Minimum Weight
    for Height Necessary for Their Maintenance or Onset.”
52. Harris, Cannibals and Kings.
53. Kislev and Bar-Yosef, “The Legumes: The Earliest Domesticated Plants in the Near East?”
54. Henry, From Foraging to Agriculture. The Levant at the End of the Ice Age; Bar-Yosef and Belfer-Cohen, “From
    Foraging to Farming in the Mediterranean Levant”; Aurenche et al., “Proto-Neolithic and Neolithic Cultures
    in the Middle East—The Birth of Agriculture, Livestock Raising, and Ceramics: A Calibrated 14C Chronology
    12,500–5500 cal bc.”
55. Nadel, “The Organization of Space in a Fisher-Hunter-Gatherers Camp at Ohalo II, Israel”; Kislev et al.,
    “Epipalaeolithic (19,000 bp) Cereal and Fruit Diet at Ohalo II, Sea of Galilee, Israel.”
56. Kislev et al., “Epipalaeolithic (19,000 bp) Cereal and Fruit Diet at Ohalo II, Sea of Galilee, Israel,” p. 162.
57. Binford, “Post-Pleistocene Adaptations”; Flannery, “The Origins of Agriculture”; Hayden, “Research and
    Development in the Stone Age: Technological Transitions Among Hunter-Gatherers.”
58. Henry, From Foraging to Agriculture: The Levant at the End of the Ice Age, pp. 29 –30.
59. Legge and Rowley-Conwy, “Gazelle Hunting in Stone Age Syria,” although it should be noted that not all
    researchers agree with this perspective; see, for example, Martin, “Gazelle (Gazella spp.) Behavioural
    Ecology: Predicting Animal Behaviour for Prehistoric Environments in South-West Asia.”
60. Belfer-Cohen, “The Natuﬁan in the Levant,” p. 169.
61. Whether Natuﬁans specialized in wild cereals is a matter of some debate. There is growing evidence that the
    cost-beneﬁt ratio is higher for gathering/processing acorns, a wild food resource widely available in the
    Mediterranean forest, compared with wild cereals. See, for example, Barlow and Heck, “More on Acorn
    Eating During the Natuﬁan: Expected Patterning in Diet and the Archaeological Record of Subsistence”;
    Olszewski, “Plant Food Subsistence Issues and Scientiﬁc Inquiry in the Early Natuﬁan.”
62. Belfer-Cohen, “The Natuﬁan in the Levant,” p. 171.
63. Valla, “Les premiers sédentaires de Palestine,” p. 583.
64. Hillman and Davies, “Measured Domestication Rates in Wild Wheats and Barley Under Primitive
    Cultivation, and Their Archaeological Implications.”
65. Olsen, Origins of the Domestic Dog.
66. Perkins and Daly, “A Hunter’s Village in Neolithic Turkey.”
67. Wright, “Origins of Food Production in Southwestern Asia: A Survey of Ideas,” p. 463; see also Solecki, “An
    Early Village Site at Zawi Chemi Shanidar.”
68. Zeder and Hesse, “The Initial Domestication of Goats (Capra hircus) in the Zagros Mountains 10,000 Years
    Ago,” p. 2256.
69. Hillman in Moore et al., Village on the Euphrates, pp. 349–398.
70. Rosen, “Notes on the Origins of Pastoral Nomadism: A Case Study from the Negev and Sinai,” p. 504; see
    also Köhler-Rollefson, “Changes in Goat Exploitation at ’Ain Ghazal Between the Early and Late Neolithic:
    A Metrical Analysis.”
71. Flannery, “The Origins of the Village as a Settlement Type in Mesoamerica and the Near East: A Comparative
    Study.”
72. Ibid., p. 48.
73. Byrd, “Public and Private, Domestic and Corporate; The Emergence of the Southwest Asian Village.”
74. Ibid., p. 658.
75. Hole, “Comment on ‘Origins of Food Production in Southwestern Asia’ by G. Wright,” p. 473.
76. Simmons et al., “’Ain Ghazal: A Major Neolithic Settlement in Central Jordan.”
77. Grigson, “The Earliest Domestic Horses in the Levant.”
78. Ammerman and Cavalli-Sforza, The Neolithic Transition and the Genetics of Population in Europe.
79. Renfrew, Archaeology and Language.
80. Harlan, “Indigenous African Agriculture”; Wenke et al., “Epipaleolithic and Neolithic Subsistence and
    Settlement in the Fayyum Oasis of Egypt.”
81. Haaland, Socio-Economic Differentiation in Neolithic Sudan.
82. Crawford and Shen, “The Origins of Rice Agriculture: Recent Progress in East Asia”; Higham and Lu, “The
    Origins and Dispersal of Rice Cultivation.”
278   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


       83. Higham and Lu, “The Origins and Dispersal of Rice Cultivation,” p. 870.
       84. Bellwood, The Prehistory of the Indo-Malaysian Archipelago.
       85. Akazawa and Aikens, Prehistoric Hunter-Gatherers in Japan; Takamiya, “Introductory Routes of Rice to
           Japan: An Examination of the Southern Route Hypothesis.”
       86. Flannery, “Archeological Systems Theory and Early Mesoamerica.”
       87. Webster, “Optimization Theory and Pre-Columbian Hunting in the Tehuacan Valley.”
       88. Reynolds, “An Adaptive Computer Model for the Evolution of Plant Collecting and Early Agriculture in the
           Eastern Valley of Oaxaca.”
       89. Johannessen, “Indian Maize in the Twelfth Century b.c.”
       90. Recent radiocarbon dates for the Ocampo caves in Tamaulipas show that this area—compared to the
           evidence from Tehuacan and Oaxaca—was peripheral to the development of agriculture in Mexico.
           The Ocampo caves are relatively late, dating to between 5,500 to 5,200 years ago. See Smith, “Reconsidering
           the Ocampo Caves and the Era of Incipient Cultivation in Mesoamerica.”
       91. Fritz, “Are the First American Farmers Getting Younger?” see, however, Flannery, “In Defense of the
           Tehuacán Project,” who states that the only dates for maize that are getting younger are AMS dates for
           samples contaminated with a preservative. Flannery purposes that original estimates for early maize are
           correct.
       92. Ibid.
       93. Mangelsdorf, Corn: Its Origin, Evolution, and Improvement.
       94. Fritz, “Are the First American Farmers Getting Younger?” p. 306.
       95. See MacNeish, The Prehistory of the Tehuacan Valley: Chronology and Irrigation; McClung de Tapia, The
           Origins of Agriculture in Mesoamerica and Central America, pp. 157–158.
       96. All of these period dates are now somewhat suspect because of recent AMS dates on these materials
           (see Fritz, “Are the First American Farmers Getting Younger?”), but additional research will be required to
           determine if just the botanical remains are mixed or if other occupational debris are mixed as well.
       97. Beadle, “The Mystery of Maize”; Beadle, “The Ancestry of Corn.”
       98. Flannery, “The Origins of Agriculture.”
       99. See, for example, Galinat, “The Origin of Maize”; but cf. Mangelsdorf, “The Mystery of Corn: New
           Perspectives.”
      100. McClung de Tapia, The Origins of Agriculture in Mesoamerica and Central America, pp. 148 –149.
      101. Gould, The Flamingo’s Smile.
      102. Iltis, “From Teosinte to Maize: The Catastrophic Sexual Mutation.”
      103. Flannery, “The Origins of Agriculture,” p. 300.
      104. McClung de Tapia, The Origins of Agriculture in Mesoamerica and Central America, p. 154.
      105. Flannery and Coe, “Social and Economic Systems in Formative Mesoamerica”; Stark and Voorhies,
           Prehistorical Coastal Adaptations: The Economy and Ecology of Maritime Middle America.
      106. Stark and Voorhies, Prehistoric Coastal Adaptations: The Economy and Ecology of Maritime Middle America;
           Fiedel, Prehistory of the Americas, pp. 160 –184.
      107. Stothert, “The Preceramic Las Vegas Culture of Coastal Ecuador”; Lippi, Bird, and Stemper, “Maize
           Recovered at La Ponga, an Early Ecuadorian Site”; Pearsall and Piperno, “Antiquity of Maize Cultivation in
           Ecuador: Summary and Reevaluation of the Evidence.” There are also arguments that the Peruvian evidence
           is “not good” due to disturbed contexts, shallow deposits, and other factors (see Bird, “What Are the Chances
           of Finding Maize in Peru Dating Before 1000 b.c.?: Reply to Bonavia and Grobman”).
      108. Pearsall, “The Origins of Plant Cultivation in South America,” p. 192.
      109. Lynch, Guitarrero Cave: Early Man in the Andes; Flannery, “The Origins of Agriculture,” p. 303.
      110. Ugent et al., “New Evidence for Ancient Cultivation of Canna edulis in Peru.”
      111. Reviewed in Pearsall, “The Origins of Plant Cultivation in South America,” p. 190.
      112. Rick, Prehistoric Hunters of the High Andes.
      113. Pearsall, “The Origins of Plant Cultivation in South America.”
      114. “The Worst Mistake in the History of the Human Race,” p. 75.
7
The Evolution of Complex Societies

I should like to see, and this will be the last and
most ardent of my desires, I should like to see
the last king strangled with the guts of the last
priest.
J. Messelier (clause in a will, Paris, 1733)




M           esselier’s vengeful wish was prompted by his feelings of exploitation as a citizen
            of France during the last period of its monarchy, when France was dominated
by oppressive elites and a venal clergy. Societies ruled and exploited by kings and priests
have existed for thousands of years, and many of their citizens have echoed Messelier’s
complaints. In today’s world, billions of people subsist on a tiny fraction of the goods and
services that the most industrialized countries enjoy, and even within the richest states there
are great inequalities.
      Why have societies for thousands of years been organized in terms of social classes
and economic inequalities? Are these inequities somehow the “natural” order of things?
Will they ever be replaced by truly just and equitable societies? What has determined who
was rich and powerful and who was poor and weak throughout history?
     To answer such questions it is important to recognize that although exploitative
political and religious elites have formed the very warp and woof of our concept of
“civilization,” they are just one of many elements in our sense of “civilization,” or what
anthropologists call “complex” societies. Scholars, predictably, disagree on exactly what
social or cultural “complexity,” or a “civilization,” or a “state,” is, particularly when these
terms are applied to the bones, stones, and bricks of the archaeological record. When
archaeologists speak of the ﬁrst “complex” societies, however, most have in mind the
kinds of changes we think happened ﬁrst long ago, for example, in Mesopotamia, on the
broad Tigris-Euphrates alluvial plains of what is now Iraq, Syria, and Iran. The evidence
suggests that if you were a member of an ordinary community here at about 6000 b.c.,
you would have lived in a village of a few hundred people, most of whom were your
blood relatives. You and almost everyone else in your community would have worked in
the ﬁelds to produce the grain held in common stores for large extended families and the
community as a whole. And if you were an older adult male you would have made most
of the decisions for you and your family about every aspect of your life. People much like
you and communities very like yours would be found in all directions from your home,

                                                  279
280   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      but your only contacts with them would have been minor trade in obsidian, ﬂint, semi-
      precious stone, and a few other commodities, as well as the exchange of young men and
      women in marriage, and—probably—the occasional ﬁght. For all practical purposes, you
      and your fellow villagers were on your own in terms of religion, manufacturing tools,
      defense, and food production; probably you and every other adult in town would know
      most of the skills necessary for survival; and your extended family—and every other
      extended family—probably could muster all the technological and social skills necessary
      for survival.
           But if you lived in this same area—perhaps the same town—3,000 years later, at about
      3000 b.c., you would have led a very different life. You could have been a slave or a king,
      depending on accidents of birth. Unlike your ancestors, who were almost all full-time
      farmers, you may have been a ﬁsherman, potter, weaver, priest, or some other specialist.
      Unless you were among the elite, however, many of the decisions you made about your job
      and your life would have been out of your hands—the prerogative of royal administrators.
      You would have been taxed and expected to ﬁght with the army in any of the numerous
      wars and revolutions you would have seen in your lifetime. As a farmer or any other semi-
      skilled or skilled worker, you would have been dependent for your continued existence
      and way of life on people with skills you yourself did not possess, such as potters, warriors,
      herdsmen, scribes, doctors, metalsmiths, sailors, and priests. Instead of a village of a few
      hundred people, you might have lived in a city of thousands, perhaps tens of thousands;
      you would probably have been a fervent believer in the national religion, and you would
      probably have been acutely aware of your social class, whether high or low. In these and
      many other ways, your society would have been “complex,” at least in comparison to the
      simple, cooperative, communistic peasants of your ancient ancestry.
           In summary then, when anthropologists speak of sociocultural complexity, they are
      generally ranking particular societies on a single scale but on the basis of several primary
      variables. For any given society these variables include (1) the degree of differential access
      to wealth, power, and prestige; (2) the extent to which differential access to wealth, power,
      and prestige are inherited, as opposed to earned; (3) the degree to which individuals in a
      community are specialized in their occupations, and the extent to which these different
      occupations are integrated and organized in the economy as a whole; and (4) the degree to
      which political power is centralized in a government.
           The same kinds of changes in these variables that we have described here for
      Mesopotamia also happened—largely independently—in various other areas of the ancient
      world, in Egypt, the Indus Valley, China, Peru, Mesoamerica, and a few other places. Later
      they also occurred in many other times and places, especially in societies that were in
      contact with the earliest civilizations. By now the reader will not be at all surprised to learn
      that the question that has fascinated archaeologists for centuries is, why? Why did simple
      agriculturalists give way to socially more complex forms in these speciﬁc areas, and not
      in other areas? Why did our ancestors not remain simple farmers or revert to the ancient
      security of the hunting-foraging way of life? Why were these early civilizations so much
      alike in socioeconomic structures and political systems? Moreover, why was this transition
      so rapid and pervasive? Although complex societies have existed for only the last ﬁve or six
      millennia, they have almost completely replaced the simpler cultural forms in which our
      ancestors had lived for a million years or more. Today, in the Amazon Valley, the Kalahari
      Desert, and a few other places, hunting-and-gathering groups still follow some of their
                                                               THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES       281


ancient ways, but if current trends continue, soon there will be no groups left in the world
that resemble our Pleistocene ancestors in society and economy.
     To answer all these various questions about the evolution of complex societies, and to
understand why today almost all people of the world live in them, we must appeal to a wide
range of evidence. Since all largely independent cases of the evolution of cultural complexity
happened before any written languages had been developed, much of this analysis must be
based on archaeological data. But in many areas of the world written languages were used
later in these developmental sequences and these provide fascinating information about the
early civilizations.
     The fact that complex societies, like agricultural economies, evolved independently
in the Old and New Worlds gives us the opportunity for comparative analyses. As we shall
see, ancient Egypt, for example, had a language completely incomprehensible to the
Aztecs, worshipped Gods unknown to the Aztecs, and lived in a riverine ecological system
unimaginable to the Aztecs. Egyptian and Aztec culture histories were unique, different,
unconnected. But for a century, the idea of a science of history has been based on the idea
that the ancient Egyptians and Aztecs were fundamentally alike—that they can both be
considered members of the same class of political entities, and that they could be analyzed
and understood in the same terms.
     Perhaps the most inﬂuential general attempt to categorize all cultures and explain their
similarities and differences was that by Karl Marx (see later). But there have been scores of
other attempts to analyze cultural differences and similarities. Bruce Trigger, for example,
compiled a comparative analysis of the ancient civilizations of Egypt, Mesopotamia, China,
Mesoamerica, and South America, as well as the early Yoruba state—all chosen because
they were class-based societies in which power was derived from control of agricultural
production and because there is relatively good archaeological, ethnographic, and textual
data for each. In this context, Trigger has come to an interesting conclusion about the
results of his many years of study of early civilizations:

    I expected to discover that, because of ecological constraints, the differences in economic
    systems [among early states] would be limited, and there would be more variation in
    sociopolitical organization, religious beliefs, and art styles. In fact, I have found that a wide
    variety of economic behavior was associated with early civilizations, the one constant being
    the production of surpluses that the upper classes appropriated through a tributary
    relationship. Yet I have been able to discover only one basic form of class hierarchy, two
    general forms of political organization, and a single basic religious paradigm. . . . I have
    documented signiﬁcant variation from one early civilization to another only in terms of art
    styles and cultural values.1

Trigger’s perceptive conclusion expresses clearly the fundamental issues in analyses of
ancient civilizations. He sees, for example, extremely little variation among them except in
art styles and cultural values. Thus we must ask, why were they so similar? It seems reason-
able to assume, as Trigger does, that there is such little variation in some elements in these
early civilizations because of these elements’ relative “efﬁciency,”2 and great variations in
other elements because they have little effect on the adaptiveness and competitive success
of the social organism of which they are a part. If so, then one aspect of an archaeological
analysis can be an examination of the speciﬁc factors that may have determined the
adaptiveness and efﬁciency of these cultural elements, and changes in these variables over
282   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      time and space. This kind of investigation does not require that one ignore the great extent
      to which the unique and speciﬁc values, ideas, and concepts of these ancient civilizations
      formed the structure of these cultures and, in a sense, determined their history. Trigger
      suggests that we must examine both the similarities and differences in ancient cultures and
      try to understand and explain them using a variety of perspectives and methods (see later).
            Today, however, the premise that a science of history can be developed on the basis of
      comparative analyses of cultures is under sustained attack.3 Some scholars argue that the
      only similarities between, for example, Egypt and Mexico and others of their supposed
      class, such as the Sumerians, the Shang Chinese, and the Harappan of the Indus Valley, are
      simply the products of gross similarities in environments and technologies. They suggest
      that the more important focus of archaeological analysis should be the ways in which the
      people in these different cultures constructed different worlds and realities through the
      use of incommensurable cultural categories. Also, many scholars today are wary of the term
      “evolution” as applied to cultures because it implies that some cultures are “better,” or
      more evolved, than others. For others, the difference in systems of trait-transmission
      between biological entities (sexual and asexual reproduction) and cultural systems (e.g.,
      learning) makes any sense of evolution inapplicable to cultures. But other scholars have
      found Darwinian evolution to be applicable to cultural changes, if one divorces this sense
      of evolution from biological concepts and focuses on trait-transmission, not any particular
      method of trait-transmission.4
            We shall examine this issue in detail later in this chapter, and in the remaining chapters,
      because it is fundamental to all that follows: Do the similarities and differences exhibited
      by various extinct cultures offer the raw material for some kind of “scientiﬁc” analysis of
      history, or do they simply represent gross analogies among societies that were intrinsically
      incommensurate and that can only be analyzed in terms of their unique histories and
      characteristics?
            Another difﬁcult issue here involves the obvious problems of trying to analyze the
      ideologies of extinct human groups on the basis of their material archaeological record.
      Karl Marx is just one of many scholars who over the millennia have tried to explain the rise
      of civilization in terms of environments, technologies, economies, and so forth. But can we
      understand the course of history from this perspective? The rise of Islam, for example,
      might seem to be a case where a powerful ideology spurred people, who previously had
      lived in simple tribal groups, to conquer huge areas of Asia and Europe. Is the spread of
      Islam to be understood as a result of the appearance of this unique inexplicable ideology,
      or is the ideology just a reﬂection of powerful underlying historical and economic forces?
      Similarly, the ancient Egyptian state seems to be something that we can only understand
      in terms of its national ideology: As we shall see in chapter 9, all the temples, tombs, and
      pyramids of Egypt are reﬂections of their principle of “divine kingship.” Ancient Egyptian
      civilization was to a certain extent a product of the rich Nile Valley environment, but it was
      also a sociopolitical construct, an idea. But how does one analyze the power of ideas from
      the archaeological record, especially since most of Egyptian civilization formed long before
      the written language began recording its development?
            Based on inferences from the archaeological record, ancient texts, and ethnography,
      one of the fundamental things that apparently all early complex societies evolved was a
      coercive sociopolitical elite—that is, a class of people who took most of the society’s power,
      prestige, and wealth. And they apparently did so without regularly resorting to armed
                                                          THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES        283


robbery or direct conﬁscation by their personal militias. These societies evolved ideologies
that sanctioned this conﬁscatory behavior and monopolization of power.5 In ancient
Egypt, for example, the pharaoh was considered a manifestation of God, and therefore duly
entitled to monopolize political power and much of the country’s wealth. Ancient Egyptians
might have whined about taxes, but they rarely if ever managed a revolution to dispossess
the elites (nor did the Victorian British or many other modern peoples, for that matter).
But how are we to study the origins and dynamics of the evolution of these all-important
belief systems? We have some traces of this evolution in such things as differences in the
wealth of individual burials, but these only indicate (possibly) that coercive sociopolitical
elites existed, not how they came about or the ideological basis of their status.
     Another issue in analyzing these early civilizations involves our assumptions about
how similar they all were in terms of power relationships. It is important to recognize that
not every society in history can be placed at some point on a continuum between a simple
band of hunter-foragers and the dimensions of complexity described earlier and applied
to, for example, ancient Mesopotamia. The term “heterarchy” has been applied by Carol
Crumley 6 to aspects of social relationships in early states, particularly those, like ancient
Greece, for example, where economic control by elites and many other social interactions
were not entirely set within the context of rigid, bureaucratic, hierarchical, administrative
institutions. In such cases the activities and interests of the elites do not entirely correspond
to the activities and interests of the state. She suggests that states can include social struc-
tures that are heterarchical in the sense that elements in these structures are either unranked
relative to other elements or possess the potential for being ranked in a number of different
ways. In such situations she suggests that power is not ranked, it is “counterpoised.”
      The concept of heterarchy is linked to ideas about dialectical social relationships that
are beyond the scope of this book, but we must assume that the social relationships of
ancient societies cannot be ﬁt exactly and simply into traditional notions about dominance
and hierarchy.
     Many scholars have explored these issues.7 The development of evolutionary theory
as applied to archaeological data remains, however, at a relatively primitive level. Major
questions remain about how one can use concepts such as “scale of selection” in cultural
analyses. One interesting current trend in these forms of evolutionary analyses involves
non-systems analyses and the “emergent” properties of complex systems. The recent book
Complexity 8 popularizes research done by physicists, biologists, anthropologists, and others
on the processes whereby simple systems grow in complexity in an apparently Lamarckian
way—able to direct the generation of variety that is then selected. Lansing and Kremer9
have published one of the ﬁrst applications of these ideas to an anthropological problem,
the evolution of Balinese economic systems.
     In part because of the limitations of functionalist explanations, in part because of the
great power of modern evolutionary theory, there has been a revival of interest in applying
the principles of biological evolution to cultural phenomena.10 Many scholars argue that
the modern theory of evolution has never really been applied to archaeological data. A key
difﬁculty has always been that the objects of the archaeological record do not reproduce in
the same way that people do, and thus the rules of genetics cannot be applied; also, whereas
change in the biological world is through the relatively slow processes of genetic mutation,
drift, selection, and so on, cultural changes can be conveyed quickly and pervasively from
one group to another (as in the spread of agriculture).
284   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


           So how might we apply evolutionary principles to archaeological problems? The answer
      is not at all clear, but there are a few interesting ideas. As Robert Dunnell has observed,
      what matters in evolutionary theory is not so much how a characteristic is transmitted—
      whether by genes or culture—as it is the mechanisms by which traits are perpetuated in an
      individual.11 Thus, whether a person gets the allele for sickle cell anemia through genetic
      inheritance or gets religious beliefs through parental instruction is irrelevant in the sense
      that both traits have been transmitted. In short, we do not have to concern ourselves
      overmuch with the fact that the behaviors at the base of cultural complexity are not
      transmitted genetically.



      SOCIAL COMPLEXITY AND HUMAN VALUES

      Before considering how societies evolved into different forms, it is worthwhile to muse on
      the fact that over the centuries people have had a very difﬁcult time coming to terms with
      their perceptions of the relative virtues of types of societies. One of the oldest and com-
      monest human errors has been to confuse cultural complexity and cultural worth. Already
      by the time of city-states, a haughty citizen of a city-state in Iraq disparagingly described
      his nomadic neighbors as “[barbarians], who know no house or town, the boor of the
      mountains . . . who does not bend his knees [to cultivate the land] . . . who is not buried
      after his death.”12 Even in our own age, it is difﬁcult to avoid the notions that civilizations
      have emerged because of the special gifts and vitality of their populaces, that simpler
      societies are incompletely developed, and that all the world’s cultures are at various points
      along a gradient whose apex is the modern Western industrial community. This attitude
      was a great advantage in the age of European colonialism because it allowed the Europeans
      to treat other peoples as hardly human, and therefore undeserving of the full protection of
      laws and morality. Immanuel Kant said that the essence of immorality is to treat other people
      as objects, and in a way this is the Original Sin of cultural complexity. Europeans are routinely
      used as examples of colonialism, but it must be recognized that all cultures that have
      achieved dominance by virtue of time and circumstance have been equally colonialism.
           To classify, as archaeologists do, history’s thousands of societies in terms of their
      inferred social stratiﬁcation, size, and the complexity of information, matter, and energy
      exchanges is a research tactic that has as its goal the elucidation of the processes that
      produced these forms of complexity; but we should not consider these measures as ultimate
      criteria. If we categorized human societies in terms of piety, social cohesiveness, “justice,”
      or other abstract but important concepts, we would see an ordering of societies very
      different from the earlier discussion about Trigger’s analysis, concerned as it was with
      “cultural complexity.”
           Because of the nature of archaeological data, we must limit ourselves primarily to the
      artifacts of these extinct civilizations, the bones and stones and debris that have survived
      them. But it is worth reﬂecting on the tremendous impact the evolution of cultural com-
      plexity has had on the way people view themselves and the world. If recent band societies
      resemble Pleistocene band societies, most Pleistocene individuals were deeply embedded
      in social and family relationships and had a clear role in society. Marshall Sahlins observed
      that our hunting-and-gathering ancestors took the “Zen road to afﬂuence”: People living
                                                          THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES           285


in complex sedentary communities
seem to live in the eternal economic
dilemma of unlimited wants and
limited means, but simpler societies
have adjusted to their limited means
by having few wants.13 Because they
are frequently moving, hunters and
gatherers cannot accumulate large
quantities of material objects and
therefore do not covet air conditioners
and trash compactors, and they live in
such small and scattered groups that
social hierarchies are of little use or
relevance. Ethnologist Richard Lee
described how one Christmas he
supplied a group of Kalahari Bushmen
with a 1,200-pound ox for a great feast
(Figure 7.1)—the ox represented far
more meat than the group could eat.14
Everyone in the group complained,
however, about how scrawny the
animal was and how poor his gift was.
Lee realized eventually that the cool
reception to his generosity was the
Bushmen’s way of maintaining an
egalitarian spirit: Any particularly
valuable or productive act or service
met the same response because group
dynamics worked best if no one could         FIGURE 7.1 Richard Lee at a Christmas ox roast for a group of Kalahari
take great personal and public prestige      Bushmen, southern Africa (see text for discussion of egalitarian principles
                                             of band organization demonstrated at this event).
from his accomplishments.
     Hunter-gatherers of the recent and
contemporary world are probably uncertain guides to what life was like during the
millennia when all of our ancestors lived this way. But any romantic visions one might have
of this ancient world may well be illusions. We might want to think of our ancestors as
generous and sharing, and perhaps they were, but not necessarily. Nicolas Peterson reports,
for example, that one aboriginal Australian in the group he was studying said to him, “I
want to owe you ﬁve dollars.” Peterson labels this kind of behavior “demand sharing,” in
which exchange of resources is stripped of all pretense that people do it because they want
to or feel generous.15 Sharing is to everyone’s advantage in some social organizations,
particularly band societies, but there is no necessary reason that it has to be cloaked in an
aura of generosity and altruism. We will never know how our Pleistocene forebears
organized their patterns of sharing and cooperation, but they were probably not the “noble
savages” that we sometimes imagine.
     All forms of social organization, of course, have their human costs, as well as beneﬁts.
In complex societies, from ancient times to the present, people often have felt themselves
286   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      to be minor replaceable cogs in a machine that operates mainly for the beneﬁt of others.
      From some of the earliest written documents, those from Mesopotamia in the third
      millennium b.c., we hear the age-old complaints about poverty, taxes, oppressive rulers,
      governmental harassment, and other ills of cultural complexity. Little wonder that from
      these early records we also see the beginnings of Utopian movements, made up of those
      who yearn for a return to a hypothetical simpler place and time, when political, religious,
      and economic hierarchies did not exist, when all people were considered of equal worth,
      where all had an equal share, and where no one had power over anyone else.
           Many of the perceived pathologies in modern societies are attributed to greed, but one
      must at least consider the premise that human selﬁshness and greed are “engines” that have
      propelled humanity to ever-more-complex socioeconomic and political forms. The biblical
      sentiment that “the love of money is the root of all evil” is no doubt true, but the love of
      money also has had some beneﬁcial side effects. Novelist John LeCarré explores this theme
      in one of his books16 in the form of an argument between two characters, one who is sickened
      by the excesses of greed, waste, and inequity in capitalistic “pigs in clover” societies, and
      another character who defends the West on the premise that capitalism uses human greed
      and acquisitiveness to produce goods and services that, ultimately, enhance human life,
      dignity, and liberty.
           In the last couple of decades, eastern Europe has begun a painful transition, from
      centralized quasi-socialist systems to more capitalistic market-oriented economies—or at
      least that is the intention of the politicians and planners. The impetus for this change appears
      to be the simple fact that economies based on self-interest have been far more productive
      than other forms in terms of goods and services. The last great bastion of communism,
      China, too has found that it can sustain impressive growth rates by allowing individuals to
      proﬁt from their own labor and initiative, with the result that barely 20 years after the
      Maoist Red Guards terrorized any individual not totally subservient to the idea of a pure
      theoretical communism, Chinese “millionaires” are emerging in ever-greater numbers.
           Only the future will reveal if the great complexity and integration that seems to make
      societies highly productive and “efﬁcient” can be achieved without the stimulus of
      individual and corporate competitiveness, and without socioeconomic inequalities.



      TRADITIONAL SOCIOCULTURAL TYPOLOGIES

      Analyzing different kinds of societies and comparing them implies that one can put them
      into categories that have some analytical signiﬁcance and then use their similarities and
      differences to focus on the determinants of cultural variation. Such studies are, for obvious
      reasons, almost exclusively the products of highly complex societies.
           The basic issues here are the concepts of “cross-cultural comparisons” and “ethnographic
      analogy.” To what extent can we extrapolate from recent and present societies to the past?
      Archaeologists have been heavily inﬂuenced in their conceptions of ancient cultural complex-
      ity by ethnographers who have studied not just hunter-foragers, but other people who live
      in social organizations and with economies that may resemble those of our extinct ancestors.
           Although the ethnographic categories formulated by anthropologists such as Elman
      Service and Morton Fried were devised principally to classify the diversity of extant and recent
                                                        THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES       287


cultures, their ideas have been widely applied by archaeologists to prehistoric societies. The
use of ethnographic data to categorize ancient societies that exist only as rubble and
discarded artifacts can, of course, be misleading, particularly since “it . . . seems possible
that every hunter-gatherer or tribal society in the world was inﬂuenced to some degree by
contact with technologically more advanced societies prior to ethnographic study.”17
     In some ways social typologies and taxonomies are a hindrance to good archaeological
analysis because they inexactly lump together societies on the basis of unstated and sometimes
irrelevant criteria.18 But almost all archaeologists continue to think of the archaeological
record in terms of three or four basic types of societies. These types are abstractions that
may ﬁt precisely no particular case, especially with regard to extinct societies, but they are
convenient summaries of the kinds of social differences archaeologists think were involved
in the evolution of complex societies.


Egalitarian Societies: Bands and Tribes
As we noted in chapters 3 and 4, the archaeological evidence is undeniable that for the ﬁrst
three million years of our history, we lived in what anthropologists generally—if inexactly
—call band societies. There is great variation19 in these societies, and all have been
inﬂuenced to some extent by industrial cultures. Eskimos who use snowmobiles to hunt
bears and Kalahari Bushmen who steal their neighbors’ cows, for example, are often seen
as distorted remnants of band societies because when ﬁrst described by explorers and
anthropologists, they exhibited far fewer signs of “contamination” by industrial societies.
     Archaeologists have developed a sense of what a “band” society is mainly by distilling
and combining ethnographic studies of societies in many different parts of the world. The
Copper Eskimo, African Pygmies, Kalahari Bushmen, and Australian Aborigines are
usually cited as examples of this social form. In contemporary and recent band societies,
the most salient characteristic seems to be that there are only minor differences among
members of the group in terms of prestige; in these societies no one has any greater claims
to material resources than anyone else. In most of these societies, older males who are good
providers gain the most respect, but they have little or no power to coerce other band
members. This lack of social differentiation is tied to their economy: Band members spend
most of their lives in groups of 15–40 people, moving often as they exploit wild plants
and animals. Julian Steward concluded that most, perhaps all, bands were patrilineal and
patrilocal—that is, people reckoned their descent primarily through their father and
newlyweds lived with the husband’s band.20 Whether or not this is true is still a major issue
in ethnography, and many ethnologists think that band societies can be extremely ﬂexible
in where newlyweds live, for example, based on available resources and other factors.21 In
any case, this is the kind of thing archaeologists can never be sure about when applying the
model of a band society to a scatter of stones and bones. The division of labor in bands is
generally along basic age and sex lines, and the economic structure is a sort of practical
communism: Money is not used, and exchange usually takes place between people who
consider themselves friends or relatives. This gift-giving is usually done very casually, and
relationships are frequently cemented by offers of reciprocal hospitality.
     In the context of the topic of this chapter, the origins of cultural complexity, one of
the most important things about bands is that they appear to be largely functionally
redundant. That is, these individual bands are very much alike in their social organization
288   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      and economy, and each individual is able to do almost everything needed for the group to
      survive and reproduce itself. Each band contains, in the form of its members’ skills, all of
      the expertise it needs to function and persist. As we shall see, it is the change from this kind
      of functional redundancy to functional interdependence that seems to be at the heart of the
      origins of complex societies.
           And, in any case, the question remains: How similar are (or were) these ethnographi-
      cally described groups to our hunter-forager ancestors—whose lives constitute 99 percent
      of our human past?
           Tribe is the rather ambiguous term that anthropologists have used to label social
      groupings that are larger than band societies but generally not particularly complex in
      terms of economy, social hierarchies, law, and so forth. People living in tribes are often
      subsistence farmers, such as the Pueblo Indian maize farmers of the American Southwest
      or New Guinea yam cultivators. Tribes often have a nominal leader—usually male—who
      acts to redistribute food and perform a few minor ceremonial activities, but, as in band
      societies, he has no privileged access to wealth or power. He leads only by example and
      serves at the pleasure of the tribe. Exchange in such societies is still usually accomplished
      through reciprocal trading within a kinship structure. Typically, tribal societies are larger
      and more territorial, have more elaborate ceremonialism and kinship systems, and make
      more distinctions in terms of prestige than band societies.22
           In many cases, tribes may have been transitional forms, appearing where farmers were
      in the transition to more complex forms of social organization, and in some cases tribal socie-
      ties may have been direct outgrowths of the inﬂuences of or contacts with state societies.23


      Stratiﬁed Societies: Chiefdoms
      Timothy Earle deﬁnes chiefdoms as “regionally organized societies with a centralized decision-
      making hierarchy coordinating activities among several village communities.”24 For many
      authorities, “chiefdoms” are different from bands and tribes both in degree and in kind.
      Chiefdoms are based on the concept of hereditary inequality: In a chiefdom, if you are the son
      of a chief, chances are you will become chief no matter how unsuitable you may be; and if
      you are able but born a “commoner,” your options in life will be narrowly circumscribed.
           These differences in prestige usually correlate with preferential access to wealth; chiefs
      and their families can claim the best farmlands or ﬁshing places as well as more food and
      more exotic and expensive items than “commoners.” They are often regarded as divine and
      typically marry within noble families. The economies of these societies often show a greater
      degree of specialization and diversiﬁcation than those of tribes or bands. Craftsmen exist, but
      they are usually also farmers, and there is no permanent class of artisans as there is in states.
      Chiefdoms are much larger than tribes, often involving thousands of people. Examples of
      chiefdoms include the pre-contact Nootka of British Columbia and early Hawaiian societies.
           Earle stresses the ideological bases of chiefdoms. He notes that chiefs typically create
      sacred places, such as ceremonial areas; they also use symbols of individual power and
      position in burial cults, and their mortuary symbolism often includes expressions of military
      might. To some extent, recent archaeological research on chiefdoms has focused on the
      political and ideological activities of chiefs, rather than just the simple deterministic factors
      of agriculture and economy that permit the evolution of chiefdoms.25 In fact, the literature
      on chiefdoms clearly mirrors a major conceptual trend in contemporary archaeology:
      Traditional analyses of chiefdoms have concentrated on the functionalist and adaptive
                                                         THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES        289


aspects of these societies, such as how chiefs may have been responsive to the problem of
redistributing resources in rapidly growing societies; but contemporary approaches26 stress
the varieties of ways in which chiefs gain and maintain control.
     The archaeology of chiefdoms is a particularly valuable endeavor, as Dick Drennan
points out, because in some cases they seem to have been a transitional phase leading to
states, and elsewhere they were “terminal,” in the sense that the indigenous developmental
factors seem to have produced chiefdoms but not states. Drennan defends the use of the
concept of chiefdoms on various grounds. He notes that “Their story is, in one respect, the
story of the emergence of substantial inequality, but it has a number of other aspects as
well, such as spatial and demographic scale, centralization, economic specialization,
exchange, supralocal political organization. . . . Very broadly speaking, these aspects are
known to be correlated with each other.”27


Stratiﬁed Societies: States
What a state is depends to some extent on what an analyst sees as the causal factors in
producing cultural complexity. The term “stratiﬁed” refers to the division of the society
into hierarchically arranged socioeconomic classes and political elites. Generally, states are
assumed to have centralized governments composed of political and religious elites who
exercise economic and political control. In addition to being larger in population and
territory than other societal forms, states are characterized by having full-time craftsmen
and other specialists, whose products are distributed in part through an integrated national
economy. The state codiﬁes and enforces laws, drafts soldiers, levies taxes, and exacts tribute.
States have powerful economic structures, often centered on market systems, and they have
a diversity of settlement sizes, such as villages, towns, and sometimes cities.
     Wright and Johnson, for example, deﬁne the state in terms of a political polity that has
at least three levels in the decision-making hierarchy, such as village headmen, provincial
governor, and national leader.28
     Early states formed essentially independently in at least six areas of the ancient world:
Mesopotamia, Egypt, the Indus Valley, China, Mesoamerica, and Peru; ethnographic and
historical accounts of state formation include cases in Africa, Madagascar, and various
other places (Figure 7.2).
     Scholars use the same term, “state,” to refer both to ancient Egypt and to the United
States, for example, despite their gross differences in complexity. Yet in a sense the
differences between ancient Egypt and the modern United States are matters of degree. The
level of occupational specialization in the contemporary United States is much greater than
in ancient Egypt, of course, but it is mainly an elaboration of the same basic economic
principle. Some scholars, however, use the term “preindustrial state” to distinguish ancient
states from those of the industrial era.
     Many of the early states seem to have been involved in competitive relationships with
other, adjacent states, and for long periods this apparently limited their size and power. Even-
tually, however, in all the early centers of state formation these competitive relationships
broke down and one state was able to increase its size and inﬂuence drastically—usually so
rapidly that it had few competitors. In fact, its ultimate size seems to have been limited only
by the level of its communications technology and its administrative efﬁciency.
     States of this type ﬁrst appeared in Mesopotamia, Egypt, and the Indus Valley toward
the end of the fourth millennium b.c. and within a thousand years thereafter in China. The
           290       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


 THE WORLD




                                                                        1                        4
                                                                  2               3
                           6
                               5




                                   7




                                                                            0         2,000 mi
                                                                            0   2,000 km




                                             1 = Mesopotamia    4 = China              6 = Teotihuacan and the Aztec
                                             2 = Egypt          5 = Olmec and Maya     7 = Wari, Tiwanaku, and the Inka
                                             3 = Indus Valley

FIGURE 7.2 Locations of some of the world’s ﬁrst highly complex civilizations and states.

                     Inka state of Peru and the Aztec state of Mexico also seem to have achieved imperial
                     dimensions just before the arrival of the Europeans, in the sixteenth century a.d.


                     CONTEMPORARY APPROACHES TO SOCIOCULTURAL
                     TYPOLOGY

                     Rather than think of the archaeological record primarily in terms of bands, tribes, chiefdoms,
                     and states, it is probably more accurate to see the record as a great continuum of variability,
                     reﬂecting the unique ﬂexibility that humans bring to any situation. We can be certain the
                     australopiths had no academic conferences on mathematics or international labor federa-
                     tions, and no great ancient state was founded principally on caribou hunting. But most
                     other generalizations about these social typologies are likely to be imprecise.
                          The important point here is that simple categories such as “bands,” “tribes,” “chiefdoms,”
                     and “states” are static descriptive types that are not of much use in analyzing the origins
                     and functions of the phenomena these labels loosely describe. Labeling ancient Egypt a
                     “state,” for example, based on the inferred appearance of characteristics such as centralized
                     government or a class-structured society, is more a description than an analysis. To many
                     scholars such typologies are inexact, atheoretical categorizations of a continuous and
                     multidimensional underlying variability. McGuire argues that such “an approach inevit-
                     ably degenerates into taxonomic arguments: What is a simple society? What is a state?”29
                                                          THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES         291


     How do we decide where to draw a boundary line that deﬁnes a “state” in such a
pattern of continuous variability? The critical problem with these archaeological analyses
of cultural variability is that there is no powerful theory that tells us what the proper units
of analysis are and what principles explain their functions. Compare this situation to
biology: Darwinian theory and modern genetics give biology a powerful explanatory theory
that reveals much about the history and operations of the biological universe. Darwinian
theory and modern genetics tell the researcher what units to use (genes, cells, populations,
etc.) and explain change over time and space in the biological universe. Archaeology has
no comparable theories and thus has no comparably effective units or principles of analysis.
Some scholars argue that because archaeology deals with people (even if they are dead) and
unique cultures (even if they are extinct), it will never be possible to have comparably
powerful theories. Others argue that we already have the beginnings of powerful theories—
a position discussed later in terms of Marxism and Cultural Evolutionary theory.
     In the face of these ambiguities, many archaeologists have resorted to trying to break
down typologies as exempliﬁed by the “bands,” “tribes,” “chiefdoms,” and “states” paradigm
and to examine the underlying variability in selected aspects of societies. Numerous
archaeologists, for example, have focused on the concepts of specialization and exchange.
Cathy Costin,30 for example, has developed a complex categorization of how societies
produce and distribute goods and services. Similarly, Elizabeth Brumﬁel and Timothy Earle
break down the concept of occupational specialization into at least four dimensions:
(1) specialists can be independent or attached, in the sense that a potter, for example, can
supply pots for an unspeciﬁed, changing market, perhaps just for members of his or her
own village, or for the larger region; or the potter can be attached to a particular patron
and make ceramics only for a given noble family or governing institution; (2) specialists
differ in the nature of their products, in that they can produce subsistence items, such as grain;
wealth, such as ritual feather headdresses or gold bracelets; or services, such as military duty
or religious ceremonies; (3) specialists differ in the intensity of production, in that they could
be part-time hunters, who contribute an occasional deer to the village economy, or full-
time weavers, who do little else but produce textiles for trade; (4) specialists also differ in
the scale of production, in the sense that in some economies a large group of people, or a
village, or even a region may specialize in something, such as salt production, while in other
cases, one or two people may produce a particular good or service.31 Brumﬁel and Earle also
note that there are many different kinds of exchange: between an elite and its supporting
citizenry, among different elites, and in the wide variety of political and social arrangements
in which subsistence goods and nonsubsistence “wealth” can be circulated within and
among communities, regions, and larger political entities.
     Another aspect of contemporary rethinking of typologies of ancient societies has to
do with the notion of the “collapse” of civilizations. Many scholars over the centuries have
thought of civilizations almost as if these societies were organisms, with a birth, life span,
and death, or collapse. And there certainly are some examples in the past of cultures that
appear to have quickly and pervasively lost some of their unique, fundamental cultural
expressions, such as the Maya civilization of Mesoamerica (see chapter 13). But in most
cases the collapse of civilizations seems to involve not a collapse and mass extinction of
people and their cultural ideas, but rather adaptation, sometimes in the form of a process—
to use Mark Kenoyer’s terms32—of decentralization and localization, in which political
authorities lose their ability to control people and economies. These periods of
decentralization can in fact involve periods of population growth, rather than decline, and
292   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      in many cases decentralization was followed by a larger, more politically potent polity in
      the same area. We will return to this point in later chapters.
           Recently, archaeologists have also moved beyond the typology of “bands,” “tribes,”
      “chiefdoms,” and “states” by developing models that feature the actions of people—thereby
      offering interpretations that cross-cut the static categories of “bands,” “tribes,” “chiefdoms,”
      and “states.” One example is the work of Gary Feinman and his colleagues in the American
      Southwest.33 They use the concepts of corporate and network strategies of political action,
      which allow for the concurrent presence of equality and hierarchy in any society, regardless
      of whether it is classiﬁed as complex or simple in terms of social organization. A network
      strategy is characterized by a centralized leadership and access to wealth is held by only a
      few people in the society. These individuals use their networks to maintain and increase
      their authority and power and may hold ostentatious displays or adorn themselves
      ostentatiously with prestige items. A corporate strategy, on the other hand, is typiﬁed by
      much wider access to wealth among the people of that society and power and authority
      tends to be shared among many individuals. Societies with a corporate strategy have
      communal projects such as rituals—fertility, rainfall, successful hunts—focused on beneﬁts
      to all members of society, as well as the construction of public works. Corporate societies
      are integrated through the use of ideology. But such societies are not necessarily egalitarian;
      hierarchies do exist, such as differences in inﬂuence and authority between various social
      groups.
           Analyses such as that of Feinman and his colleagues demonstrate the potential for
      considering the highly variable nature of how human societies are organized. We will
      undoubtedly see additional examples of these cross-cutting sociocultural typologies as
      archaeologists continue to focus on the issues involved in the origins of and explanations
      for complex societies.



      THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES

      Archaeologists regularly talk about the band societies of the Middle Pleistocene and the
      early chiefdoms of prehistoric Mesopotamia, but we do not have these societies trapped
      in amber; we have only their artifacts, and we use the words “bands,” “tribes,” “chiefdoms,”
      and “states” to describe them only with some license. To deal with this problem,
      archaeologists typically equate these terms with speciﬁc categories of physical evidence.
           At the heart of many conceptions of cultural complexity is the idea of changing forms
      and levels of matter, energy, and information exchange. Each person and each society exists
      because it is able to divert energy from the natural world, through food sources and
      technology, and some of these changes are selective advantages. The greater the amount
      of energy a culture can capture and efﬁciently utilize, the better its competitive chances.
      And we can measure this in part by measuring such variables as population density and
      agricultural and commodity productivity.
           Leslie White’s equation of cultural evolution, with the amount of energy captured per
      person per year, has been widely criticized, but it remains of interest.34 The fundamental
      data of archaeology are usually the stones and pots and other implements with which
      people converted energy to their purposes—the very appliances of energy use, in other
                                                        THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES         293


words, that White stressed. And
every early state left a record of its
economic basis in the form of such
things as irrigation canals, stone
tools, and agricultural ﬁelds. Yet
in essence every ancient state was
also an idea. The Egyptians viewed
their state and culture metaphoric-
ally as a living organism, an organ-
ism of which they were all a part,
from the pharaoh himself to the
lowliest slave. As Egyptologist
Barry Kemp has noted, for example,
the ancient Egyptians’ vision of
their state as an organism is vividly
portrayed on the throne base
of Pharaoh Senusret I (1971–
1928 b.c.) (Figure 7.3). Here, two
potent competing Egyptian deities,
Seth and Horus, are shown tying
together the plants symbolic of
Upper (southern) and Lower
(northern) Egypt, the lotus and
the papyrus, respectively, recon-
ciling their conﬂicting powers and
thereby forming the Egyptian                FIGURE 7.3 Two potent competing Egyptian deities, Seth and Horus, shown
state. Note that the plants and the         tying together the plants symbolic of Upper and Lower Egypt.
column supporting the name of
the king (in the “cartouche,” or
the oval inscribed around the letters in the king’s name) form a vivid representation of a
human windpipe and lungs—a person, for all intents and purposes.
      All other early states had a similar intellectual foundation—an ideology that embraced
the people and elements of the state. For all early states, the process of analyzing them
archaeologically requires that the material remains of these cultures be interpreted in the
context of their ideologies.


Architecture
Perhaps the most obvious differences between the archaeological record of the Pleistocene
and that of the last ﬁve or six millennia is the presence in the latter period of massive
amounts of residential and public architecture. All early states built palaces and tombs
(Figure 7.4); hunter-gatherers occasionally built permanent structures but rarely on the
same scale as agriculturalists.
    The appearance of substantial houses and other forms of residential architecture is
mainly a reﬂection of economic productivity: If a group produces or gathers sufﬁcient
resources within a small enough area, it can become sedentary, and in most climates shelter
           294       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                   from rain, sun, heat, cold, and
                                                                                   other elements is worth the cost
                                                                                   and effort required to build it.
                                                                                         Soon after permanent
                                                                                   communities appeared in both
                                                                                   the Old and New Worlds, the
                                                                                   architecture of these settle-
                                                                                   ments began to reﬂect changing
                                                                                   levels of cultural and social
                                                                                   complexity. Whereas the ﬁrst
                                                                                   houses in all communities
                                                                                   were probably built very much
                                                                                   alike and had the same con-
                                                                                   tents, later communities incor-
                                                                                   porated residences that varied
                                                                                   considerably in expense of
                                                                                   construction and furnishing.
FIGURE 7.4 The mudbrick wall of the Early Dynastic Shunet al-Zebib (the funer-     Ethnographic evidence leaves
ary enclosure of King Khasekhemwy) at Abydos, Egypt.                               little doubt that this architec-
                                                                                   tural variability reﬂects eco-
                                                                                   nomic, social, and political
                      differentiation within the community, but the essential point is that, relative to earlier
                      societies, there was a change in patterns of investment of societal energy and resources.
                           Similarly, once residential architectural variability appeared in many of these early
                      communities, “monumental” architecture also appeared. Pyramids, earthen or brick
                      platforms, “temples,” “palaces,” and other constructions protrude from the ruins of ancient
                      settlements from North China to the high mountain valleys of Peru. Here, too, the
                      important thing is that the ability and incentive to make these investments are radically
                      different from the capacities of Pleistocene bands, in that they imply the ability of some
                      members of the society to control and organize others.


                     Mortuary Evidence
                     For much of its early history archaeology was almost synonymous with grave-robbing. Its
                     early practitioners were primarily concerned with ﬁnding ancient burials so that they could
                     loot the beautiful goods that people so often have lavished on their departed.
                           Objects carefully enclosed in burials are often much better preserved than those found
                     in houses or tool-making sites. Also, death for our ancestors, as for ourselves, was invested
                     with more ritual than any other cultural aspect. In many burials we have, so to speak, the
                     crystallization of complex religious and social forces, as well as reﬂections of social status.
                     It is in their great variability that mortuary customs are so informative: Corpses can be
                     buried, burned, ritually exposed, or entombed; they can be laid out ﬂat, on their sides, or
                     ﬂexed; they can be oriented to the cardinal points of the compass or to a geographical
                     feature; they can be placed in earth, in caves, in crypts, in trees, or on refuse heaps. Burial
                     contents can range from nothing to enormous quantities of jewelry and furnishings and
                     scores of sacriﬁced human attendants and animals (Figure 7.5).
                                                         THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES          295


     It is a fundamental archaeological assumption that a
correlation exists between the level of social complexity of a
people and the way they treat their dead.35 Ethnographic
studies show that the correlation between subsistence strategy,
social organization, and mortuary practices is strong: Bands
and tribes differed comparatively little in mortuary practices,
while sedentary agriculturalists varied their practices accord-
ing to a wide range of age, sex, and status distinctions.36 These
correlations are strong but not perfect: In some cultures,
including our own, some of the most important and wealthiest
people are cremated and leave no material record of their
passing, their status, or their wealth.
     The presence of juveniles buried with rich grave goods has
been given considerable importance in deﬁning the cultural
complexity of ancient societies because such burials are
considered indications of ascribed status: We assume that
young individuals could not have earned these goods on their
own. Similarly, some ancient cemeteries have three or four            FIGURE 7.5 Excavations at Ur in Mesopotamia
distinct classes of burials. Some types are well constructed of       by Sir Leonard Woolley revealed the “death pit”
stone, have rich grave goods, and are centrally located, while        in the tomb of Queen Pu-abi, which contained
others are simple graves with little in them except the corpse.       the bodies of dozens of her retainers.
And it is a reasonable inference that these divisions correspond
to different economic and social classes.37


Functional Differentiation and Integration
In chapter 15 we will see that the aboriginal Americans of the Mississippian culture who
built the huge mounds that dot the eastern North American river valleys had great trade
systems, intensive maize agriculture, thousands of inhabitants, and a mortuary cult that
involved human sacriﬁce and great expenditures of wealth on dead leaders—yet most
archaeologists do not consider that these societies constituted “states” because these Native
Americans were almost all full-time maize farmers, with only a few specialists: in religion,
hunting, warfare, and other areas. In some deﬁnitions of cultural complexity, the essential
component is the division of a community into functionally interdependent entities of such
complexity that no small group of people can maintain all that community’s activities. This
is important because it produces a situation in which societies survive or die out as societies,
as groups; in contrast, among hunter-gatherers the focus of selection is usually the
individual, or at most the 12 or 15 people with whom each individual spends most of the
year. In other words, the unit of “selection” changes with cultural complexity. Contempor-
ary North Americans, for example, are extremely interdependent, in the sense that we are
all reliant for our continued existence as both physical individuals and social organizations
on the 3 or 4 percent of the population that produces nearly all our food.
      To translate this sense of functional interdependence into archaeological terms, we
must look for concentrations and distributions of artifacts indicating a certain level of
activity specialization. In early agricultural villages, each house and each group of houses
had approximately the same contents in terms of numbers and types of ceramics, stone
296   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      tools, ﬁgurines, and garbage. But in later, more complex societies we ﬁnd concentrations
      of artifacts that clearly represent such things as pottery or stone-tool manufacturing
      workshops, indicating that people specialized in these activities. Again, we infer that they
      were specialized, but the signiﬁcant point archaeologically is that certain classes of artifacts
      are found in places, volumes, and diversities far different from what would be produced by,
      say, a hunting-and-gathering group. Certain differences will also be evident if we compare
      the contents of settlements. Some settlements might specialize in salt-making, or barley
      agriculture, or pottery manufacture. This variability in the artifacts found within discrete
      but contemporary sites is a key element in our identiﬁcation of cultural complexity.


      Settlement Patterns
      In addition to measuring social complexity by looking at objects excavated at speciﬁc sites,
      we can also look at how settlements are distributed spatially. First, we can examine
      variability in settlement size and conﬁguration. Early Southwest Asian agricultural villages
      were almost all approximately the same size, but settlements there several thousand years
      later were of many different sizes, ranging from a few hundred square meters to several
      square kilometers. Similarly, the basic shape of the settlements changed; some were
      apparently fortiﬁed rectangular compounds, while others were just ﬁve or six mudbrick
      houses. Thus, any archaeological analysis of cultural complexity will involve measuring the
      variability in site size and shape in a large sample of contemporary sites.
           Second, we can look at the placement of settlements relative to the environment and
      to each other. A major part of the cost of exploiting any resource is the distance it must be
      transported. This applies equally to the deer hunted by Paleolithic bands and the irrigated
      rice of ancient China. It also applies to the cost of making decisions about resource pro-
      duction, movement, and storage. With primitive communications systems, for example, an
      ofﬁcial in one settlement cannot make many timely decisions about the agriculture or craft
      production of 30 or 40 other settlements many kilometers away because the cost of
      gathering the relevant information and accurately and rapidly acting on it is too high: He
      would need teams of observers and relay runners.
           As a consequence, some arrangements of settlements are more common than others
      under certain conditions, and we can tell something about the relationships between
      settlements by analyzing their respective locations. On a relatively broad agricultural plain,
      towns and villages that exchange goods and services tend to be placed so as to form a pattern
      of interlocking hexagons (Figure 7.6) because this arrangement is especially efﬁcient if there
      is a high level of movement of goods and people among the various settlements.38 In our
      discussion of archaeological evidence relevant to the origins of cultural complexity, we will
      see several instances where ancient settlements are arranged in a hexagonal pattern or some
      other form. Here too it is relatively unimportant whether or not the distribution of ancient
      settlements corresponds exactly to the patterns observed among present ones. What is
      important is that we know a major change in settlement patterning has occurred over time.
      Paleolithic hunters and gatherers and early agriculturalists lived in locations determined
      largely by the availability of material resources. But later, in some areas of the ancient world,
      settlements began to be located with less regard for natural resources and more concern for
      trade routes, political frontiers, and administrative networks. Again, these changes
      occurred in settlements that were also building monumental structures, achieving denser
                                                              THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES          297


population concentrations, and evolving some or all of the
other elements of cultural complexity.
     For these reasons, archaeological settlement pattern
analyses have provided signiﬁcant insights into the nature of
ancient social, political, and economic changes.39
     One of the continuing debates in archaeology is the rela-
tionship of urbanism and state societies. Some civilizations,
such as those in Mesopotamia, seemed to have been formed
out of cities, while others, such as Egypt, remained largely
non-urban for much of their history. Trigger evaluates the
attempts to place examples of the pre-industrial city on a
single continuum and concludes that, while we can identify
key variables that link these examples, the variables combine            FIGURE 7.6 One of the initial archaeological
“to shape an indeﬁnite number of trajectories or paths of pre-           signs of changing levels of complexity in regional
industrial urban development, any one of which may be                    economic and political systems is the appearance
associated with a particular civilization.”40 He identiﬁes three         of settlement patterns in which settlements are
variables of particular importance:                                      arranged spatially in recognizable patterns. The
                                                                         Central Place model suggests that on a ﬂat plain
    (1) The degree of economic complexity of the society in              where all resources are uniformly distributed, the
    which the city is found, as measured in terms of the degree          settlements will be arranged in different patterns
    of division of labour in craft production, the increasing            depending on the strength of marketing, transport,
    number of people divorced from food production . . . , and           administrative, and other factors. No perfectly
    the increasingly large areas and numbers of people that are          uniformly endowed plains exist, of course, but
    effectively linked by routine economic interaction . . . ; (2)       actual maps of archaeological settlements can
    the different strategies by which urban dwellers obtain food         be matched against the theoretical ideal and
    from their hinterland . . . ; (3) The political context within       similarities noted to these ideal models. The
    which cities occur.41                                                hexagonal areas surrounding the settlements in
It may seem as if the elements of cultural complexity we have            the models here are produced by assuming that
sketched here are mainly found in the urban centers and                  on a featureless plain each settlement would have
                                                                         a circular area around it, the inhabitants of which
ceremonial centers of early states, but this is not so. In Egypt,
                                                                         would go to the center for goods and services. But
for example, the remains of tiny provincial villages appear to           since a plain packed with such circular “demand
reﬂect a simple agrarian life, undisturbed by the events and             zones” would leave some areas outside these
forces emanating from the center of the Egyptian state; but a            circles, the theoretical model assumes that the
closer look at the remains of these provincial communities               circles are slightly overlapped and that the over-
reveals many reﬂections of the state as a whole. Artifact styles         lapping areas are bisected. The resulting ﬁgures
are those of every other community in the state, inscribed               are hexagons. Modern settlement maps as well as
clay commodity sealings bespeak a commercial connection to               archaeological site maps for a given area often
the royal court, and trade items reﬂect standardization and              roughly approximate the variations of hexagonal
integration into the national and international economy.                 distributions illustrated here. Here some of the
Similar patterns are observed in most early states.42                    major settlements of the Maya in lowland Mexico
                                                                         were spaced in an hexagonal arrangement.
     To summarize archaeological approaches to determining
cultural complexity, we have several speciﬁc lines of evidence:
We can look for changes in architecture, technology, mortuary complexes, and settlement
size and location; and we can attempt to link these changes to different levels and forms of
energy and information usage and overall thermodynamic capture.
     Most of the rest of this book is a summary of how different cultures in various parts
of the world made the transition to complexity, and this summary is based on these forms
298   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      of evidence of evolving complexity. But before considering the speciﬁcs, let us look ﬁrst at
      the general problem of explaining these evolutionary patterns. As in the case of the origins
      of cultural behavior itself, and the appearance of agricultural economies, we would like to
      have some kind of theoretical constructs that will help tie all these separate early states
      together as members of a class and then will account for the time and location of their
      appearance.



      EXPLAINING THE EVOLUTION OF CIVILIZATIONS:
      THE SEARCH FOR CAUSES

      The earliest scholars believed the rise of cities and states and other elements of evolving
      cultural complexity required no explanation because they assumed these developments to
      be mainly or entirely the work of the gods. The scholars of the Enlightenment and
      subsequent centuries usually explained the origins of cultural complexity in evolutionary
      terms. Drawing a parallel with the biological world, Europeans felt that competition
      between human societies was inevitable and that to a large extent they had already “won.”
           Darwin thought that “civilized nations are everywhere supplanting barbarous nations,
      excepting where the climate opposes a deadly barrier; and they succeed mainly, though not
      exclusively, through their arts, which are the products of the intellect. It is, therefore, highly
      probable that with mankind the intellectual facilities have been gradually perfected through
      natural selection.”43 John Locke saw the cultures of North America as exemplifying a moral
      and philosophical lesson:

          There cannot be a clearer demonstration of [European cultural superiority] than . . . [the]
          several nations of the Americans . . . , who are rich in land and poor in all the comforts of
          life; whom nature having furnished as liberally as any other people, with the materials of
          plenty, i.e. a fruitful soil, apt to produce in abundance, what might serve for food, raiment,
          and delight; yet for want of improving it by labor, have not one hundredth part of the
          conveniences we enjoy; and a king of a large and fruitful territory there, feeds, lodges, and
          is clad worse than a day-labourer in England.44

      Even in the early part of the twentieth century, many scholars believed that the process of
      cultural evolution of the whole world was to some extent a result of the rise of the West.
      The ancient states of China, India, and even the Americas were thought to have been
      prodded to higher achievements by contact with the European/Middle Eastern core areas.
      Thor Heyerdahl’s expeditions, for example, perpetuate this notion that all civilizations are
      derived from a Middle Eastern, or at least Old World, source.
           The coincidence of the village farming way of life with the rise of cultural complexity
      represented to some scholars a sufﬁcient explanation of the evolution of cultural
      complexity. People then ﬁnally had enough leisure time and sedentary habits, it was argued,
      to develop architecture, art, writing, cities, and the rest of “civilization.” The problems with
      this explanation are apparent even with a superﬁcial examination. Many agricultural groups
      apparently never developed into “states,” while at least one early complex culture (in Peru)
      may have evolved without a primary agricultural economy. In any case, many hunters and
      gatherers have more leisure time than did primitive agriculturalists.
                                                       THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES       299


Techno-Ecological Hypotheses About the Origins of
Civilizations
For many analysts of early civilizations, the search for an explanation of how these cultures
evolved in highly similar yet distinctive ways logically should begin with a consideration of
these similarities and differences. What, in other words, did these early civilizations share
in the way of, for example, climate, ecology, demographics, or any other factors, that might
explain why it was Mesopotamia, Egypt, the Indus Valley, China, Mesoamerica, and
Andean South America that gave rise to the ﬁrst great states and civilizations, and not
Australia, Polynesia, Scandinavia, California, Japan, or Scotland?
     If you knew nothing about the archaeology of early complex cultures and began to
compare them, chances are you would be struck by the same facts that so forcefully
impressed Julian Steward, V. G. Childe, and other early scholars who studied the problem
of cultural complexity origins: Most of these cultures developed in similar physical
environments and were based on similar economies.45 The earliest states and empires arose
for the most part in arid or semi-arid environments where crops like wheat and barley could
be grown without having to turn over thick grasslands or ﬁght back lots of competing
vegetation and where agricultural production could be easily intensiﬁed, either by canals,
terracing, building up ﬁelds in lake beds, or some other method.
     Thus, you might look for one or two key factors that had operated in each of these early
societies to cause civilization in a rather mechanical fashion, in which these civilizations
were the outcome of the proper mix of population growth, agricultural intensiﬁcation,
trade, and the peculiarities of the human mind.
     In some ways it is easy to imagine societies becoming more complex once the ﬁrst
elements of complexity are in place. A powerful chief, for example, could become a national
king if he were successful in battle and conquered a large, exploitable hinterland like the
Mesopotamian Alluvium. And once a city had organized its production and distribution
of pottery and grain, it seems an easy step to extend these administrative institutions to
ﬁsh, beer, plows, and tax revenues; and once the ﬁrst royal tombs ﬁlled with grave gifts are
constructed, the building of great mortuary pyramids seems a fairly simple extension of
the basic idea.
     But what could produce the ﬁrst irrevocable breaks with the strong traditions of
practical communism and social equality of the ﬁrst agricultural communities?
     To begin with the most obvious factor, as noted earlier, even though intensive
agriculture is the foundation of almost all early complex cultures, it is not a sufﬁcient
explanation in and of itself. Therefore most attempts to understand the origins of com-
plexity try to link speciﬁc agricultural patterns with other factors. Anthropologist Stephen
Athens notes that agriculture is an effort to maintain an artiﬁcial ecosystem, and in some
climates, such as arid or temperate environments, the plowing, irrigating, and other efforts
needed to maintain agricultural ecosystems are so great that it is doubtful that “the more
intense forms of agricultural production would be developed or become adopted unless
there was a compelling reason to do so.”46 Athens maintains (as does Ester Boserup)47 that
the only reason sufﬁcient to account for the enormous efforts required to maintain agri-
cultural systems would be an imbalance between the population and available food supply.
     In both arid and temperate environments, annual agricultural production can vary
greatly because of crop disease, weather, and other factors, and there is some incentive to
300   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      try to stabilize production in these areas by intensive weeding, land leveling, augmenting
      the irrigation system, and other tasks that require a great deal of labor. In arid, semi-arid,
      and temperate regions, the growing season is often sharply restricted by the weather, and
      thus “cultivation . . . does not permit cycling of plantings in such a way as to equalize the
      labor requirement throughout the year.”48 Each spring, for example, many different
      activities might have to be performed to avoid poor harvests, and under these conditions,
      according to Athens, there is a strong selection for certain kinds of cultural complexity.
      Increasing the territorial size of the cultural system would help meet crises brought on by
      a ﬂood or some other disaster striking a single village; individuals and villages might also
      become specialized in trades and crafts to make production more efﬁcient; and, perhaps
      most important, it would be advantageous to have a hierarchical administrative
      organization, so that work and production could be closely and efﬁciently administered.
            Many explanations of the evolution of complex societies combine certain forms of
      agricultural intensiﬁcation with population growth. But what causes human population
      growth? The immediate cause of population growth is well-known, but the more important
      question is: What are the causes and effects of the gradual rise in population densities and
      total population that all early civilizations experienced? George Cowgill remarked that
      many analysts of cultural evolution have assumed that a pervasive and powerful factor in
      human history has been the strong tendency of human populations to increase up to the
      point where serious shortages of important resources are in the ofﬁng and that experience
      or anticipation of such shortages has been a major factor, or even the dominant factor, in
      stimulating intensiﬁcation of agricultural production and other technical and social
      innovations. In extreme versions, the entire history of complex societies and civilizations
      is seen as hardly more than the outcome of measures that began as ways of coping with
      problems posed by relentless human fertility—what might be called the “strictly from
      hunger” point of view of developmental processes.49
            It is easy to see the attractiveness of these ideas, for if one examines history, a strong
      positive statistical correlation between population growth and cultural complexity is
      evident. The relationship between human population growth and cultural complexity
      may not be one of direct cause and effect, however, for correlation does not necessarily
      demonstrate causation. Moreover, even if the relationship is in some sense causal, it may
      be that the evolution of cultural complexity leads to rising population densities, rather than
      the reverse. Empirically, too, there seem to be some problems with the idea that human
      population growth somehow caused the evolution of cultural complexity. All societies have
      evolved mechanisms like migration, abortion, infanticide, marriage rules, and contracep-
      tive techniques to control population growth, and thus we might expect people faced with
      stresses because of overpopulation to impose population controls rather than “invent”
      cultural complexity.50
            It is worth noting that the greatest recent falls in fertility rates come not as the result
      of food shortages or technical advances in contraception, but as correlates of increasing
      educational levels for women, greater social mobility, increasing urbanization, the
      expanding role of women in the work force—in sum, the lessening of women’s dependence
      on husbands and children for support.
            The actual causal mechanisms by which these factors are translated into reduced
      fertility are not clear, however. In any case, there is no evidence human populations have
      ever increased at anything approaching the biologically feasible rate. If the world’s
                                                          THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES          301


population 5,570 years ago were only 1,000 people and their annual rate of increase since
then were 4 per 1,000 people—a relatively moderate growth rate—the world’s present
population would be between seven and eight trillion. Obviously, human populations in
the past have been under fairly stringent natural and cultural controls, and if we are to link
population growth to increasing cultural complexity, we must specify additional factors or
principles in causal “models” of how these variables were related.
     It should be stressed, however, that most of the following “models” of cultural
evolution are relatively simple, and many current scholars consider them incomplete or
ﬂawed as explanations of early complexity.

IRRIGATION AGRICULTURE AND THE EVOLUTION OF CULTURAL
COMPLEXITY
Perhaps the most obvious common denominator of ancient complex societies was extensive
irrigation systems. Even today aerial photographs of Mesopotamia, Peru, and most other
areas of early state formation clearly show the massive remnants of these ancient structures,
and similar constructions were built by early “chiefdoms” in such places as Hawaii and
southwestern North America (Figure 7.7). This led some scholars to conclude that the
construction and operation of extensive irrigation systems were at the heart of the origins
of complex societies. A particularly inﬂuential proponent of this view was Karl Wittfogel,
whose Oriental Despotism is a detailed excursion into comparative history and sociological
analysis.51
     Wittfogel notes that the limiting factors on agriculture are soil conditions, tempera-
ture, and the availability of water. Of these, water is the most easily manipulated, but its
weight and physical characteristics impose limitations on this manipulation. To divert
water to agricultural ﬁelds requires canal systems, dams, and drainage constructions that
can only be built efﬁciently with
organized mass labor; and,
once built, irrigation systems
require continued enormous
investments of labor and
resources to operate, clean, and
maintain them. In addition,
these systems necessitate com-
plex administration and com-
munication because crucial
decisions have to be made
about construction and repairs,
water allocation, and crop
harvesting and storage. Thus, a
complex irrigation system under
ancient conditions required
cooperation and centralized
hierarchical decision-making
institutions.                         FIGURE 7.7 The Hohokam of Arizona built an extensive canal system to carry
     Irrigation systems also          water to their agricultural ﬁelds. Some of these can still be seen today as large
have the intrinsic capacity to        “ditches,” only partially ﬁlled in after hundreds of years of abandonment.
302   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      create another element in the process of the evolution of complex societies: wealth and
      status differentials. Fields closer to main rivers are better drained and more easily irrigated
      and possess a higher natural fertility; thus control of such lands would create immediate
      wealth differentials. Correspondingly, wealth and status would most likely accrue to the
      elites of the decision-making hierarchies. Wittfogel concludes that irrigation-based
      agriculture has many other effects on a society. It encourages the development of writing
      and calendrical systems, so that records can be kept of periods of annual ﬂooding,
      agricultural production statistics, the amounts of products in storage, and the allocation of
      water. Construction of roads, palaces, and temples would also be encouraged because the
      mobilization of labor for the canal works could be generalized to these other endeavors very
      easily, and roads would contribute to the movement of agricultural produce and to the
      communication required for efﬁcient operation of the systems. The construction of
      temples and palaces would also serve to reinforce the position of the hierarchy. The creation
      of standing armies and defensive works would also likely follow because irrigation systems
      are extremely valuable but not very portable, and they are easily damaged by neglect or
      intentional destruction.
           Wittfogel’s hydraulic hypothesis still has some currency, but there seem to be logical
      and empirical problems with his ideas as a general model of the origins of cultural
      complexity. Simple societies in several parts of the world have been observed operating
      extensive irrigation works with no perceptible despotic administrative systems or rapid
      increases in social complexity.52 More damaging to Wittfogel’s hypothesis is the scarcity of
      archaeological evidence of complex irrigation systems dating to before, or to the same time
      as, the appearance of monumental architecture, urbanism, and other reﬂections of
      increasing cultural complexity, in Southwest Asia and perhaps other areas where complex
      societies appeared independently and early.
           Nonetheless, the difﬁculties of dating irrigation canals, inadequate archaeological
      samples, and other deﬁciencies of evidence are such that we cannot conclude that irrigation
      was unimportant in virtually any case of early cultural complexity.


      WARFARE, POPULATION GROWTH, AND ENVIRONMENTAL
      CIRCUMSCRIPTION
      “War is the father of all things,” said Heraclitus, and, given its frequency in human affairs,
      we should not be surprised that many scholars see warfare as a natural adjunct of
      population growth in driving cultural evolution. In the ﬁlm The Third Man, Orson
      Welles—justifying his proﬁteering in postwar Vienna to Joseph Cotton—says, “in Italy
      for 30 years under the Borgias they had warfare, terror, murder, bloodshed, but they
      produced Michelangelo, Leonardo da Vinci, and the Renaissance. In Switzerland, they had
      brotherly love, they had 500 years of democracy and peace. And what did that produce?
      The cuckoo-clock.”
          Welles’s character was stating what for many is an uncomfortable truth: Human
      competition seems to be a powerful engine of cultural evolution. No early state—not Mexico,
      or China, or Sumer, or Peru—was without a background level of organized violence that
      occasionally erupted into great wars spanning decades.
          Why should this be so? Why doesn’t “natural selection” favor those cultures that
      develop institutions to resolve conﬂicts? Why doesn’t cultural selection seem to give the
                                                          THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES         303


edge to communities that pool their resources to build irrigation canals, establish
universities, and work for world peace?
     Most scholars consider warfare simply a cultural behavior that is elicited by environ-
mental and cultural conditions. Anthropologist Robert Carneiro argues that warfare was the
primary mechanism for the evolution of social complexity in ancient Peru, Mesopotamia,
Egypt, Rome, northern Europe, central Africa, Polynesia, Mesoamerica, Colombia, and else-
where. He believes, however, that “warfare cannot be the only factor. After all, wars have
been fought in many parts of the world where the state never emerged. Thus while warfare
may be a necessary condition for the rise of the state, it is not a sufﬁcient one. Or, to put it
another way, while we can identify war as the mechanism of state formation, we need also
to specify the conditions under which it gave rise to the state.”53 Carneiro sees two such
conditions as essential to the formation of complex societies in concert with warfare:
population growth and environmental circumscription. He notes that human population
densities have been increasing in many areas for millennia, but that only in certain
environmental zones can population growth join with warfare to produce highly complex
early civilizations. These environmental zones are exceptionally fertile areas “circumscribed,”
or surrounded, by areas of lesser productivity such as deserts, mountains, or oceans. As
an example, Carneiro points to the coast of Peru, where approximately 78 rivers run from
the Andes to the ocean through an 80-km stretch of some of the driest deserts on earth
(Figure 7.8). Here, he says, are fertile, easily irrigated strips of land along the rivers, but in
any direction one soon encounters desert, mountains, or the ocean. Similar conditions, he
asserts, prevailed in Mesopotamia, Egypt, and the other centers of early civilizations.
     Again using Peru as an example, Carneiro suggests that shortly after the appearance of
the village farming way of life, these fertile riverine areas were sparsely occupied by small
autonomous villages. He assumes that in such conditions populations grew, and, as these
populations increased, villages tended to divide because of internal conﬂicts and pressure
on agricultural lands. Some of the inhabitants would then establish a new community some
distance away. Such movements were easily accomplished in this early period because there
was no shortage of land and little investment in terracing or irrigation systems. As a
consequence, the number of villages increased faster than village size, and all communities
remained essentially the same in political and social organization.
     Eventually, however, given this constant population growth and the proliferation of
villages, all the land that could be irrigated and exploited easily became occupied, and the
expanding population rapidly began to outrun the available food supplies. Since they could
not move into the sea or deserts or easily colonize the mountains, early Peruvian farmers
chose agricultural intensiﬁcation. They built terraces and irrigation canals and tried to keep
pace with their population growth rates, but they were caught in the classic Malthusian
dilemma: Food supplies can be increased, but not nearly as quickly as population increases.
At this point, Carneiro concludes, people turned to warfare as the only alternative. The
village under the most stress would attack the weakest adjacent village, and the victor would
expropriate the land and harvests of the loser. The conquered people not killed in the
ﬁghting could not simply move away and reestablish their villages, and they could not
emigrate to the highlands because their whole culture was based on the village farming
way of life. They were either taken back to the victors’ village, where they became slaves or
artisans, or they were left as serfs who were taxed so heavily that they had to reduce their
own consumption and intensify their production still further.
304   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY




                                                                                                          Ti
                                                                                                           gr                     Amazon
                                                                                                               e
                                                                               a
                                                                           ron
                                                                         Mo                                                       lquitos
                                     r
                                 ve
                               Ri                              añ on
                                                           Mar                                            ñon
                         ira                                                                        Mar
                                                                                                       a
                       Ch

                                                                                                                ali
         Piura River                            er          er                                              ay
                                              iv         iv                                               Uc
                                           eR         eR
                                         ch        equ
                                    Le        bay
                            La
                                         Lam
                Zaña River
         Jequetepeque River
               Chicama River
                    Moche River
                         Viru River
                         Chao River                           Cal                       Hu
                         Santa River                             lejo                    alla
                                                                                          ga
                        Nepena´ River                               nd
                                         Casma River                   oH
                                                                        uay
                                     Huarmey River
                                                                            las
                                      Fortaleza River                                                  er
                                         Patavilca River                                            Riv r
                                              Supe River                                   i f fon Rive
                                                                                         Ch ima   c
                                             Huaura River                                 R                                                 M
                                              Chancay River                                     M                                            ad
                                                                                                an                                              re
                                                                                                    ta                                               de
                                                              Lima                                   ro                                                   Di
                                                                                                                                                            os
                                                           Lurin River
                                                              ´
                                                            Canete River
                                                              Chincha River                                                     Nou
                  Paciﬁc Ocean
                                                                                                                                   nim
                                                                                                                                      a     Cuzco
                                                                    Pisco River
                                                                                                                           de
                                                                                                                        an
                                                                                                                      Gr iver
                                                                                                                        R
                                                                                   Ica River

                            0                            200 km                                                                              Laka Titicaca


                                                                                                           Acari River
                                              Elevation above 3000 meters



                                                                                                                            Moquegua River
                                                                                                                                   Sama River



      FIGURE 7.8 Numerous semi-permanent rivers run from the Peruvian highlands through the arid
      coastal zone to the sea. These rivers allowed people to establish agricultural centers in an otherwise
      inhospitable desert.
                                                         THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES        305


     These developments encouraged the formation of an institutionalized bureaucracy to
administer the taxes and slaves, and the establishment of the bureaucracy in turn intensiﬁed
wealth and status differentials, as the most successful military leaders were given the
administrative posts. In addition, the defeated peoples came to constitute a lower class, and
thus the stratiﬁcation of society increased as the level of warfare rose. Carneiro believes
that warfare continued in Peru until all of each river valley was under the control of one
integrated authority, a development he terms a “state.” Subsequently, again because of the
never-ending pressure of population, these states contended with each other until a whole
series of river valleys was controlled by a single dominant center. Carneiro’s ideas are
diagrammed in Figure 7.9.
     Since many primitive societies had remarkably precise control of their population-
to-resources balance, population growth cannot be regarded as automatic. There is no
demonstrated and inevitable reason why these populations could not have maintained their
size below the stress level rather than resorting to agricultural intensiﬁcation or warfare.
Thus, to strengthen Carneiro’s hypotheses we must stipulate other factors that encouraged
or allowed these presumed growth rates.
     In a reconsideration of Carneiro’s model, David Webster maintains that warfare’s
principal importance in the evolution of the ﬁrst states was the role it played in breaking
down the kinship ties that organized early chiefdoms.54 He notes that chiefdoms apparently
are kept from evolving into states partially because the chief’s power and prestige are tied
to his role as a redistributive head, and if the chief begins to hoard wealth or exploit people,
he begins to lose the support of his kinsmen and deputy rulers. Webster proposes that
warfare produces a potent environment for the evolutionary change to state-level societies
by rendering ineffective many of the internal constraints that keep chiefdoms in a stable
sociopolitical status. Continued warfare between chiefdoms would place great adaptive value
on a stable military leadership, thereby dampening the constant petty squabbles between
rival rulers. A chief who is successful in warfare can also claim more wealth in the form of
booty than he could on the basis of his redistribution of his own society’s production.
     Carneiro’s ideas have stimulated much research55 and seem to have broad applicability
to various cultures.56 But in contemporary archaeology there is a widespread sense that
the key points of analysis in understanding the origins of early states must be at a
socioeconomic and political level, not just demographics, physical environments, and the
assumption of warfare.


EARLY MARXIST AND MATERIALIST EXPLANATIONS OF EARLY CULTURAL
COMPLEXITY
For much of the twentieth century, Marxist social scientists had few doubts about the
proper explanation of the origins of civilization. Friedrich Engels’s remarks at Karl Marx’s
grave expressed this certainty: “As Darwin discovered the law of evolution in organic nature
so Marx discovered the law of evolution in human history.”57
    Despite the collapse of Marxist states all over the world, and despite the interweaving
of Marx’s economic analysis with dubious political polemic, there is no denying the
tremendous inﬂuence Marx’s contributions have had on the analysis of social systems.
    Almost any attempt to sum up Marx’s theories about the origins of cultural complexity
and the dynamics of history necessarily involves great oversimpliﬁcation and arguable
306   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY




      FIGURE 7.9 Several models of the evolution of cultural complexity. In these diagrams Henry
      Wright (1977) has depicted the most important hypothetical cause-and-effect relationships in
      several models of the origins of states and urbanism.
                                                              THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES      307


interpretations. Marx’s famous statement of his basic ideas is worth quoting at length and
studying carefully because it is still one of the most astute and revolutionary observations
on the nature of cultural evolutionary history:
    In the social production of their subsistence men enter into determined and necessary
    relations with each other which are independent of their wills—production-relations which
    correspond to a deﬁnite stage of development of their material productive forces. The sum
    total of these production-relations forms the economic structure of society, the real basis,
    upon which a juridical and political superstructure arises, and to which deﬁnite forms of
    social consciousness correspond. The mode of production of material subsistence
    conditions the social, political and spiritual life-process in general. It is not the con-
    sciousness of men which determines their existence but on the contrary it is their social
    existence that determines their consciousness. At a certain stage of their development, the
    material productive forces of society come in conﬂict with the existing production
    relations, or what is merely a juridical expression for the same thing, the property relations
    within which they operated before. From being forms of development of the productive
    forces, these relations turn into fetters upon their development. Then comes an epoch of
    social revolution. With the change in the economic foundation the whole immense
    superstructure is slowly or rapidly transformed. In studying such a transformation one
    must always distinguish between the material transformation in the economic conditions
    essential to production—which can be established with the precision of the natural
    science—and the juridical, political, religious, artistic, or philosophic, in short ideological
    forms, in which men become conscious of this conﬂict and ﬁght it out. As little as one
    judges what an individual is by what he thinks of himself, so little can one judge such an
    epoch of transformation by its consciousness; one must rather explain this consciousness
    by the contradictions in the material life, the conﬂict at hand between the social forces of
    production and the relations in which production is carried on.58
What all this means in terms of the whole history of complex societies is the point of enough
books to ﬁll a large library, and Marx’s basic premises are being constantly reinterpreted.
Still, many accept as valid the basic tenets of Marxian analyses of history, and there is cer-
tainly great power to some of his ideas.59
      Marx himself, however, had very little to say speciﬁcally about the origins of complex
societies. Much more attention was paid to the problem by later followers of Marx,
particularly Engels and Lenin, and, more recently, V. V. Streuve and I. M. Diakonoff.60
      Until the origins of agriculture, these scholars suggest, all societies were classless, all
goods were shared, no one really owned anything, and all were treated equally. But
gradually, after the achievement of domestication and the agricultural way of life, some
people managed to control more than their fair share of the land, which is of course the
basic source of wealth in an agricultural community. By controlling land, these elites were
able to enslave others and force these people to work the land for them. In time the ruling
classes developed the state, the laws, and the church to justify, protect, and perpetuate their
economic and political privileges. The state is then seen as an exploitative mechanism
created by the elites to control and oppress the workers. Marx promulgated a “labor theory
of value,” according to which capitalists steal much of the value that a worker produces by
paying the worker only a fraction of the value his labor confers on goods and produce and
appropriating the rest.
      According to Marxian theory, every economic system based on the division of society
into socioeconomic classes and on exploitation carries within itself the seeds of its own
308   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      destruction because generally the means of producing wealth constantly improve,
      technologically and otherwise, and at a certain stage outgrow the social system constructed
      on them. Thus, slave societies would eventually give way to feudal societies and, eventually,
      Communist societies will replace capitalist societies.
           I. M. Diakonoff has been the most prominent but traditional Marxist. His model of
      early Mesopotamian state formation rests on the assumption that if wealth differentials can
      arise, they will, and that once these differentials exist, antagonism between socioeconomic
      classes will follow and eventually the state will form to promote and protect the vested
      interests of the ruling class.61
           Economists and others have challenged many of Marx’s ideas, but evidence from early
      Mesopotamian and Egyptian societies does support some aspects of the Marxian recon-
      struction: Wealth differentials developed early and were impressive, and slavery existed, as
      did communal labor pools, warfare, irrigation systems, trade networks, and other elements
      integral to the Marxian scheme. But that is not to say that this scheme is correct or
      complete. Much of it was constructed on the basis of evidence from early documents, and
      some forms of the Mesopotamian state evolved several hundred years prior to writing;
      thus the textual evidence is most likely of only limited relevance to the origins of social
      complexity. More important, it is very difﬁcult to test the Marxian reconstruction with
      archaeological data. Without written records, we cannot conclusively demonstrate class
      conﬂict or slavery, and many of the crucial elements of the Marxian paradigm, such as the
      labor theory of value and the contradictions between economies and their social correlates,
      seem utterly beyond the reach of archaeological research per se. Zagarell uses documents
      from Mesopotamia, however, to show that by the time the ﬁrst extensive texts were written,
      some correspondences do exist between Marxian ideas and what we know from these texts
      about property, the rights of women, and so on.62
           Other scholars have focused on the importance of trade in a Marxian context. Kipp
      and Schortman, for example, argue that an important factor in some cases of early state
      formation was the destabilizing effects markets in luxury goods had on early chiefdoms. In
      chiefdoms personal relationships between elites and the populace are important, but, as
      market economies evolved, chiefs and other elites had an increasingly difﬁcult time trying
      to control these markets: “When leadership is undermined by a market blind to everything
      except proﬁts, policies of systematic impoverishment are as essential to leaders as armies.
      Economic exploitation joins tyranny, and so states are born.”63
           Marvin Harris has tried to combine some of Marx’s ideas with those of Wittfogel,
      Carneiro, and others to formulate a model that, although many reject it, at least has the
      advantages of being stipulated and partially testable with the archaeological data.64
           The big step in Harris’s view is the rise of chiefdoms, which he ties to the appearance
      of “big men,” particularly inﬂuential older men whose advice and guidance the community
      seeks. Village big men act as the “nodes” of three important institutional complexes: They
      intensify production, carry out redistribution of harvest surpluses and trade goods, and use
      their prestige and position to lead the way in ﬁghting or trading with neighboring villages.
           Harris says that simple
          chiefdoms come into being with the ﬁrst intensiﬁer-redistributor-warrior complexes. The
          more production is intensiﬁed, the more there is to redistribute and to trade, the larger the
          population, the more intense the warfare, the more complex and powerful the chieﬂy
          sector. Other things being equal, all such systems tend to move from symmetric forms of
                                                           THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES      309


     redistribution (in which the primary producers get back everything they produce) to
     asymmetric forms (in which the redistributor gets more of what is produced for longer and
     longer periods). Eventually the retained portion of the harvest surplus provides the chief
     with the material means for coercing his followers into further intensiﬁcation.65

If all this is a standard developmental trajectory, why did chiefdoms never appear among
the Eskimo, while they appeared in Melanesia but stabilized at that level of development,
and while they quickly became interregional states in Mesopotamia and many other
areas?
      Harris turns to basic factors of demography, economy, environment, and technology
to answer this question. He suggests that for chiefdoms to appear and then to become states
and empires, the appropriate “energy gates” had to be available: Yams and tubers are poor
energy gates because they do not store well and have no clearly deﬁned harvest period, so
a big man or chief cannot easily shut off the ﬂow of proteins and calories produced by the
farmers; but grains store well and have deﬁned periods of harvest, so a chief with command
of community grain stores absolutely controls the lives of his associates.66
      Harris expects the ﬁrst “pristine” states to arise in areas of sharp ecotones, where there
is good potential for intensifying agriculture, but where away from the agricultural lands
the environment is such that a family would suffer a sharp drop in standard of living if
they moved away.67 Drawing on the work of Robert Carneiro (see earlier), Harris identiﬁes
the sharply circumscribed farmlands of Egypt, Mesopotamia, northern India, the Yellow
River Basin, central highland Mexico, the Peruvian coast, and the Andes highlands as areas
where pristine states could be expected.68 And once pristine states form in an area, their
expansionist tendencies and economic impact act as a “single gigantic ampliﬁer,” as the
whole region is caught in cycles of agricultural intensiﬁcation, population growth, warfare,
and so on.
      Harris’s version of Marxist analysis is rejected by many as being too “vulgar” and
“mechanical,” in that it focuses on demographic and ecological variables and appeals to
these as the primary explanations of differences and similarities in early states.


Contemporary Approaches to the Explanation of the
Evolution of Civilizations
It is better to know some of the questions than
all of the answers.
James Thurber (1894–1961)

Attempts by Childe, Wittfogel, Harris,69 and others to formulate general models of cultural
evolution, on the basis of correlations between techno-environmental and demographic
variables and social and political patterns and processes, stimulated a great deal of creative
research, and there is still much of value about these ideas. But many contemporary
scholars70 argue that identifying correlations between these variables, patterns, and
processes does not and cannot “explain” all the important aspects of the evolution of
ancient civilizations. With the growing appreciation of the limits of techno-ecological
analyses and traditional Marxist approaches, contemporary archaeologists have gone in
many different directions in their approaches to the problem of the origins of civilizations.
310   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      CONTEMPORARY MARXIST PERSPECTIVES
      Many contemporary archaeologists continue to draw inspiration from Marx and his
      theoretical successors. Friedman and Rowlands,71 for example, have interpreted Marx in
      such a way that the focus of the analysis is the social relations of production that economies
      embody, rather than just the blunt forces of technology, environment, and agriculture. Their
      study deﬁes easy translation and summary, but contains at least the following elements.
      Friedman and Rowlands assert that we must “reconstruct the structures of reproduction
      of particular social forms,” which they deﬁne as the “social structures that dominate the
      process of production and circulation and which therefore constitute the socially
      determined form by which populations reproduce themselves as economic entities.”72
            Although Friedman and Rowlands’s complex approach includes much of interest, it
      involves various problems. The primary one is that so much of it seems untestable with the
      archaeological record. Testability with archaeological data cannot, of course, be taken as
      the ultimate criterion of social theory, but archaeologists must try to measure the “ﬁt” of their
      ideas against the reality of the bones and stones they excavate. In Friedman and Rowlands’s
      approach, as in so many Marxist and Structuralist endeavors, causation is expressed in
      terms of dominances and constraints. Friedman and Rowlands say that the physical
      environment, technology, and general economic forces impose a system of constraints
      that make certain kinds of things unlikely to evolve (like a drive-through bank set up and
      frequented by hunter-gatherers); but, working in the opposite direction, the relations of
      production dominate the entire functioning of the system, determining its characteristics
      and developmental pattern. To ﬁnd “relations of production” archaeologically, however,
      and then to demonstrate how they were the causes of other cultural phenomena is difﬁcult.
      In Friedman and Rowlands’s approach, something like an organized system of ancestor
      worship can—in a given society and instance—be the result of a complex of economic
      factors, and in another society and time organized ancestor worship can be a cause of
      economic behavior.
            In general, many contemporary Marxist archaeologists are bound together by several
      basic ideas. One of these involves the rejection of “functionalist” ideas about adaptation.
      We might conclude, for example, that all early civilizations were rigidly stratiﬁed by
      socioeconomic classes because, in the absence of modern communications technology, an
      industrial base, and other means of economic production and social integration like those
      of contemporary societies, ancient civilizations could only organize themselves and
      function efﬁciently if their citizens were born into classes that automatically determined
      what occupational specialty they would perform and what access to wealth, power, and
      prestige they would have. Many Marxists reject this kind of functionalism and adapta-
      tionism on various grounds but particularly because such interpretations are descriptions,
      not explanations, and because they tend to emphasize the stability of these adaptations—
      and in so doing, justify them to some extent. Most forms of Marxism are about the necessity
      and social desirability of radical social change arising out of social conﬂict and inequities.
      It is not surprising, thus, that they see any attempt to interpret the appearance of such
      phenomena as social classes, legal systems, administrative bureaucracies, and so on as
      adaptive responses to problems societies faced as interpretations that obscure the conﬂicts
      and contradictions that are the true forces behind social changes. But contemporary
      Marxist critiques of traditional archaeology go much deeper than this. Marxists reject the
                                                          THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES         311


notion that people in any society are just passive players whose actions and ideas are entirely
the result of external forces. They focus on the social relationships that are the nexus of
interactions among individuals and groups.
     Marxism continues to have a strong inﬂuence on contemporary archaeology, although
Marx himself might not recognize, or might reject, many contemporary applications of his
ideas to the archaeological record. A continuing issue for Marxist archaeologists is the
testability of their ideas in terms of the material remains of the archaeological record. In
the absence of a written language, how are we to know if, for example, overt or institution-
alized class conﬂict, or the subordination of women, or other social behaviors and concepts
were part of the origins of the ﬁrst states in the northern Andes—or anywhere else? If one
rejects the notion that the archaeological record offers the possibility of a scientiﬁc and
empirical test of the validity of any theory of history, however, as some archaeologists do,
then the apparent difﬁculties of relating Marxian ideas to the material record of the past
disappear.
     The details of contemporary Marxist approaches are beyond the scope of this book,
but the interested reader is referred to the bibliography of this chapter for additional
sources on this topic.

THE THEORY OF CULTURAL EVOLUTION
The term theory of cultural evolution is heavily encrusted with past misuse and inappro-
priate applications, and for many scholars it immediately suggests that the analysis will be
based on a false analogy with biology, will invoke sterile social typologies, will rearrange all
human history in a sequence leading to the apex of Western civilization, and will apply
capitalist and colonialist misperceptions to the analysis of history.
     S. Gould summed up this view as follows: “Cultural evolution is not even a good
analogue for biological evolution because it proceeds so much more rapidly and, especially,
because it works by amalgamation and coalescence across lineages—the very topology
precluded on the Darwinian tree of continuous divergence.”73
     The kind of evolutionary theory that some archaeologists now are applying to cultures,
however, is different from the Spencerian forms of traditional neo-evolutionism that was,
in fact, guilty of many of these sins. Evolutionary theory basically concerns the transmission
of traits through time and space, and there is no necessary linkage with biology. As Robert
Dunnell (see earlier) has observed, what matters in evolutionary theory is the mechanisms
by which traits are perpetuated in an individual.74 Nonetheless, the objects that comprise
the archaeological record do not reproduce in the same way that people do, and thus the
rules of genetics cannot be applied; also, whereas change in the biological world is through
the relatively slow processes of genetic mutation, drift, selection, and so on (see chapter 3),
cultural changes can be conveyed quickly and pervasively from one group to another (as
in the spread of agriculture).
     One issue in evolutionary models of cultural complexity involves the scale of selection.
In the biological universe, the transmission of traits takes place at the level of the individual.
The individual genes of the plant or animal do or do not get perpetuated, not the species
as a whole. Therefore, the most productive point at which to analyze a given evolutionary
problem is the transmission of traits from individual to individual. But in cultural situations,
many individual traits, speciﬁcally behavioral ones, are the products of instruction by the
312   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      complete community of parents, teachers, and friends. And people act in corporate groups
      in ways that make these the functional units of the society. For example, in the next chapter
      we will see that religions appeared75 early in all great civilizations and that these formed
      effective ways to get people to act in concert for the corporate good—such as in ﬁghting
      wars, clearing irrigation canals, and building pyramids. To summarize, in the production
      and transmission of cultural characteristics, cultural selection can act on groups as well as
      individuals.
           So, to apply evolutionary theory to archaeological data will require analyzing a great
      diversity of concepts of trait transmission.
           It is also important to note that the cases of cultural evolution detailed in the following
      chapters repeatedly show that cultural evolution is not a continuous, cumulative, gradual
      change, in most places. “Fits and starts” better describes it. In Mesopotamia, the Indus
      Valley, and elsewhere, there is clear evidence of communities that seem on the verge of
      cultural complexity—either to die out without further development or to be overtaken by
      developments in some core area to which they became the periphery.
           The supposed “uniﬁcation” of the Nile Delta and Valley cultures at about 3200 b.c.
      provides a useful example here. This pivotal event in Egyptian history apparently involved
      a process in which the cultural repertoire of the Valley cultures—in terms of artifact styles,
      political ideology, and so forth—was imposed upon, or was integrated into, or largely
      replaced those of the Delta cultures.
           How are we to understand such a process of trait-transmission? And, at a higher level,
      how are we to understand similar processes in other early civilizations? Consider again
      Trigger’s conclusion, quoted earlier, concerning the extremely limited variations in what
      he observed in early states in their most important elements. In trying to account for this
      lack of variation, Trigger appeals to the apparent “efﬁciency” that these basic social and
      political forms must have conferred on their individual cultures. If we accept that
      supposition, the analytical problem then becomes one of understanding and measuring the
      relative efﬁciency of various mechanisms of social forms and phenomena—and the kinds
      of selection that operate on variability, and how that variability is generated in the ﬁrst
      place. If evolutionary theory has any application to the analysis of ancient and modern
      cultures, it would seem to be precisely with regard to these questions of cultural change.
           Most early complex societies, for example, underwent a transition in which labor-
      intensive, highly decorated pottery was replaced by mass-produced forms of much less
      aesthetic appeal. Various scholars have seen cultural collapse and dissolution in such
      changes, but as Trigger notes, this replacement does “not indicate a decline in cultural or
      aesthetic standards. Instead it suggests that pottery no longer served as a medium of artistic
      expression.”76 In fact, the appearance of these mass-produced forms of pottery seems to be
      a prime indicator of increasing complexity in the institutions administering and controlling
      craft production. G. Johnson, R. McC. Adams,77 and others have concluded that the rapid
      development of Southwest Asian states occurred during the period when the beautiful
      painted wares of the early fourth millennium were largely replaced by the unimpressive,
      mass-produced unpainted pottery. Egyptian pottery seems to have made a parallel
      transition in the Early Dynastic and Old Kingdom periods, when various low-ﬁred wares
      including “bread molds” were the dominant ceramic types.
           Several factors may explain these dramatic changes in pottery manufacture. The
      individual and corporate social groups identiﬁed by regional pottery styles, for example,
                                                         THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES        313


are, in a sense, dangerous expressions of individualism and group distinctiveness that
detract from the unity of the larger state, and it is possible that these states suppressed some
expressions of group identity not derived from the state structures. The greater efﬁciency,
too, of producing massive quantities of cheap and nearly identical pottery vessels would be
best realized in a state organization.
     The formulation of a powerful evolutionary theory will require that we avoid the naive
“functionalism” of early versions of cultural evolutionism: that is, that evolutionary theory
must supply some explanation for cultural change other than that a given cultural
characteristic made a positive contribution to a culture’s efﬁciency of adaptation.

CRITIQUES OF COMPARATIVE APPROACHES
Shanks and Tilley, for example, suggest that cross-cultural generalizations are not only
misguided but also result from conscious or unconscious attempts to further the cause of
Western imperialism.78 In contrast to materialist deterministic models, Giddens79 and
many others have emphasized the power of sociopolitical factors over economic factors as
determinants of the character and histories of pre-industrial class-based societies. “Post-
processualists” and “post-modernists,” in general, argue that “positivist” scientiﬁc
epistemologies are fundamentally inappropriate for understanding the past.80
     Critiques of the methodology of comparative studies have come from a wide variety
of sources. Philip Kohl, for example, himself an advocate of a form of materialist theory,
suggests that “[l]inear models of class and state formation, which decontextualize social
and historical processes, make meaningful comparative studies impossible.”81 Even some
traditional Marxists82 now emphasize how different cultures construct unique and—at
some levels—incommensurable social forms and histories.
     And it is not just the post-processualists and post-modernists who have challenged the
validity of traditional anthropological comparative studies. Contemporary thought in
evolutionary theory, as applied to both cultural and biological systems, emphasizes the
uniqueness and essential unpredictability of evolutionary trajectories.83
     If even evolutionists conclude that evolutionary sequences are unpredictable and
unique, what is the importance of comparative analyses as applied to, for example, Old
Kingdom Egypt and the Inka state?

HOLISTIC AND SYNTHETIC APPROACHES
A holistic perspective, to use Bruce Trigger’s term, is a multifaceted one in which any and
every form of inquiry that seems to expand one’s knowledge of the past is used. Trigger
argues84 that the future of analyses of the origins of civilizations must include combining
all our ideas, perspectives, and methods in order to examine all the factors that “constrain”
human behavior, in the present and the past. He notes that these constraints can be
ecological, such as the great river valleys that were the homes of many of the ﬁrst great civi-
lizations and which directly determined the kinds of agriculture and settlement patterns
that could be effective in this kind of environment, but he notes that these constraining and
shaping factors can also be ideologies and cultural traditions.
     Trigger dismisses the simplistic materialist determinism of, for example, Wittfogel,85
and acknowledges the research importance of the unique aspects of early states. But in his
concluding essay, he writes:
314   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


          [My] ﬁndings indicate that practical reason plays a greater role in shaping cultural change
          than many postprocessual archaeologists and postmodernist anthropologists are prepared
          to admit. This encourages me to accord greater importance to an evolutionist analysis and
          less importance to a cultural particularist one than I would have done when I began my
          study. A particularlist approach is necessary to understand many aspects of early
          civilizations. But it is clearly a mistake to ignore, or even to underestimate, the importance
          of evolutionism, as those who would privilege cultural reason would have us do.86

      Trigger acknowledges the power and primacy of cultures to construct their own realities,
      but he also sees extremely limited worldwide variation in some of the core structures and
      processes of early civilizations.87 One can, therefore, usefully study what factors contribute
      to the “efﬁciency” of these rather invariant elements of early civilizations, perhaps from the
      “evolutionist” perspective Trigger suggests. But the baroque variability of “art styles and
      cultural values” provides ample material for particularistic studies that need not appeal
      to cross-cultural and comparative analyses for intellectual justiﬁcation.
           Trigger thus provides a justiﬁcation and rationale for a wide variety of theoretical
      perspectives in archaeology, embracing both particularist studies and cross-cultural
      comparative analyses aimed at understanding the selective forces that so greatly constrained
      variation in some elements of these early civilizations.
           Moreover, even in those elements that seem relatively invariant in early civilizations,
      there is considerable interesting variety in speciﬁc expression. Trigger suggests that
      many archaeologists have assumed “that aspects of civilizations that were shaped most
      directly by the constraints of environment and technology would display the greatest
      degree of cross-cultural uniformity.”88 He notes, however, that this is not the case. Metal-
      working, for example, was a core industry in Mesopotamia, where it was used to produce
      tools as well as ornaments, whereas in Egypt it was used to make weapons but not often to
      make agricultural tools, and in the New World it was used extensively to produce
      ornaments.
           There may well be good functional reasons for these patterns (e.g., the scarcity of stone
      for implements such as hoes in Mesopotamia), but cultural constructs may be equally
      determinative even in such basic technologies as metallurgy.
           In his chapter on religion, Trigger states he initially assumed that, given the ﬂexibility
      of the human intellect, religious behavior would vary much more greatly in early
      civilizations than economic behavior, but he concluded that this was not the case. He
      identiﬁes strong recurrent patterns in many religious systems. Kings, for example, tend to
      trace their descent to strangers, probably in order to minimize their kinship obligations to
      the people they dominate. He suggests that all early civilizations had religious systems based
      on establishing social relationships with unseen forces in the natural world in order to
      manipulate it. The early civilizations Trigger surveys are all ones, he notes, that existed prior
      to the appearance of “transcendent religions”—those that make strict distinctions between
      the social, the natural, and the supernatural.
           Some of the commonalties in ideology that Trigger ﬁnds in early civilizations seem
      obviously understandable in functional terms. Most placed their own civilization in the
      center of a world that had four quarters corresponding to the cardinal directions, political
      competition was cast in terms of religious struggles, and the universe was once or regularly
      threatened with extinction and could only be saved by the intercession of gods, who had to
      be placated by human activities and earthly wealth.
                                                        THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES        315


     In summary, Trigger’s basic goal and strategy is to use many different ideas and
techniques to analyze early civilizations—not in a simplistic positivist sense but, still, in a
sense that does not admit the possibility that any “reading” of the record of the past is
equally valid, equally “true.” He stresses that cultural differences are as important in this
context as are cultural similarities, and he admits particularistic studies as useful adjuncts
in a synthetic approach to the past. But his basic goal is to understand why these similarities
and differences appeared, and he invokes materialist and evolutionist ideas in this regard.
     All explanations of cultural complexity focus on the similarities and differences that
the various forms of cultural evolution exhibit. But what is the signiﬁcance of these
similarities and differences?
     Stephen Jay Gould, in his book Wonderful Life,89 emphasizes how every evolutionary
sequence is unique; and the state of uniqueness, like that of pregnancy, permits no
qualiﬁcations or degrees. But if every sequence is unique, what is the signiﬁcance of the
similarities of cultural systems unconnected by genetics or history? The Aztecs and the
Egyptians—who knew nothing of each other and lived thousands of years separated in
time—did many of the same things, from building pyramids to establishing state religions;
but what is the signiﬁcance of these similarities? Scholarly opinion, of course, remains
divided on this point.
     Brumﬁel and Earle have categorized some of the variability they see in early economic
exchange in terms of three “models”: (1) commercial development models, in which
increasing occupational specialization and exchange are seen as the “natural” outgrowth of
economic growth; (2) adaptationist models, in which political leaders are assumed to have
intervened directly in the economy, to redistribute goods, for example, or to manage
irrigation systems; and (3) political models, in which local rulers intervene in economies
but, unlike their role in adaptationist models, these leaders are assumed to be the primary
beneﬁciaries of their efforts.90 Brumﬁel and Earle propose that “political elites consciously
and strategically employ specialization and exchange to create and maintain social inequity,
strengthen political coalitions, and fund new institutions of control, often in the face of
substantial opposition from those whose well-being is reduced by such actions.”91
     It is worth noting here that most of these many kinds of explanations of cultural
complexity are functional arguments. The basic idea of a functionalist explanation was
introduced earlier in the context of contemporary Marxist perspectives on archaeology.
Functional arguments attempt to explain the origins of something (e.g., the human heart)
in terms of the functions it performs (e.g., blood circulation). To the question, “Why do
people have hearts?” the answer that some device is needed to circulate blood is an
explanation of sorts, but it does not explain why some other kind of life-support system
did not evolve, nor does it explain the evolutionary history of the heart or the selective
pressures that shaped this history.
     Similarly, to assert that complex societies developed because a leader was needed to
coordinate irrigation and redistribute agricultural production is a functional explanation
and does not explain why the society did not remain egalitarian, or develop a capitalist
economic system, or go off in some other developmental direction.
     Yet functional explanations seem to work so well for certain phenomena. The national
religious cults that all early states developed, for example, seem so transparently a device
for social control. Montaigne said, “Man is certainly stark mad. He cannot make a worm,
and yet he will be making gods by the dozen.” But for an early state few things are as useful
316   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      as gods in whom everyone believes. Then one can despise and kill (and take possession of
      the property of ) all nonbelievers, foreign and domestic, without qualms; one is willing to
      sacriﬁce oneself in battles, or participate in pyramid building, or accept a social hierarchy,
      simply because the gods have so decreed. And the best part is that one does all these things
      without much cost to the state—people ﬁght in wars, work for the common good, or accept
      life as a disenfranchised slave often on the premise that in the afterlife things will be greatly
      improved.
            Thus, functionalist arguments have the strong heuristic value of suggesting hypotheses
      about a speciﬁc development and indicating crucial variable relationships. Marxist and
      other scholars see such functionalist interpretations as adequate descriptions, perhaps, but
      not explanations, which must involve, in their opinion, an analysis of the social relations
      out of which arise social changes.


      SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

      In the rest of this book we will review numerous cases of the evolution of complex societies,
      but in all these analyses of cultural and social complexity, archaeologists must come to
      terms with a fundamental problem: Most of the origins and development of ancient
      societies cannot be fully explained on the basis of the archaeologically retrievable facts of
      climate, technology, economy, and demography. Cultural evolution instead must be
      analyzed at some level above these basic conditions—at the higher level of the social,
      economic, and political relationships of peoples and social entities. But how do we get at
      these higher-level interactions through the data and methods of archaeology? Some
      archaeologists have concluded that we cannot do so in any scientiﬁc way, and thus
      archaeology cannot be a science; others argue that only the principles of evolutionary
      theory will help us understand these patterns of cultural change, but that we can never get
      at the speciﬁcs of the changes in social relations at the heart of the origins of civilizations;
      still other archaeologists believe that we can make inferences about these kinds of social
      changes and in various ways incorporate them in a holistic discipline of archaeological
      analysis.
            The following chapters of this book, thus, should be seen as more of a description of
      the problems of analyzing the evolution of civilizations than an explanation of these
      evolutionary processes, for we are still very far from any powerful comprehensive
      explanation of them—and there is little agreement about how we might analyze these
      processes or even about the usefulness of trying to analyze them. If that summary sounds
      somewhat nilhilistic, it is well to recall that there is much about the pyramids of Egypt, the
      ﬁrst written texts of Mesopotamian civilization, the glory that was Greece and the grandeur
      that was Rome, and so on, that is interesting and rewarding to consider, even if we can’t
      ultimately and utterly explain their origins.


      BIBLIOGRAPHY
      Adams, R. McC. 1966. The Evolution of Urban Society. Chicago: Aldine.
      ———. 1981. Heartland of Cities. Chicago: Aldine.
      Adams, R. N. 1981. “Natural Selection, Energetics, and Cultural Materialism.” Current Anthropology 22:603–624.
                                                                      THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES                317


———. 1988. The Eighth Day. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Alexander, R. D. 1975. “The Search for a General Theory of Behavior.” Behavioral Science 220:77–100.
———. 1979. “Evolution and Culture.” In Evolutionary Biology and Human Social Behavior: An Anthropological
            Perspective, ed. N. Chagnon and W. Irons. North Scituate, MA: Duxbury Press.
———. 1987. The Biology of Moral Systems. Hawthorne, NY: Aldine de Gruyter.
Algaze, G. 1989. “The Uruk Expansion.” Current Anthropology 30(5):571–608.
Ammerman, A. J., and L. L. Cavalli-Sforza. 1973. “A Population Model for the Diffusion of Early Farming in Europe.”
            In The Explanation of Culture Change, ed. C. Renfrew. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Appadurai, A., ed. 1986. The Social Life of Things. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Athens, J. S. 1977. “Theory Building and the Study of Evolutionary Process in Complex Societies.” In For Theory
            Building in Archaeology, ed. L. S. Binford. New York: Academic Press.
Bard, K. 1994. From Farmers to Pharaohs. Monographs in Mediterranean Archaeology 2. Shefﬁeld, UK: Shefﬁeld
            Academic Press.
Barnard, A. 1983. “Contemporary Hunter-Gatherers: Current Theoretical Issues in Ecology and Social
            Organization.” Annual Review of Anthropology 12:193 –214.
Bartel, B. 1982. “A Historical Review of Ethnological and Archaeological Analyses of Mortuary Practice.” Journal
            of Anthropological Archaeology 1(1):32–58.
Bass, G. F. 1987. “Splendors of the Bronze Age.” National Geographic, 172(6): 693–732.
Beck, L. A., ed. 1995. Regional Approaches to Mortuary Analysis. New York: Plenum Press.
Bender, B. 1985. “Emergent Tribal Formations in the American Midcontinent.” American Antiquity 50(1):52 – 62.
Berlinski, D. 1976. On Systems Analysis. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bernal, M. 1987. The Afroasiatic Roots of Classical Civilization. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
Berry, B. 1967. Geography of Market Centers and Retail Distribution. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Betzig, L. L. 1986. Despotism and Differential Reproduction: A Darwinian View of History. Hawthorne, NY: Aldine
            de Gruyter.
Binford, L. R. 1971. “Mortuary Practices: Their Study and Their Potential.” In Approaches to the Social Dimensions
            of Mortuary Practices, ed. J. A. Brown. Memoirs of the Society for American Archaeology 25:6 –29.
            Washington, D.C.: Society for American Archaeology.
Blanton, R. E. 1995. Houses and Households: A Comparative Study. New York: Plenum Press.
Boserup, E. 1965. The Conditions of Agricultural Growth. Chicago: Aldine.
Boyd, R., and P. J. Richerson. 1985. Culture and the Evolutionary Process. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Braun, D. P. 1986. “Midwestern Hopewellian Exchange and Supralocal Interaction.” In Peer Polity Interaction and
            Socio-Political Change, ed. C. Renfrew and J. F. Cherry. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bronson, B. 1980. “South-east Asia: Civilizations of the Tropical Forest.” Cambridge Encyclopedia of Archaeology.
            pp. 202–266.
Brumﬁel, E. M., and T. K. Earle, eds. 1987. Specialization, Exchange, and Complex Societies. Cambridge, England:
            Cambridge University Press.
———. 1987. “Specialization, Exchange, and Complex Societies: An Introduction.” In Specialization, Exchange,
            and Complex Societies, ed. E. M. Brumﬁel and T. K. Earle. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University
            Press.
Buck, R. C. 1956. “On the Logic of General Behavior Systems Theory.” In The Foundations of Science and the
            Concept of Psychology and Psychoanalysis, ed. H. Feigl and M. Scriven. Minnesota Studies in the
            Philosophy of Science 1:223–128. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Carniero, R. 1970. “A Theory of the Origin of the State.” Science 169:733–738.
Carr, C. 1995. “Mortuary Practices: Their Social, Philosophical-Religious, Circumstantial, and Physical
            Determinants.” Journal of Archaeological Method and Theory 2:105–200.
Carr, C., and J. E. Neitzel, eds. 1995. Style, Society, and Person: Archaeological and Ethnological Perspectives. New
            York: Plenum Press.
Cavalli-Sforza, L. L., and M. W. Feldman. 1981. Culture Transmission and Evolution. A Quantitative Approach.
            Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Childe, V. G. 1934. New Light on the Most Ancient East. London: Kegan Paul.
Clark, J. G. D. 1986. Symbols of Excellence: Precious Materials as Expressions of Status. Cambridge: Cambridge
            University Press.
Cohen, G. A. 1978. Karl Marx’s Theory of History: A Defense. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Cohen, R. 1981. “Evolutionary Epistemology and Human Values.” Current Anthropology 22:201–218.
Costin, C. L. 1991. “Craft Specialization: Issues in Deﬁning, Documenting, and Explaining the Organization of
            Production.” In Archaeological Method and Theory, Vol. 3, ed. M. B. Schiffer. Tucson: University of
            Arizona Press.
———. 1996. “Ceramic Production and Distribution.” In Empire and Domestic Economy: Transformation in
            Household Economics of Xauxa Soceity Under the Inkas, ed. T. D’Altroy and C. Hastorf. Washington,
            DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
318   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      Costin, C. L., and T. Earle. 1989. “Status Distinction and Legitimation of Power as Reﬂected in Changing Patterns
                  of Consumption in Late Prehispanic Peru.” American Antiquity 54(4):691–714.
      Cowgill, G. 1975. “On the Causes and Consequences of Ancient and Modern Population Changes.” American
                  Anthropologist 77:505 –525.
      Crumley, C. L. 1979. “Three Locational Models. An Epistemological Assessment for Anthropology and
                  Archaeology.” In Advances in Archaeological Method and Theory, Vol. 2, ed. M. B. Schiffer. New York:
                  Academic Press.
      ———. 1992. “A Dialectical Critique of Hierarchy.” In Power Relations and State Formation, ed. T. Patterson and
                  C. Gailey. Salem, WI: Shefﬁeld Publishing Company.
      Crumley, C. L., and W. H. Marquardt, eds. 1987. Regional Dynamics: Burgundian Landscapes in Historical
                  Perspective. Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
      Darwin, C. 1871. The Descent of Man and Selection in Relation to Sex. New York: Appleton.
      Demarest, A. A., and G. W. Conrad, eds. 1992. Ideology and Pre-columbian Civilizations. Santa Fe, NM: School of
                  American Research.
      Diakonoff, I. M., ed. 1969. Ancient Mesopotamia. Moscow: Nauka.
      ———. 1991. Early Antiquity. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
      Drennan, R. D. 1995. “Chiefdoms in Northern South America.” Journal of World Prehistory 9(3):301–340.
      Drennan, R. D., and C. A. Uribe, eds. 1987. Chiefdoms in the Americas. Lanham, MD: University Press of America.
      Dunnell, R. C. 1978. “Style and Function: A Fundamental Dichotomy.” American Antiquity 43:192–202.
      ———. 1980. “Evolutionary Theory and Archaeology.” In Advances in Archaeological Method and Theory, Vol. 3,
                  ed. M. B. Schiffer. New York: Academic Press.
      ———. 1982. ““Science, Social Science, and Common Sense: The Agonizing Dilemma of Modern Archaeology.”
                  Journal of Anthropological Research 38:1–25.
      Dunnell, R. C., and R. J. Wenke. 1980. “An Evolutionary Model of the Development of Complex Societies.” Paper
                  presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, San
                  Francisco.
      Durham, W. H. 1990. “Advances in Evolutionary Culture Theory.” Annual Review of Anthropology 19:187–242.
      Earle, T. K. 1987. “Chiefdoms in Archaeological and Ethnohistorical Perspective.” Annual Review of Anthropology
                  16:279 –308.
      ———, ed. 1991. Chiefdoms: Power, Economy, Ideology. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
      Earle, T., and R. W. Preucel. 1987. “Processual Archaeology and the Radical Critique.” Current Anthropology
                  28(4):501–538.
      Eisenstadt, S. N. 1963. The Political System of Empires. New York: Free Press of Glencoe.
      Ember, C. R. 1975. “Residential Variation Among Hunter-Gatherers.” Behavioral Science Research 10:199 –227.
      Evans, S. “Settlement Models in Archaeology.” Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 1:275 –304.
      Feinman, G. M., K. G. Lightfoot, and S. Upham. 2000. “Political Hierarchies and Organizational Strategies in the
                  Puebloan Southwest.” American Antiquity 65(3):449 – 470.
      Feinman, G. M., and J. Neitzel. 1984. “Too Many Types: An Overview of Sedentary Prestate Societies in the
                  Americas.” In Advances in Archaeological Method and Theory Vol. 7, ed. M. Schiffer. New York:
                  Academic Press.
      Flannery, K. V. 1972. “The Cultural Evolution of Civilizations.” Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics
                  3:399 – 426.
      ———. 1973. “Archeology with a Capital S.” In Research and Theory in Current Archeology, ed. C. L. Redman.
                  New York: Wiley.
      Fried, M. H. 1960. “On the Evolution of Social Stratiﬁcation and the State.” In Culture in History, ed. S. Diamond.
                  New York: Columbia University Press.
      ———. 1967. The Evolution of Political Society. New York: Random House.
      Friedman, J., and M. J. Rowlands. 1977. The Evolution of Social Systems. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
      Gellner, E., ed. 1980. Soviet and Western Anthropology. London: Duckworth.
      Giddens, A. 1981. A Contemporary Critique of Historical Materialism, Vol. 1. Power, Property and the State. London:
                  Macmillan.
      ———. 1985. A Contemporary Critique of Historical Materialism, Vol. 2. The Nation-State and Violence.
                  Cambridge: Polity Press.
      Gould, S. J. 1989. Wonderful Life. New York: W.W. Norton.
      ———. 1987. An Urchin in the Storm. New York: W.W. Norton.
      Graber, R. B. 1994. A Scientiﬁc Model of Social and Cultural Evolution. Lanham, MD: University Press of America.
      Harris, M. 1968. The Rise of Anthropological Theory. New York: Crowell.
      ———. 1977. Cannibals and Kings. New York: Random House.
      ———. 1979. Cultural Materialism: The Struggle for a Science of Culture. New York: Vintage Press.
      Harris, M., and E. B. Ross. 1990. Death, Sex and Fertility: Population Regulation in Preindustrial and Developing
                  Societies. Irvington, NY: Columbia University Press.
                                                                 THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES              319


Hassan, F. 1988. “The Predynastic of Egypt.” Journal of World Prehistory 2(2):135 –185.
Hastorf, C. A., and S. Johannessen. 1993. “Pre-Hispanic Political Change and the Role of Maize in the Central
             Andes of Peru.” American Anthropologist 95(1):115 –137.
Hill, J. N. 1977. Explanation of Prehistoric Change. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
Hodder, I., ed., 1982. Symbolic and Structural Archaeology. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Hodder, I. 1986. Reading the Past: Current Approaches to Interpretation in Archaeology. Cambridge, England:
             Cambridge University Press.
Johnson, G. A. 1977. “Aspects of Regional Analysis in Archaeology.” Annual Review of Anthropology 6:479 –508.
———. 1980. “Rank-Size Convexity and System Integration: A View from Archaeology.” Economic Geography
             56:234–247.
———. 1981. “Monitoring Complex System Integration and Boundary Phenomena with Settlement Size Data.”
             In Archaeological Approaches to Complexity, ed. S. E. van der Leeuw. Amsterdam: University of
             Amsterdam.
———. 1982. “Organizational Structure Scalar Stress.” In Theory and Explanation in Archaeology. New York:
             Academic Press.
———. 1987. “The Changing Organization in Uruk Administration on the Susiana Plain.” In The Archaeology of
             Western Iran, ed. F. Hole. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
Kemp, B. J. 1989. Ancient Egypt: Anatomy of a Civilization. London and New York: Routledge.
Kenoyer, J. M. 1991. “The Indus Valley Tradition of Pakistan and Western India.” Journal of World Prehistory
             5(4):331–385.
Kipp, R. S., and E. M. Schortman. 1989. “The Political Impact of Trade in Chiefdoms.” American Anthropologist
             91(2):370–385.
Kirch, P. V. 1988. “Circumscription Theory and Sociopolitical Evolution in Polynesia.” American Behavioral
             Scientist 31(4):416 – 427.
———. 1990. “The Evolution of Sociopolitical Complexity in Prehistoric Hawaii: An Assessment of the
             Archaeological Evidence.” Journal of World Prehistory 4(3):311–346.
Kohl, P. L. 1987. “The Use and Abuse of World Systems Theory.” In Advances in Archaeological Method and
             Theory, Vol. 11, ed. M. B. Schiffer. New York: Academic Press.
Lansing, J. S., and J. N. Kremer. 1993. “Emergent Properties of Balinese Water Temple Networks.” American
             Anthropologist 95(1):97–114.
LeCarré, J. 1974. Tinker, Tailor, Soldier, Spy. New York: Knopf.
Lee, R. E. 1969. “!Kung Bushmen Subsistence: An Input-Output Analysis.” In Environment and Cultural Behavior,
             ed. A. P. Vayda. Garden City, NY: Natural History Press.
Legros, D. 1977. “Chance, Necessity and Mode of Production: A Marxist Critique of Cultural Evolutionism.”
             American Anthropologist 79:26 – 41.
Locke, J. 1980 (orig. a.d. 1690). Second Treatise of Government. Indianapolis: Hackett.
Lumsden, C. J., and E. O. Wilson. 1981. Genes, Mind, and Culture. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Madsen, M., C. Lipo, and M. Cannon. 1999. “Fitness and Reproductive Trade-Offs in Uncertain Environments:
             Explaining the Evolution of Cultural Elaboration.” Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 18:251–
             281.
Madsen, T. 1982. “Settlement Systems of Early Agricultural Societies in East Jutand, Denmark: A Regional Study
             of Change.” Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 1:197–236.
Mann, M. 1986. The Sources of Social Power I: A History of Power from the Beginning to AD 1760. Cambridge:
             Cambridge University Press.
Marx, K. 1932 (orig. 1859). Capital and Other Writings. New York: The Modern Library.
———. 1973 (orig. manuscript 1857–1858). Grundrisse: Foundations of the Critique of Political Economy. New
             York: Vintage Press.
Marx, K., and F. Engels. 1970. Selected Works. 3 Vols. Moscow: Progress Publishers.
May, D. A., and D. M. Heer. 1968. “Son Survivorship, Motivation and Family Size in India: A Computer
             Simulation.” Population Studies 22:199 –210.
McGuire, R. H. 1992. A Marxist Archeology. San Diego: Academic Press.
McGuire, R. H., and R. Paynter, eds. 1991. The Archaeology of Inequality. Cambridge, MA: Basil Blackwell.
Miller, D. 1985. “Ideology and the Harappan Civilization.” Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 4(1):34 –71.
Montmollin, O. de 1989. The Archaeology of Political Structure: Settlement Analysis in a Classic Maya Polity.
             Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Neiman, F. D. 1995. “Stylistic Variation in Evolutionary Perspective: Inferences from Decorative Diversity and
             Interassemblage Distance in Illinois Woodland Ceramic Assemblages.” American Antiquity
             60(1):7–36.
O’Shea, J. M. 1984. Mortuary Variability—An Archaeological Investigation. New York: Academic Press.
Patterson, T. C., and C. W. Gailey, eds. 1987. Power Relations and State Formation. Washington, DC: American
             Anthropological Association.
320   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      Peebles, C. S. 1971. “Moundville and Surrounding Sites: Some Structural Considerations of Mortuary Practices,
                   II.” In Approaches to the Social Dimensions of Mortuary Practices, ed. J. A. Brown. Society for American
                   Archaeology Memoir No. 25. Washington, D.C.: Society for American Archaeology.
      ———. 1987. “Moundville from 1000 –1500 ad.” In Chiefdoms in the Americas, ed. R. D. Drennan and C. A.
                   Uribe. Lanham: University Press of America.
      Peterson, N. 1993. “Demand Sharing: Reciprocity and the Pressure for Generosity Among Foragers.” American
                   Anthropologist 95(4):860 – 874.
      Polyani, K., C. M. Arensberg, and H. W. Pearson. 1957. Trade and Market in the Early Empires. Glencoe, IL: Free
                   Press.
      Price, T. D., and G. M. Feinman, eds. 1995. Foundations of Social Inequality. New York: Plenum Press.
      Redman, C. L. 1978. The Rise of Civilization. San Francisco: Freeman.
      Renfrew, C. 1972. The Emergence of Civilization. London: Methuen.
      ———. 1986. “Varna and the Emergence of Wealth in Prehistoric Europe.” In The Social Life of Things, ed.
                   A. Appaudrai. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
      ———. 1987. Archaeology and Language. London: Jonathan Cape.
      Renfrew, C., and J. F. Cherry, eds. 1986. Peer Polity Interaction and Socio-political Change. Cambridge: Cambridge
                   University Press.
      Rindos, D. 1984. The Origins of Agriculture. New York: Academic Press.
      Roberts, N. 1989. The Holocene: An Environmental History. Oxford: Blackwell.
      Robins, G. 1986. Egyptian Painting and Relief. Aylesbury: Shire.
      Rothschild, N. A. 1979. “Mortuary Behavior and Social Organization at Indian Knoll and Dickson Mounds.”
                   American Antiquity 44(4):658 – 675.
      Roux, G. 1964. Ancient Iraq. Baltimore: Penguin.
      Sabloff, J. A. 1989. The Cities of Ancient Mexico. London and New York: Thames & Hudson.
      Sahlins, M. 1968. “Notes on the Original Afﬂuent Society.” In Man the Hunter, ed. R. Lee and I. DeVore. Chicago:
                   Aldine.
      ———. 1976. Culture and Practical Reason. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
      Saunders, N. 1989. People of the Jaguar. London: Souvenir Press.
      Schacht, R. M. 1988. “Circumscription Theory.” American Behavioral Scientist 31(4):438 – 448.
      Schele, L., and M. E. Miller. 1986. The Blood of Kings: Dynasty and Ritual in Maya Art. Fort Worth: Kimbell Art
                   Museum.
      Schwartz, G. M., and S. E. Falconer, eds. 1994. Archaeological Views from the Countryside: Village Communities in
                   Early Complex Societies. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
      Service, E. 1962. Primitive Social Organization. New York: Random House.
      ———. 1975. Origins of the State and Civilization. New York: Norton.
      Shanks, M., and C. Tilley. 1987a. Re-Constructing Archaeology. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
      ———. 1987b. Social Theory and Archaeology. Oxford: Polity Press.
      ———. 1989. “Archaeology into the 1990s.” Norwegian Archaeological Review 22(1):1–12.
      Shennan, S. J. 1987. “Trends in the Study of Later European Prehistory.” Annual Review of Anthropology
                   16:365 –382.
      ———. 1988. Quantifying Archaeology. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
      Stein, G. J., and M. J. Blackman. 1993. “The Organizational Context of Specialized Craft Production in Early
                   Mesopotamian States.” Research in Economic Anthropology 14:29 –59.
      Steward, J. 1936. “The Economic and Social Basis of Primitive Bands.” In Essays in Anthropology in Honor of Alfred
                   Louis Kroeber. Berkeley: University of California Press.
      ———. 1949. “Cultural Causality and Law: A Trial Formulation of the Development of Early Civilizations.”
                   American Anthropologist 51:1–27.
      Streuve, V. V. 1969. “The Problem of the Genesis, Development and Disintegration of the Slave Societies in the
                   Ancient Orient.” Trans. I. Levit. In Ancient Mesopotamia, ed. I. M. Diakonov. Moscow: Nauka.
      Tainter, J. A. 1987. The Collapse of Complex Societies. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
      Teltser, P. A., ed. 1995. Evolutionary Archaeology: Methodological Issues. Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
      Trigger, B. 1972. “Determinants of Urban Growth in Pre-Industrial Societies.” In Man, Settlement and Urbanism,
                   ed. P. J. Ucko, R. Tringham, and G. W. Dimbleby. London: Duckworth.
      ———. 1983. “The Rise of Egyptian Civilization.” In Ancient Egypt: A Social History, ed. B. Trigger, B. J. Kemp,
                   D. O’Connor, and A. B. Lloyd. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
      ———. 1984. “Archaeology at the Crossroads: What’s New?” Annual Review of Anthropology 13:275 –300.
      ———. 1985. “The Evolution of Pre-industrial Cities: A Multilinear Perspective.” Melanges offerts à Jean
                   Vercoutter. Paris: Editions Recherce sur les Civilisations.
      ———. 1993. Early Civilizations: Ancient Egypt in Context. Cairo: American University in Cairo Press.
      ———. 2003. Understanding Early Civilizations: A Comparative Study. New York: Cambridge University Press.
      Waldrop, M. M. 1992. Complexity. New York. Touchstone.
                                                                   THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES               321


Wallerstein, I. 1974. The Modern World System. New York: Academic Press.
Webb, M. 1975. “The Flag Follows Trade: An Essay on the Necessary Integration of Military and Commercial
            Factors in State Formation.” In Ancient Civilization and Trade, ed. J. Sabloff and C. C. Lamberg-
            Karlovsky. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
Webster, D. 1975. “Warfare and the Evolution of the State: A Reconsideration.” American Antiquity 40:471– 475.
Weiss, R. M. 1976. “Demographic Theory and Anthropological Inference.” Annual Review of Anthropology
            5:351–381.
Wenke, R. J. 1981. “Explaining the Evolution of Cultural Complexity: A Review.” In Advances in Archaeological
            Method and Theory, Vol. 4, ed. M. B. Schiffer. New York: Academic Press.
White, L. 1949. The Science of Culture. New York: Grove Press.
Wittfogel, K. A. 1957. Oriental Despotism: A Comparative Study of Total Power. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Wolf, E. R. 1966. Peasants. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Woodburn, J. 1982. “Egalitarian Societies.” Man (NS) 17:432 – 451.
Woodbury, R. B. 1961. “A Reappraisal of Hohokam Irrigation.” American Anthropologist 63(3):550–560.
Wright, H., and G. A. Johnson. 1975. “Population, Exchange, and Early State Formation in Southwestern Iran.”
            American Anthropologist 77:267–289.
Yellen, J. E. 1976. “Settlement Patterns of the !Kung: An Archaeological Perspective.” In Kalahari Hunter-
            Gatherers: Studies of the !Kung San and Their Neighbors, ed. R. Lee and I. DeVore. Cambridge, MA:
            Harvard University Press.
Yoffee, N. 1979. “The Decline and Rise of Mesopotamian Civilization: An Ethnoarchaeological Perspective on the
            Evolution of Social Complexity.” American Antiquity 44:5–35.
Yoffee, N., and G. Cowgill, eds. 1988. The Collapse of Ancient States and Empires. Tucson: University of Arizona
            Press.
Yoffee, N., and A. Sherratt, eds. 1993. Archaeological Theory: Who Sets the Agenda? Cambridge: Cambridge
            University Press.
Zagarell, A. 1986. “Trade, Women, Class, and Society in Ancient Western Asia.” Current Anthropology
            27(5):415– 430.



NOTES
 1. Trigger, Early Civilizations: Ancient Egypt in Context, p. 110.
 2. Ibid.
 3. See, for example, Shanks and Tilley, Re-Constructing Archaeology.
 4. See, for example, Graber, A Scientiﬁc Model of Social and Cultural Evolution; Neiman, “Stylistic Variation in
    Evolutionary Perspective: Inferences from Decorative Diversity and Interassemblage Distance in Illinois
    Woodland Ceramic Assemblages”; Dunnell, “Science, Social Science, and Common Sense: The Agonizing
    Dilemma of Modern Archaeology.”
 5. See, for example, Demarest and Conrad, eds., Ideology and Pre-columbian Civilizations.
 6. Crumley, “A Dialectical Critique of Hierarchy.”
 7. See, for example, Dunnell, “Science, Social Science, and Common Sense: The Agonizing Dilemma of Modern
    Archaeology”; Rindos, The Origins of Agriculture; Lumsden and Wilson, Genes, Mind, and Culture; Boyd and
    Richerson, Culture and the Evolutionary Process; Wenke, “Explaining the Evolution of Cultural Complexity:
    A Review”; Ammerman and Cavalli-Sforza, “A Population Model for the Diffusion of Early Farming in
    Europe”; Kirch, “The Evolution of Sociopolitical Complexity in Prehistoric Hawaii: An Assessment of the
    Archaeological Evidence”; R. N. Adams, “Natural Selection, Energetics, and Cultural Materialism”; Cavalli-
    Sforza and Feldman, Cultural Transmission and Evolution. A Quantitative Approach; Neiman, “Stylistic
    Variation in Evolutionary Perspective: Inferences from Decorative Diversity and Interassemblage Distance in
    Illinois Woodland Ceramic Assemblages”; Teltser, ed., Evolutionary Archaeology: Methodological Issues.
 8. Waldrop, Complexity.
 9. Lansing and Kremer, “Emergent Properties of Balinese Water Temple Networks.”
10. See, for example, Adams, “Natural Selection, Energetics, and Cultural Materialism”; Alexander, “The Search
    for a General Theory of Behavior”; Alexander, “Evolution and Culture”; Cohen, “Evolutionary Epistemology
    and Human Values”; Dunnell, “Style and Function: A Fundamental Dichotomy”; Dunnell and Wenke, “An
    Evolutionary Model of the Development of Complex Societies”; Kirch, “Circumscription Theory and
    Sociopolitical Evolution in Polynesia”; Boyd and Richerson, Culture and the Evolutionary Process; also see
    Durham, “Advances in Evolutionary Culture Theory”; Betzig, Despotism and Differential Reproduction: A
    Darwinian View of History; Alexander, The Biology of Moral Systems.
11. Dunnell, “Evolutionary Theory and Archaeology.”
12. Roux, Ancient Iraq, p. 161.
322   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      13. Sahlins, “Notes on the Original Afﬂuent Society.”
      14. Lee, “!Kung Bushmen Subsistence.”
      15. Peterson, “Demand Sharing: Reciprocity and the Pressure for Generosity Among Foragers.”
      16. LeCarré, Tinker, Tailor, Soldier, Spy.
      17. Trigger, “Archaeology at the Crossroads: What’s New?” p. 287.
      18. Wenke, “Explaining the Evolution of Cultural Complexity: A Review.”
      19. Recently other typologies have been developed based on food storage and other characteristics.
      20. Steward, “The Economic and Social Basis of Primitive Bands.”
      21. Barnard, “Contemporary Hunter-Gatherers: Current Theoretical Issues in Ecology and Social Organization,”
          pp. 195 –197; Ember, “Residential Variation Among Hunter-Gatherers.”
      22. Flannery, “The Cultural Evolution of Civilizations.”
      23. Service, Origins of the State and Civilization.
      24. Earle, “Chiefdoms in Archaeological and Ethnohistorical Perspective,” p. 288.
      25. Ibid.
      26. See, for example, Earle, ed., Chiefdoms: Power, Economy, Ideology.
      28. Drennan and Uribe, Chiefdoms in the Americas.
      27. Drennan, “Chiefdoms in Northern South America.” Also see Drennan and Uribe, Chiefdoms in the Americas.
      28. Wright and Johnson, “Population, Exchange, and Early State Formation in Southwestern Iran.”
      29. McGuire, A Marxist Archeology; also see Rindos, The Origins of Agriculture; Yoffee, “The Decline and Rise of
          Mesopotamian Civilization: An Ethnoarchaeological Perspective on the Evolution of Social Complexity”;
          Wenke, “Explaining the Evolution of Cultural Complexity: A Review.”
      30. Costin, “Craft Specialization: Issues in Deﬁning, Documenting, and Explaining the Organization of
          Production.”
      31. Brumﬁel and Earle, “Specialization, Exchange, and Complex Societies: An Introduction,” p. 5.
      32. Kenoyer, “The Indus Valley Tradition of Pakistan and Western India.”
      33. Feinman et al., “Political Hierarchies and Organizational Strategies in the Puebloan Southwest.”
      34. White, The Science of Culture.
      35. Binford, “Mortuary Practices: Their Study and Their Potential”; Rothschild, “Mortuary Behavior and Social
          Organization at Indian Knoll and Dickson Mounds”; also see Beck, ed., Regional Approaches to Mortuary
          Analysis. See, however, Carr (“Mortuary Practices: Their Social, Philosophical-Religious, Circumstantial, and
          Physcial Determinants”) for an alternative view. Carr’s extensive use of ethnographic ﬁles (HRAF) appears
          to show that there are many determinants involved in mortuary practices, and that these are highly variable
          from society to society, irrespective of their level of social complexity. As such, one-to-one correspondances
          do not exist between societal type and mortuary behavior.
      36. See also O’Shea, Mortuary Variability—An Archaeological Investigation; Peebles, “Moundville and
          Surrounding Sites”; Bartel, “A Historical Review of Ethnological and Archaeological Analyses of Mortuary
          Practice.”
      37. O’Shea, Mortuary Variability—An Archaeological Investigation.
      38. Berry, Geography of Market Centers and Retail Distribution.
      39. Johnson, “Aspects of Regional Analysis in Archaeology”; Johnson, “Monitoring Complex System Integration
          and Boundary Phenomena with Settlement Size Data”; Evans, “Settlement Models in Archaeology”; Crumley
          and Marquardt, Regional Dynamics; Madsen, “Settlement Systems of Early Agricultural Societies in East
          Jutland, Denmark.”
      40. Trigger, “The Evolution of Pre-industrial Cities: A Multilinear Perspective,” p. 343.
      41. Ibid., pp. 344 –345.
      42. See, for example, Schwartz and Falconer, eds., Archaeological Views from the Countryside: Village Communities
          in Early Complex Societies.
      43. Darwin, The Descent of Man and Selection in Relation to Sex, p. 154.
      44. John Locke, Second Treatise on Government, section 41.
      45. See, for example, Steward, “Cultural Causality and Law: A Trial Formulation of the Development of Early
          Civilizations.”
      46. Athens, “Theory Building and the Study of Evolutionary Process in Complex Societies,” p. 375.
      47. Boserup, The Conditions of Agricultural Growth.
      48. Athens, “Theory Building and the Study of Evolutionary Process in Complex Societies,” p. 366.
      49. Cowgill, “On the Causes and Consequences of Ancient and Modern Population Changes,” p. 505.
      50. Harris and Ross, Death, Sex and Fertility: Population Regulation in Preindustrial and Developing Societies.
      51. Wittfogel, Oriental Despotism.
      52. Woodbury, “A Reappraisal of Hohokam Irrigation.”
      53. Carniero, “A Theory of the Origin of the State,” p. 734.
      54. Webster, “Warfare and the Evolution of the State: A Reconsideration.”
      55. Schacht, “Circumscription Theory.”
                                                                    THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES               323


56. Kirch, “Circumscription Theory and Sociopolitical Evolution in Polynesia.”
57. Quoted in Harris, The Rise of Anthropological Theory, p. 217.
58. Marx, Capital and Other Writings, pp. 10 –11.
59. See, for example, G. A. Cohen’s excellent Karl Marx’s Theory of History: A Defense.
60. See, for example, Streuve, “The Problem of the Genesis, Development and Disintegration of the Slave Societies
    in the Ancient Orient”; or Diakonoff, Early Antiquity.
61. Diakanov, Ancient Mesopotamia.
62. Zagarell, “Trade, Women, Class, and Society in Ancient Western Asia.”
63. For example, Kipp and Schortman, “The Political Impact of Trade in Chiefdoms.”
64. Harris, Cannibals and Kings; idem., Cultural Materialism.
65. Harris, Cultural Materialism, p. 92.
66. Ibid., p. 94.
67. Webster, “Warfare and the Evolution of the State: A Reconsideration”; Webb, “The Flag Follows Trade.”
68. See Carniero, “A Theory of the Origin of the State.”
69. Childe, New Light on the Most Ancient East; Wittfogel, Oriental Despotism: A Comparative Study of Total Power;
    Harris, Cultural Materialism.
70. For example, Hassan, “The Predynastic of Egypt,” p. 166; Trigger, “The Rise of Egyptian Civilization”; Bard,
    From Farmers to Pharaohs; Kohl, “The Use and Abuse of World Systems Theory.”
71. Friedman and Rowlands, The Evolution of Social Systems; also see Patterson and Gailey, Power Relations and
    State Formation.
72. Friedman and Rowlands, The Evolution of Social Systems.
73. An Urchin the Storm, pp. 33 –34.
74. Dunnell, “Evolutionary Theory and Archaeology.”
75. See, for example, Adams, “Natural Selection, Energetics, and Cultural Materialism”; Alexander, “The Search
    for a General Theory of Behavior”; Alexander, “Evolution and Culture”; Cohen, “Evolutionary Epistemology
    and Human Values”; Dunnell, “Style and Function: A Fundamental Dichotomy”; Dunnell and Wenke, “An
    Evolutionary Model of the Development of Complex Societies”; Kirch, “Circumscription Theory and
    Sociopolitical Evolution in Polynesia”; Boyd and Richerson, Culture and the Evolutionary Process; also see
    Durham, “Advances in Evolutionary Culture Theory”; Betzig, Despotism and Differential Reproduction: A
    Darwinian View of History; Alexander, The Biology of Moral Systems.
76. Trigger, “The Rise of Egyptian Civilization,” p. 64.
77. Johnson, “The Changing Organization in Uruk Administration on the Susiana Plain”; R. McC. Adams,
    Heartland of Cities.
78. See, for example, Shanks and Tilley, “Archaeology into the 1990s.”
79. Giddens, A Contemporary Critique of Historical Materialism, Vol 1. Power, Property and the State.
80. See, for example, Shanks and Tilley, Re-Constructing Archaeology, Social Theory and Archaeology,
    “Archaeology into the 1990s”; Hodder, Symbolic and Structural Archaeology.
81. Kohl, “The Use and Abuse of World Systems Theory,” pp. 10 –11.
82. See, for example, Diakonov, ed., Early Antiquity.
83. See, for example, Gould, Wonderful Life.
84. Ibid., p. 563.
85. Wittfogel, Oriental Despotism.
86. Trigger, Early Civilizations: Ancient Egypt in Context, p. 112.
87. Ibid., p. 110.
88. Ibid., p. 8.
89. Gould, Wonderful Life.
90. Brumﬁel and Earle, “Specialization, Exchange, and Complex Societies: An Introduction.”
91. Ibid., p. 3.
8
Origins of Complex Societies in
Southwest Asia

        And Babylon, the glory of kingdoms, the beauty of the Chaldees excellency, shall be
        as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah.
             It shall never be inhabited, neither shall it be dwelt in from generation to
        generation: neither shall the Arabian pitch tent there; neither shall the shepherds
        make their fold there.
             But wild beasts of the desert shall lie there; and their houses shall be full of
        doleful creatures; and owls shall dwell there, and satyrs shall dance there.
             And the wild beasts of the islands cry in their desolate houses, and dragons in
        their pleasant places: and her time is near to come, and her days shall not be
        prolonged.
                                                                                  Isaiah 13:19–22




    T         he Old Testament presents Isaiah as a dreary, complaining alarmist, but in the case
              of Babylon he was right. Babylon—once the brightest star in a galaxy of brilliant
    ancient cities—has for many centuries been a great rubbish heap.
         Five thousand years ago, however, when many of the world’s people were illiterate
    marginal farmers, and most were still hunters and gatherers, and when the peoples of the
    New World were still many centuries from village life, Babylon and its surroundings were
    a cosmopolitan world of cities, libraries, schools, international trade, roads, taxes, temples,
    and many of the other elements we collectively call “civilization.” Indeed, much of the
    world’s population today is still living the urban way of life that ﬁrst evolved in these ancient
    Southwest Asian cities.
         Southwest Asian cultural history is so rich, so ancient, that even short journeys here
    take one through complex histories (Figure 8.1). Before recent wars it was possible to
    drive from the eastern outskirts of Babylon, near Baghdad, Iraq—the heartland of the oldest
    cities in the world—east to Susa, in Iran, one of the world’s ﬁrst true metropolises at about
    3400 b.c. One could then continue north through the area of some of the world’s ﬁrst farms,
    distributed along the margins of the Zagros Mountains in Iran and Syria, and the foothills
    of the Taurus Mountains in Turkey. North from Syria through Turkey one crosses the same
    terrain that Xenophon1 tells us ancient Greek soldiers traversed as—homesick for Greece
    —they fought their way to the Black Sea to sail home. South from Turkey through Syria

                                                  324
                                               ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN SOUTHWEST ASIA                  325


and along the Mediterranean coast one
follows a route very close to that taken by
European crusaders a millennium later,                        1792 B.C.    Babylonian Empire begins
to effect the fateful collision of Chris-
                                                        2100–2004 B.C.     Ur III period
tianity and Islam.
     Amidst the ruins of these millennia                      2350 B.C.    Sargon of Akkad and the beginning of the
of civilization, scholars have tried to sort                               Akkadian period
out much about the human condition.                           3000 B.C.    Development of cuneiform writing
This, after all, was the homeland of
several of the world’s great religions and              3000–2350 B.C.     Early Dynastic period (Sumerians)
the place where writing, cities, metallurgy,
                                                              3000 B.C.    Fortiﬁcation of most major settlements begins
and many other aspects of civilization
ﬁrst appeared. And all the obvious ques-                3300–2800 B.C.     Proto-Elamites
tions apply: Why here? Why in the parti-
cular period of about 5000 to 3000 b.c.?                      4000 B.C.    Early monumental construction of temples begins
And—perhaps the most intriguing and
revealing question—why in forms so                      4100–3000 B.C.     Uruk and Jemdat Nasr periods; development
                                                                           of city-states
strikingly similar to later developments
                                                        6000–3700 B.C.     ‘Ubaid period
in China, Egypt, Mesoamerica, and
elsewhere?                                                    5500 B.C.    Samarran and Halaﬁan style pottery appear


                                                              6500 B.C.    Ceramic technology appears
THE ECOLOGICAL
                                                              8500 B.C.    Neolithic food-producing economies appear
SETTING                                             (10,500 years ago)


Two ecological elements are particularly
important to analyses of Southwest Asian
cultural history: First is the great pro-
ductivity of agriculture in this area, and
second is its role as a nexus, a cross-
roads, of many cultural inﬂuences. As Nicholas Postgate noted, Mesopotamia is quite
different from its near neighboring civilization in Egypt (see chapter 9):

    Egypt, physically constrained within the narrow strip of the Nile Valley and isolated from
    western Asia, retained its highly idiosyncratic identity with little infusion from elsewhere,
    and did not export its language or script or other artistic forms, except upstream to Nubia.
    Mesopotamia was open along both ﬂanks to intrusion from the desert and mountain, and
    its cuneiform script was exported across thousands of miles.2

The ﬁrst states and cities appeared in a relatively small area of southern Iraq and Iran, but
the factors that produced them involved most of the Fertile Crescent and the surrounding
lowlands it encompasses, or Greater Mesopotamia, as it is known (see Figure 8.1).
     The lower elevations of the great arc of mountains of the Fertile Crescent were the
natural habitats of wild wheat, barley, sheep, and goats (Figure 8.2). In ancient times this
area was covered with vast grasslands and oak and pistachio forests, and, even as late as the
nineteenth century, sheep grazing these verdant uplands were brought to lowland markets
          326       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY




                    FIGURE 8.1 Southwest Asia. The world’s ﬁrst complex societies evolved in the alluvial plains of the
                    Tigris and Euphrates rivers and their tributaries, but they had their origins in these early agricultural
                    communities.




                 with their wool stained scarlet by wildﬂowers in their range. Today the forests are almost
                 entirely gone, and the whole area is severely overgrazed.
                                                                                  From the very beginnings
                                                                            of life on the alluvial lowlands,
                                                                            people there fought and traded
                                                                            for the gold, silver, copper,
                                                                            stone, wheat, sheep, and goats
                                                                            of the mountain areas. Today
                                                                            there is still no better way to
                                                                            integrate the highlands and
                                                                            lowlands economically than
                                                                            this same ancient pattern in
                                                                            which nomads and herders
                                                                            take sheep and goats to these
                                                                            highlands in the lush summer
                                                                            months, using the animals to
                                                                            convert mountain vegetation
                                                                            into milk, meat, and hides,
                                                                            which can then be exchanged
                                                                            for lowland products.
                                                                                  Below the high ridges of
FIGURE 8.2 The Zagros Mountains and foothills region of Iran.               the Zagros and Taurus moun-
                                           ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN SOUTHWEST ASIA        327


tains, the foothills and rolling plains of the piedmont saw some of the world’s earliest
agricultural villages. Neolithic settlements are found here almost every place rainfall is
sufﬁcient to grow wheat and barley with a reasonable reliability.
     Coming down from the piedmont, one ﬁnds north and northwest of Baghdad the dry,
undulating northern Mesopotamian Plains. The Tigris and Euphrates have cut deeply into
the land surface, so that irrigation here requires sophisticated damming and canalization.
But with irrigation, the high productivity of this area made these northern plains the
“breadbasket” of some of the greatest empires of antiquity.
     For the very ﬁrst cities, however, the heartland is the lower alluvial plains of
Mesopotamia. Historian Arnold Toynbee argued that civilizations ﬁrst evolved in physical
circumstances that challenged the inhabitants to overcome severe problems of climate and
resources, and he was thinking in part about southern Mesopotamia. Nothing in this region
appears to account for its pivotal role in human history. The unprepossessing hot plains
have no usable stone or metal, few trees, and a climate whose extremes of heat have been
a main topic of conversation for generations of archaeologists.
     But most early civilizations are the “gift” of some great river system, and this is
particularly true of Mesopotamian cultures (“Mesopotamia” means “between the rivers”
in Greek). The Tigris and Euphrates rivers created the alluvial plain—mainly in the area
south of Bagdad—with annual deposits of ﬂood-borne fertile silt and clay, and they provide
the irrigation water that has made productive farming possible here for many thousands of
years. The swamps and wetlands formed by the rivers support a variety of usable wild
plants, such as ﬂax for textiles and rushes for basketry, but in addition to these plants and
water for irrigation, the major gift of the rivers is ﬁsh. The scrub forests along the rivers
cannot support many game animals, and thus ﬁsh—and later, domestic cattle—furnished
the protein indispensable to survival on the alluvial plain. Vegetarianism was not an option
for ancient Mesopotamians because the blend of vegetable proteins necessary to substitute
for animal protein was not always available. Fish ﬁll this lack admirably, however, and many
clues point to their importance for the early inhabitants: “Altars” in buildings dating to the
ﬁfth millennium b.c. have been found covered with layer upon layer of ﬁsh bones.
Mesopotamia’s rivers also provided a vital transportation artery. None of these rivers was
as navigable as the Nile, for example, but with the proper boats one could move goods,
armies, and so forth from ports along the Turkish and Syrian foothills, south through the
heart of Mesopotamia.
     From May to October, the average daily high temperature is over 40°C (104°F), and
hot winds dry the soil to the depth of a meter and darken the sky with choking clouds of
dust. Anyone who has spent a summer in Mesopotamia understands why several Middle
Eastern religions have envisioned heaven’s primary recreation to be sitting by shaded
streams in cool palm groves, eating fruit, in complaisant sexual company. The ﬁery sum-
mers, however, are balanced by temperate, lovely, warm autumns, winters, and springs.
And with adequate irrigation, the Mesopotamian alluvial plain richly rewards those who
farm it, so that throughout history this region has been celebrated for its melons, oranges,
pomegranates, dates, wheat, barley, lentils, onions, and other crops.
     Part of Mesopotamia’s rich agricultural heartland is enclosed in large deserts, from
Syria far into the Arabian peninsula. Nomads and pastoralists eventually occupied some of
these areas, and trade routes crossed them, but even in our own age some of these desert
areas are only sparsely inhabited.
          328       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                         As we saw in chapter 4, Southwest Asia in the Pleistocene can be thought of as an exten-
                    sion of Africa, in terms of its climates, ﬂora, and fauna, and even as late as a few hundred
                    to a thousand years ago such African animals as ostriches, cheetahs, lions, and hartebeest
                    were common in large areas of Southwest Asia.
                         The climates and physical geography of Southwest Asia have been much the same for
                    the past 9,000 years, with some variations. At times tectonic movements have raised or
                    lowered Mesopotamia, and these movements, in combination with ﬂuctuations in the
                    water level of the Persian Gulf and the deposition of massive amounts of alluvial silts and
                    clays in some areas, have made it difﬁcult to determine where the coastline was during the
                    past 10,000 years. Some areas, for example, that were farmed a millennium ago are now
                    underwater, and it is possible that some important parts of the ancient archaeological
                    record are under the Gulf, too. Human alterations of river courses, deforestation, and
                    climate changes have so greatly altered the landscape (and probably even microclimates)
                    that we may never have an entirely clear picture of what Southwest Asia was like as a natural
                    landscape when its ﬁrst civilizations began forming.3


                    FUNDAMENTALS OF THE SOUTHWEST ASIAN
                    ARCHAEOLOGICAL RECORD

                  Southwest Asian peoples have lived in villages for nine millennia, and there is hardly a
                  square meter there that does not contain a few sherds, stone tools, bones, or old irrigation
                  canal banks. Nevertheless, the most common unit of analysis in Southwest Asian
                                              archaeology is still the “site,” which usually takes the form of a
                                              mound, referred to as a tell (Arabic) or teppeh (Persian). These
                                              tells are a result of the construction and continual reconstruc-
                                              tion of villages or towns on the same spot (Figure 8.3). For
                                              thousands of years, people here have used mudbricks as their
                                              basic building material, and their settlements have numerous
                                              closely packed, small, rectangular structures. Although ideally
                                              suited to the climate and resources of the area, such buildings
                                              become so dilapidated after 50 or 100 years that it is easier to
                                              rebuild than to repair them, and because there are incentives
                                              to rebuild on the same spot (less land is lost to cultivation and
                                              higher elevation gives better drainage and protection against
                                              ﬂoods and attack), settlements become mound-shaped as they
                                              are constantly reconstructed on the debris of the previous
                                              ones.
                                                    Hundreds of thousands of such mounds dot the South-
                                              west Asian landscape, some of them rising 50 m or more above
                                              plain level, while others—occupied for only a few decades or
                                              so—are only imperceptibly higher than the surrounding
FIGURE 8.3 Millennia of rebuilding at Jericho plains or are buried beneath the alluvial plain. The mounds are
formed many superimposed layers containing    littered with stone tools, bones, broken pottery, broken clay
stone walls.                                  bricks, collapsed walls, eroding ovens and pottery kilns, and
                                            ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN SOUTHWEST ASIA        329


corroding metal. Burrowing animals, well and terrace construction, and erosion often mix
the layers of these mounds so that usually one ﬁnds the remnants of every phase of a site’s
occupation on its surface. This allows archaeologists to estimate a site’s periods of occupa-
tion simply by inspecting the surface artifacts. At some sites bones and ﬂoral remains are
well preserved, but at other sites, such as those in areas with a high level of salty ground-
water, even ceramics do not preserve well.
     Besides mounds, the most obvious archaeological features of Southwest Asia are
irrigation canals. Seven millennia of irrigation agriculture have resulted in a landscape
criss-crossed with canals, and it is not unusual to ﬁnd abandoned irrigation canals several
thousand years old with banks still 2 or 3 m high. Aerial photographs are particularly useful
in charting these ancient waterworks.
     Because of the time and expense of archaeological excavation and the destruction
of sites, far less than 5 percent of all sites dating from 8000 to 2350 b.c., for example, have
been, or will ever be, properly excavated, and thus our interpretations must be tempered
with some tentativeness. On the other hand, the rich archaeological remains provide an
opportunity to use sampling procedures and to test hypotheses; and by using aerial
reconnaissance, surface surveys, and regional analyses, archaeologists can determine
when and for how long unexcavated sites were occupied. In the case of Mesopotamia, a
generation of archaeologists has followed Robert McC. Adams in performing regional
surveys.4 In many of these surveys, archaeologists have used aerial photographs and maps
to locate ancient sites, and then made maps of these individual sites and collected ceramics
from them to infer their cultural histories. But Southwest Asia’s archaeological record is so
vast that many hundreds of thousands of ancient towns and villages will probably never be
excavated—and many hundreds of thousands more have already been destroyed by
agricultural expansion, industrialization, and looting.


THE NEOLITHIC ORIGINS OF SOUTHWEST ASIAN
CIVILIZATION (C. 8500–6000 B.C.)

When we left the ﬁrst farmers of Southwest Asia in chapter 6, they were living in
thousands of small villages, from Afghanistan to western Turkey, occupying in small
numbers those areas with sufﬁcient rainfall to support wheat and barley without exten-
sive irrigation. In most areas the simple village farming way of life continued largely
unchanged into the last few millennia b.c., but in other areas changes were underway by
8500 b.c.
     We saw in chapter 6 that people at Jericho, in the West Bank, for example, began
building stone walls and other buildings that indicate that they were beginning to direct
their energies in a way quite different from that of most hunters and gatherers. Also, the
apparent ancestor cult at Jericho and many Levantine sites—in which human skulls were
plastered with clay and ﬁtted with eyes made from seashells or otherwise accentuated—and
the plaster ﬁgures of people and clay animals at sites such as ‘Ain Ghazal, in Jordan, suggest
a changing social context of village life.
     Analogous developments were also underway in Turkey. Recently in the Urfa region
(the area in southeastern Turkey just north of the Syrian border) impressive evidence from
           330        PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                       about 8400 b.c. for ritual activ-
                                                                                       ities at sites such as Nevali Çori,
                                                                                       Göbekli Tepe, and Gürcütepe
                                                                                       has been found. 5 In many
                                                                                       respects, these sites are farming
                                                                                       villages similar to many others
                                                                                       from this time period. What
                                                                                       makes them unusual, however,
                                                                                       is the presence of cult buildings
                                                                                       —with unusual construction
                                                                                       and decoration—and various
                                                                                       sculptures.
                                                                                             These cult buildings are
                                                                                       nearly square in shape—ranging
                                                                                       in size from 13.9-by-13.5 m
                                                                                       to 12.1-by-12.8 m at Nevali
                                                                                       Çori—and have terrazzo ﬂoors
FIGURE 8.4 A Neolithic cult building at Göbekli Tepe, Turkey. Note the unusual         as well as benches along the
T-shaped pillars that may have served as roof supports.                                walls covered in stone slabs. All
                                                                                       of these building incorporate
                                                        large “T-shaped” limestone pillars—likely to support the
                                                        roof of the structure (Figure 8.4)—and, quite remarkably,
                                                        these pillars are engraved with images of animals such as
                                                        birds, cattle, lions, and fox (Figure 8.5). Other sculptures—
                                                        frequently found buried in the these cult buildings—
                                                        include human and animal heads, birds, and lions.
                                                              This dramatic evidence of profound social social
                                                        changes in Neolithic societies in Turkey continues into
                                                        later times at sites such as Çatalhöyök (pronounced rather
                                                        like Chatal Huooyook). James Mellaart, who originally
                                                        excavated much of this site, suggested that “It may be said
                                                        without undue exaggeration that Anatolia, long regarded
                                                        as the barbarous fringe to the fertile crescent, has now been
                                                        established as the most advanced center of neolithic culture
                                                        in the Near East. The neolithic civilization revealed at
                                                        Çatalhöyök shines like a supernova among the rather dim
                                                        galaxies of contemporary peasant culture.”6 Çatalhöyök
                                                        may not merit all the superlatives its excavators have
                                                        showered on it, but it is one of the most interesting sites in
                                                        Southwest Asia. Located in south central Anatolia (Turkey)
                                                        and ﬁrst occupied at about 6250 b.c., Çatalhöyök was
                                                        probably inhabited continuously until its abandonment at
FIGURE 8.5 Many of the T-shaped pillars at the          about 5400 b.c. During some of this time it may have
Urfa region Neolithic cult sites are engraved with      extended over 13 hectares and had a population of about
images of animals. This one shows a cattle (top),       4,000 to 6,000—several times larger than any other known
canine (middle), and bird (bottom).                     site in this period.
                                            ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN SOUTHWEST ASIA           331


     A great ﬁre swept through
Çatalhöyök in the middle of its
history, nicely preserving the
earliest levels, but unfortun-
ately only less than a hectare of
the site was excavated before
the project was ended by polit-
ical disputes and other prob-
lems several decades ago. Since
1993, Ian Hodder and his
colleagues have been able to
open new excavations at this
site and offer multiple ways of
examining and interpreting
the information that has been
recovered.7
     Located not far from the
ﬁrst ranges of the Taurus            FIGURE 8.6 The volcanic areas of Cappadoccia in Turkey are a source of obsidian.
Mountains, Çatalhöyök is near        Workshop debris from making stone artifacts litters the surface, as seen in this
a critical resource: the obsidian    photograph of a Neolithic period site.
sources at the Hasan Dag
volcano (Figure 8.6). Because
each obsidian source is chemically distinctive, we can track the great quantities of obsidian
from this area that were distributed throughout Anatolia, the Levant, and Cyprus (Figure
8.7) after 7000 b.c. Beautiful obsidian artifacts were found in Çatalhöyök itself, but so far




FIGURE 8.7 The circulation of obsidian throughout Southwest Asia was an important economic
process that may have contributed to the evolution of political and economic institutions.
           332       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                       no obsidian storage or workshop areas have been discovered in the small fraction of the site
                       that has been excavated. It is possible that most of the workshop activity occurred at the
                       obsidian sources themselves rather than in the village.
                            Most of the 158 structures uncovered at Çatalhöyök are little different from their
                       contemporaries elsewhere in Southwest Asia: Each is built of shaped mud and composed
                       of rectangular rooms with plastered walls and ﬂoors, and most houses are about 25 m
                       square, one story high, and abut one another, except where occasionally separated by an
                       open courtyard. Inside most rooms are two raised platforms, probably for sleeping, and an
                       occasional rectangular bench. Unlike any other community of this period and area, access
                       to the rooms of Çatalhöyök was only by ladder through the roof—there are no front
                       doors—and the close packing of structures is such that much of the movement among the
                       houses must have been on the roofs. The roof access may reﬂect a need for defense, for once
                       the inhabitants had pulled up the ladders on the outside walls, the settlement would have
                       been difﬁcult to attack. Other Southwest Asian sites had walls at this time, but most
                       settlements were small unfortiﬁed hamlets.
                            The 40 or so shrines at Çatalhöyök have essentially the same ﬂoor plan as the other
                       structures, but their walls are richly decorated with paintings, reliefs, and engravings
                                                                                  expressing many naturalistic
                                                                                  themes, most concentrating on
                                                                                  the two favorites of ancient
                                                                                  art—fertility and death. Vul-
                                                                                  tures are portrayed ripping
                                                                                  apart headless human corpses,
                                                                                  women give birth to bulls
                                                                                  and ride leopards, and other
                                                                                  symbols such as breasts, vul-
                                                                                  tures, bulls, and rams abound.
                                                                                  Some of the rooms have
                                                                                  intricate arrangements of cattle
                                                                                  skulls and horns (Figure 8.8).
                                                                                  Walls were plastered and then
                                                                                  painted, and periodically the
                                                                                  walls were replastered and
                                                                                  new designs were painted or
                                                                                  engraved on them. One wall
                                                                                  was plastered and painted 40
                                                                                  times. These shrines do not
                                                                                  seem to have required the
                                                                                  expenditure of vast amounts of
                                                                                  labor and resources for essen-
                                                                                  tially non-economic purposes,
                                                                                  as did the monumental con-
                                                                                  structions of later periods. Nor
FIGURE 8.8 These reconstructions of “cult-centers” at Çatalhöyök show the         do they enclose radically dif-
importance of the cattle motif. All early complex societies evolved rituals and   ferent amounts of expensive
religions that functioned as organizing and controlling institutions.             goods, indicating great wealth
                                          ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN SOUTHWEST ASIA      333


disparities. Little about them, in fact, conﬂicts with the interpretation that they were
kinship-cult centers in a simple ranked society.8
     Such a conclusion would be strengthened if we found only minor variability in
mortuary practices, and indeed this seems to be the case. Many corpses appear to have been
taken outside the settlement and exposed to the vultures and the elements until the ﬂesh
was gone, after which the bones were interred in the house ﬂoors. Men, women, and
children were buried in much the same way, either in baskets or simply in holes. Most of
the graves contained no goods, but some women and children were accompanied by shell
and stone necklaces, armlets and anklets, and, occasionally, obsidian mirrors and bone
cosmetic implements. Some men were buried with mace heads, ﬂint daggers, obsidian
projectile points, clay seals, and other items.
     In one complex of rooms, the so-called Vulture Shrine, six individuals were buried in
the ﬂoor with signiﬁcantly richer grave goods than were found in the residential burials.9
However, we do not ﬁnd any infants at Çatalhöyök buried with disproportionately rich
or numerous grave goods, nor is there any signiﬁcant variation in construction expense
of the graves themselves; there are no stone cofﬁns, tombs, or the like.
     The people of Çatalhöyök subsisted on the typical late Neolithic combination of
agriculture, hunting, and gathering. Emmer, another kind of wheat known as “einkorn,”
barley, pea vetch, and other crops were grown in quantity, but with simple techniques.
Domestic cattle supplied meat, hides, milk, and perhaps traction: Even simple cattle-drawn
wood plows that do no more than scratch the surface greatly increase agricultural
productivity by suppressing weeds and increasing soil permeability. We do not know when
the ﬁrst plows were used in the Middle East, but the domestication of cattle probably did
not precede the development of the plow by more than a millennium or two.
     Trade at Çatalhöyök was considerable, but mainly in small quantities of exotic items.
Shells from the Mediterranean (160 km distant) and Syrian ﬂint were found here, perhaps
taken in trade for obsidian artifacts. But there is no evidence of voluminous trade in
agricultural products, or even in large amounts of obsidian, and there are no obvious
workshops for goods, no stores of obsidian, and no complex technologies.
     Jarmo, in Iraqi Kurdistan, is an example of the drab peasant culture that Mellaart
invidiously compared to Çatalhöyök. Jarmo was ﬁrst settled sometime before 6750 b.c.
and was occupied intermittently to 5000 b.c., and thus it overlaps with Çatalhöyök for
perhaps as much as 1,000 years. But unlike Çatalhöyök, Jarmo was probably home to no
more than 200 people, and for most of its existence it consisted of only about 20 small mud
houses. Burials at Jarmo are quite uniform, as are the contents of the houses. There is not
nearly the diversity of aesthetic expression found at Çatalhöyök in wall paintings, ﬁnely
worked obsidian, or the like; there are just a few clay ﬁgurines of pregnant women and
animals. Jarmo has no fortiﬁed walls or large, nonresidential buildings, and the technology
seems to have been mainly devoted to the processing of plant foods. Perhaps the most
signiﬁcant difference between the two sites is that Çatalhöyök controlled a localized and
important resource (obsidian), whereas Jarmo did not.
     Elsewhere in the Zagros, northern Mesopotamia, and the Iranian Plateau, most
communities established between 8000 and 6000 b.c. were also farming villages, with little
public architecture, elaborate mortuary cults, or occupational specialization.
     Charles Redman has pointed out that “Çatal Hüyük exempliﬁes those communities
that may have made many of the crucial advances leading to civilization, but for one reason
334   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      or another did not become urban societies. In some ways, the town of Çatal Hüyük and its
      inhabitants should be considered a premature ﬂash of brilliance and complexity that was a
      thousand years before its time.”10 The various excavations at Jericho, Çatalhöyök, Jarmo,
      and other sites provide a picture of the kinds of communities that immediately preceded
      civilization in Southwest Asia, but we still lack many elements of this picture. In a rightly
      ordered world, the combined international archaeology faculties and their students—
      funded by the United Nations—would begin surveys in western Anatolia and work their
      way east into Afghanistan and south into Iraq, mapping and excavating sites along the way.
      Instead, our evidence for the world’s ﬁrst socially complex societies is gathered mainly from
      fewer than a hundred well-excavated settlements and perhaps 20 or 30 regional site surveys
      in this huge area.


      INITIAL CULTURAL COMPLEXITY (C. 6000–4000 B.C.)

      An early indication of social change in Southwest Asia is evident in the distribution of
      pottery styles. As with agriculture, the invention of pottery seems to have occurred
      independently in many areas of Southwest Asia, where clay had been used for centuries
      for ﬁgurines and storage pits. The multiple origins and rapid spread of pottery after about
      6500 b.c. no doubt reﬂect the increasing importance of containers in these agricultural
      economies—probably for carrying water and for storing, cooking, and serving food.
           Soon after ceramic vessels came into general use in Southwest Asia, the ﬁrst
      sophisticated pottery styles appeared, and by about 5500 b.c. two distinctive styles, the
      Samarran and the Halaﬁan, are present (Figures 8.9 and 8.10).11 Samarran pottery tends to
      be in simpler shapes than the Halaﬁan and is painted in matte colors, whereas the Halaﬁan
      colors are glossy. Halaﬁan ceramics are important beyond their aesthetics: They are the ﬁrst
      complex style of artifacts to be so widely distributed. These highly stylized ceramics were
      ﬁrst made with a tournette, a wooden slab afﬁxed to a peg that could be set in a hole in the
      ground and act as a pivot around which the slab could be turned by hand. Simple as this
      sounds, it was a major advance over simply hand-molding a pot; the tournette allowed the
      potter to turn the pot so as to shape and paint it.12 So intricate and delicate are the designs
      that one might assume that specialists produced them. But Frank Hole cautions us not to
      underestimate the skill of villagers—Persian carpets being just one example of an
      extraordinarily complex and beautiful product made by simple villagers.13 And despite the
      wide geographical distribution of the Halaﬁan designs, there is little evidence that ceramic
      production was centrally organized and administered.
           Exactly what kinds of social changes the spread of these styles may reﬂect remain
      obscure. Their distributions tend to overlap and there is no convincing proof that they
      belong to different time periods or social groups. 14 Yet people of the Halaﬁan era
      transported decorated pottery over distances of almost 1,000 km, and it is difﬁcult to believe
      that this was a simple utilitarian and cost-effective adaptation to the growing need for
      containers in agricultural economies. Pottery is heavy, breaks easily, and can be made from
      local materials in nearly every part of Southwest Asia, so why transport it in massive
      quantities? The expanding zones of distribution of Halaﬁan and other decorated ceramics
      would seem to make the most sense as expressions of a growing sense of social status and
      political allegiance. At some point in every ancient civilization, elites were able to begin
                                           ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN SOUTHWEST ASIA        335




FIGURE 8.9 Halaﬁan and Samarran (bottom two vessels) pottery styles spread over large areas of
sixth millennium b.c. Mesopotamia.
336   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY




      FIGURE 8.10 Distribution of Samarran and Halaﬁan pottery. One of the ﬁrst steps in the evolution
      of complex societies seems to be a rapid expansion of an art style over a large area.



      appropriating elaborate and exotic goods and use them to indicate their status and power.
      Perhaps these early pottery styles are early indications of this process of the emergence of
      elites.
           The distribution of Halaﬁan and Samarran ceramics coincides with the extension
      of cultivation to the arid areas of Mesopotamia, and this involved what may have been
      the world’s ﬁrst systematic artiﬁcial irrigation systems. At sites such as Choga Mami, in the
      areas just east of Baghdad, for example, people used irrigation canals to grow cereals,
      linseed (for oil), and other crops. Another signiﬁcant site of this period is Tell as-Sawwan,
      located in north central Iraq at the juncture of the northern arid steppe country and the
      alluvial plains.15
           Preliminary excavations indicate that from 6000 to 5000 b.c. Tell as-Sawwan was
      home to a few hundred people, most of whom were engaged in simple irrigation farming
      of wheat, barley, and linseed. They also kept domestic goats, sheep, and cattle; hunted
      onagers, antelopes, and other animals; and gathered ﬁsh and mussels from the Tigris, which
      ran close to the site.
           In most ways, this settlement resembled other early agricultural villages: Granaries,
      kilns, ovens, and small mudbrick houses were arranged around open courtyards. In
      addition, a large ditch or moat was constructed around the site by cutting into the natural
      conglomerate rock on which the site was located. The discovery of many hardened clay balls
      (sling missiles) in the ditch led its excavators to conclude it was a defensive structure,
      reminiscent of the fortiﬁcations at Jericho.
                                              ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN SOUTHWEST ASIA       337


     The residential architecture of Tell as-Sawwan contrasts somewhat with that of other
settlements of the period, consisting mainly of huts with stone foundations and the more
common rectangular clay structures, although there is still little variability in building size
or apparent construction cost.
     At least 128 burials at Tell as-Sawwan date to approximately 5500 b.c., and they contain
one of the richest assortment of grave goods for this period of any site known in Southwest
Asia. Of the classiﬁable skeletons, 55 were infants, 16 were adolescents, and 13 were adults.
The graves differ little in orientation, location, or construction. Most bodies were placed in
a contracted position, facing west, in simple shallow oval pits dug into house ﬂoors. Most
graves had at least one craft item, mainly carved alabaster, beads in exotic stones, or pottery.
Although most rooms had many burials (one had up to 23), one room contained only an
adult male’s burial, whose relatively rich grave goods may reﬂect emerging status ascription.
But the Tell as-Sawwan burials do not seem to reﬂect inherited status and wealth. As we
noted in chapter 7, attempts to draw conclusions about the social systems of extinct
societies from examination of burial characteristics is somewhat speculative, but there does
seem to be a period in all early civilizations where burials begin to reﬂect inherited status.
An infant buried with massive amounts of wealth that he or she could not possibly have
earned personally may reﬂect nothing more than a wealthy and caring family, but in all
known early civilizations wealth and status eventually became largely inherited aspects
of everyone’s life. Although there are some signs of differences of wealth and status at Tell
es-Sawwan, there is nothing to indicate this wealth and status was inherited.
     Tell as-Sawwan is just one of many sites of this period, and soon after Halaﬁan,
Samarran, and other pottery styles spread through the highlands, the developmental focus
shifted to the Mesopotamian alluvial plain.
     The few sites on the alluvial plain that may antedate 5500 b.c. are poorly known—most
are probably covered by much larger and later sites. The earliest known sites on the alluvial
plain are near the estuary of the Persian Gulf, and there is some evidence that with the end
of the Pleistocene, the Gulf shoreline moved inland as much as 180 km.16 Thus, the key settle-
ments in the transition to life on the alluvial plain—and the origins of cultural complexity
here—may now be under sea water. Between about 5500 and 3500 b.c. Mesopotamian
climates were comparatively humid, with a change to cooler and drier conditions after
about 3500 b.c. Subtle changes in climate like this might have had major effects on the
settlement history of the area, because the zones in which dry-ﬁeld rainfall-based grain
cultivation was possible may have shifted. Also, changes in sea levels at this time may have
meant that lands that previously were ﬂooded were opened to settlement.17
     Frank Hole has argued that

    economic necessity, caused by environmental shocks that were induced by climatic
    changes, resulted in major dislocations of local [Mesopotamian] populations as early as the
    second half of the sixth millennium [b.c.], and continued into the fourth, during which
    there was a qualitative reorientation of society around urban places. These natural events
    resulted ﬁrst in the loss of sites and decline of population. Except at a few favorable
    locations, these conditions discouraged nucleation. However, with the steady ﬂow of
    dislocated people who could provide labor, larger and more dependable agricultural
    systems could be built. The ﬁrst urban-sized places may have been composed of disparate
    populations who developed an organic interdependence as they ﬁlled many . . . ecological
    and economic niches.18
338   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      If Hole is correct, then the rise of cities and civilizations was based on ecological factors,
      and once these developments were underway, very complex patterns of socioeconomic
      changes would have developed. Subsistence in most parts of the alluvial plain is more
      complex than in the highlands, requiring many timely decisions in which ﬂoods must be
      anticipated and controlled, land irrigated and drained, and cattle pastured, tended, and
      milked. Fishing adds to this complexity because it is seasonal to some extent and requires
      coordination to be maximally effective. Even getting sufﬁcient stone for simple agricultural
      implements necessitates considerable organization here, for such stone often had to be
      obtained in the mountains, far from lowland settlements.
           If Ali Kosh in Iranian Mesopotamia is typical, the movement onto the alluvial plain
      required a very generalized diet, in which many small plant seeds eventually were discarded
      in favor of the wheat-barley-lentil group augmented by sheep-goat-cattle proteins.19 There
      is some evidence that the cuisine centered on a variant of the one-pot approach, a stone or
      clay vessel ﬁlled with water, cereals, and other plants, and bits of whatever animals were
      about. Like the spartan meals of ancient Sparta (described as consisting of two courses, the
      ﬁrst a kind of porridge, and a second, which was a kind of porridge), the diets of these
      Mesopotamian villagers probably relied on blending as many plant and animal nutrients
      as possible in soups and stews. Breakfasts may have been rather uninspiring, but perhaps
      these early farmers subsisted on something quite like their modern descendants and ate
      porridge, bread, cheese, and dates.


      The ‘Ubaid Period (c. 6000–3700 B.C.)
      In the ancient Sumerian account of the creation of the universe, the city of Eridu was the
      ﬁrst to have emerged from the primeval sea that covered the world before humans. Eridu
      is in fact one of the earliest known settlements on the southern Mesopotamian alluvial
      plain, having been established at about 5700 b.c. The southern Mesopotamian alluvium in
      fact is characterized by many small communities of farmers by 5700 b.c. These earliest
      southern communities belong to the ‘Ubaid period, named after a small town of this period,
      and are associated with a particular and distinctive style of ceramics. These people may be
      identiﬁed with their styles of pottery, but they did something much more important than
      make ceramics: They were the ﬁrst to establish a productive economy on the basis of a
      traditional Mesopotamian farming strategy, based on cereals (in this case, barley) and
      various vegetables and fruits (particularly dates) in combination with the milk and meat of
      cattle, sheep, and goats. Living in communities that ranged in size from fewer than 50 to a
      few thousand, the ‘Ubaid peoples did small-time irrigation of crops, traded for a few
      products, and in general were able to produce the base materials out of which the alchemy
      of cultures produces civilization, namely economic surpluses. Anthropologists have long
      argued about the applicability of the term surplus to pre-monetary economies, such as that
      of the ‘Ubaid farmers, but the most important point is that, once established, the
      agricultural economy of the alluvial lowlands could be intensiﬁed in such a way that ever
      greater populations could be supported and massive amounts of materials and energy could
      be devoted to monumental construction, warfare, and ever more diversiﬁed occupational
      specialization, from kings to foot-soldiers, from scribes to potters.
           Debates continue as to the ethnic origins of the ‘Ubaid people—they may have been
      Iranians who migrated to the river valleys as domesticated wheat, barley, sheep, and goats
                                              ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN SOUTHWEST ASIA      339


became adapted to these environments and as changes in climates and river regimes made
the alluvium more suitable for simple farming.20
     If we look at the ‘Ubaid archaeological record for the ﬁrst signs of these fundamental
changes, we see only a few indirect reﬂections. One of the earliest known ‘Ubaid sites is at
Tell al-Ouell: near Larsa, which dates to at least 5300 b.c., and recent excavations deep into
the great site of Uruk suggest that occupations of the earliest ‘Ubaid sites are probably
deeply buried at many major sites. A major temple dating to after 4000 b.c. at Uruk was
found to have been built on the exact same site as a temple of the ‘Ubaid period, indicating
a great continuity of religious traditions.21 At Eridu, the earliest known structure is thought
to have been a temple. Archaeologists have been accused of bestowing this term on virtually
any structure large enough to stand upright in, but the earliest building at Eridu is very
similar to others known through texts and other evidence to have been temples. A single
small room (3.5-by-4.5 m) with an altar faces the entrance, and a pedestal is in the center;
in these speciﬁcs the building is nearly identical to the temples of later periods. These
temples may reﬂect a low level of social complexity, and some of the larger ‘Ubaid
communities included some fairly impressive mudbrick buildings, but for the most part
the people of the ‘Ubaid period appear to have been small-time farmers; no clear evidence
has been found indicating differential access to wealth, power, or prestige, and their
economy seems only marginally more diversiﬁed and integrated than that of the ﬁrst
Southwest Asian farmers a millennium earlier.
     But by 4500 b.c. some signs of cultural changes toward complexity appeared in a large
region of the lower alluvial plain, in the foothills of the Zagros, and in some of the larger
valleys in the Zagros. Henry Wright notes that, in these areas, “There were large centers
with populations of 1,000 to 3,000, which dominated networks of smaller settlements.
Excavation on some of these larger centers revealed central platforms, supporting ritual
buildings, segregated elite residences with large storage structures, and indications of
socially segregated cemeteries.”22 As Wright notes, there is evidence that there had been a
previous period in which larger centers had emerged, but here too, as in the case described
earlier for Çatalhöyök, we see no uniform gradual pattern of increasing complexity. The
whole history of early complexity, in fact, seems to be a messy boom-or-bust cycle, with
only a very general long-term overall trend toward complexity.
     In addition to the central Mesopotamian plains in Iraq, the Susiana Plain (Figure 8.11)
in southwestern Iran was also a major developmental center for early complexity—
probably because one could do both rainfall agriculture and irrigation farming here and
because trade routes from the Gulf to the Iranian plateau ran across the Susiana. By about
4500 b.c.—perhaps much earlier—several large centers may have dominated surrounding
areas economically and politically. The people of this era made beautiful hand-painted
pottery in such large quantities and with such great similarity that, even given the virtuosity
of peasant artisans, some occupational specialization may be reﬂected.23
     In summarizing this and other evidence from the Susiana, Gregory Johnson observed:
    In sharp contrast to the pervasive smaller villages of the [earlier] periods, Choga Mish on
    the Susiana Plain covered an area of some ﬁfteen hectares by 4300 b.c. Most architecture
    consisted of residences and associated ceramic kilns. The community also contained at least
    one monumental building, perhaps more. This ten-by-ﬁfteen-meter structure had walls of
    between one and two meters thick and contained several interior rooms. One of these was
    stacked with storage jars, while another was apparently used in working ﬂint. A substantial
340   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY




      FIGURE 8.11 The ﬁrst socially complex societies were concentrated in areas of Mesopotamia where
      rivers allowed great agricultural productivity.



          mud-brick platform stood nearby. This period in Susiana and elsewhere saw the
          introduction of formalized closure of containers using clay sealings that carried the
          impression of a decorated seal. This practice is ordinarily associated with problems of
          security in materials storage or shipment.24

      Johnson goes on to note that the high degree of similarity in ceramics across the plain
      indicates that not everyone was making these—that their production might already have
      been somewhat centralized. All this evidence, he says, “[s]trikes me as indicative of a
      hierarchically organized social system with some degree of inﬂuence over labor and
      resource allocation. The fact that the known major architecture at Choga Mish was
      destroyed by ﬁre and the community abandoned . . . suggests that elite inﬂuence over the
      population in general was less than elites might have wished.”25 Frank Hole’s interpretation
      of Susiana culture history differs somewhat from Johnson’s.26 Hole suspects that even
      toward the end of the ﬁfth millennium b.c., the Susiana was loosely tied together by small-
      scale trade and a regional religious cult, centered at Susa, in which priests and people were
      in a voluntary mutually supportive relationship dedicated to the continued success of
      agriculture.27
           To the west of the Susiana, in central Mesopotamia, the later ‘Ubaid period (after about
      c. 4500 b.c.) saw the gradual settlement of the plain by villagers. By 4350 b.c. the ‘Ubaid
      culture was quite uniform over most of the alluvial plain: All the settlements seem to have
                                             ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN SOUTHWEST ASIA          341


been located on reliable water courses, and almost all were less than 10 hectares in size
(most of them only 1 or 2).
     The spread of the ‘Ubaid culture is remarkable for many reasons, particularly its great
extent. ‘Ubaid-style ceramics are found far into central Turkey, to the southwest in the
Arabian Plateau, and in highland Iran—an area much greater than that encompassed
within the Halaﬁan and Samarran stylistic zones. The potter’s wheel was probably invented
by the end of the ‘Ubaid period, when the pivoted working surface, or tournette, was altered
by setting the wheel’s axle in bearings and weighting the wheel in such a way that high
speeds could be produced. This allowed delicate vessels to be made, and painted
decorations like bands could be easily applied simply by holding a paintbrush steady against
a rotating ceramic vessel.28
     Virtually every ‘Ubaid settlement had a large nonresidential building, probably a
temple, built of mudbrick on platforms of clay or imported stone. Access typically was by
a ﬂight of stairs, to a room about 10 m in length, with a broad platform at one end and a
table or small altar at the other. Smaller rooms were built on both sides of the main room,
and ladders in these would sometimes give access to a second story. The exteriors of the
buildings were often decorated with projections and recesses, where light and shadows
created pleasing effects. In later periods, mosaics of colored ceramic cones and bitumen
were used as decorations. At Eridu, 17 such temples were found superimposed, giving the
later ones considerable elevation. Such structures are found all over Greater Mesopotamia
soon after their appearance on the southern alluvial plain.
     Until about 5000 b.c., settlements seem to have been located primarily with regard to
the availability of resources and the land’s agricultural potential, not on the basis of political
and economic relationships. People tend to organize their territories in patterns reﬂecting
changing social and economic conditions; thus when the movement of people and goods
between settlements becomes important, and the area is agricultural and relatively ﬂat,
these settlements often are quite regularly spaced, as is evident in both the Warka area and
the Susiana Plain.
     By 4000 b.c., the number of small settlements had increased dramatically in many
areas, and there was increasing variability in their arrangement and composition.


EARLY STATES: THE URUK AND JEMDET NASR PERIODS
(C. 4100– 3000 B.C.)

The Uruk period is regarded as the era of primary state formation in Southwest Asia.
Cultural forces and processes probably in operation for thousands of years culminated in
this interval in the appearance of the complete checklist of civilization: cities, warfare,
writing, social hierarchies, advanced arts and crafts, and other elements.
     Recently, Guillermo Algaze has proposed a model to explain why complex societies
developed ﬁrst in southern Mesopotamia.29 He suggests that it is the ecological context
of southern Mesopotamia that makes it unusual compared to neighboring regions. The
alluvial lowlands are well watered by the Tigris and Euphrates rivers and thus create
the potential for enormous agricultural productivity as well as for extensive trade using the
rivers for transportation. In Algaze’s model, trade is the most signiﬁcant mechanism that
342   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      early elite people or groups used as a method to expand their control of resources and
      power. They also used trade as a way to legitimize unequal access to resources that favor
      themselves. During the course of the Uruk period, further disparities in resource access,
      power, and trade arose between regions—including those outside of Mesopotamia—and
      these disparities favored cities in southern Mesopotamia. Trade thus accentuated
      differences in localized ecologies and their attendant resources as well as differences in
      ability to control river transportation routes.
           Algaze’s model receives some support from the geological work of Galina Morozova.30
      She points out that natural avulsions—changes in the courses of rivers—in the delta area
      of Tigris and Euphrates rivers were the result of a low-gradient ﬂoodplain, ﬂoods with high
      water levels, and deposition of sediments within channels. Rivers such as the Euphrates had
      many channels and networks of channels, and it is along these networks that the earliest
      southern Mesopotamian cities were built—a situation favorable to control of ﬂoodplain
      agriculture and control of transportation routes. Natural shifts in river channel courses
      away from the cities could, of course, affect these ecological advantages. 31
           The central Mesopotamian alluvial plain and the Susiana Plain offer our earliest and
      best known examples of the changes that occurred in Greater Mesopotamia in the Uruk
      period.


      Warka: An Uruk City-State
      The ancient settlement of Uruk (known as Warka in Arabic and Erech in the Bible), located
      in the heart of the southern alluvial plain, is one of the oldest cities in the world and may
      have been the center of one of the earliest states.
           As many as 10,000 people may have lived in the city of Uruk by 3800 b.c., and around
      the town were many smaller villages and towns whose sizes and distribution suggest they
      may not have been tightly integrated into Uruk’s political and economic systems (Figure
      8.12).32 Then, at about 3000 b.c., the city of Uruk apparently grew rapidly to about 50,000
      people, who lived behind substantial defensive walls. There is also evidence of the beginning
      of abandonment of rural settlements surrounding Uruk—leaving little doubt, Robert McC.
      Adams suggests, that the growth of the city was a result of the immigration or forcible
      transference of the population from the hinterlands into the city.33
           The residential architecture of Uruk reﬂects a diversity of occupational, economic, and
      social classes. All the buildings were mudbrick, but some were larger, better built, and more
      elaborately decorated. Many of the people lived in small rectangular buildings along narrow
      winding streets through which ran both above- and below-ground drainage canals.
      Apparently, houses were one story high for the poor and two stories tall for the wealthier,
      but both types were similar. Built of mudbrick and whitewashed, they represent an ideal
      architectural adaptation to the climate. Similar houses today are comfortable and attractive,
      with their whitewashed walls contrasting effectively with beautiful dyed rugs and textiles.
           Archaeologists who have excavated Uruk occupations usually have found themselves
      ankle deep in the remains of millions of bevel-rimmed bowls, surely one of the ugliest
      ceramic types ever made outside a kindergarten, but also one of the most signiﬁcant.
      Gregory Johnson has shown that various measurements of these bowls change over time,
      so that the Late, Middle, and Early Uruk periods can be deﬁned in part by changes in their
      form.34 Hans Nissen has also argued that these bowls, which an associated with temples,
                                                ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN SOUTHWEST ASIA            343




FIGURE 8.12 In simple societies the location of settlements with respect to each other is dictated
mainly by ecological factors like water availability. But as societies become more complex, political
and economic relationships begin to inﬂuence where settlements are located and how large they
become. In Gregory Johnson’s reconstruction (1975) of exchange networks among Late Uruk period
(c. 3200 b.c.) settlements in southern Iraq, the spatial arrangement of the settlements with respect to
one another is quite regular (the wall cones were used to decorate administrative centers, and their
distribution here may indicate lines of political authority).
344   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      probably were ration bowls and were used to pay workers in grain for their labors.35 Most
      have a capacity that corresponds to what a laborer’s daily ration was asserted to be in
      ancient texts, and the symbol for to eat in early Mesopotamian writing seems to be that of
      a person eating from a bevel-rimmed bowl. Others have suggested that these bowls were
      used to bake bread. The prevailing theory, however, is that they were votives for temple
      ceremonies. The bowls were mass-produced, probably by simply molding, and they
      represent one of the ﬁrst craft items for which the temple administrators organized some
      aspects of the production and distribution system. But these simple features of mass
      production and, perhaps, government administration of commodity production and
      distribution were fateful steps in the evolution of states. To most modern people, few things
      are more natural than governmental forms of organization and control, but our ancestors
      lived as farmers for many centuries without government in this sense; these ﬁrst few steps
      in the direction of government in Mesopotamia were a long, slow process in these initial
      stages; later, the process of ancient state-formation was largely one in which the govern-
      ment increasingly intruded on socioeconomic and political life.
           By the middle of the fourth millennium b.c., the population of Uruk included
      specialists in scores of arts and crafts. Potters, using molds and mass-production techniques,
      turned out enormous quantities of pottery. In earlier periods great numbers of beautifully
      painted vessels were made at most larger settlements, but by the middle and late fourth
      millennium, pottery manufacture had become a centralized, administered activity at Uruk
      and many other settlements. Other specialists included stonecutters, metalsmiths,
      bricklayers, farmers, ﬁshermen, shepherds, and sailors. Writing did not come into general
      use in Mesopotamia until the ﬁrst half of the third millennium b.c., but at Uruk and other
      sites, in levels dating from the ﬁfth millennium onward, archaeologists ﬁnd clay tablets and
      cylinder seals—a distinctive Mesopotamian tradition for 3000 years—which were used to
      impress clay sealings for containers, bales of commodities, and documents. Some of these
      seals convey in picture form the economic specialization of the community. Boats,
      domestic animals, grain, deities, and many other motifs are portrayed.
           By the late fourth millennium b.c., Uruk was already an impressive settlement of resi-
      dences and several large temples. Between about 3200 and 3100 b.c., the “White Temple”
      at Uruk was built on a platform some 12 m above ground level. Constructed of whitewashed
      mudbrick and decorated with elaborate recesses, columns, and buttresses, it must have
      been an impressive sight—especially to peasants coming into the city on market days.
      Inside the temple were tables and altars, all arranged according to the same ritual plan
      evident at Eridu some 2,500 years earlier.
           The temple architecture and ziggurats of Mesopotamian antiquity raise an important
      point. As we will see in surveying other early complex cultures around the world, one of the
      most consistent signs of evolving cultural complexity is the diversion of enormous amounts
      of energy and materials into pyramids, ziggurats, palaces, platforms, and other huge
      constructions. Why would people who could just as easily—and certainly more proﬁtably
      —build irrigation canals or terrace slopes, weave wool, or do other productive tasks instead
      “waste” their labors on these mammoth construction projects?
           The answer to this question may lie precisely in the fact that these constructions are,
      in a limited sense, “wasteful.” They may, for example, have helped prevent high and
      unstable rates of population growth, perhaps by deﬂecting investments in food production.
      As Leslie White suggested: “It would appear that the ruling class was frequently confronted
                                               ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN SOUTHWEST ASIA         345


with the problems of over-production and the threat of technological unemployment or
a surplus of population among the lower classes. Their great public works programs, the
wholesale disposition of wealth in mortuary customs, etc., enabled them to solve both these
problems with one stroke.”36
     Just as important, monumental construction programs could reinforce social and
political hierarchies. Frankfort speculates:
    The huge building, raised to establish a bond with the power on which the city depended,
    proclaimed not only the ineffable majesty of the gods but also the might of the community
    which had been capable of such an effort. The great temples were witnesses to piety, but
    also objects of civic pride. Built to ensure divine protection for the city, they also enhanced
    the signiﬁcance of citizenship. Outlasting the generation of their builders, they were true
    monuments of the cities’ greatness.37

SUSIANA PLAIN DURING THE URUK PERIOD
The sequence of Uruk culture history on the Susiana Plain parallels in many ways
developments on the central alluvium. Gregory Johnson and Henry Wright have analyzed
Susiana cultural history by focusing on the evolution of administrative institutions.38 They
have been principally concerned with the origins of the state, which they deﬁne as a society
with at least three levels of hierarchically arranged, specialized administrators. For example,
in a simple agricultural village, many of the decisions about what crops to plant, how much
of the harvest is to be stored, who gets what share of the land, who marries whom, and so
forth are made by individuals. Some of those decisions—particularly those that directly affect
the whole community—are made by a village headman. We might say that this individual
represents the ﬁrst level of the decision-making hierarchy—he directs the activities of
others who do the work. A second level of administrative hierarchy would exist if there were
people who coordinate the activities of these village headmen and correct or approve their
decisions—perhaps government agents charged with taxing and administering local affairs.
Such agents would be under a third administrative level, and additional levels may exist
above this.
     In addition to suggesting that the ancient Mesopotamian state can be deﬁned as a
society with at least three such levels of specialized administrators, Wright and Johnson
contend that the effectiveness of such societies and their dominance over other societal
forms are tied to their ability to store and process information and make correct decisions
at speciﬁc points within the control hierarchy.
     Wright and Johnson examined several areas where the ﬁrst Mesopotamian states
developed, looking for evidence of this change. One type of evidence was the actual admin-
istrative documents themselves. In most of Mesopotamia at this time, the administration
of people and goods was facilitated by using pieces of inscribed stone to impress clay with
signs of authorization. These stones were usually either in the form of stamps, used like the
rubber stamps of today, or cylinders that were rolled across the clay to make an impression,
and they varied in size and in the complexity of the symbols incised on them. Fortunately,
the clay impressed with these seals and the seals themselves are often preserved in
archaeological sites, and they can be used to infer the levels of administration in these
extinct societies.
     The impressed clay can be divided into two classes. Some were used to certify the con-
tents of a container such as a vessel, basket, bale, or storeroom. They were made by placing
346   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      a lump of clay over a knot that had to be untied to gain access to the container, so that
      unauthorized entry could be detected. Discarded sealings of this type indicate the receipt
      of stored or redistributed goods. Other seals convey or store facts about goods or people.
      Some are plain counters whose shape indicates a numerical unit, while others (bullae) are
      small spheroidal jackets that were once wrapped around sets of counters, and still others
      are ﬂat, rectangular tablets stamped with numerical symbols. Writing, as we know it, did
      not exist until after the state—as deﬁned by Wright and Johnson—emerged, but these
      stamps and seals obviously conveyed a great deal of information. Clay tokens have also been
      found in about 10 geometric shapes at many early Mesopotamian sites, and Denise
      Schmandt-Besserat argues that these tokens, which were usually enclosed in clay envelopes,
      represented such commodities as pots of grain, numbers of animals, and areas of land and
      are the direct precursors of later written scripts.39
           Wright and Johnson used commodity and message sealings found at sites on the
      Susiana to reconstruct some aspects of the production, transport, and administration of
      goods. They concluded that they could determine when the change was made from one-
      and two-level decision-making institutions to the three levels that deﬁne the state.
           Wright and Johnson also analyzed the locational arrangement of the settlements in
      southwestern Iran and found that after about 3600 b.c. there were trends toward more
      regular spacing of settlements and the emergence of distinctive site size groupings—both
      consistent with the change from a two-level to a three-level control hierarchy. This pattern
      of developing settlement arrangements that correlate with changes in the technology of
      administration is apparently not unique to southwestern Iran: “The transition seems to
      occur in several adjacent regions in Iraq between [2700 b.c. and 3250 b.c.] around the
      ancient centers of Nippur, Nineveh, and Uruk. . . . Thus rather than one case of state
      emergence, there was a series of emergences of individual states in a network of politics.”40
      Wright and Johnson suggest that decisions involving problems posed by drought,
      overpopulation, conﬂict, or some other single factor could probably be handled by a two-
      level hierarchy—something on the order of a chiefdom, perhaps—but a combination of
      problems would require additional decision-making capacity. They suspect that one
      important factor in early Southwest Asian state formation may have been the economic
      interactions between nomadic pastoralists and lowland farmers, probably in the form of
      the exchange of cheese, rugs, meat, minerals, and other highland resources for pottery,
      grain, and other lowland commodities. Economic models suggest that ﬂuctuating demand
      for certain craft products in relatively simple economies often stimulates the centralization
      of workshops and economic administration, and Wright and Johnson suggest that in
      prehistoric Mesopotamia the economic demands of nomads on lowland economies may
      have ﬂuctuated sufﬁciently to produce a similar effect, with the eventual emergence of a
      three-level hierarchy.
           Johnson has applied various concepts from what is known as hierarchy theory and the
      so-called rank-size rule to the Susiana data.41 Hierarchy theory is essentially a search for
      explanations of how everything, from molecular structures to world governments, seems
      to involve hierarchical orderings. The assumption here is that there are principles common
      to all these forms of hierarchies and that the processes by which hierarchies change and
      appear can be mathematically analyzed.
           The rank-size rule is an empirical observation that many settlement patterns are
      similar in terms of the relative sizes of their component settlements. Thus, in any region,
                                             ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN SOUTHWEST ASIA         347


state, or country, one can expect that the distribution of people will be somewhere between
the extreme distributions in which everyone lives in one settlement, or those in which the
populace is divided into settlements of exactly equal population size. A rank-size plot is
produced by ranking each settlement in terms of its population, assigning the number one
to the largest, two to the second largest, and so on, and then graphing the actual popula-
tion of each settlement against the rank of that settlement on a full logarithmic scale.
Geographers have noted that for many developing countries, such as Egypt, the rank-size
plot will be a primate one. For example, Cairo is much larger than any other settlement and
forms such a large proportion of the total Egyptian population that a rank-size plot of Egypt
is sharply concave, in contrast to a linear distribution in which the second-ranked city is
only slightly smaller than the largest, the third is slightly smaller than the second, and so
on. It is sufﬁcient here to note that major shifts in the political and economic organization
of an area are usually reﬂected in its rank-size plot. To use Egypt as an example again, the
great growth of Cairo’s population to nearly 15 million people recently has correlated with
the growing power of the national government and the rapidly industrializing economy.
Prior to 1965, a much greater percentage of Egyptians lived in smaller towns and villages
than do now.
     The archaeological applications of this are obvious. If we know when a site was
occupied and how big it was, we can then estimate population sizes, construct rank-size
plots, and perhaps detect when great political and economic changes were taking place. The
application of this idea to various areas of Mesopotamia yields mixed results. Clearly there
were different rank-size patterns at different times, which might signal the origins of state-
level societies. This would not explain their appearance, but it would help identify them.
But it is difﬁcult to estimate the populations of sites in different time periods with precision.
Also, no one really knows what the different kinds of rank-size plots mean. They are
essentially empirical generalizations without any theory to explain them.
     Nonetheless, a fundamental problem of archaeology is to deﬁne and interpret patterns
in the distribution of artifacts through space and time, and these rank-size plots at least
have the virtue of showing us some possible patterns.
     Various other archaeologists have proposed alternative models of how the Uruk states
formed. Guillermo Algaze,42 for example, has argued that this development was essentially
a process in which the peoples of the resource-deﬁcient Mesopotamian lowlands expanded
their state through trade and warfare in order to incorporate resource-rich areas on the
periphery and to establish secure trade routes extending far beyond the Uruk heartland.
We see, for example, communities in which Uruk styles of architecture and ceramics were
used in western Iran, north into Syria, and even as far away as the Nile Delta.43
     In evaluating the many models of the development of the Uruk and Jemdet Nasr
periods, Susan Pollock notes that these models present these ancient people as rather
passive elements in these developments and tend to focus on the adaptations large groups
made over time and large areas. She suggests that archaeological analyses should attempt
to make our appreciation of the Uruk peoples more human and that “archaeological
analyses . . . must also highlight internal conﬂicts generated from acts of daily social life, as
well as those deriving from major sociocultural transformations.”44 In making these and
other points, Pollock joins numerous other contemporary archaeologists in trying to see
the peoples of the Uruk period, and of all other cultures and eras, as individuals—real, live
people.
348   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


           In a sense, the rise of Mesopotamian states is the rise of urbanism. As the centuries of
      the fourth millennium b.c. passed, towns that had once been home to hundreds became
      cities of thousands of inhabitants. Urbanism does not just increase the size of communities,
      however: A key element of Mesopotamian urbanism was that proportionately greater
      numbers of people lived in larger settlements, and the people in these settlements became
      increasingly specialized in their occupations. All of these people—kings, priests, scribes,
      farmers, soldiers, farmers, slaves, and so on—became functionally integrated in the sense
      that they all depended on each other to perpetuate the community, and all derived beneﬁts
      from the greater efﬁciency of functional differentiation and integration. Toward the end of
      the Uruk period, almost all major settlements were fortiﬁed, and documents written much
      later, at circa 2600 b.c., speak at length of conﬂict between the people of Ur, Uruk, Umma,
      and the other city-states. In subsequent chapters, we will see that the initial stimulus for
      urbanization in other parts of the world also seems to be related to defensive needs: Egypt,
      which was protected from hostile outside forces by the deserts and the sea, developed urban
      societies only comparatively late; while in the Indus Valley, which was much more of a
      crossroads for nomadic and other groups, urbanism was present almost from the very ﬁrst.
      In this context, Adams argues that early Mesopotamian urbanization may have been
      imposed on a rural populace by a small, politically conscious superstratum that was
      motivated principally by military and economic interests.45
           Because of defensive considerations and the cost of transporting labor and products,
      agricultural land nearest the urban areas would have been the most intensively exploited,
      and this may have stimulated the construction of large irrigation systems. Another
      important possible effect of urbanism is that it might have created—and to some extent
      have been created by—the large nomadic populations thought to have been present in
      Southwest Asia as early as 6000 b.c. Most of these people were probably similar to the
      present-day Bakhtiari of western Iran, who herd sheep and goats in the uplands during
      much of the year but come down to the lowlands in the winter to sell their animals wool,
      meat, and milk products and to buy craft items, food, and other products. The relationships
      between these upland nomadic and lowland sedentary groups are varied and complex.46
      Historically, when central governments have weakened in Southwest Asia, some marginal
      cultivators revert to nomadic pastoralism in times of war or poor harvests, while other
      pastoralists become laborers or marginal farmers if they lose too many sheep. One of the
      effects of urbanism suggested by the archaeological record—the depopulation of the
      countryside—may have given nomads a new niche. By working the mountain areas and
      highlands for most of the year, the nomads could have come down and exploited the
      marginal areas between urban centers—peacefully most of the time, but other times with
      hostility—and then traded with the townspeople.
           Toward the end of the fourth millennium b.c., the Mesopotamian alluvium and
      adjacent regions were the heartland of a developed sociopolitical and economic organiza-
      tion that most would call a civilization. Writing had been developed, great temples soared
      up from the centers of large cities, and the economy was both productive and complexly
      interdependent. Also, the Uruk polity spread far beyond the central alluvial plain. At
      Habuba Kabira South, in Syria, a large later Uruk settlement is so similar to the great Uruk
      cities to the south in styles of ceramics and architecture that it may well have been built by
      people who came directly from the south to found this city.47
                                           ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN SOUTHWEST ASIA        349


     As noted earlier, this expansion and intensiﬁcation of the Uruk sphere of cultural
interaction undoubtedly involved extension of commercial links between and within
communities, but there was also probably a strong element of conﬂict as well.


THE EARLY DYNASTIC PERIOD (C. 3000–2350 B.C.)

To the modern urbanite, it may seem inappropriate to label as a “state” a collection of
12 or 14 cities with a combined population of perhaps 100,000 and an area of only a few
thousand square kilometers, but, as someone once observed, it is the small states, like
ﬁfth–century b.c. Athens, Renaissance Florence, and Elizabethan England, that have put
posterity most in their debt. To this list can be added Early Dynastic Sumer.


Sumerian Civilization
Approximately 13 city-states made up Sumerian “civilization” between about 3000 and
2350 b.c. Through most of their history, these city-states were politically autonomous,
but they belonged to the same cultural tradition, and by 3000 b.c. they had collectively
developed many of the classical elements of Southwest Asian civilization, including
ziggurats, brick platforms, the potter’s wheel, wheeled carts, metal-working, sailboats, and
writing.
     The fact that the Sumerian language was essentially unlike those of the contemporary
but less-developed Semitic cultures that surrounded the Sumerian has led some to place
Sumerian origins in Turkey or Bahrain. Sumerian myths speak of origins in some distant
land; but we will probably never determine their ethnic origins, and in a sense this is an
unimportant question. The achievements of cultures cannot be explained in terms of the
special characteristics and mental gifts of the people of these cultures: People are constants
in the equations of cultural evolution, and it is their circumstances and position in place
and time that determine their cultural “achievements.”

SUMERIAN WRITING
We have a detailed picture of life in these Sumerian city-states because shortly before 3000
b.c. they began to develop a written language. What we know about the Sumerian language
is derived from the thousands of clay tablets on which they wrote (Figure 8.13). Their script
is known as cuneiform, from the Latin for “wedge-shaped,” a reference to the fact that
Sumerian was written by impressing wet clay with the end of a reed, leaving wedge-shaped
marks.
      The earliest known written documents may be clay tablets and sealings from early
occupations at Uruk (c. 3400 b.c.)—although we can’t identify their language as written by
Sumerians. These documents include signs for carpenter, donkey, boat, copper, and many
other things, totaling 1,500 symbols in all (Figure 8.14). Some signs seem to mean “to buy,”
while others refer to en, the title of a lord, and to unken, which may have been a people’s
assembly.48 The hierarchical nature of Mesopotamian society by the end of the Uruk period
is vividly illustrated by one of the oldest documents known, the “Standard Professions List,”
           350      PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                 which gives the titles of ofﬁcials and names of professions, all
                                                 arranged according to what is apparently a composite sense
                                                 of power and prestige.49
                                                      The ability of this cumbersome writing to convey
                                                 abstract concepts or the spoken language was initially quite
                                                 limited, but in the centuries after 2900 b.c. the Sumerians
                                                 improved it. Phoneticization, by which some signs came to
                                                 represent distinct words and syllables of the spoken language,
                                                 was a most important development.50 Eventually, much of
                                                 spoken Sumerian was represented by written symbols, and
                                                 the pictographic elements slowly lost their representational
                                                 character as the scribes stylized them and reduced the num-
                                                 ber of directions in which the stylus had to move to write
                                                 them.51 Signs were developed for most Sumerian vowels and
                                                 syllables, but the language was never reduced to an alphabetic
                                                 system where every distinct sound is represented by a unique
                                                 sign. Instead, it remained a welter of signs that represented
                                                 pictographs of concrete objects, signs that represented
                                                 syllables of speech, and signs that categorized (determinatives).
                                                 This made reading the script somewhat complicated, requir-
                                                 ing the memorization of hundreds of different characters.
                                                 One sign, for example, which ultimately derived from a
FIGURE 8.13 A cuneiform text on clay.            pictograph representing a mountain, acquired a total of 10
                                                 possible phonetic values and 4 ideographic values as well.52
                                                 To aid in reading the meaning of the word the Sumerians
                 devised a system of determinatives—signs placed before or after a word to indicate the
                 general category to which the word belonged, such as birds, male proper nouns, or deities.
                      Over the centuries the Sumerians’ successors reduced the complexity of the written
                 language, but even as late as about 1900 b.c., it had between 600 and 700 unique elements.
                 At this stage it was similar to Chinese and a few other modern languages, which faithfully
                 represent the spoken language and are adequate for most purposes, but which, compared
                 to alphabetic systems, are very cumbersome. It is difﬁcult to construct typewriters or
                 computers for languages with hundreds of unique elements, and even minimal literacy in
                 such languages is the product of long and arduous training. (To become literate in modern
                 Chinese, for example, one must memorize several thousand characters.)
                      The role of writing in early Mesopotamian societies seems largely economic. Simple
                 pictographs and the spoken language cannot efﬁciently meet the requirements of a society
                 that has surpluses to be stored and redistributed, water to be allocated, land rights to be
                 assigned and adjudicated, ritual prayers to be said, and all the other tasks we ﬁnd in complex
                 cultures. In fact, only the Inka of Peru managed to develop states and empires without a
                 written language, but they had a fairly efﬁcient substitute in the form of a vast bureaucracy
                 and the quipu, a system of knotted strings in which the length of strings and placement of
                 knots was used as a device to assist the memory of the recordkeeper.
                      The economic element in ancient Mesopotamian scripts is evident in their mathemat-
                 ical notations. Georges Ifrah notes that the Sumerians used a counting system with a base
                 of 60, as well as the base-10 system we have.53 Different commodities were counted using
                                              ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN SOUTHWEST ASIA           351




FIGURE 8.14 The evolution of Sumerian writing. Fourth millennium b.c. tablets were inscribed
vertically with pictographs, but in the early third millennium, the direction of the writing and the
pictographs were rotated to the horizontal. In succeeding millennia the symbols were stylized and
given phonetic meanings.



different systems. It is difﬁcult for most people to accept that there is nothing inherently
necessary about a base-10 numbering system. But modern computers employ a base-2
system, for example, using just 1s and 0s to represent all numbers. Whatever base is used,
people usually have given a unique name to each of the numbers, so a base-2 system is the
simplest and a base-60 system is rather unwieldy.54 The Sumerians got around the problem
of having to learn and use a unique name for each number between 0 and 60 by giving a
name to each multiple of 10 lower than or equal to 60. As H. W. F. Saggs notes, the ancient
Sumerians and their successors used their mathematical systems not only for economic
accounting but also for land surveying, calendrical calculations, and astronomical science.55
By about 1800 b.c. the people of Mesopotamia (1) had calculated the square root of 2 to a
value correct to 1 in 2,000,000; (2) had formulated massive tables of reciprocals of
sexagesimal numbers; (3) knew how to calculate the length of a hypotenuse from the
352   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      lengths of the sides of right-angled triangles (1,200 years before Pythagoras); (4) could
      calculate cube roots; and (5) knew some algebraic operations.56
           The way of life described by the Sumerian texts, and by texts of other Southwest Asian
      cultures of the third millennium b.c., is still recognizable to anyone who has traveled in
      these areas. Sheep, goats, and cattle are tabulated, taxed, and exchanged; children are
      shepherded to school—as always, much against their will; a council of elders meets to
      consider grievances against the inhabitants of an adjoining town; and Sumerian proverbs
      express ideas recognizable in many societies:
          Upon my escaping from the wild ox,
          The wild cow confronted me.
          When a poor man dies,
          do not try to revive him.57
      But when they turn to mythological and eschatological themes, the ancient Mesopotamians
      are less accessible—perhaps even a bit bizarre—by our standards, as in this section of the
      myth of the revival of the goddess Inanna:
          Go to the underworld.
          Enter the door like ﬂies.
          Ereshkigal, the Queen of the Underworld, is moaning
          With the cries of a woman about to give birth.
          No linen is spread over her body.
          Her breasts are uncovered.
          Her hair swirls about her head like leeks.

          When she cries, “Oh! Oh! My inside!”
          Cry also, “Oh! Oh! Your Inside!”
          When she cries, “Oh! Oh! My outside!”
          Cry also, “Oh! Oh! Your outside!”
          The queen will be pleased.
          She will offer you a gift.
          Ask her only for the corpse that hangs from the hook on the wall.
          One of you will sprinkle the food of life on it.
          The other will sprinkle the water of life.
          Inanna will arise.58
      Western philosophy and theology are deeply inﬂuenced by the philosophies ﬁrst pro-
      pounded in ancient Greece, philosophies very different from those of ancient Sumer. Thus,
      most Westerners see the world in terms of beginnings and ends, causes and effects, and the
      importance and “will” of the individual. We cannot completely reconstruct Sumerian
      philosophy on the basis of fragmentary texts, but it seems evident that the Sumerians saw
      a much more static and magical world than we do. Although their technology and complex
      organizations demonstrate that they were shrewd, rational people, there seems to have been
      little emphasis or analysis of human motivation or the physical world. They viewed the
      earth as a ﬂat disk under a vaulted heaven and believed that various gods guided history
      according to well-laid-out plans and that the world continues without end and with little
                                                  ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN SOUTHWEST ASIA           353


Table 8.1 Similarities Between Sumerian Stories and the Noachian Flood Story

Babylonian Cuneiform                                   Genesis

1. The gods decide to make a ﬂood.                     1. The Lord decides to destroy wicked mankind.
2. The God Ea warns Artarhasis to build a ship.        2. The Lord warns Noah to build an ark.
3. Artarhasis is to take his family and animals        3. Noah is to take his family and animals aboard.
   aboard.
4. The ﬂood turns mankind into clay.                   4. The ﬂood destroys all ﬂesh.
5. The ship grounds on Mount Nisir.                    5. The ark comes to rest on the Ararat
                                                          Mountains.
6. Artarhasis learns when the waters have subsided     6. Noah learns when the waters have subsided by
   by sending out a dove, a swallow, and a raven.         sending out a dove, a swallow, and a raven.
7. He offers sacriﬁce to the gods.                     7. He offers sacriﬁce to the Lord.
8. The gods smell the sweet savor.                     8. The Lord smells the pleasing odor.
9. The god Enlil blesses Artarhasis and his wife.      9. God blesses Noah and his sons.



change. Each god was in charge of something—the movements of the planets, irrigation,
or brick-making, for example—and each was immortal and inﬂexible. As with humans, the
deities were hierarchically arranged in power and authority and were given to power
struggles and many vices.
     Like most people, the Sumerians thought that the gods had a special interest in
them. Just as every American dollar bill has on the back of it the assertion that annuit coeptis
(“[God] has favored our undertaking”), almost every ofﬁcial Sumerian pronouncement
and inscription invoked the favor of the gods who, it was assumed, favored the city’s
fortunes.
     One way in which Sumerian religion and ideology has inﬂuenced modern cultures is
in its inﬂuence on Judeo-Christian religious traditions. The biblical account of the
Noachian ﬂood, for example, is clearly related to Sumerian stories that predated the Old
Testament by thousands of years. Finegan has identiﬁed some of the similarities59 (see
Table 8.1).
     In 1929 S. Langdon, excavating the Sumerian city of Kish, and Sir L. Woolley,
excavating at Ur, both announced that they had found thick levels of clean sand that they
presumed was evidence of the biblical Flood.60 Some members of these expeditions are
even said to have sold vials of sand labeled “Samples from the Great Flood.”
     But Spuhler notes that many layers thought to be ﬂood deposits are really sand dunes
produced by winds, while others are ordinary river deposits.61 In any case, radiocarbon
dates for levels thought to be of the biblical Flood range from 4500 b.c. to 2700 b.c., and
the absence of sand strata at many other nearby sites, and the evidence of life as usual all
over Mesopotamia at this time, rule out fairly conclusively any scientiﬁc evidence for the
biblical Flood—except in the opinion of the people who keep climbing Mount Ararat
looking for pieces of the ark. Popular press reports of a Russian pilot who saw the outline
of a boat far above the tree line on this mountain have fueled several expeditions to recover
the ark, but so far only a few questionable bits of wood have been found. Only the drearily
unimaginative archaeologist would be impressed by the fact that all the samples of wood
were radiocarbon-dated to about 3,500 years ago—a time for which there is no evidence
that the rest of the world was ﬂooded.62
354   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      SUMERIAN INSTITUTIONS AND ECONOMY
      Tantalizing clues in documents suggest that many Sumerian city-states had a public
      assembly in which, perhaps, people formulated policy and made decisions through
      consensus and even a form of simple democracy.63 Cities appear to have been divided into
      something like modern “wards,” but we really don’t know the organizing principles. There
      is some evidence64 that people were organized in clans, and kinship ties probably remained
      the connective tissue of Sumerian civilization through most of its history. Yet one of the things
      that all states do is complement kinship ties with links among and within socioeconomic
      classes in order to provide effective methods of getting people to operate in useful corporate
      groups (e.g., serving in military units tied together by kinship and place of origins, as in units
      in the American Civil War). In the long run, state societies seem to wear away at kinship
      ties, replacing them with socioeconomic class ties and other kinds of corporate groups.
            The Sumerian extended family appears to have been a strong and durable unit,
      protected by laws governing rights of inheritance, recompense for injuries, and so forth. As
      Nicholas Postgate notes, women were reasonably well treated both by law and custom in
      Sumerian society, but there seems little doubt that this was a strongly patriarchal culture,
      as evidenced by divorce law: “If a wife rejects her husband and says ‘You are not my husband’,
      they shall cast her into the river. If a husband says to his wife ‘You are not my wife’, he shall
      pay 1/2 mina of silver.”65
            In Sumer, wheat, barley, vegetables, and dates were the major crops, while cattle-
      raising and ﬁshing were of almost equal importance. Cattle were raised for draft power,
      hides, and milk and meat. Fish was a staple, as were mutton, goat, and pork. It is interesting
      in view of their later status as a taboo food in much of the Middle East that pigs were a
      common sight on Sumerian farms, prized for their fat and grease (although rarely if ever
      depicted in art, except in ﬁgures and ceramics66).
            Out of each measure of wheat or barley harvested, the Mesopotamian farmer probably
      fed about 16 percent to his animals, reserved about 10 percent for the next year’s sowing,
      lost about 25 percent in storage, and ate the rest.67 If ethnographic studies are to be believed,
      in the absence of modern transport, people did not cultivate ﬁelds much more than 4 km
      from their houses. At any given time, much of the land around a village in ancient times
      would have been fallow, while other land would have been unirrigatable or of marginal
      productivity. Adams estimates that each person would need for subsistence about 1 hectare
      of barley and wheat ﬁelds, along with at least some pastures and orchards.
            One of the less desirable “ﬁrsts” of Sumerian civilization was probably in the ﬁeld of
      epidemic diseases. Just as there are certain disastrous things a hunter and gatherer can do
      (e.g., to presume on too slight evidence that a cave bear is not at home), one of the worst
      things a villager can do is contaminate drinking water with sewage, and this is hard to avoid
      in a primitive town. Typhoid, cholera, and many other diseases require certain levels of
      population density to evolve, to maintain a reservoir of infected individuals, and to
      perpetuate themselves. These levels were probably reached for the ﬁrst time in Sumer. Once
      people started digging wells and irrigation canals in areas with many people and animals,
      disease and epidemics quickly followed.
            Few economies in history or prehistory have been as organized as the Sumerian. Tablet
      after tablet records endless lists of commodities produced, stored, and allotted. Ration lists,
      work forces, guild members—all are recorded in numbing detail. Even the city’s snake-
      charmers were organized.
                                              ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN SOUTHWEST ASIA   355


     The state and church controlled economic matters
through much of Mesopotamian history, but individual
merchants and capitalist elements also seem to have
been signiﬁcant fairly early on. This is important for the
Marxian scholar because once you have individual wealth
and capital, the possibilities for class conﬂict and the rest
of the Marxian paradigm exist. Although Sumerian
society was organized on the basis of kinship, people also
belonged to and acted through occupational and social
classes. In the event of war, for example, members of
different “guilds,” such as silversmiths or potters, would
be under the command of their “guild president.” At the
pinnacle of Sumerian society was a god-king, assumed to
be a descendant of the gods who was also in contact with
the gods. Beneath him was a leisure class of nobles. There
was also a class of wealthy businessmen who lived in the
larger, better houses of the city; of lesser wealth and
prestige were the many artisans and farmers, including
smiths, leather-workers, ﬁshermen, bricklayers, weavers,
and potters. Scribes apparently held fairly important
positions, and literacy was an admired accomplish-
ment. At the bottom of society were the slaves, often war
captives or dispossessed farmers.
     Money, as we know it, did not exist in ancient Sumer;
most exchange was “in kind,” the trading of products for
other products. Local and long-distance trade was
voluminous, however, and ships sailed up the rivers from
the gulf carrying shell, carnelian, lapis lazuli, silver, gold,
onyx, alabaster, textiles, and food and other produce.
     One of the most spectacular differences between
Sumerian societies after 3000 b.c. and their predecessors
is in mortuary practices. At the end of the ‘Ubaid period
(3800 b.c.), graves varied little, even at the largest settle-
ments; but after 3000 b.c. a radical shift occurred. The
famous death pit at Ur is an impressive display of wealth
and pomp (Figure 8.15). Excavating here in 1927–1928,
Sir Leonard Woolley came upon ﬁve bodies lying side
by side, each with a copper dagger and other items.68
Beneath them was a layer of matting on which he
encountered the bodies of 10 women, lying in two rows,


FIGURE 8.15 (Right) Crushed skull of a female attendant in
the death pit at Ur (above). Note the gold jewelry and precious
stones. This Sumerian model of a goat and a tree (below) is
made of wood, lapis, and gold, and is about 51 cm high. It was
found at Ur and dates to about 2600 b.c.
           356        PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                        each richly ornamented with gold, lapis lazuli, and carnelian
                                                        jewelry. Nearby was a gold- and jewel-encrusted harp, across
                                                        which were the bones of the gold-crowned harpist. The bodies
                                                        were lying on a ramp, and as the excavators continued down
                                                        the platform they encountered a heavily jeweled chariot,
                                                        complete with the remains of oxen and grooms. Then the
                                                        investigators began unearthing masses of gold, silver, stone,
                                                        and copper vessels, as well as additional human bodies,
                                                        weapons, and other items. Nearby, another set of six male
                                                        skeletons equipped with copper knives and helmets was
                                                        found, as well as the remains of two four-wheeled wooden
                                                        wagons—also decorated with harnesses of gold and silver and
                                                        accompanied by the skeletons of grooms and drivers. Other
                                                        arrangements of human skeletons, harps, wagons, and model
                                                        boats appeared as the excavations continued. At the end of the
                                                        tomb was a wooden bier containing the remains of the queen.
                                                        The entire upper part of her body was hidden by a mass of
                                                        beads of gold, silver, lapis lazuli, carnelian, agate, and
                                                        chalcedony. Her headdress and other furnishings were lavishly
FIGURE 8.16 Gypsum statuettes of an aged                ornamented with gold, silver, and precious jewels. Liberally
couple, residents at about 2500 b.c. of Nippur,         strewn about the chamber were human bodies, jewelry, vessels
one of the largest cities in southern Mesopotamia       of precious metals, silver ﬁgurines, silver tables, cosmetics,
during this period.                                     seashell ornaments, and a number of other treasures.
                                                              All together some 16 “royal” burials were found at Ur, all
                                                        of them distinguished from the myriad common graves by the
                         fact that each was not merely a cofﬁn but rather a structure of stone, or stone and mudbrick,
                         and by the inclusion of human sacriﬁces—up to 80 in one case. At least three categories of
                         burials seemed evident, ranging from the 16 royal graves to less elaborate but still richly
                         furnished graves in which the common people were presumably placed.
                               As brilliant as Sumerian civilization was, one must realize that it was just one of the
                         states of this era (Figure 8.16). In the southwestern highlands of Iran, for example, between
                         3300 and 2800 b.c. a great Proto-Elamite trading state arose, perhaps on the basis of its
                         ability to dominate trade over the rich routes between Mesopotamia and the Iranian
                         Plateau.69



                      SOUTHWEST ASIA AFTER 2350 B.C.

                      For centuries after 3000 b.c., the Sumerian city-states engaged in almost constant warfare,
                      with ﬁrst one and then another gaining temporary ascendancy. With the rise to power of
                      Sargon of Akkad at about 2350 b.c., however, the political fabric of ancient Southwest Asia
                      was forever changed. Sargon and his several immediate successors used the city of Akkad
                      as a military base from which they mounted spectacularly successful attacks in all
                      directions. Akkadian historical documents recount 34 battles fought by Sargon against the
                      southern city-states, during which he moved down the alluvial plain, capturing many kings,
                      smashing city walls, and ﬁnally “cleansing his weapons in the sea.” Sargon appointed
                                           ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN SOUTHWEST ASIA       357


Akkadians to administrative posts in the conquered city-states and then began expanding
his other frontiers, invading Syria, Lebanon, and western Iran.
     After 2250 b.c. quarrels arose among rival claimants to the Akkadian throne, and the
state fragmented under the onslaught of peoples moving in from the highlands on its
margins. This “dark age” lasted until about 2100 b.c., when one or more Sumerian kings
were able to evict the invaders and reestablish political control over much of the southern
alluvial plain under what is known as the Ur III dynasty. One ruler, Ur-Nammu, based at
the ancient city of Ur, aggressively extended his inﬂuence into much of the area formally
encompassed by the Akkadians. Great volumes of obsidian, lapis lazuli, and copper are
thought to have passed into central Mesopotamia from as far away as Afghanistan, Anatolia,
and even Cyprus. Legal texts of the late third millennium describe in detail problems of
land use, irrigation rights, compensation for bodily injury, penalties for adultery, and many
other elements of daily life.
     Despite its apparent stability, the Ur III political system of the late third millennium
was constantly under pressure from internal political rivalries, as well as from the
incursions of semi-nomads and rival groups along the state’s frontiers. The coup de grace
was administered at about 2004 b.c. with the invasion from western Iran of the Elamites,
who led the king of Ur away in captivity.
     From about 2000 to 1800 b.c., Greater Mesopotamia was politically fragmented
as kings at Isin, Larsa, Susa, and elsewhere established contending states.70 Eventually, the
ancient city of Babylon became the most powerful political entity, and by 1792 b.c.
Hammurabi established the Babylonian Empire, based mainly on the southern alluvial
plain. The many documents of his reign that have survived reﬂect a skillful politician adept
at bureaucratic, military, and political uses of power: his famous law code, although harsh
by modern standards, reﬂects efﬁcient administration. Both Hammurabi and his successors
encountered opposition from southern city-states and from a rival state in Assyria, to the
north. As always, the nomads and other peoples on the empire’s periphery—in this case
the Kassites and Hurrians—made inroads as soon as the central government weakened, and
eventually they overran much of the Babylonian Empire.
     After about 1600 b.c., the political history of Southwest Asia becomes extremely
complicated, with frequent political realignments and, ultimately, the gradual development
and extension of imperial power (Figure 8.17). Assyrians, Elamites, Achaemenids, and




FIGURE 8.17 The extent of the Assyrian and Persian (Achaemenid) empires.
           358       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                    other cultural groups estab-
                                                                                    lished empires, and eventually
                                                                                    the political and military scale
                                                                                    became distinctly internal as
                                                                                    empires centered in Egypt,
                                                                                    Anatolia, and Iran met and,
                                                                                    more often than not, came into
                                                                                    conﬂict (Figure 8.18).


                                                                                    SUMMARY AND
                                                                                    CONCLUSIONS

                                                                                     It is possible that some
                                                                                     archaeologist will, while sweat-
FIGURE 8.18 At about 500 b.c. the capital of the Achaemenid Empire was               ing over a Mesopotamian
Persepolis, in central Iran. This grand stairway ascends to the Palace, and along it mudbrick building foundation
are reliefs that illustrate real-life processions to pay homage to the king. Some of one day, discover a library of
these sculpted ﬁgures carry ﬂowers and other gifts for the ruler.                    cuneiform tablets that record
                                                                                     in great detail a history of the
                                                                                     origins of the Mesopotamian
                                                                                     state, complete with popula-
                                                                                     tion statistics, war casualties,
                                                                                     changes in the weather, average
                                                                                     fertility rates, and a demo-
                                                                                     graphic analysis of the whole
                                                                                     critical two millennia of state
                                                                                     origins.
                                                                                          In fact, discoveries from
                                                                                     Syria, dated to the late third
                                                                                     millennium b.c., of previously
                                                                                     unknown archives of thousands
                                                                                     of texts do provide some
                                                                                     information of this kind
                                                                                     (Figure 8.19). But for the most
                                                                                     part, only archaeological data
                                                                                     can provide evidence of the
                                                                                     long-term and broad-scale
FIGURE 8.19 Important records written on clay tablets were preserved in burnt        factors that form the frame-
rooms at Ebla, Syria.                                                                work of Southwest Asian
                                                                                     cultural history. We have some
                                                                                     sense of such factors as the
                         rates of population growth, evolution of trade networks, changing settlement patterns
                         (Figure 8.20), and so on, but excavations are slow and expensive, and political problems
                         continue to hinder research.
                                                ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN SOUTHWEST ASIA            359




FIGURE 8.20 Settlement rank-size plots produced by Robert McC. Adams (1981) for two areas of
Mesopotamia during the early Middle Uruk period (c. 3400 b.c.) and the Late Uruk period (c. 3200
b.c.), the periods when the ﬁrst “states” were appearing in this part of Mesopotamia. Rank-size plots
like these are formed by ranking the settlements from largest to smallest and then plotting a
settlement’s rank against its size on a log-log scale. Geographers have found that different shapes of
such plots correlate with certain kinds of economic and political situations. The “ﬂat-top” plot of the
Early Uruk in the Nippur-Adab region (B) often is associated with very loose economic integration,
whereas a log-normal distribution (the dotted lines in the graphs) is associated with considerable
political and economic integration. The fact that both the plots for the Late Uruk period—when the
ﬁrst developed complex societies here were in operation—changed over time in the same direction
from markedly different original plots may reﬂect the growing economic and political
interdependence of settlements in the Late Uruk “state.”

     With the information now available, however, the evolution of complex societies in
Mesopotamia seems to have been the result of multiple factors, operating in complex
patterns that differed from place to place. The alluvial plain has the potential to produce
tremendous quantities of food, more than is required in most years to sustain millions of
people and their domestic animals. Such surpluses do not necessarily create great differ-
ences in wealth, but they certainly allow the formation of rich and poor social classes, and
360   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      it seems to be a pattern that wherever one ﬁnds economic systems that produce great
      surpluses, one also discovers elaborate social hierarchies of administrators to organize,
      store, distribute, and exploit these surpluses.
           What factors stimulate the production of surpluses and thus create the conditions for
      the establishment of social classes and administrative hierarchies? Our review of the evidence
      from Southwest Asia suggests that irrigation cannot be said to be the “primary cause” of
      early Southwest Asian cultural complexity. Occupational specialization, monumental
      architecture, changes in settlement spacing and size hierarchies, architectural variability,
      mortuary stratiﬁcation—in short, the whole range of physical evidence of cultural complexity
      —appear before evidence of signiﬁcant extension of irrigation systems. This is true for both
      the heartland of Sumer and for the Susiana Plain in southwestern Iran—the two areas for
      which we have the best archaeological data. In much of Southwest Asia, in fact, increased
      investments in irrigation systems appear to be the result of urbanism, not its cause.71
           For large cities to form and persist, the areas surrounding them must be particularly
      productive because it was not feasible for these ancient city-dwellers to farm areas more
      than a 5 or 10 km from the city. Irrigation was absolutely necessary for any sedentary
      existence on the alluvial plain, but if the spread, integration, and construction of irrigation
      systems were the mechanisms whereby complex societies ﬁrst evolved and developed, we
      would expect to see a direct and positive correlation between the size and complexity of
      irrigation systems and the complexity of cultures based on them.
           Instead, we ﬁnd that ‘Ubaid, Uruk, and Early Dynastic settlements subsisted on the
      produce of ﬁelds that could be irrigated by relatively simple, autonomous canal works. Only
      many centuries after the appearance of the ﬁrst complex societies were complex, integrated
      irrigation systems in place.
           Some scholars have tried to explain the origins of cultural complexity in Southwest
      Asia and elsewhere as mainly the result of human population growth. The persistence of
      this view must be seen in large part as a result of the fact that if one graphs the approximate
      population of Greater Mesopotamia from about 8000 b.c. to about 3000 b.c. against
      evidence of activity specialization, monumental architecture, agricultural productivity, and
      other indications of cultural complexity, then an impressively close correlation is apparent.
      Also, it is difﬁcult not to be impressed by the evidence that warfare was a potent factor in
      Mesopotamian cultural evolution. Great brick walls ring cities and villages alike in some
      periods, and there are caches of weapons, chariots, documents, and representational art to
      tell us that warfare formed the very weft and warp of Mesopotamian history. Nor is this
      sustained level of warfare merely a historical curiosity: If some adult male citizen in ancient
      Mesopotamia of almost any century were transported through time to our own age, the
      thing he would ﬁnd most familiar, perhaps, is the battle that raged through the 1980s
      between Iran and Iraq, or the 1990 Gulf War, or the recent Iraq war in 2003. Armies have
      met here in this same general area in almost every century for more than 5,000 years.
           If we apply the principles of evolutionary biology, warfare is simply an expression of
      competition, which is common to all life-forms. To give it a name, however, is not to
      explain it, nor is the importance of warfare in initial Mesopotamian cultural complexity
      manifestly evident. One might expect that, with the cheapness of clay construction, there
      would be many more walled settlements in the early civilizations if warfare were a frequent
      curse. The walling of towns does occur very soon after the emergence of urbanism, and
      warfare may have played a signiﬁcant role in the major increases of cultural complexity that
                                              ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN SOUTHWEST ASIA       361


followed the earliest “states,” but extensive circumvallation of sites is common on the
southern alluvial plain mainly after about 2900 b.c.—some centuries after the appearance
of other evidence of cultural complexity. After 2900 b.c. the historical records leave no
doubt that warfare was almost continuous throughout Southwest Asia. But can population
growth and warfare be shown to have been antecedent conditions to the rise of
Mesopotamian states? Robert McC. Adams concludes:
    Possibly the attainment of some minimal population level was necessary to set the process
    [for urbanization] into motion. But such evidence as there is suggests that appreciable
    population increases generally followed, rather than preceded, the core processes of the
    Urban Revolution. Particularly in Mesopotamia, where the sedentary village pattern seems
    to have been stabilized for several millennia between the establishment of effective food
    production and the “take-off ” into urbanism, it may be noted that there is simply no
    evidence for gradual population increases that might have helped to precipitate the Urban
    Revolution.72
Adams here is principally concerned with the phenomenon of urbanism rather than
complex societies in general, but his “Urban Revolution” includes many of the essential
transitions we have deﬁned as the basis for the evolution of complex societies. What about
agricultural intensiﬁcation? In Carneiro’s scheme this is a direct result of population
pressure; thus we should ﬁnd evidence of increasingly intensive irrigation and of farming
of marginal lands just before, and along with, the evolution of cultural complexity. But
major investments in irrigation and land reclamation seem to have occurred after the
emergence of urbanism and other evidences of cultural complexity. In addition, as Adams
notes, urbanization appears to have involved the widespread abandonment of large areas
of formerly intensively farmed lands. Furthermore, there is no evidence that any of the areas
of early state formation ever approached their agricultural limits; that is, with only minor
investments in additional irrigation systems, they could have enormously increased the
numbers of people who could be supported, yet the population size remained quite stable.
In short, agricultural intensiﬁcation seems to have been more a result than a cause of the
emergence of complex societies.
     Adams nonetheless attributes considerable importance to environment and agri-
culture in the evolution of Southwest Asian civilization:
    In the largest sense, Mesopotamian cities can be viewed as an adaptation to [the] perennial
    problem of periodic, unpredictable shortages. They provided concentration points for the
    storage of surpluses, necessarily soon walled to assure their defensibility. The initial
    distribution of smaller communities around them suggests primarily localized exploitation
    of land, with much of the producing population being persuaded or compelled to take up
    residence within individual walled centers rather than remaining in villages closer to their
    ﬁelds. Tending to contradict a narrowly determinist view of urban genesis as merely the
    formation of walled storage depots, the drawing together of signiﬁcantly larger settlements
    than had existed previously not only created an essentially new basis for cultural and
    organizational growth but could hardly have been brought about without the development
    of powerful new means for unifying what originally were socially and culturally
    heterogeneous groups.73
Adams argues “that the primary basis for [political-economic] organization was religious
allegiance to deities or cults identiﬁed with particular localities, political superordination
resting ultimately on the possibility of military coercion, or a ﬂuid mixture of both.”74
362   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


           So, as with other areas of early civilization, when we examine the basic factors of
      environment, ecology, technology, demography, and agriculture, we see strong correlations
      between these factors and the shape and history of Southwest Asian history. Yet, these
      correlations do not constitute a powerful explanation or comprehensive understanding of
      Southwest Asian cultures. At a fundamental level these civilizations were a set of ideas and
      social relations. The ideology that legitimized the strict hierarchies of power, prestige and
      wealth and the social relationships among the many peoples in these hierarchies are a
      crucial focus of analysis in trying to understand why Southwest Asian civilizations evolved
      and how they functioned. Ancient texts, in combination with other archaeological data,
      help us understand much about these social relationships, but there is much we still do not
      understand.


      BIBLIOGRAPHY
      Abu es-Soof, B. 1968. “Tell Es-Sawwan: Excavations of the Fourth Season (Spring 1967) Interim Report.” Sumer
                  24:3–16.
      Adams, R. McC. 1965. Land Behind Baghdad. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
      ———. 1966. The Evolution of Urban Society: Early Mesopotamia and Prehispanic Mexico. Chicago: Aldine.
      ———. 1972. “Patterns of Urbanization in Early Southern Mesopotamia.” In Man, Settlement and Urbanism, ed.
                  P. G. Ucko, R. Tringham, and G. Dimbleby. London: Duckworth.
      ———. 1981. Heartland of Cities. Chicago: Aldine.
      Adams, R. McC., and H. Nissen. 1972. The Uruk Countryside. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
      Akkermans, P. P. M. G. 1989. “Tradition and Social Change in Northern Mesopotamia During the Later Fifth and
                  Fourth Millenium b.c.” In Upon This Foundation—The Ubaid Reconsidered, ed. E. F. Henrickson and
                  I. Thuesen. Copenhagen: Museum Tusculanum Press.
      Alden, J. R. 1982. “Trade and Politics in Proto-Elamite Iran.” Current Anthropology 23(6):613–640.
      Algaze, G. 1989. “The Uruk Expansion, Cross-Cultural Exchange in Early Mesopotamian Civilization.” Current
                  Anthropology 30(5):571–608.
      ———. 1993. The Uruk World System. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
      ———. 2001. “Initial Social Complexity in Southwestern Asia: The Mesopotamian Advantage.” Current
                  Anthropology 42(2):199–233.
      Algaze, G., M. E. Evins, M. L. Ingraham, L. Marfoe, and K. A. Yener. 1990. Town and Country in Southeastern
                  Anatolia. Vol. 2: The Stratigraphic Sequence at Kurban Höyük. Oriental Institute Publications 110.
                  Chicago: Oriental Institute.
      Areshian, G. E. 1990. “Further Thoughts on the Uruk Expansion.” Current Anthropology 31:396 –398.
      Ball, W., D. Tucker, and T. J. Wilkinson. 1989. “The Tell Al-Hawa Project: Archaeological Investigations in the
                  North Jazira, 1986–87.” Iraq 41:1– 66.
      Ballard, R. D. 2001. “Deep Black Sea.” National Geographic 199(5):52–69.
      Behm-Blancke, M. R. 1989. “Mosaiksifte am oberen Euphrat—Wandschmuck aus Uruk-Zeit.” Istanbuler
                  Mitteilungen 39:73–83.
      Boehmer, R. M. 1991. “Uruk 1980 –1990: A Progress Report.” Antiquity 65:465 – 478.
      Breniquet, C. 1989. “Les origines de la culture d’Obeid en Mésopotamie du nord.” In Upon This Foundation—The
                  Ubaid Reconsidered , ed. E. F. Henrickson and I. Thuesen. Copenhagen: Museum Tusculanum Press.
      Byrd, B. F. 1994. “Public and Private, Domestic and Corporate: The Emergence of the Southwest Asian Village.”
                  American Antiquity 59(4):639– 666.
      Chase-Dunn, C., and T. D. Hall. 1991. “Conceptualizing Core/Periphery Hierarchies for Comparative Study.” In
                  Core/Periphery Relations in Pre-capitalist Worlds, ed. C. Chase-Dunn and T. D. Hall. Boulder, CO:
                  Westview Press.
      Childe, V. G. 1952. New Light on the Most Ancient East. 4th ed. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
      Cowgill, G. 1975. “On Causes and Consequences of Ancient and Modern Population Changes.” American
                  Anthropologist 77:505–525.
      Crawford, H. 1991. Sumer and the Sumerians. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
      Cribb, R. 1991. Nomads in Archaeology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
      Crumley, C. L. 1979. “Three Locational Models: An Epistemological Assessment for Anthropology and
                  Archaeology.” In Advances in Archaeological Method and Theory, Vol. 2, ed. M. B. Schiffer. New York:
                  Academic Press.
                                                      ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN SOUTHWEST ASIA                     363


Diakonoff, I. M., ed. 1969. Ancient Mesopotamia. Moscow: Nauka.
Diringer, D. 1962. Writing. New York: Praeger.
Evins, M. A. 1989. “The Late Chalcolithic/Uruk Period in the Karababa Casin, Southeastern Turkey.” In “Out of
             the Heartland: The Evolution of Complexity in Peripheral Mesopotamia During the Uruk Period,
             Workshop Summary,” ed. M. Rothman. Paléorient 14:270 –271.
Falconer, S. E., and S. H. Savage. 1995. “Heartlands and Hinterlands: Alternative Trajectories of Early
             Urbanization in Mesopotamia and the Southern Levant.” American Antiquity 60(1):37–58.
Finegan, J. 1964. Handbook of Biblical Chronology: Principles of Time Reckoning in the Ancient World and Problems
             of Chronology in the Bible. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Flannery, K. V. 1972. “The Cultural Evolution of Civilizations.” Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics
             3:399–426.
Frangipane, M., and A. Palmieri. 1987. “Urbanization in Perimesopotamian Areas: The Case of Eastern Anatolia.”
             In Studies in the Neolithic and Urban Revolutions, ed. L. Manzanilla, pp. 295–318. Oxford: British
             Archaeological Reports International Series 349.
Frankfort, H. 1956. The Birth of Civilization in the Near East. Garden City, NY: Doubleday.
Friedman, J., and M. J. Rowlands. 1977. The Evolution of Social Systems. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Gelb, I. J. 1952. A Study of Writing: The Foundations of Grammatology. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
———. 1969. “On the Alleged Temple and State Economics in Ancient Mesopotamia.” Estratto da studi in onore
             di Edouard Vtoltera 4:139–154.
Gibson, M. 1972. “Population Shift and the Rise of Mesopotamian Civilization.” In The Explanation of Cultural
             Change: Models in Prehistory, ed. C. Renfrew. London: Duckworth.
Goldstein, P. S. 1989. “The Tiwanaco Occupation of Moquegua.” In Ecology, Settlement, and History in the Osmore
             Drainage, Peru. ed. D. S. Rice, C. Stanish, and P. R. Scarr. Oxford: British Archaeological Review,
             International Series 545.
Hamblin, D. J., and the Editors of Time-Life Books. 1973. The First Cities. New York: Time-Life.
Hauptmann, H. 1999. “The Urfa Region.” In Neolithic in Turkey: The Cradle of Civilization: New Discoveries, ed.
             M. Özdoǧan and N. Başgelen, pp. 65–86. Istanbul: Arkeoloji Sanat Yayinlari.
Hodder, I. 1999. “Renewed Work at Çatalhöyük.” In Neolithic in Turkey: The Cradle of Civilization: New
             Discoveries, ed. M. Özdoǧan and N. Başgelen, pp. 157–164. Istanbul: Arkeoloji Sanat Yayinlari.
———, ed. 2000. Towards Reﬂexive Method in Archaeology: The Example at Çatalhöyük. Cambridge, UK:
             McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research.
Hodder, I., and C. Cessford. 2004. “Daily Practice and Social Memory at Çatalhöyük.” American Antiquity
             69(1):17–40.
Hole, F. 1978. “The Prehistory of Herding: Some Suggestions from Ethnography.” In L’Archéologie de l’Iraq du
             début de l’époque Néolitique à 333 avant notre ère, ed. M. T. Barrelet pp. 119–130. Paris: Éditions de la
             Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque.
———. 1987. “Settlement and Society in the Village Period.” In The Archaeology of Western Iran, ed. F. Hole.
             Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
———. 1994. “Environmental Instabilities and Urban Origins.” In Chiefdoms and Early States in the Near East:
             The Organizational Dynamics of Complexity. Monographs in World Archaeology 18, pp. 121–151.
             Madison: Prehistory Press.
Hole, F., K. V. Flannery, and J. A. Neely. 1969. Prehistory and Human Ecology of the Deh Luran Plain. Ann Arbor:
             Memoirs of the Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan, No. 1.
Hout, J.-L. 1979: “Ubaidian Villages of Lower Mesopotamia.” In Upon This Foundation—The Ubaid Reconsidered,
             ed. E. F. Henrickson and I. Thuesen. Copenhagen: Museum Tusculanum Press.
Ifrah, G. 1985. From One to Zero. Trans. L. Bair. New York: Viking Penguin.
Jacobsen, T., and R. Adams. 1958. “Salt and Silt in Mesopotamian Agriculture.” Science 128:1251–1258.
Jawad, A. J. 1965. The Advent of the Era of Townships of Northern Mesopotamia. Leiden: Brill.
Johnson, G. A. 1973. Local Exchange and Early State Development in Southwestern Iran. Ann Arbor: Museum of
             Anthropology, Anthropological Papers, University of Michigan, No. 51.
———. 1977. “Aspects of Regional Analysis in Archaeology.” Annual Review of Anthropology 6:479–508.
———. 1981. “Monitoring Complex System Integration and Boundary Phenomena with Settlement Size Data.”
             In Archaeological Approaches to the Study of Complexity, ed. S. E. van der Leeuw. Amsterdam: University
             of Amsterdam.
———. 1982. “Organizational Structure Scalar Stress.” In Theory and Explanation in Archaeology. New York:
             Academic Press.
———. 1987a. “The Changing Organization in Uruk Administration on the Susiana Plain.” In The Archaeology
             of Western Iran, ed. F. Hole. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
———. 1987b. “Nine Thousand Years of Social Change in Western Iran.” In The Archaeology of Western Iran, ed.
             F. Hole. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
———. 1988–1989. “Late Uruk in Greater Mesopotamia: Expansion or Collapse?” Origini 14:595–613.
364   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      Kipp, R. S., and E. M. Schortman. 1989. “The Political Impact of Trade in Chiefdoms.” American Anthropologist
                  91:370–385.
      Kramer, S. N. 1959. History Begins at Sumer. Garden City, NY: Doubleday.
      Larsen, C. E. 1975. “The Mesopotamian Delta Region: A Reconsideration of Lees and Falcon.” Journal of the
                  American Oriental Society 95:43–57.
      Larsen, C. E., and G. Evans. 1978. “The Holocene History of the Tigris-Euphrates-Karun Delta.” In The
                  Environmental History of the Near and Middle East Since the Last Ice Age, ed. W. C. Brice. London:
                  Academic Press.
      Lees, S. H., and D. G. Bates. 1974. “The Origins of Specialized Nomadic Pastoralism: A Systematic Model.”
                  American Antiquity 30:187–193.
      Loding, D. 1976. Ur Excavations: Economic Texts from the Third Dynasty. Philadelphia: Publication of the Joint
                  Expedition of the British Museum and the University Museum, University of Pennsylvania.
      Maisels, C. K. 1993a. The Emergence of Civilization: From Hunting and Gathering to Agriculture, Cities and the State
                  in the Near East. New York: Routledge.
      ———. 1993b. The Near East: Archaeology in the “Cradle of Civilization.” New York: Routledge.
      Mallowan, Sir M. E. L. 1965. Early Mesopotamia and Iran. London: Thames and Hudson.
      Margueron, J-Cl. 1992. “Le bois dans l’architecture.” Bulletin on Summerian Agriculture 6:79–96.
      Mellaart, J. 1965. Earliest Civilizations of the Near East. London: Thames and Hudson.
      ———. 1975. The Neolithic of the Near East. London: Thames and Hudson.
      Mellink, M. 1989. “Archaeology in Asia Minor, Samsat.” American Journal of Archaeology 93:114.
      Mitchell, W. 1973. “The Hydraulic Hypothesis: A Reappraisal.” Current Anthropology 4:532–534.
      Moghaddam, A., and N. Miri. 2003. “Archaeological Research in the Mianab Plain of Lowland Susiana,
                  Southwestern Iran.” Iran 41:99–137.
      Morozova, G. S. 2005. “A Review of Holocene Avulsions of the Tigris and Euphrates Rivers and Possible Effects
                  on the Evolution of Civilizations in Lower Mesopotamia.” Geoarchaeology 20(4):401– 423.
      Nissen, H. 1988. The Early History of the Ancient Near East, 9000 –2000 b.c. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
      Nutzel, W. 1976. “The Climatic Changes of Mesopotamia and Bordering Areas.” Sumer 32. pp. 11–24.
      Oates, J. 1980. “The Emergence of Cities in the Near East.” In The Cambridge Encyclopedia of Archaeology. New
                  York: Crown Publishers/Cambridge University Press.
      Oppenheim, A. L. 1964. Ancient Mesopotamia: Portrait of a Dead Civilization. Chicago: University of Chicago
                  Press.
      Özdoǧan, M., and N. Başgelen, eds., 1999. Neolithic in Turkey: The Cradle of Civilization: New Discoveries. Istanbul:
                  Arkeoloji Sanat Yayinlari.
      Palmieri, A. 1989. “Storage and Dsitribution at Arslantepe-Malatya in the Late Uruk Period.” In Anatolia and the
                  Ancient Near East: Studies in Honor of Tahsin Özgüç, ed. K. Emre et al. Anakara: Türk Tarih Kurumu.
      Pattee, H. H. 1973. Hierarchy Theory. The Challenge of Complex Systems. New York: Braziller.
      Pitman, W., and W. Ryan. 1998. Noah’s Flood. New York: Simon & Schuster.
      Pollock, S. 1983. “Style and Information: An Analysis of Susiana Ceramics.” Journal of Anthropological Archaeology
                  2(4):354 –390.
      ———. 1992. “Bureaucrats and Managers, Peasants and Pastoralists, Imperialists and Traders: Research on the
                  Uruk and Jemdet Nasr Periods in Mesopotamia.” Journal of World Prehistory 6(3):297–336.
      Postgate, N. 1994. Early Mesopotamia: Economy and Society at the Dawn of History. New York: Routledge.
      Redman, C. L. 1978. The Rise of Civilization. San Francisco: W. H. Freeman.
      Reimer, S. 1989. “Tell Qraya on the Middle Eurphrates.” In “Out of the Heartland: The Evolution of Complexity
                  in Peripheral Mesopotamia During the Uruk Period, Workshop Summary,” ed. M. Rothman.
                  Paléorient 15:273.
      Rothman, M. 2004. “Studying the Development of Complex Society: Mesopotamia in the Late Fifth and Fourth
                  Millennia B.C.” Journal of Archaeological Research 12(1):75–119.
      Roux, G. 1976. Ancient Iraq. Baltimore: Penguin.
      Saggs, H. W. F. 1989. Civilization Before Greece and Rome. New Haven: Yale University Press.
      Scammell, G. V. 1989. The First Imperial Age. London: Unwin Hyman.
      Schacht, R. 1987. “Early Historic Cultures.” In The Archaeology of Western Iran, ed. F. Hole. Washington, DC:
                  Smithsonian Institution Press.
      Schmandt-Besserat, D. 1981. “Decipherment of the Earliest Tablets.” Science 211:283–284.
      ———. 1992. Before Writing. Austin: University of Texas Press.
      Simmons, A. H., I. Kohler-Rollefson, G. O. Rollefson, R. Mandel, and Z. Kafaﬁ. 1988. “ ‘Ain Ghazal: A Major
                  Neolithic Settlement in Central Jordan.” Science 240:35–39.
      Smith, P. E. L., and T. C. Young, Jr. 1972. “The Evolution of Early Agriculture and Culture in Greater
                  Mesopotamia. A Trial Model.” In Population Growth: Anthropological Implications, ed. B. Spooner.
                  Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
                                                      ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN SOUTHWEST ASIA                    365


Spuhler, J. 1985. “Anthropology, Evolution, and ‘Scientiﬁc Creationism.’ ” Annual Review of Anthropology
            14:103–133.
Stager, L. 1992. “The Periodization of Palestine from Neolithic to Early Bronze Times.” In Chronologies in Old
            World Archaeology, 3d ed., ed. R. Ehrich. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Stein, G. J., and M. J. Blackman. 1993. “The Organizational Context of Specialized Craft Production in Early
            Mesopotamian States.” Research in Economic Anthropology 14:29–59.
Steward, J. H. 1949. “Cultural Causality and Law: A Trial Formulation of the Development of Early Civilizations.”
            American Anthropologist 51:1–27.
Taylor, R. E., and R. Berger. 1980. “The Date of Noah’s Ark.” Antiquity 54:35–36.
Tosi, M. 1984. “The Notion of Craft Specialization and Its Representation in the Archaeological Record of Early
            States in the Turanian Basin.” In Marxist Perspectives in Archaeology, ed. M. Spriggs. Cambridge:
            Cambridge University Press.
Wattanmaker, P. 1990. “On the Uruk Expansion.” Current Anthropology 31:67–68.
Wattanmaker, P., and G. Stein. 1989. “Leilan 1987 Survey: Uruk Summary.” In “Out of the Heartland: The
            Evolution of Complexity in Peripheral Mesopotamia During the Uruk Period, Workshop Summary,”
            ed. M. Rothman. Paléorient 15:273.
Webb, M. 1975. “The Flag Follows Trade: An Essay on the Necessary Integration of Military and Commercial
            Factors in State Formation.” In Ancient Civilization and Trade, ed. J. Sabloff and C. C. Lamberg-
            Karlovsky. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
Weiss, H. 1977. “Periodization, Population, and Early State Formation in Khuzestan.” In Mountains and
            Lowlands: Essays in the Archaeology of Greater Mesopotamia, ed. L. D. Levine and T. C. Young, Jr.
            Malibu: Undena.
———, ed. 1986. The Origins of Cities in Dry-farming Syria and Mesopotamia in the Third Millennium b.c.
            Guildford, CT: Four Quarters Publishers.
Wenke, R. J. 1975–1974. “Imperial Investments and Agricultural Developments in Parthian and Sasanian
            Khuzestan: 150 b.c. to A.D. 640.” Mesopotamia 10–11:31–217.
———. 1981. “Explaining the Evolution of Cultural Complexity. A Review.” In Advances in Archaeological Method
            and Theory, Vol. 4, ed. M. B. Schiffer. New York: Academic Press.
———. 1987. “Western Iran in the Partho-Sasanian Period: The Imperial Transformation.” In The Archaeology
            of Western Iran, ed. F. Hole. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
White, L. 1949. The Science of Culture. New York: Grove Press.
Wilkinson, T. J. 1990a. Town and Country in Early Southeastern Anatolia. Vol. 1: Settlement and Land Use in the
            Lower Karababa Basin. Oriental Institute Publications 109. Chicago: Oriental Institute.
———. 1990b. “The Development of Settlement in the North Jazira Region Between the Seventh and First
            Millennia b.c.” Iraq 52:49–62.
———. 2000. “Regional Approaches to Mesopotamian Archaeology: The Contribution of Archaeological
            Surveys.” Journal of Archaeological Research 8(3):219–267.
Willcox, G. H. 1992. “Timber and Trees.” Bulletin on Sumerian Agriculture 6:1–31.
Wittfogel, K. A. 1957. Oriental Despotism: A Comparative Study of Total Power. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Wolkstein, D., and S. N. Kramer. 1983. Inanna, Queen of Heaven and Earth. New York: Harper & Row.
Woolley, Sir L. 1965. Excavations at Ur. New York: Crowell.
Wright, H. T. 1969. The Administration of Rural Production in an Early Mesopotamian Town. Ann Arbor: Museum
            of Anthropology, Anthropological Papers, University of Michigan, No. 38.
———. 1986. “The Evolution of Civilizations.” In American Archaeology. Past and Future, ed. D. Meltzer,
            D. Fowler, and J. Sabloff. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
———. 1987. “The Susiana Hinterlands During the Era of Primary State Formation.” In The Archaeology of
            Western Iran, ed. F. Hole. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Instution Press.
Wright, H. T., and G. A. Johnson. 1975. “Population, Exchange, and Early State Formation in Southwestern Iran.”
            American Anthropologist 77:267–289.
Yasin, W. 1970. “Excavation at Tell Es-Sawwan, 1969 (6th Season).” Sumer 26:4 –11.
Yener, A. K., H. Ozbal, A. Minzoni-Deroche, and B. Alsoy. 1989. “Bokardag: Archaeo-metallurgy Surveys in the
            Taurus Mountains, Turkey.” National Geographic Research 5:477– 494.
Yener, A. K., E. V. Sayre, E. C. Joel, H. Ozbal, et al. 1991. “Stable Lead Isotope Studies of Central Taurus Ore
            Sources and Related Artifacts from Eastern Mediterranean Chalcolithic and Bronze Age Sites.” Journal
            of Archaeological Science 18:541–577.
Yoffee, N. 1995. “Political Economy in Early Mesopotamian States.” Annual Review of Anthropology 24:281–311.
Young, C. T., Jr., P. E. L. Smith, and P. Mortensen, eds. 1983. The Hilly Flanks and Beyond: Essays on the Prehistory
            of Southwestern Asia. Chicago: Studies in Ancient Oriental Civilization, No. 36, University of Chicago.
Zagarell, A. 1986. “Trade, Women, Class, and Society in Ancient Western Asia.” Current Anthropology
            27(5):415– 430.
366   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      NOTES
       1. Xenephon, Anabasis.
       2. Postgate, Early Mesopotamia: Economy and Society at the Dawn of History, p. xxi.
       3. Reviewed in Postgate, Early Mesopotamia: Economy and Society at the Dawn of History.
       4. See, for example, Adams, Land Behind Baghdad, or Adams and Nissen, The Uruk Countryside.
       5. Hauptmann, “The Urfa Region.”
       6. Mellaart, Earliest Civilizations of the Near East, p. 77.
       7. Hodder, “Renewed Work at Çatalhöyük”; Hodder, Towards Reﬂexive Method in Archaeology: The Example at
          Çatalhöyük.
       8. In Building 1 in the North Area, Hodder’s excavations suggest that some of these “shrines” can be linked to
          the cycle of family life, as a young family (extended family) grows up in the structure and ages. For example,
          early phases of occupation have an association of the wall paintings with burial of young individuals (deaths
          of children). This pattern shifts as the family ages and there are less children, so that burials of older indi-
          viduals are the most common. Eventually the building is abandoned (see Hodder, “Renewed Work
          at Çatalhöyük”).
       9. Mellaart, The Neolithic of the Near East, pp. 101–105.
      10. Redman, The Rise of Civilization, p. 187.
      11. Wilkinson, “Regional Approaches to Mesopotamian Archaeology: The Contribution of Archaeological
          Surveys.”
      12. Mellaart, Earliest Civilizations of the Near East, p. 77.
      13. Hole, Settlement and Society in the Village Period, p. 95, citing Childe, New Light on the Most Ancient East,
          p. 111.
      14. Nissen, The Early History of the Ancient Near East, 9000 –2000 b.c., p. 57.
      15. Abu es-Soof, “Tell Es-Sawwan: Excavations of the Fourth Season (Spring 1967) Interim Report”; Yasin,
          “Excavation at Tell Es-Sawwan, 1969 (6th Season).”
      16. Larsen and Evans, “The Holocene History of the Tigris-Euphrates-Karun Delta.”
      17. Nutzel, “The Climatic Changes of Mesopotamia and Bordering Areas.”
      18. Hole, “Environmental Instabilities and Urban Origins,” p. 140.
      19. Hole, Flannery, and Neely, Prehistory and Human Ecology of the Deh Luran Plain.
      20. Nissen, The Early History of the Ancient Near East, 9000–2000 b.c.
      21. Postgate, Early Mesopotamia: Economy and Society at the Dawn of History, p. 24.
      22. Wright, “The Evolution of Civilizations.”
      23. Cf. Hole, “Settlement and Society in the Village Period,” p. 95.
      24. Johnson, “Nine Thousand Years of Social Change in Western Iran,” p. 284.
      25. Ibid., p. 285.
      26. Hole, “Settlement and Society in the Village Period.”
      27. Ibid., p. 96.
      28. Nissen, The Early History of the Ancient Near East, 9000 –2000 b.c., pp. 47–48.
      29. Algaze, “Initial Social Complexity in Southwestern Asia: The Mesopotamia Advantage.”
      30. Morozova, “A Review of Holocene Avulsions of the Tigris and Euphrates Rivers and Possible Effects on the
          Evolution of Civilizations in Lower Mesopotamia.”
      31. Following Morozova’s analysis to its conclusion indicates that avulsions could be “created” by cities upstream
          from others through channel diversion and blockage. This essentially acts as a way to control cities located
          downstream (ibid., p. 419) and to shift power balances from one city to another.
      32. Adams, “Patterns of Urbanization in Early Southern Mesopotamia.”
      33. Ibid., p. 739.
      34. Johnson, Local Exchange and Early State Development in Southwestern Iran; Johnson, “Organizational
          Structure Scalar Stress.”
      35. Nissen, The Early History of the Ancient Near East, 9000 –2000 b.c., pp. 84–85.
      36. White, The Science of Culture, p. 383.
      37. Frankfort, The Birth of Civilization in the Near East, pp. 56–58.
      38. Johnson, Local Exchange and Early State Development in Southwestern Iran; Johnson, “The Changing
          Organization of Uruk Administration on the Susiana Plain”; Wright, “The Evolution of Civilizations”;
          Wright, “The Susiana Hinterlands During the Era of Primary State Formation”; Wright and Johnson,
          “Population, Exchange, and Early State Formation in Southwestern Iran.”
      39. Schmandt-Besserat, “Decipherment of the Earliest Tablets.”
      40. Wright and Johnson, “Population, Exchange, and Early State Formation in Southwestern Iran,” pp. 273–274.
      41. Johnson, “Aspects of Regional Analysis in Archaeology”; Johnson, “Organizational Structure Scalar Stress.”
          For a description of hierarchy theory, see Pattee, Hierarchy Theory: The Challenge of Complex Systems.
      42. Algaze, “The Uruk Expansion”; also see Algaze, The Uruk World System.
                                                       ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN SOUTHWEST ASIA                     367


43. Algaze, “The Uruk Expansion, Cross-Cultural Exchange in Early Mesopotamian Civilization”; Algaze, The
    Uruk World System; Frangipane and Palmieri, “Ubranization in Perimesopotamian Areas: The Case of Eastern
    Anatolia”; Johnson, “Late Uruk in Greater Mesopotamia: Expansion or Collapse?”
44. Pollock, “Bureaucrats and Managers, Peasants and Pastoralists, Imperialists and Traders: Research on the
    Uruk and Jemdet Nasr Periods in Mesopotamia,” p. 330.
45. Adams, “Patterns of Urbanization in Early Southern Mesopotamia,” p. 743.
46. Cribb, Nomads in Archaeology.
47. Nissen, The Early History of the Ancient Near East, 9000 – 2000 b.c., pp. 120 –121.
48. Oates, “The Emergence of Cities in the Near East.”
49. Nissen, The Early History of the Ancient Near East, 9000 – 2000 b.c., p. 81.
50. Diringer, Writings.
51. Nissen, The Early History of the Ancient Near East, 9000 – 2000 b.c., p. 136.
52. Ibid., p. 40.
53. Ifrah, From One to Zero.
54. Ibid., p. 35.
55. Saggs, Civilization Before Greece and Rome.
56. Ibid., pp. 225–227.
57. Hamblin et al., The First Cities, pp. 103–104.
58. Wolkstein and Kramer, Inanna, Queen of Heaven and Earth.
59. Finegan, Handbook of Biblical Chronology: Principles of Time Reckoning in the Ancient World and Problems of
    Chronology in the Bible, pp. 42–43; quoted in Spuhler, “Anthropology, Evolution, and ‘Scientiﬁc Creationism,’ ”
    p. 116.
60. One theory says that Noah’s Flood occurred when rising sea levels caused the Mediterranean Sea to breach
    the Bosporus Valley and ﬂow into the Black Sea (then a freshwater lake) about 7,500 years ago. If this is true,
    it is not hard to imagine how such a profound event, even though it did not occur in Mesopotamia, might
    have been preserved initially in oral traditions of the region, later to be recorded in writing (see Ballard, “Deep
    Black Sea”; Pitman and Ryan, Noah’s Flood).
61. Spuhler, “Anthropology, Evolution, and ‘Scientiﬁc Creationism.’”
62. Taylor and Berger, “The Date of Noah’s Ark.”
63. See Postgate, Early Mesopotamia: Economy and Society at the Dawn of History, for an excellent review of
    Sumerian civlization.
64. Ibid., pp. 82–83.
65. Ibid., p. 105.
66. Ibid., p. 166.
67. Adams, Heartland of Cities, pp. 252–254.
68. Woolley, Excavations at Ur.
69. Alden, “Trade and Politics in Proto-Elamite Iran.”
70. Schacht, “Early Historic Cultures.”
71. Adams, “Patterns of Urbanization in Early Southern Mesopotamia.”
72. Adams, Heartland of Cities, pp. 252–254.
73. Ibid., p. 244.
74. Ibid., p. 78.
           9
           The Origins of Complex Societies
           in Egypt

                    Concerning Egypt I shall extend my remarks to
                    a great length, because there is no country that
                    possesses so many wonders, nor any that has
                    such a number of works that defy description.
                    Herodotus (c. 440 b.c.)




                    E      gypt’s similarities to other early civilizations are obvious: Egypt is yet another
                           variation on an ancient theme, a developmental pattern in which farmers succeeded
                 the hunter-forager-gatherers who had roamed northeast Africa for millennia, and then
                 within a few centuries produced state-level governments, writing, monumental architecture,
                 and the other aspects of “civilization,” including a spiral of, ﬁrst, civil wars, and later,
                                                                                centuries of ever-wider spheres
                                                                                of international warfare. In
                                                                                these and other developmental
                                                                                similarities Egypt is just one of
                                                                                a general class of phenomena
                                                                                —pre-industrial states, one of
                                                                                the six “primary civilizations”
                                                                                (see chapter 7).
                                                                                     Yet the similarities among
                                                                                ancient civilizations should
                                                                                not blind us to the unique
                                                                                genius of each. Egypt was a
                                                                                distinctive civilization whose
                                                                                excellence in arts, letters, and
                                                                                science can only be dimly
                                                                                glimpsed in its artifacts that lie
                                                                                in museum cases all over the
                                                                                world (Figure 9.1).
FIGURE 9.1 Museum visitors gaze at Tutankhamun’s throne at the Egyptian              Ancient Egypt’s most
Museum in Cairo.                                                                important contributions to the

                                                                   368
                                                                     THE ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN EGYPT         369


                                                                 EGYPT

                       0   GRAECO-ROMAN (322– )




IRON AGE
                           DYNASTIES 25–31 (712–322) LATE PERIOD Nubians and All Egypt (Dyn 25)      Saitic
                           Dynasty (Dyn 25) Saitic Dynasty (Dyn 26) Persian Dynasty (Dyn 27) Libyan Dynasty
                     500   (Dyns 28–30) Parsian Dynasty (Dyn 31)

                           DYNASTIES 21–25 (1080–712)       3RD INTERMEDIATE    Wen-Amun      Nubians      Thebes

                    1000




MIDDLE BRONZE AGE
                           DYNASTIES 18–20 (1570–1080) NEW KINGDOM Thebes, Eastern Delta             Egyptian State
                           in Levant Amarna Period: Tell el-Amarna Ramesside Era, Abu Simbel
                    1500
                           DYNASTY 12 (2050–1800) MIDDLE KINGDOM Thebes              DYNASTIES 13–17
                           (1800–1570) 2ND INTERMEDIATE Memphis (Ity-towy)           DYNASTIES 16–17 (1700–1570)
                             Hyksos era Avaris
                    2000   DYNASTIES 7–11 (2180–2050)       1ST INTERMEDIATE    Memphis     Hierakonpolie

                           DYNASTIES 3–6 (2650–2180) OLD KINGDOM Step pyramid of Djoser Saqqara                Great
                           Pyramids (Khufu, Khafre, Menkaure) Giza Worship of Re Heliopolis
                    2500
                           DYNASTIES 1–2 (2900–2650)        PHARAONIC STATE    King Menes   Hieroglyphic
                           writing Abydos, Saqqara
                    3000
                           NEOLITHIC (PREDYNASTIC) Irrigation agriculture Decorated pottery/palettes         El-Amra
                           Naqada (early) Urban centers?? El-Girzen Naqada Writing
                    4000

                           NEOLITHIC        Fayyum   El-Badari    Merimda

                    5000

                           Early Neolithic    Fayyum A

                    6000   Bir Kiseiba Nabta
                           Early Neolithic


                    7000
                           Early farming villages
                           Epipaleolithic/Early Neolithic
                    8000

                           Epipaleolithic

                    9000
370   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      comparative analyses of early civilizations may derive from its variations on the themes
      evident in other early civilizations. Egypt, for example, was one of the most politically
      centralized of early states, yet it also seems to have been the least urban; the complexity of
      its governmental bureaucracy was extraordinary, with rank upon rank of viziers, governors,
      and other ofﬁcials, but the vast majority of people seem to have lived in largely self-
      sufﬁcient villages and towns; and though its political cycles were closely related to a single
      environmental factor (Nile ﬂood levels), within these environmental limits Egypt’s
      sociopolitical evolution was a baroque interweaving of factors, personalities, and events.


      THE ECOLOGICAL SETTING

      Egypt . . . is an acquired country, the gift of the
      [Nile].
      Herodotus (c. 440 b.c.)

      Egypt is, indeed, in Herodotus’s much-repeated phrase, the gift of the Nile, and the Nile in
      turn is the gift of rainstorms in the mountains of eastern and central Africa. The “White
      Nile” ﬂows out of the lakes and springs of central Africa and ﬂows northward, where it is
      joined at Khartoum, in the Sudan, by the “Blue Nile,” which is fed by summer monsoonal
      rains in the Ethiopian savannas and highlands.1 Further north in the Sudan, the Atbara
      River, which also drains the Ethiopian highlands, joins the Nile.
           The White Nile’s volume does not vary much from season to season or year to year,
      but the Blue Nile and the Atbara ﬂuctuate with the sharply seasonal rainstorms in their
      watersheds. Thus, until the twentieth century, when huge dams were built in southern Egypt,
      the torrential spring rains in east Africa annually sent silt-choked ﬂoods pulsing down the
      Nile Valley, depositing along the way a rich layer of fertile silts and clays. Along the river’s
      course this natural alluviation has produced one of the world’s richest agricultural niches,
      which with even the simplest tools supports as many as 450 people per square kilometer.
           The Nile itself was an enormous source of food and other resources. The Nile perch,2
      for example, was a favorite food of ancient Egyptians before they became farmers and then
      throughout the pharaonic period as well. This ﬁsh lived in the ancient Nile in huge numbers
      and it is often found in warm shallow water—where it can easily be harpooned. It regularly
      grows to 75 kg in weight, and one specimen caught in Lake Nasser in recent times was over
      2 m long and weighed 175 kg.3 The Nile also teemed with wildfowl—a favorite food
      throughout Egyptian antiquity.
           Although highly productive, the Nile Valley is really only an extremely elongated oasis
      (Figure 9.2) where agricultural lands are sharply circumscribed in most regions by rocky
      deserts. From the Sudanese border to Cairo, the cultivable strip along both banks of the
      river is only a few kilometers wide in most places, and so sharp is the demarcation that, as
      the cliché has it, one can stand with one foot on the red desert sands and the other foot on
      the black, irrigated croplands (Figure 9.3). The ancient Egyptians called their country
      Kemet, or “black land,” after the life-giving dark silts that produced the crops that sustained
      them. The surrounding deserts they called Deshret, or “red land.” This distinction between
      desert and croplands is so marked because Egypt does not get enough precipitation to
      sustain any agriculture based on rainfall alone. The Nile is a single river through most of
                                                   THE ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN EGYPT         371




FIGURE 9.2 Some major Egyptian sites. Egypt’s desert and mountain frontiers protected it for
many centuries against outside inﬂuences, but already by 3000 b.c. its trade and military contacts
extended into Palestine, Nubia, and the Mediterranean world.
           372       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                     the land of Egypt, but north of
                                                                                     Cairo it divides into several
                                                                                     main branches, creating a delta
                                                                                     of ﬂat, well-watered, fertile
                                                                                     land. Although the origins of
                                                                                     Egyptian civilization were in
                                                                                     the south, near Hierakonpolis,
                                                                                     in later Egyptian history the
                                                                                     Delta was the agricultural heart-
                                                                                     land of the country, famed for
                                                                                     its wines, wheat, fruit, garden
                                                                                     crops, and huge herds of cattle
                                                                                     pastured there. As Egypt’s
FIGURE 9.3 A dramatic contrast exists between the well-watered, irrigated Nile
                                                                                     political and cultural focus
Valley corridor and the hyper-arid desert regions.
                                                                                     increasingly turned toward
                                                                                     Syro-Palestine, the Delta also
                      became a more important staging ground for armies and a crossroads of overland and
                      maritime trade routes.
                            The ancient Egyptians appreciated the basic geographic dichotomy of the Valley and
                      Delta and thought of their country as composed of two different geographical units: from
                      the Nubian border to the border of the Delta was ta-shema, the “land of the shema reed”;
                      north of that, the Delta, was ta-mehu, the “land of the papyrus plant.” Today most
                      archaeologists refer to this division as that between “Upper Egypt” in the south and “Lower
                      Egypt” in the north, the “Upper” and “Lower” reﬂecting the gradient of the Nile.
                            Thanks to the Nile, ancient Egyptians could traverse the length of their country in just
                      a week or so of pleasant sailing, providing a rapid, reliable channel for the movement of
                      goods, people, and information. The Egyptians did not use the wheel—either for vehicles,
                      pottery manufacture, or other uses—until quite late, many centuries after it was a mainstay
                      of Asian technology, probably because wheeled vehicles did not have much use in a country
                      where the Nile provides such easy transport and where there is limited advantage to moving
                      products among communities in an ecosystem that is quite similar over its entire length.
                      Egypt’s ecological similarity over most of its area and the Nile’s efﬁciency as a transport and
                      communications artery were key factors in the highly centralized governments that
                      developed in later Egyptian antiquity, and it is not surprising that in the southern reaches
                      of the Nile, where ﬁve cataracts (steep rapids) constitute impassable barriers to navigation,
                      the power of the Egyptian government often weakened.
                            Although there have been major ﬂuctuations in the annual volume of the Nile—for
                      example, catastrophically low water levels in some of the years between 2250 and 1950 b.c.
                      —the Nile ﬂoodplain has existed in essentially its present form since about 3800 b.c. In
                      ancient times, however, the Mediterranean coastline was farther inland (see Figure 9.2)
                      because the Delta had not sunk nearly as far as it has now under the weight of accumulated
                      silt. The gradient, periodicity, and other attributes of the Nile are such that complex
                      irrigation systems using dams and long feeder canals up river became important only fairly
                      late in Egypt’s history. For the most part the Nile forms small ﬂood basins that a few villages
                      could manage successfully.4 One simply waited for the spring ﬂoods to recede, leaving
                      behind their rich sediments, and then scattered seeds on the ground, herded pigs or sheep
                                                 THE ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN EGYPT      373


over the cropland to trample the seeds into the ground, weeded and hoed the crops as they
needed it, and then waited for the bountiful harvest. And while the Egyptians faced a lot of
competition for grain ripening in ﬁelds, especially from birds and rodents, they had the
friendly help of cats, which they “domesticated” (and vice versa), and most harvests were
bountiful.
     The annual ﬂoods were usually visible in southern Egypt, near the Nubian border, by
late May, and the river rose quickly thereafter, until the beginning of September, when it
began a long slow recession to its lowest level the next May. The Egyptian annual calendar
was based on this ﬂood cycle, dividing the year into three periods of four months each. The
period of ﬂooding, from July to October, was called akhet, which may have meant
“inundation.” Most of the crops were planted between November and February, a season
called peret, or “time of emergence,” in the sense that the farmland emerged as the ﬂoods
receded. The harvest season, or shemu, was from March to June.
     By ancient standards, Egypt was a rich country. The Israelites, wandering in the Sinai
deserts, bemoaned the rich meals they had enjoyed while living in Egypt: “[A]nd the
children of Israel . . . wept again and said, who shall give us ﬂesh to eat? We remember the
ﬁsh, which we did eat in Egypt for nought; the cucumbers, and the melons, and the leeks
and the onions and the garlic.”5 But if the spring ﬂoods were too high, then water stayed
on the lands too long and crops could not be sown in time to harvest them before the
summer heat destroyed them; if the ﬂoods were too low, not enough sediment and water
were available for good harvests. Ancient Egyptians used tripods to dip water from the river
to irrigate crops, and in some cases they trapped water behind dams during low ﬂood years,
so that they could use it later for irrigation; but in the long run—and with sensible storing
of grains—the Nile Valley was rich enough to support high population densities.


EARLY EGYPTIAN AGRICULTURE

The Nile Valley and Delta are among the richest agricultural niches in the world, and thus
the farming way of life may seem to be the “natural” state of human habitation there, but
in fact farming came to Egypt only relatively late. For many millennia before farming
appeared in Egypt, people lived there simply by hunting, ﬁshing, and gathering the area’s
rich profusion of indigenous plants and animals. Today the Nile Valley looks like a rather
poor place to try to make a living as a hunter-forager because the narrow Nile ﬂoodplain
runs through one of the harshest deserts on earth, the Sahara; but before about 60,000 years
ago rainfall made the deserts bloom for many millennia. In this Pleistocene epoch the Nile
itself teemed with ﬁsh and wildfowl, and areas that are now deserts along the Nile were for
long periods rich grasslands that supported wild cows, gazelles, and many other large
animals which, in turn, supported ancient Egyptian hunter-foragers.
      This centuries-old way of life began to fade away about 60,000 years ago. The African
rainfall patterns shifted, and the deserts replaced grasslands across much of North Africa.
And as these deserts expanded, almost all human life in Egypt was concentrated in the Nile
Valley and Delta, where until about 8000 b.c., people continued to hunt wild animals, ﬁsh,
and gather wild plant foods. Sometime between 8000 and 7000 b.c., agriculture and
domestication appear for the ﬁrst time in the Nile Valley area, with some scholars suggesting
that people in Egypt might have been in the process of domesticating cattle.6 But only at
374   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      about 7500 b.c. did some of them become full-time farmers and make the transition to
      village life and an economy based mainly on the foods that eventually were to serve as the
      staples of pharaonic Egypt—emmer wheat, barley, sheep, goats, cattle, and pigs.
           How did this transition to agriculture occur in Egypt? Egypt provides an interesting
      case to study this question because it exhibits both the processes by which people
      transmuted “wild” species into the ordinary domesticates of the village farm and also the
      means through which these people came to adopt Southwest Asian domesticates.
           There is some suggestion of intensiﬁed plant use at late Pleistocene northeast African
      sites in areas like Kom Ombo in the form of mortars, sickle blades, and other implements,
      but the adaptation appears to have been a mobile one, based on small groups pursuing a
      diversiﬁed hunting-foraging economy.7 Sometime after about 10,000 years ago, Egyptians
      appear to have been domesticating several varieties of local grasses,8 and they also
      apparently were in the process of domesticating cattle, and then later some other animals,
      such as the mongoose (ichneumon), gazelle, oryx, addax, ibex, and hyena—none of which
      ever became completely domesticated or extensively used as farm or food animals.
           The earliest evidence of forms of subsistence, settlement, and technology that differed
      signiﬁcantly from those of the late Pleistocene in northeast Africa comes from the desert
      areas of Bir Kiseiba and Nabta in southwest Egypt (see Figure 9.2). On the basis of evidence
      from this area, Wendorf, Schild, and Close note that both “cattle and pottery seem to have
      been known in the Sahara as early as anywhere else in the world.”9 Moreover, they observe
      that the people of about 6200–5900 b.c. lived in communities in which:

          The houses and pits indicate long term or, at least, recurrent settlement. At the very least,
          they must have been occupied for most of the year, and it seems likely that the Nile no
          longer played an important role in the settlement system, suggesting that a different kind
          of exploitation was now being employed in the desert. Instead of sites representing small
          family units or task-groups, there are now medium-sized villages, composed of perhaps as
          many as 14 family units . . . where there was at least sufﬁcient social control to determine
          the arrangement of the community.10

      One of the most intriguing discoveries at Nabta is the presence of wild sorghum, an
      important African cereal—in one structure at Nabta it represents 74 percent of the wild plant
      foods.11 Although sorghum was not to become one of the main staples of later Egyptian
      civilization, the use of this wild cereal by Neolithic people in Egypt clearly shows that—like
      their early Neolithic counterparts in the Levant—these early Egyptians were focusing
      intensively on plant foods that would later become domesticated crops. Wild sorghum,
      along with sheep and goats, has also been found in Neolithic contexts at Farafra, an oasis
      far out in the Sahara desert in north-central Egypt.12
            Compared to the glories of pharaonic civilization, these tiny communities described
      by Wendorf, Schild, and Close might seem of negligible importance and interest, but they
      demonstrate again the great breadth and pervasiveness of the changes that swept the world
      after the end of the last Pleistocene era. As we saw in chapter 6, for reasons not altogether
      clear people around the world after about 10,000 years ago began to interact with plants
      and animals in ways that led in many cases to domestication and agriculture; and in this
      same period of transition people all over the world appear to have begun living in larger
      communities, in which they spent much or all of the year. Not every group around the
      world changed in these ways, and hunting-foraging in the traditional ways continued
      throughout most of the world. But when we place these early Egyptian communities in the
                                                   THE ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN EGYPT         375


context of similar changes in Anatolia, Mesoamerica, northern China, and many other
places, this pattern of worldwide change appears revolutionary.
      These early Egyptian communities also illustrate the nature of cultural evolutionary
processes: Cultural change and transformation is a ﬁtful process of dead-ends, failures,
extinctions, and only occasionally the kinds of slight changes that result in long-term
revolutionary cultural transformation. For example, apparently these early Egyptian
communities did not make the transition to a fully agricultural, sedentary way of life in
these arid zones. Fekri Hassan and others have argued that eventually climate changes
induced people to abandon areas that were slowly turning into deserts and migrate into the
richer Nile Valley.13 Had these climatic changes not forced people out of what are now the
deserts of Egypt, perhaps they would have evolved their own agricultural communities on
the basis of local grasses, cattle, and other resources—but we will never know: Evolutionary
processes are not predictable and only reveal a “pattern” when viewed backward in time.
      Sometime between 6000 and 5000 b.c., domesticated wheat, barley, sheep, and goats
were introduced from outside Egypt and became the basis for the evolution of Egyptian
civilization. Whether these domesticates were introduced for the ﬁrst time in this
millennium or were just successfully farmed for the ﬁrst time is unknown, as are their
ultimate origins. The most likely source of the domestic wheat, barley, sheep, and goats that
formed the staples of the Egyptian diet is Syro-Palestine and other areas of Southwest Asia,
where they had already been in agricultural use for 2,000 years.
      Our most systematic evidence about these early agriculturalists is from the Fayyum
Oasis. British archaeologist Gertrude Caton-Thompson conducted excellent excavations
along the lake’s north shore in the 1930s, Fred Wendorf and Romauld Schild’s work there
in the 1970s greatly augmented Caton-Thompson’s ﬁndings, and additional work has been
done by other scholars.14
      Agriculture has such great inertia because once people begin making and using large
grinding stones, big grain storage silos, sickles, and all the rest of the primitive farmer’s tool
kit, there is a strong incentive not to move. Also, cereal grains ripen over a short interval,
and a farmer who is out hunting the week they ripen can expect to come back to a ﬁeld
stripped bare by rodents and birds.
      Thus it is puzzling that the ancient peoples of the Fayyum left no traces of houses or
prolonged occupation. Caton-Thompson found complete sickles in silos full of wheat and
barley in Fayyum sites dating to about 5000 b.c., but people here seem to have combined
some minor cereal farming with the ancient hunting-foraging ways. Partly for this reason,
some scholars see a resistance to the spread of agriculture in Egypt because of the richness
of the lake and river environments.15 But by 4000 b.c. agriculture had spread over much of
Egypt, including the southern areas. Some people still depended on ﬁsh and wild plants for
much of their food, while others were already heavily dependent on the wheat-barley,
sheep-goat-cattle-pig combination that underlies so much of Middle Eastern cultural
evolution.


THE PREDYNASTIC PERIOD (C. 4000–3000 B.C.)

One of the most impressive and puzzling things about ancient Egypt is the apparent rapidity
and comprehensiveness with which hundreds of unconnected and functionally similar
villages were transmuted into an organized social, economic, and political unity—the ﬁrst
           376        PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                           Egyptian state. This transformation began at about
                                                           4000 b.c. in the south and rapidly spread to the north,
                                                           encompassing most of Egypt by 3000 b.c.
                                                                The rise of the Egyptian “state” after circa 3100 b.c.
                                                           is really just a bold reconstruction of what we infer
                                                           happened. These inferences are based on (1) the spread
                                                           over much of Egypt of pottery and architectural styles
                                                           that suggest close, continuing contacts among people
                                                           over large areas of the country; (2) the investment of
                                                           massive amounts of labor and resources in tombs and
                                                           monumental buildings in such a way as to imply an
                                                           unequal distribution of wealth, power, and prestige;
                                                           and (3) some equivocal signs, like the Narmer Palette
                                                           (Figure 9.4), that seem to indicate a potentate in the
                                                           process of exercising kingly authority.
                                                                The evolution of Egyptian civilization began in the
                                                           south, in Upper Egypt. In 1894 Sir Flinders Petrie
                                                           excavated more than 2,000 graves at the site of Naqada,
                                                           just north of Luxor, and deﬁned the Predynastic
                                                           cultural sequence. These graves were ﬁlled with pottery
                                                           in different styles, as well as slate palettes, beautiful ﬂint
                                                           tools, jewelry made of bone and other materials, untold
                                                           beads, ﬁgurines, and other riches. These graves and
                                                           other Predynastic sites reveal a society quickly chang-
                                                           ing in the direction of the class-stratiﬁed, religious
                                                           unity that we know from documents of less than a
                                                           thousand years later.16
                                                                The largest and most complex cluster of Pre-
FIGURE 9.4 The Narmer Palette, a thin sheet of stone       dynastic settlements in Egypt are those at Hierakonpolis,
engraved with symbols that may reﬂect the political        the “City of the Hawk,” where excavations have gone
uniﬁcation of Egypt. King Narmer is shown wearing          on for almost a century (until recently under the direc-
different crowns on the different sides of the palette,
                                                           tion of the late Michael Hoffman).17
possibly symbolizing the political uniﬁcation of the
                                                                The Predynastic people of Hierakonpolis lived in
Delta and Nile Valley, under the representation of the
hawk-headed god Horus. Scenes of battle and what           rectangular,   semi-subterranean houses of mudbrick
appears to be a beheading suggest a military uniﬁcation of and  thatch;  they apparently worshipped in small, per-
the country.                                               haps  wooden    shrines;  and they made and distributed
                                                           regionally several kinds of pottery, some of it very
                      beautiful. They also hunted, herded, ﬁshed, and farmed the by now traditional array of
                      Egyptian plants and animals, and they buried their dead in rock and mudbrick tombs of a size
                      and content to reﬂect the social power and prestige of the individual. The famed Narmer
                      Palette (see Figure 9.4), which traditionally has been interpreted as commemorating
                      the uniﬁcation of the Nile Valley and Delta into a national state, was found at Hierakonpolis,
                      which may indicate that this city was an early capital of Egypt. But many scholars doubt
                      that the Narmer Palette was a unique record of the ﬁrst uniﬁcation of Egypt.18
                            Elsewhere in southern Egypt, excavations by Fekri Hassan at Naqada (see Figure 9.2)
                      suggest that by the middle of fourth millennium b.c. this site was a large town that already
                                                  THE ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN EGYPT        377


was fully dependent on agriculture. Naqada and Hierakonpolis may have been by far the
largest communities in all of southern Egypt at this time, with much smaller communities
scattered down the valley.
      In the north, beginning at about 3650 b.c. there were at least some large and compara-
tively wealthy communities, such as those at Ma’adi and El-Omari, both of which are just
south of what is now Cairo. Stone tools, pottery, and other artifacts show that the people
of Ma’adi exchanged products with Palestine, and they may have been part of a large trade
network that integrated commodities from the Levant, the Nile Valley, and even the deserts
and oases. The bones of donkeys have been found at Ma’adi, and one can imagine these
people sending caravans off across the desert to Palestine, while their boats plied the Nile
River trade. Burials at El-Omari included some apparently wealthy and perhaps powerful
people who were buried in straw mats, along with large stores of pots, stone tools, and other
goods.
      Other Predynastic communities have been found in northern Egypt, most of them
dating to just before 3000 b.c. At Minshat Abu Omar, hundreds of graves have been found
containing the distinctive pottery, alabaster jars, slate palettes, and other riches of the late
Predynastic. Excavations at Buto, in the northwestern Delta, have revealed clay cones ident-
ical to those used to decorate temples in the Uruk state centered in Mesopotamia at about
3200 b.c. Buto may have been one of the most important ports on maritime trade routes
over which vast quantities of timber, oil, wine, minerals, pottery, and other commodities
passed.19


THE ARCHAIC, OLD KINGDOM, AND FIRST INTERMEDIATE
PERIODS (C. 3000–2040 B.C.)

Despite the apparent extent of commercial relationships in Predynastic Egypt, the ceramics
of northern and southern Egypt remained quite different in style until about 3100 b.c.
As we noted in chapter 8 with regard to Southwest Asia, and as we will see in later chapters,
one apparently unfailing sign of increasing cultural complexity in ancient societies was
a growing uniformity over larger and larger areas of styles of pottery. In fact, around the
world, these increases in the area of distribution of certain styles and their growing
uniformity correlate precisely with the appearance of other elements of complexity, such
as more complex settlement patterns, monumental architecture, agricultural intensiﬁca-
tion, mortuary cults, and so on. Thus, we might suspect that in Egypt the same pattern
would hold, and there is evidence that it did. The distinctive styles of pottery from northern
sites like Ma’adi, Buto, and various other sites in the Delta20 appear to have been quickly
and completely replaced by the styles of southern Egypt.
     If this pattern of change does reﬂect the uniﬁcation of Egypt, we may wonder how it
was actually accomplished. As noted earlier, traditional sources suggest that Narmer, a minor
ofﬁcial from Upper Egypt, rose to power and conquered Lower Egypt at about 3100 b.c.,
and that he and his successors established a theocratic political system over the entire
navigable length of the Egyptian Nile. Narmer (also known as Menes) is recorded as having
built a capital at Memphis (near modern Cairo), diverting the stream of the Nile to create
a strategic position at the junction of Upper and Lower Egypt. His next several successors
378   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      were also powerful kings, but there is some evidence of internal dissension at about
      2900 b.c. Later, peace appears to have been restored, and major construction projects were
      undertaken in the centuries before 2700 b.c. We know from tombs and other archaeological
      evidence that already by the early Old Kingdom (c. 2700 b.c.), Egypt was a complexly
      organized nation-state, with monumental architecture, a multi-tiered economy, and a
      centralized and hierarchically arranged bureaucracy.
           Fekri Hassan has shown that the evolution of complex societies in Predynastic Egypt
      was a long, involved process, in which climate changes, warfare, evolving agricultural
      efﬁciency, and the development of religions and political institutions were all subtly
      interrelated. He stresses that no simple ecological model can account for these changes and
      that Egypt is not likely to have been uniﬁed by any single battle or ruler.21
           And while the Predynastic period saw the ﬁrst complex Egyptian societies, in trade
      patterns, occupational specialization, and settlement patterns, the Archaic and Old Kingdom
      periods were the great formative era of Egyptian civilization, the time when Upper and
      Lower Egypt were ﬁrst united politically and Egyptian forms of writing, architecture,
      administration, and ideology emerged.
           By 2700 b.c. the economic sphere was already quite complex, involving long-distance
      trade to Syria and beyond and considerable local exchange of craft goods and foodstuffs;
      but most Egyptians of the Old Kingdom period continued to live in unwalled, largely self-
      sufﬁcient villages. Apart from Memphis there were few towns or cities, which may have
      contributed to the political integration of the country, since there were no urban power
      centers to resist incorporation.22 Large areas of the middle Nile Valley were only sparsely
      settled, and population growth was quite slow, with little competition for agricultural land
      or irrigation water (although many new settlements appear to have been established in the
      Delta). Apparently, the slow population growth during the Old Kingdom (Butzer estimates
      an annual rate of 0.8 per 1,000 people) eventually did begin to exert some pressure on
      available resources toward the end of the period, since large game almost disappeared from
      the Alluvium and contemporary documents describe a shift away from pastoralism to a
      greater reliance on grain agriculture.23
           The middle of the third millennium b.c. was for Egypt a marvelous age in which many
      of the greatest pyramids and palaces were built, an integrated royal bureaucracy was
      formed, and arts and crafts were brilliantly executed (Figure 9.5). Because of the relatively
      comprehensive documents from this period, we know many of its political and social
      details.24 Economic exchange was apparently controlled almost entirely through the king;
      there were no “merchants”—in the capitalistic sense at least—until centuries after the end
      of the Old Kingdom. Craftsmen, scribes, peasants, and everyone else were required to
      perform some services in the name of the king and were liable for military and civil
      conscription, but there is a clear contrast here with the partially capitalistic, multi-tiered,
      highly differentiated economic system characteristic of the later Mesopotamian states.
           What Old Kingdom Egypt was like outside the main centers is less well known. Recent
      excavations and surveys have shown that the Old Kingdom Delta was densely occupied.25
      Many Delta settlements were probably “pious donations,” the granting of tax exemptions
      to certain communities whose revenues were used to support mortuary cults at Giza and
      elsewhere. Pharaoh Wahkare’ Khety III (2070–2040 b.c.), in his instructions to his son,
      Merykare, forcefully recommended building towns as a means to counteract political
      fragmentation and inefﬁcient organization, especially in the eastern Delta, which, he
                                                  THE ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN EGYPT          379


lamented, was being subdivided into rival provinces and cities.26
Old Kingdom Egypt had complex commercial and political
relationships to Southwest Asian cultures, and since most of
the sea and land routes to these areas were through the Delta, the
Delta’s importance increased. In fact, by about 2400 b.c. the
majority of Egypt’s population probably lived north of Saqqara,
and the seat of government power remained at Memphis, in the
north, through much of Egypt’s ancient history. Old Kingdom
towns at Hierakonpolis and other southern cities remained
important, however. Also, the Old Kingdom fort at Elephantine,
near Aswan, guarded the southern approaches to the Kingdom.
     Some characteristics distinguish Old Kingdom Egypt from
Mesopotamia and other early complex societies. For example,
there seem to have been no standing armies during most of the
Old Kingdom and no economically signiﬁcant slavery. In some
ways the economic system—although highly administered—was
a simple redistributive, almost chiefdom-like system, quite
different from that of early Mesopotamian states.


Pyramids
Djoser, the second king of the Third Dynasty who reigned from
about 2630 to 2611 b.c., was able to organize Egypt’s people and
economy to the extent that he, or his grand vizier, Imhotep, could
arrange construction of the great step pyramid at Saqqara as his
tomb (Figure 9.6). The actual crypt was built inside the pyramid,
whose six levels rose over 60 m and were surrounded by large
buildings and a stone wall more than 9 m wide with a perimeter
of more than 1.6 km. The pyramid complex at Saqqara was the              FIGURE 9.5 Lifelike funerary portrait
                                                                         masks such as this one, from the Fayyum, are
world’s ﬁrst large-scale stone building and remains, despite much
                                                                         a highlight in the history of mortuary art.
deterioration and the looting of its limestone facing, one of the
most beautiful. It truly must have been an impressive sight, 45
centuries ago, with its crisp white limestone facing contrasting with the cobalt blue sky,
green palm groves, and desert sands.
      Djoser’s successors, particularly those of the Fourth Dynasty (c. 2575–2465 b.c.)—the
beginning of the Old Kingdom Period—also built massive pyramids and experimented with
designs and constructions until the “perfect” pyramid form was achieved by King Khufu—
as exempliﬁed by the pyramids at Giza (Figure 9.7). It is not just the massive size of this and
other pyramids of this era that is so impressive, but also the complex engineering, the deft
execution of stone sculpture, and the precise planning such projects would have required.
      So much has been said and imagined about the pyramids, yet we can hope to know so
little. The minds that designed them and invested them with meaning are these many
centuries gone to dust, and not a single ancient Egyptian text of the period when they were
built describes how they were constructed or why.
      Cairo sprawls out and around the pyramids today in such clamorous ubiquity that the
only way to see the pyramids in a manner anything like that of the ancient Egyptian is to
           380       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                     come in from the west, in the
                                                                                     early morning, in the quiet of
                                                                                     the desert. The pyramids were
                                                                                     all located on the west bank of
                                                                                     the Nile, an equation no doubt
                                                                                     with death and the setting
                                                                                     sun. All are situated on the
                                                                                     limestone outcrop near the
                                                                                     river, to facilitate the transfer
                                                                                     of innumerable blocks of lime-
                                                                                     stone and alabaster, some of
                                                                                     which had to be shipped down
                                                                                     the Nile and then transported
                                                                                     up the bank to the construc-
                                                                                     tion area.
                                                                                           Exactly how the blocks
                                                                                     were quarried and transported
FIGURE 9.6 The stepped pyramid of the Pharoah Djoser at Saqqara is an early          remains unknown, but we
forerunner of the Pyramids at Giza.                                                  have some clues. Quarrying
                                                                                     probably involved a combina-
                                                                                     tion of hammering with hard
                      stones, chopping with copper adzes, and fracturing by heating the rock with ﬁres and then
                      splashing cold water on it. Mark Lehner has thoroughly analyzed evidence relating to the
                      surveying and construction methods used to build the pyramids, and he has evaluated the
                      various possible combinations of ramps, rollers, and so on against the physical remains.27
                      The Great Pyramid of Giza required the quarrying, transport, preparation, and laying of
                      about 2,300,000 stone blocks, each with an average weight of 2.5 tons, and an estimated
                      labor force equivalent to about 84,000 people employed for 80 days a year for 20 years. We
                      do not know how these people were mobilized and administered, but many think the
                      construction was done by the peasantry during the ﬂood seasons, when little agricultural
                      activity was required. The administration, feeding, direction, and planning required to
                      control such a work force, which included many highly trained craftsmen as well as
                      laborers, would obviously argue a high degree of political and bureaucratic centralization.
                      The king was apparently able to call on all the resources of the country, and direct them
                      and the people to virtually any end, and at times the entire national economy was probably
                      focused on these projects. The monarch’s absolute control is directly reﬂected in the texts
                      and in the mortuary complexes of the various levels of high-ranking administrators who
                      served him, many of whose tombs are laid out around the king’s, reﬂecting his control over
                      them even into eternity.
                           With the construction techniques available to Old Kingdom craftsmen, a pyramid is
                      the only architectural form that could support its own weight when built to the scale that
                      the Old Kingdom pyramids were. But we also have to account for the dimensions and
                      angles used. Engineering considerations obviously constrained the Egyptians to build the
                      pyramids at angles such that stone blocks could be raised to each new level and that the
                      whole could sustain its own weight. But I. E. S. Edwards suggested that this angle (about
                      52 degrees) parallels that of the slant of light on winter afternoons28 in Egypt, and he says
                                                 THE ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN EGYPT         381




FIGURE 9.7 The Pyramids at Giza are the focal points in a vast mortuary complex of tombs and temples.
But outside these mortuary centers Egypt was primarily a rural, agricultural society, with few cities.



the texts hint that the pharaohs ascended into heaven by walking up the rays of light.29 The
pyramids thus would be a ﬁrst step to the pharaoh’s union with the sun god and eternity.
      Limited as they were by the lack of electronic survey equipment and precisely
engineered tools, we cannot expect Egyptian craftsmen to have been up to modern
construction standards. The north corner of the Great Pyramid at Giza, for example, is
almost a whole inch higher than the south corner, and there is the famous example of the
“bent” pyramid at Dashur, the top of which leans at an odd angle to achieve its apex.
      Some of the most impressive features associated with the pyramids were the “solar
boats,” which are thought to have been buried at the time of the pharaoh’s death, to
facilitate his sailing into eternity. These boats were disassembled and buried in stone pits
382   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      near the pyramids, and in the 1960s and 1970s, when one was excavated and reconstructed,
      the wood, ropes, and other components were found to be almost perfectly preserved by the
      dark and aridity of the boat pits. In 1987 scientists introduced a camera through an airlock
      into another boat pit, in the hopes that the atmosphere would be unchanged since the time
      of burial, but the camera showed dung beetles walking around somewhat decayed segments
      of the boat.
           Earlier versions of boat burials, however, have a long history in Egypt, dating back to
      the period of the earliest dynasties. They have been found, for example, at Abydos,
      surrounding a funerary monument to the Second Dynasty Pharoah, Khasekhemwy, but
      they are stratigraphically earlier than this monument and may actually date to the period
      of the First Dynasty Pharoah, Djer, around 2920 b.c.30 The 12 boats at Abydos are “moored”
      with a small boulder placed either near the prow or the stern to anchor them, and they range
      in length from 19 to 29 m. Unlike the later Giza boat burials, however, those at Abydos are
      not complete—they lack decks, cabins, oars, and attached prows and sterns (which are
      fashioned of mudbrick instead). They are, in David O’Connor’s estimation, “proto-types”
      for the Giza boat pits.31
           Mark Lehner has argued that the placement of the various elements of the Giza
      monuments in relation to the geology of the area indicates that the Sphinx, the three main
      Giza pyramids, and various temples are part of a single uniﬁed design, in which the different
      strata of limestone on the Giza Plateau were carefully used to produce this magniﬁcent
      ceremonial center.32
           The pyramids continue to fascinate most people who see them, and numerous ideas
      have been suggested about what the pyramids meant to the ancient Egyptians and how they
      were constructed. On hot summer nights some tourists continue experiments to determine
      if the pyramids retard aging, heighten sexual potency, cure diseases, or in other ways give
      off powerful emanations.


      Egyptian Temples
      The Egyptians built thousands of temples, some of which still stand as classics of
      architectural accomplishment, such as the Temple of Queen Hatshepsut at Deir el-Bahri.
           In our own world architecture seems a somewhat chaotic art form and discipline, with
      the highest adulation often reserved for those who break free from tradition and introduce
      new forms that express an aesthetic sense but also function well. “Form follows function”
      and “less is more” are principles that have guided some great architects of the modern
      world, but new materials and methods allow them a freedom to experiment that was utterly
      unknown in the ancient world.
           Egyptian architects, too, evolved forms and developed new aesthetic expressions, but
      there was a canon of architectural principles for many buildings that did not permit
      innovation in certain fundamental aspects. In Ancient Egypt there was no sense of “art for
      the sake of art,” in the sense of a free-form expression of whim and whimsy. Egyptian
      architects did not, for example, use gigantic stone replicas of papyrus plants as columns for
      temples because of simple personal aesthetic preference. Everything had a purpose.
      Egyptian architecture was made to “work” in a profound sense.
           The traditional plan of Egyptian temples was based on the belief that the temple was
      not a place of meditation, as a modern church might be said to be, but, instead, a home of
                                                     THE ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN EGYPT      383


a god. Egyptian temples were static realizations in stone of the creation of the universe and
are to be seen as replicas of the universe at this moment of creation. Thus, the temples were
aligned on an east-west axis, so that each morning the rising sun, the god Ra, would shine
through the double pylon gate, representing two mountains, and penetrate the westernmost
chamber of the temple, to illuminate the statue of the god. The temple itself was subdivided
into different chambers, so that a person entering would only gradually pass through toward
the god, reﬂecting a step-by-step process of puriﬁcation in preparation for approaching the
god. As Nicholas Grimal explains:
    The approach consisted of a gradual movement from light to shadow, achieving total
    darkness in the holy of holies where the god dwelt. At the same time the ground slowly rose,
    achieving its highest point under the naos [large carved stone cubicles], which was thus
    located on the primeval mound emerging from Nun, the lake of chaos. Out of this aqueous
    environment rose the stems of the papyrus columns, their architraves holding up the sky,
    which was usually represented on the ceiling. In order to achieve this effect, the temple had
    to consist of at least three elements: a courtyard, a colonnade, and a pylon entrance.33
In this movement from light to dark, low to high, profane to sacred, ancient Egyptian
worshippers expressed many elements of their view of the world and the signiﬁcance of
their lives.

The Intellectual Foundations of the Ancient
Egyptian State
Wilson notes that the written language of Old Kingdom Egypt had no words for
“government” or “state” as impersonal terms, conceived apart from the pharaoh; the
Egyptian “theory of government was that the king was everywhere and did everything. . . .
The ﬁction of direct delegation of duty and of a direct report to the king was impossible to
maintain in practice; but in the theory of government it was no ﬁction, it was a working
reality.”34 Thus, the Egyptians viewed their state and culture metaphorically as a living
organism, an organism of which they were all a part, from the pharaoh himself to the
lowliest slave (described in chapter 7 and illustrated in Figure 7.3 using iconography from
the throne base of Pharaoh Senusret I—1971–1928 b.c.).
     A key concern to the Egyptian theory of government was “divine kingship.”35 The
ancient Egyptians viewed their state as a complex blend of human and divine elements that
was created and sustained by the interactions of people and gods, particularly through the
agency of the pharaoh. The divinity of the pharaoh was a complex idea, however. Various
scholars36 have suggested that the position of pharaoh, his “job,” in a sense, was regarded
as divine but that the person of the pharaoh was not considered divine. For example, a
statue of Chephren, for whom the second pyramid at Giza was constructed, shows the god
Horus protecting him by spreading his wings over Chephren. And usually the pharaoh is
pictured as confronting the gods, not as one of them. The pharaoh’s responsibility was the
“containment of unrule”—in other words, he had to ensure domestic tranquility and
prosperity. To that end he participated in many religious rituals.
     Shortly after 2495 b.c. there was a change in dynasties as well as in the religious
and political texture of the Old Kingdom. The worship of the sun god, Ra, emerged as the
dominant religion, and the nobility and provincial authorities began to encroach on the
king’s authority.
384   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      The First Intermediate Period (c. 2134–2040 B.C.):
      Breakup or Transformation?
      In a sense the end of the ﬁrst cycle of dynastic Egypt appears to have occurred between
      about 2134 and 2040 b.c., when the Old Kingdom state seems to have experienced a short
      period of disruption and change. Scholars differ on the extent of ﬂuctuations of royal power
      during the Fourth and Fifth Dynasties. Kemp suggests that in Upper Egypt the control of
      local affairs by the pharaoh’s overseer was gradually diluted during the late Old Kingdom,
      culminating in the appearance of provincial governors, or nomarchs.37 Trigger raises the
      possibility that a slow but continuous expansion and elaboration of society and economy
      in the Old Kingdom may have been accompanied by growing complexity and power of
      provincial administrative institutions.38 The apparent emergence of powerful nomarchs in
      the Sixth Dynasty may reﬂect a reduction of pharaonic power, but the pharaohs of this
      period were still able to send expeditions to Nubia and Palestine and to exert considerable
      internal control as well.39
           The political breakdown of Egypt toward the end of the Old Kingdom may have been
      in part a result of dramatic climatic changes. Rainfall decreased in much of Egypt after
      about 2900 b.c., and Butzer notes that decreasing rainfall would have reduced the resources
      and numbers of desert nomads as well as eliminated much of the seasonal pastoral
      movements into the deserts.40
           The concept of societal “collapse,” a dominant theme in many analyses of Egypt,
      Mesopotamia, China, and other early states,41 has some application to Egypt, but the
      periodic partial disintegrations of Egyptian polities seem to have been quite different. When
      its central government weakened, there was a reversion to greater autonomy for the
      provinces for brief periods. Even during the three “intermediate periods” that are taken as
      major divisions of Egypt’s culture history, the level of disruption may have been less than
      originally estimated.42 There was always a base level of expansion-collapse cycles as a result
      of variations in the Nile’s annual ﬂow. Various texts describe social disruptions that may
      be associated with ﬂood-level ﬂuctuations, but the Egyptian state evolved effective
      mechanisms to cope with these problems.
           To some extent, Egypt’s “intermediate periods” may have been periods of reorganiza-
      tion rather than of collapse. For example, the great decline in pyramid construction that
      marked the end of the Old Kingdom and the beginning of the First Intermediate Period
      does not necessarily reﬂect catastrophe; in fact, there is evidence that any economic
      dislocations in these periods were short-lived and relatively minor.43


      THE MIDDLE KINGDOM AND SECOND INTERMEDIATE
      PERIODS (2040–1550 B.C.)

      Reconstructing the sociopolitical changes of the Middle Kingdom (c. 2080–1640 b.c.)
      —Egypt’s “Classical” period—is a complex matter. In general, the history of the Middle
      Kingdom contains the same cycles of expansion and collapse that can be seen in all the great
      ancient empires. Periods of well-regulated trade, prosperity, and brilliance in art, architec-
      ture, and literature were punctuated by periods of revolution, poverty, and political
                                                     THE ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN EGYPT      385


fragmentation. The Middle Kingdom originated in the great civil unrest of the twenty-ﬁrst
century b.c., when, according to a contemporary account:
    [Grain] has perished everywhere. . . . People are stripped of clothing, perfume, and oil.
    . . . Everyone says, “There is no more.” . . . Strangers have come into Egypt everywhere.
    . . . Men do not sail to Byblos today: What shall we do for ﬁne wood? Princes and pious
    men everywhere as far as the land of Crete are embalmed with the resins of Lebanon, but
    now we have no supplies. . . . The dead are thrown in the river. . . . Laughter has perished.
    Grief walks the land.44

In the face of this turmoil, successive rulers sought to increase national integration while
directing defense and trade along increasingly active frontiers.45 The Eleventh Dynasty
Pharaoh Nebhepetre’ Mentuhotpe (c. 2061–2010 b.c.) and his immediate successors of the
Eleventh Dynasty reuniﬁed the country. He and his successors of the Eleventh and Twelfth
Dynasties reorganized the country with considerable energy, undertaking expeditions into
Nubia, Libya, and Syria; reopening trade routes to the Red Sea; and commencing again the
construction of monumental buildings. The capital was reestablished near Memphis, from
which both Upper and Lower Egypt could be ruled effectively; trade routes were extended;
fortresses were built along the country’s frontiers; and the tradition of co-regency was
established, in which sons were made co-rulers toward the end of their fathers’ reigns,
thereby eliminating some of the bloody battles for succession that had plagued previous
dynasties.
     There were also advances in Egyptian art and architecture during this period. Many
literary classics were composed, and the cult of Osiris completed its replacement of the
colder, sterner religion of Ra and gave the common people some hope of the afterlife that
in the past had been restricted to royalty.
     From about 1786 to about 1720 b.c., various kings managed to remain in general
control of most of Egypt, but gradually people from, it appears, Syro-Palestine, who were
collectively referred to as the Hyksos, began to inﬁltrate the Delta, and they eventually
appear to have been absorbed into the lower levels of Egyptian society. Gradually the power
of these Asiatic peoples increased. At about 1640 b.c. they captured Memphis, and the
Hyksos king adopted the trappings of Egyptian royalty. Artifacts made in the Hyksos
manner have been found all along the Nile Valley and as far south as Karnak, but it is not
clear how directly they were able to control most of the population. The skull of a ruler of
southern Egypt, Seqenenre’ Ta’o II (c. ruled at about 1600 b.c.), bears the imprint of a
western Asiatic-type battle axe,46 and there are other evidences of frequent conﬂict between
Egyptians and Asiatics along the eastern Delta border.


THE NEW KINGDOM AND THIRD INTERMEDIATE PERIODS
(1550–712 B.C.)

The hated Asiatics were largely expelled from Egypt by Pharaoh Ahmose I (c. 1550–1525 b.c.),
who ushered in a new age of political unity. The major cities of the New Kingdom were
Memphis, near what is now Cairo, and Thebes, at Luxor. Ahmose, a native of Thebes,
expelled the Hyksos from the Delta, and after several battles drove them beyond the eastern
frontier. He even captured the rich city of Sharuhen, in Palestine, and he and his successors
           386       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                      reformed the bureaucracy, modeling it after that of the Middle
                                                      Kingdom. He and his immediate successors also undertook
                                                      massive building projects to restore and expand cult complexes
                                                      at Abydos, Deir el-Bahari, and other major southern towns.
                                                           By the mid-ﬁfteenth century b.c. Egypt probably had a
                                                      population of many millions of people, whose governmental
                                                      institutions, religion, language, economy, and most other
                                                      aspects of life were probably remarkably like those of their
                                                      ancestors during all of the preceding 2,000 years.47 This great
                                                      weight of tradition must be considered when analyzing
                                                      Egyptian history. Time and time again Egypt would fragment
                                                      under revolt and invasion, but the ancient order would always
                                                      persist and reform.
                                                           New Kingdom documents, such as the Wilbour Papyrus,
                                                      describe a highly stratiﬁed society, with a king and elite who
                                                      could draw freely on the country’s wealth (Figure 9.8), and
                                                      under them provincial nobles, who inherited their titles and
                                                      wealth, lesser bureaucrats, priests, military ofﬁcers, wealthy
                                                      farmers, craftsmen, soldiers, and tenant-farmers, with peasants
                                                      supporting the whole structure (Figure 9.9).48
                                                           One of the greatest New Kingdom rulers, Thutmosis III,
                                                      reigned for 54 years (1479–1425 b.c.), and his mummiﬁed
                                                      body suggests that he died still looking quite young for his
FIGURE 9.8 Mummy of Queen Tiye—her
                                                      many years and accomplishments.49 Thutmosis III established
lovely hair still largely intact—who died about
1350 b.c. The position of the left hand is typical    Egypt’s Asiatic empire with his conquest of much of the east-
of Egyptian royalty.                                  ern Mediterranean coastal areas. Even powerful Assyria paid
                                                      material tribute to the Egyptian Empire, as did the Babylonians
                                                      and the Hittites. His surprise attack on Megiddo in Palestine
                        and his amphibious operation against the Mitanni, a powerful northern Mesopotamian
                        kingdom, established Egypt as a world power. By about 1450 b.c. Egypt had commercial
                        contacts on a large scale, exchanging products with Phoenicia, Crete, the Aegean Islands,
                        and its traditional African trading partners. Military paciﬁcation programs were extended
                        far into Nubia, and vast quantities of Nubian gold and building stone were shipped to the
                        Nile Valley.
                             One of the most famous New Kingdom monarchs was Akhenaten (ruled 1353–1335 b.c.),
                        who introduced a semi-monotheistic religion and tried to eradicate vestiges of older
                        polytheistic cults. He built marvelous temples to Aten, the new god, and constructed a new
                        capital at Tell el-Amarna in central Egypt, complete with magniﬁcent religious and
                        administrative buildings.
                             Akhenaten’s physical appearance suggests he may have been a hermaphrodite, and
                        some suspect that he had physical problems that produced some mental instabilities, but
                        he was a reasonably effective civil and military leader.

                          Akhenaten started off with certain disadvantages. From statues and portraits medical
                          historians have diagnosed tuberculosis, hyperpituaritism, hypogonadism, and acromegaly.
                          . . . Nor was his emotional life any healthier. His ﬁrst wife appears to have been his mother,
FIGURE 9.9 The bureaucratic organization of Egypt in the New Kingdom period. This reconstruction by David O’Connor (1983) shows the   THE ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN EGYPT
numerous ofﬁcials who organized most aspects of Egyptian society.




                                                                                                                                      387
388   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


          Tiy. . . . [T]hey had one daughter. Then he married his maternal cousin, Nefretiti, and
          fathered three more daughters. His third and fourth wives were not blood relatives, and
          there was one son of each marriage, the second of whom was to rule as the boy pharaoh
          Tutankhamun. Akhenaten’s ﬁfth and last marriage was to the third of his own daughters
          by Nefretiti. . . .50
      Soon after Akhenaten’s death, the old religions were reestablished by Smenkhare and the
      famous Tutankhamun. Akhenaten’s mummy was probably intentionally destroyed by
      bitter opponents of his attacks on the old religious traditions of Egypt.51 The “Boy King,”
      Tutankhamun, reigned as a teenager from about 1333 to 1323 b.c.,52 and powerful members
      of his court tried to reestablish the power of the central court by reviving the state religion
      in the classical traditions of the cult of Amun.
           When Howard Carter, whose work was funded by a British nobleman, Lord
      Carnarvon, discovered Tutankhamun’s undisturbed tomb in 1922, his ﬁnd captured the
      world’s attention as no other archaeological discovery has. Lord Carnarvon’s death from
      an infected mosquito bite in 1923 and other bad luck (to which we can add Howard Carter’s
      favorite donkey, who was bitten on the lip by a cobra and died within three hours),53
      inspired the notion of the “Curse of the Pharaohs” and made Lord Carnarvon’s son so
      disenchanted with things Egyptian that he had some of his father’s antiquities sealed away
      in the family castle. In 1988, with the help of a 75-year-old butler, these antiquities were
      rediscovered, but the most important ﬁnds from this tomb had long since been distributed
      among various museums, principally Cairo’s Egyptian Museum.
           Between about 1327 b.c. and the accession of Ramesses II (ruled 1290–1224 b.c.),
      Egypt’s fortunes varied, with periods of foreign invasion and some internal breakdowns of
      the social order. And from Ramesses II on, “[c]ontraction, not expansion, characterized
      the foreign policy while the disintegration of government became evident.”54 Even in an era
      of megalomaniacs, Ramesses II is impressive. While invading Palestine, he allowed himself
      and his army to be ambushed by Hittites. He barely salvaged himself by a strategic retreat,
      and then proceeded to cover almost every available ﬂat stone surface in Egypt (and much
      papyri) with heroic accounts of his mighty victory. Ramesses II and his successors were also
      plagued by court intrigues, probably some assassination attempts, various economic
      problems, and threats along the frontiers. Some scholars think that it may have been
      Ramesses II, or his successor, Mer-ne-Ptah, who refused to let the Israelites leave, as related
      in the biblical Exodus story, but few scholars consider this story to have much—if any—
      historical basis.55 There is little if any reliable evidence of major changes in the archaeological
      record of Palestine at the time the Exodus story is supposed to have occurred, nor are there
      any evident traces in Sinai, where presumably the million or more Israelites would have
      wandered. The eastern Delta was a strongly fortiﬁed military area at the time the Exodus is
      supposed to have occurred, and the area of Palestine which they were recorded in the Bible
      to have invaded was already largely controlled by the Egyptians, so it is difﬁcult to imagine
      how the Exodus story could have occurred as recorded. Also, the pyramids were built
      thousands of years before the Israelites arrived in Egypt—or were recognized as a distinct
      people, and it may be that the building projects described in the Bible as their work were
      small mudbrick complexes in the eastern Delta.
           In any case, the Exodus story is a classic example of the collision of myth and the
      positivistic view of history. As discussed in chapter 1, all history is interpretation, and the
      phrase “what actually happened” is to some scholars meaningless.
     At about 1000 b.c., Egypt lost military
control of Nubia, and the breakup of its
Asiatic empire brought it into confrontation
with the Israel of David and Solomon. The
Egyptians captured a city on the border of
Israel and agreed to peace with the marriage
of the pharaoh’s daughter to Solomon. But
ﬁve years after Solomon’s death Seshonk I
invaded Israel, plundered Jerusalem, and
reestablished Egypt’s control.
     During the ﬁrst millennium b.c., Egypt
had various periods of resurgence when
various kings reasserted Egyptian inﬂuence
in Palestine and Africa, and as late as 715 b.c.
Shako conquered the Delta and forged a
uniﬁed country once again. But continued
military pressures from Kush and the dis-
integration of national political and economic
systems ate away at the country’s structure
and stability, and at about 525 b.c. Cambyses,
a Persian king, conquered Egypt and reduced
it to a vassal kingdom, proclaiming himself
pharaoh. In 332 b.c., Alexander the Great
marched into Egypt, evicted the Persians,
and built the city of Alexandria. Later, the
Romans, Arabs, and British would complete
the conquest of Egypt, submerging almost
entirely this distinctive civilization that was
for so many years the light of the ancient
world (Figure 9.10). Not until a.d. 1952 was       FIGURE 9.10 Members of 1920s-era baseball teams play a road
Egypt again ruled by Egyptians.                    game.


ANCIENT EGYPTIAN ART AND THOUGHT

As we noted in chapter 1, some archaeologists now argue that the archaeological record can
only really be interpreted if we shift our attention away from the simplicities of technology,
environment, and economy, to the ideas, concepts, and world-views of ancient peoples.
Unlike many areas, in Egypt it is in some ways possible to do this because of its rich and
early literature. Through most of antiquity, Egyptians believed that their society and life in
general had been established by the gods and that they and all their social, political, and
economic relationships were part of a divinely designed, immutable world order. To some
extent, the Egyptian past makes sense only when viewed in that way.
     Certain themes are deeply embedded in ancient Egyptian culture. For one thing,
Egyptians seem to have been a “God-intoxicated” people, “half in love with easeful death.”
Herodotus wrote that they were the most “religious” people he had encountered, given to

                                             389
390   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      incessant and elaborate religious rituals and an enormous priestly bureaucracy. Their
      concern with death, and the vast energies and richness they invested in preparing for it, are
      manifestly evident, but it is also a testament to a people so passionately alive that they tried
      everything to perpetuate life into death.
            Mummiﬁcation was an attempt to preserve the body for use in the afterlife, when it
      would be revived and rehabilitated. Burial in the arid desert sands must have been the ﬁrst
      form of mummiﬁcation, but chemical methods were already developed by the Old
      Kingdom period. After death, the corpse was placed on a board and washed. The brain was
      removed by a hooked wire passed through the nose, an incision was made in the abdomen,
      and all the internal organs except the kidneys and heart were removed. A Greek of the third
      century a.d. reported that the stomach was then placed in a box and offered to the sun god,
      with the incantation, “If I have sinned in eating or drinking what was unlawful, the fault
      was not mine, but of this” (showing the box containing the stomach).
            The heart was left in, so that on the ﬁnal day it could be weighed against a feather, to
      see if its accumulated sins would tip the balance against eternal life. After the internal organs
      had been removed, the abdomen and chest cavity were washed in palm wine, and the
      viscera were placed in a container of natron (hydrated sodium carbonate) for 40 days. The
      liver, lungs, stomach, and intestines were then placed separately in four “canopic” jars, to
      be guarded over by four different deities. The body was then stuffed with sand, sawdust,
      linen, or straw and covered with dry natron crystals to desiccate it for another 40 days. Then
      it was washed once more and rubbed with wine, spices, and oils. The cheeks were some-
      times restored to life-like dimensions with rag stufﬁng, the incised abdomen was sewn up,
      and the hair and complexion were touched up with paint. The entire body was protected
      with a coating of resin, wrapped in linen bandages (up to 324 m2 of linen could be used),
      placed in a cofﬁn or tomb, and carried across to the west bank of the Nile for interment.
      At the close of ceremonies, the priest would incant: “You live again, you revive always,
      you have become young again, you are young again, and forever. . . .” It must have been a
      great comfort to the ancient Egyptians to hear these words and see the extensive care given
      the dead.
            Egyptian deities were conceived of as very human in their behavior, even to the extent
      that they could be intimidated. Egyptians recited prayers in which they ticked off the
      services rendered a god, demanding payment in the form of the prayer answered.
            For the Westerner, the physical world is a rather neutral place, where a lightning bolt
      or virus may strike one down, but on the basis of chance, without malevolence. Rocks are
      rocks, the dark is peopled only by morbid human projections, and death is inevitable, ﬁnal,
      complete. For the ancient Egyptian, however, the world teemed with unseen but animate,
      conscious forces; malignant spirits were everywhere, as were forces for good; and, with
      sufﬁcient effort, some of the inconveniences of being dead could be mitigated.
            Ancient Egyptians seem to have had a monophysitic perspective in that everything in
      the universe was thought to have been derived from one substance and to be an expression
      of that substance. The god Amun, for example, might reside in a stone statue, but also in
      a well-formed ram or a duck, or in all three at the same time. Nor were these considered just
      different representations; rather, “the image was the god for all working purposes.”56 The
      symbolic, mythical element seemed to pervade even quite practical areas, such as medicine.
      One remedy for schistosomiasis (a disease characterized by bloody urine) was to shape some
      cake dough like a penis, then wrap it in meat, recite an incantation, and feed it to a cat.57
                                                   THE ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN EGYPT        391


      In all this supernatural and symbolic content, we should not lose sight of the practical,
canny Egyptian. These were not people paralyzed by the Inﬁnite: They built houses, boats,
and beautiful buildings, and they enjoyed themselves in a world of color, play, and physical
pleasures that still seems attractive and alive, even when viewed only in fragmentary 4,000-
year-old paintings on tomb walls. When contemporary tourists see Egyptian wall paintings
they are often surprised at the riot of colors—even the great temple columns of Karnak
were brightly colored. This seems strange to many because we see beauty in the
monochrome simplicity of Egyptian stone reliefs and buildings. But it helps to understand
their art if one experiences ﬁrst-hand the qualities of Egyptian natural light, the sun rolling
up redly over the horizon, illuminating the blues and greens of river, sky, and vegetation
with a vividness possible only in the thin arid air of the Sahara, with the limestone of the
pyramids and temples absorbing and transforming the light into weights and colors and
dimensions and textures that constantly change.
      To our own, essentially Greek, minds, the Egyptians seem to have been unable to
distinguish between things and representations of things. J. Wilson argues that the
Egyptians saw no difference between supplying a dead king with real loaves of bread,
wooden models of bread, or loaves painted on the walls; it was not the actual thing that
mattered, it was the idea.58 The physical man needed physical bread, but in the spirit world,
“spiritual” bread was appropriate.59
      Similarly, Egyptian art challenges Western notions about aesthetics. For the Egyptians,
art was mainly functional and had a purpose—it was done so that people and things could
live forever. Wall frescoes, statues, and drawings were all done not just to record an image,
but “to create and maintain a perfect world in which the good life . . . could continue to
ﬂourish without opposition from the bad.”60 Therefore, decay and imperfection are seldom
shown in Egyptian art—people and objects are shown in ideal condition, since they are
meant to be part of an ideal afterlife. And given this purpose, people and objects, whether
loaves of bread, geese, gardens, or boxes, should be depicted in their most easily recogniz-
able forms and positions, and not necessarily from a single point of view or in perspective.
      The ethical basis of Egyptian society was a composite sense of order, fairness, and
justice, all expressed in the concept of maat, which is usually translated as “justice,” “truth,”
or “right-dealing.” It is interesting that English really has no single word equivalent to the
sense of maat, or to the Greek concept of “virtue,” which has a little of the same sense of
maat. For the Egyptian, maat was recognizing the order of the world and universe and the
necessity of doing the right thing, which usually meant following religious and civil laws
and customs. Justice tempered with mercy, giving to the widow and the orphan but
encouraging self-reliance and planning, doing one’s share—all these and more were part
of maat. One could demand justice and respect as a moral right, based on maat.



EGYPTIAN WRITING AND LITERATURE

One of the many mysteries of Egypt is the origin of its written language, or hieroglyphs
(“sacred carvings”) (Figure 9.11). These were ﬁrst used shortly before 3100 b.c. and con-
tinued in use until about a.d. 1100 (and are still used today by the crafty forgers in modern
Cairo’s tourist traps). Elements of the spoken ancient Egyptian are still used in the liturgy
392   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY




      FIGURE 9.11 The hieroglyphic signs in early Egyptian writing were representations of common
      objects, but they eventually acquired phonetic meaning—sound values—that allowed Egyptians to
      express their entire spoken language in writing. In later periods the signs were stylized and simpliﬁed
      to facilitate writing. The names of royalty were written in ovals—cartouches—and each ruler used
      several different names.


      of the Coptic Christian church. But hieroglyphic writing ﬁrst appeared in such a developed
      form that we cannot see the full transition from what was probably pictographic writing
      ﬁrst expressed on papyrus. Some scholars think writing was introduced from Mesopotamia,
      where it may have been in use some centuries before it appeared in Egypt, but there are
      great differences between the characters and materials used.
                                                  THE ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN EGYPT         393


     Ancient Egyptian was a mixture of signs and
symbols, some of them expressing sounds in the
spoken language, others indicating to the reader how
a written character with several possible meanings was
to be read in that speciﬁc context (Figure 9.12). It was
not used as a truly alphabetic system, but virtually
everything in the spoken language could be efﬁciently
conveyed in the written language.
     To a much greater degree than in modern English,
hieroglyphs were written in a manner that expressed
both contemporary aesthetic styles and the subject
matter. Thus, we get simple, grave characters in early
religious writings and more overblown, showy char-
acters in later military texts. The beautifully simple
hieroglyphic characters were complemented very
early on by a hieratic script (see Figure 9.11), which
was much more abstract and cursive and thus could
be written easily on papyrus with a reed pen and
ink.
     Various scholars had tried to decipher ancient
Egyptian writing in the eighteenth century and had
guessed correctly about the sound values and of some
of the characters, but they were also wrong about most
of the characters. One key to the eventual decipher-
ment of the language was the discovery of the Rosetta
Stone, which had been found by Napoleon’s soldiers
in 1799 in the northern Delta. We now know that its
text is an unimportant tribute to the Pharaoh Ptolemy
V, written at about 196 b.c., but it is signiﬁcant         FIGURE 9.12 Reading hieroglyphic writing required
                                                           recognizing symbols that convey sound values, symbols
because the same text was written in Greek as well as
                                                           that are determinatives—which clarify meanings in
in two forms of ancient Egyptian, hieroglyphic and         ambiguous contexts—and symbols that are grammatical
demotic—a cursive form of handwriting that was             markers. The inscription outlined in this ﬁgure is on the
easier to write on papyrus than the hieroglyphic script.   sarcophagus of Amenhotep II (died c. 1412 b.c.) and reads
The English scholar Thomas Young, for example,             “Illumine his face, open his eyes.”
recognized the names of Ptolemy, Cleopatra, and
Berenice—in parts of the Rosetta Stone inscriptions.
     It was Jean-François Champollion, however, to whom we are most indebted for the
decipherment of ancient Egyptian. Champollion was born in France in 1790, and by the
age of 16 he was ﬂuent in Latin, Greek, Coptic, and at least ﬁve other languages; and from
boyhood his physical features were such that eventually he was nicknamed “The Egyptian.”
To enter a Parisian school he was asked to write a paper on the subject of his choice, and
he wrote on Egypt under the Pharaohs with such obvious intelligence that he was
immediately asked to join the faculty.
     A key to Champollion’s success in deciphering Egyptian script was his exten-
sive knowledge of the many ancient Egyptian texts, and a major breakthrough was
when he
394   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


          . . . became the ﬁrst man in fourteen centuries to recognize the dual principle behind the
          Egyptian hieroglyphic script. . . . The name Ramses illustrates most clearly the dual
          principle: Ra means ‘sun’ in Coptic, and in the cartouche [the name of the king written in
          an oval] Champollion recognised the sun-disk, clearly representing the sense or idea ‘sun’,
          with the sound-value ra in Egyptian. The sign at the end of the cartouche was used to write
          the letter s in the name Ptolemy (Greek form in full Ptolemaios) on the Rosetta Stone, and
          so Champollion could read ra-?-s-s; he was then able to guess that the middle sign should
          read m, and he had the name Ramses, which he could explain from his knowledge of Coptic
          as ‘Ra-mise’ or ‘Ra is the one who gives birth to him’.61

      By extending these principles to other names and inscriptions, and by using the work of
      previous scholars, Champollion eventually became the ﬁrst person in centuries to be able
      to read an Egyptian text. He made mistakes, and later scholars greatly extended his work
      (and this work continues), but after Champollion the meaning of many ancient Egyptian
      texts could be understood.
            The ancient written Egyptian language was different from ancient Mesopotamian
      scripts in a signiﬁcant structural element. Sumerian nouns and verbs did not vary in their
      written forms depending on grammatical context, so that the word for mouth (ka), for
      example, was always the same, whether it was the subject, direct object, or some other
      grammatical element; but in ancient Egyptian the ﬁrst letter in the word for mouth, r,
      was followed by a different vowel, depending on the grammatical position of the word.62
      As H. W. F. Saggs notes, an important consequence of this is that the ancient Egyptians
      “already had an alphabet within their grasp.” Ancient Egyptians could have written all or
      most of their spoken language with just 24 signs. Saggs points out, however, that the
      Egyptians never simpliﬁed their written language to this alphabetic format—probably, as
      he says, because it would have been against the interest of the scribes who had mastered the
      difﬁcult and more cumbersome syllabic forms to use a system anyone could have mastered
      in just a few months—a reaction similar to that of print unions throughout history.63
            Since hieroglyphs give us only consonantal sound values (and not vowels), we will
      never know what ancient Egyptian really “sounded” like precisely, although no cat lover
      would have any problem with the fact that the ancient Egyptian word for cat was written
      with the sound values “MIW.”
            Egyptian literature took many forms. Dedicatory inscriptions recording the activities
      and histories of the kings and priests predominate, but there are also many poems, songs,
      ﬁnancial records, letters, medical texts, astronomical accounts, and so on. As ancient and
      strange as pharaonic culture may seem, there are many signs that these were very human
      people and would be recognizable to us in many ways.
            The theme of one love poem of the New Kingdom, for example, is the timeless lament
      of a young man prostrated by the adolescent passions that poetry celebrates in all cultures.
      He proclaims that the absence of the object of his desires (where she’s gone we don’t know)
      has so sickened him that doctors and priests are helpless. But if his girlfriend could only
      visit!

          Why, that girl’s better than any prescription,
           more to me than the Pharmacopoeia—
          My own secret Hathor Home Remedy?—
           Her slipping into my room from the road!
                                                 THE ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN EGYPT       395


       (have her examine me, then watch my energy!)
     And just let her look me full in the eye,
       every bit of my body is back in its prime.
     At the sound of her voice my heart leaps to her tune,
     And then when I kiss her, feel her length breast to thigh,
       Love’s evil spirits ﬂy clean from my system—
          God, what a girl, what a woman!
     And that bitch has been gone for a week!64


WHO WERE THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS?

Victory has a thousand fathers; defeat is an
orphan.
Chinese proverb

This chapter is mainly a review of ancient Egyptian cultural history, but the ancient
Egyptians offer an opportunity to consider some larger issues about such difﬁcult topics as
cultural “achievement” and the nature of historical interpretation. History is not only kind
to “winners,” most of history is written by them; also, most people like to be associated with
cultural “achievements”: Thus, it is not surprising that, as with the Sumerians (chapter 8),
many people have tried to claim the ancient Egyptians as their physical or intellectual
ancestors.
     Beyond this, there is the question of Egyptian contributions to Western civilization.
The traditional academic view is that the origins of Western civilization are mainly in the
classical Greek world, with some inﬂuences from Southwest Asia, but few if any from
Egypt.65 But the historian I. Bernal has argued that Western scholars have had anti-Jewish,
anti-Arab, and anti-Black African biases that resulted in their intentionally ignoring the
contributions of Egypt and Africa to Greek and Western civilization. Few scholars give
much credence to Bernal’s claims, but in this politically sensitive era they have achieved a
level of debate far beyond their rather esoteric academic subject.
     Various studies strongly suggest that ancient Egyptians were a distinctive people early
in the pharaonic period, but with much of the same variations of physical characteristics
that one sees in modern Egypt. The ancient Egyptians, of course, considered themselves
different from all other peoples and superior to them. They disparaged all other peoples,
particularly those with whom they had the most interactions, such as the “Asiatics” of
Syro-Palestine and the Nubians beyond their southern border.
     Their artistic representations of their neighbors are demeaning, and they clearly show
that the ancient Egyptians considered themselves physically different from Nubians and
other sub-Saharan Africans in facial features and skin tones, and from “Asiatics” as well.
Egyptian men were painted a darker color than women to underscore gender differences,
misleading some to conclude that most ancient Egyptians were very dark in skin tone;
but there is no evidence that they were much different in this regard from modern
Egyptians, with a wide range from the very light Mediterranean types to sub-Saharan
African tones.
           396       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                     SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

                       Many simplistic notions about the origins of cultural complexity have foundered on the
                       evidence from Egypt. Population growth, for example, may have produced fairly dense
                       concentrations of people in favorable agricultural areas, but the long-term pattern of
                       population growth was probably one of very slow increase through most of antiquity. Karl
                       Wittfogel’s notion of large-scale irrigation as a powerful impetus to empire (chapter 7) may
                       have some application to Egypt, for irrigation no doubt was important early on, and some
                       of the ﬁrst Egyptian stone engravings apparently show royalty in the process of opening
                       irrigation canals.66 But irrigation in ancient Egypt was primarily through the passive
                       blessings of the Nile ﬂood, and such irrigation works as were constructed seem to have been
                       small, local installations that did not require a lot of people or “paperwork” to run them.
                                                     Similarly, the Egyptians were fond of murals showing their
                                                     kings defeating hordes of foreigners, and people in the compet-
                                                     ing areas of pre-state Egypt may well have been given to bloody
                                                     civil wars. But the location of settlements, the lack of walled
                                                     towns and forts, and the art and literature do not support the
                                                     notion that the critical factor in Egyptian state origins was
                                                     Menes or someone else strapping on his sword, massing his
                                                     troops, and marching to the Mediterranean, leaving a uniﬁed
                                                     political state in his wake. Warfare was part of state formation
                                                     processes, but probably as a mechanism, not a primary cause.
                                                          Nor is there much solace for the orthodox Marxian
                                                     searching for the power of class conﬂict to produce states. Many
                                                     scholars can and do see Egypt as an example of the validity of
                                                     Marxian theory, but Egyptian literature and iconography seem
                                                     to exhibit more mutually supportive bonds of kinship and
                                                     religion than naked class struggle.
                                                          The pressure of nomads and others on the Egyptian
                                                     periphery seems to have been a factor occasionally, but there is
                                                     not much of a parallel here with the situation in ancient
                                                     Mesopotamia or in China, where nomad-farmer relationships
                                                     were a central theme in imperial developments.
                                                          A comparison of Mesopotamian and Egyptian settlement
                                                     patterns underscores that urbanization is just one strategy, not
                                                     an indispensable condition of cultural complexity. Whereas the
                                                     people of Mesopotamia early and dramatically aggregated into
                                                     fortiﬁed towns and cities, from which they conducted
                                                     agricultural, industrial, religious, and administrative
                                                     operations, the Egyptians did not even have a permanent
                                                     capital until late in the second millennium, when Thebes
FIGURE 9.13 This late second millennium              emerged as a center—although recent excavations reveal a
b.c. Egyptian sculpture of a noble woman has the     greater degree of urbanization than was previously thought to
vibrant, sensual quality typical of some later       have existed. The comparatively slow development of Egyptian
periods but in great contrast to archaic forms.      urbanism probably had many causes, including (1) the absence
                                                            THE ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN EGYPT                397


of any powerful foreign peoples on Egyptian borders, and thus relatively little need for large
walled defensive cities; (2) the uniformity of the environment all along the Nile, so that
there was little to be gained from large-volume, inter-regional exchange of food or craft
products; and (3) the pronounced political centralization, which inhibited development of
secular, economic differentiation.
     When the largest pyramids and other structures were built, population growth rates
were slow, there was apparently little pressure on the country’s resources, and large areas
of uninhabited but fertile land existed. If we view these pyramids as mechanisms to mobilize
and train a large work force, we must ask why such a work force would be an advantage,
since when the ﬁrst pyramids were built there were few large irrigation works and little
demand for a standing army. If we view the vast expenditures of wealth in the funerary
complexes as a means of “balancing” the economy by taking out of circulation inordinate
amounts of gold, silver, or craft items, there is some difﬁculty in explaining why this would
have been necessary in a society whose economic system and long-distance trade were
strictly controlled by the monarchy and where there were few large markets and almost no
free enterprise or capitalism of any kind.
     In conclusion, it has proven remarkably difﬁcult to prise apart the many causes and
effects that make up Egyptian cultural history, but we are beginning to understand at least
some aspects of this history. And, like other early civilizations, there is much about Egypt
that is interesting and rewarding at a level beyond that of the mechanics of its history
(Figure 9.13).



BIBLIOGRAPHY
Aldred, C. 1961. The Egyptians. New York: Praeger.
Allen, R. O., H. Hamroush, and D. J. Stanley. 1993. “Impact of the Environment on Egyptian Civilization Before
            the Pharaohs.” Analytical Chemistry 65(1):36 – 43.
Anderson, W. 1992. “Badarian Burials: Evidence of Social Inequality in Middle Egypt During the Predynastic Era.”
            Journal of the American Research Center in Egypt xxix:51–66.
Asante, M. K. 1990. Kemet, Afrocentricity, and Knowledge. Trenton, NJ: Africa World Press.
Badawy, A. 1967. “The Civic Sense of the Pharaoh and Urban Development in Ancient Egypt.” Journal of the
            American Research Center in Egypt 6:103–109.
Baer, K. 1960. Rank and Title in the Old Kingdom. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Baines, J. 1990. “Restricted Knowledge, Hierarchy, Decorum: Modern Perceptions and Ancient Institutions.”
            Journal of the American Research Center in Egypt xxvii:1–23.
Bakr, M. 1988. “The New Excavations at Ezbet el-Tell, Kufur Nigm: The First Season (1984).” In The Archaeology
            of the Nile Delta: Problems and Priorities, ed. E. C. M. van den Brink. Amsterdam: Netherlands
            Foundation for Archaeological Research in Egypt.
Bard, K. A. 1987. “The Geography of Excavated Predynastic Sites and the Rise of Complex Society.” Journal of the
            American Research Center in Egypt 24:81–93.
———. 1992. “Toward an Interpretation of the Role of Ideology in the Evolution of Complex Society in Egypt.”
            Journal of Anthropological Archaeology II:1–24.
———. 1994. From Farmers to Pharaohs. Shefﬁeld, UK: Shefﬁeld Academic Press.
Bard, K. A., and R. L. Carneiro. 1989. “Patterns of Predynastic Settlement Location, Social Evolution, and the
            Circumscription Theory.” Societes Urbaines en Egypte et au Soudan, Cahiers de Recherches de l’Institut
            de Papyrologie et d’Egyptologie de Lille 11:15–23.
Barich, K., and F. Hassan. 2000. “A Stratiﬁed Sequence from Wadi el-Obeiyd, Farafra. New Data on Subsistence
            and Chronology of the Egyptian Western Desert.” In Recent Research into the Stone Age of Northeastern
            Africa, ed. L. Kryzaniak, K. Kroeper, and M. Kobuciewicz, pp. 11–20. Studies in African Archaeology,
            Vol. 7. Poznan: Poznan Archaeological Museum.
Bernal, M. 1987. Black Athena: The Afroasiatic Roots of Classical Civilization, Vol. 1: The Fabrication of Ancient
            Greece. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
398   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      Bokonyi, S. 1985. “The Animal Remains of Maadi, Egypt: A Preliminary Report.” In Studi di Paletnologia in Onore
                   di S. M. Puglisi. Rome: Universita di Roma “La Sapienza.”
      Bonani, G., H. Haas, Z. Hawass, M. Lehner, S. Nakhla, J. Nolan, R. Wenke, and W. Wölﬂi. 2004. “Radiocarbon
                   Dates of Old and Middle Kingdom Monuments in Egypt.” Radiocarbon 43(3):1297–1320.
      Bourriau, J. 1981. Umm el-Ga’ab: Pottery from the Nile Valley Before the Arab Conquest. Cambridge: Fitzwilliam
                   Museum.
      Bradley, D. G., D. E. MacHugh, P. Cunningham, and R. T. Loftus. 1996. “Mitochondrial Diversity and the Origins
                   of African and European Cattle.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 93(10):5131–5135.
      Brewer, D. J. 1991. “Temperature in Predynastic Egypt Inferred from the Remains of the Nile Perch.” World
                   Archaeology 22(3):288–303.
      Brewer, D. J., and R. Friedman. 1989. Fish and Fishing in Ancient Egypt. Warminster: Aris & Phillips.
      Brewer, D. J., and R. J. Wenke. 1992. “Transitional Late Predynastic-Early Dynastic Occupations at Mendes:
                   A Preliminary Report.” In The Nile Delta in Transition: 4th–3rd Millennium BC, Proceedings of the
                   Seminar Held in Cairo, 21–24 October, 1990, ed. E. C. M. van den Brink. pp. 191–197. Jerusalem:
                   R. Pinkhaus.
      Brothwell, D. R., and B. A. Chiarelli, eds. 1973. Population Biology of the Ancient Egyptians. London: Academic
                   Press.
      Butzer, K. W. 1976. Early Hydraulic Civilization in Egypt. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
      ———. 1980. “Pleistocene History of the Nile Valley in Egypt and Lower Nubia.” In The Sahara and the Nile, ed.
                   M. Williams and H. Faure. Rotterdam: Balkema.
      ———. 1984. “Long-Term Nile Flood Variation and Political Discontinuities in Pharaonic Egypt.” In From
                   Hunters to Farmers, ed. J. D. Clark and S. A. Brandt. Berkeley: University of California Press.
      Caneva, I., M. Frangipane, and A. Palmieri. 1987. “Predynastic Egypt: New Data from Maadi.” The African
                   Archaeological Review 5:105–114.
      ———. 1989. “Recent Excavations at Maadi (Egypt).” In Late Prehistory of the Nile Basin, ed. L. Krzyzaniak and
                   M. Kobusiewicz. Poznan: Polish Academy of Sciences.
      Cavalli-Sforza, L., and M. Feldman. 1981. Cultural Transmission and Evolution. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
                   University Press.
      Close, A. E., ed. 1980. Loaves and Fishes: The Prehistory of Wadi Kubbaniyya. New Delhi: Pauls Press.
      ———, ed. 1987. Prehistory of Arid North Africa. Essays in Honor of Fred Wendorf. Dallas: Southern Methodist
                   University Press.
      Coutellier, V., and D. J. Stanley. 1987. “Late Quaternary Stratigraphy and Paleogeography of the Eastern Nile
                   Delta, Egypt.” Marine Geology 77:257–275.
      Cruz-Uribe, E. 1985. Saite and Persian Demotic Cattle Documents. Chico, CA: Scholars Press.
      Davis, W. 1989. The Canonical Tradition in Ancient Egyptian Art. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University
                   Press.
      ———. 1992. Masking the Blow. Berkeley: University of California Press.
      Decker, W. 1992. Sports and Games of Ancient Egypt. Trans. A. Guttmann. New Haven: Yale University Press.
      Diop, C. A. 1974. The African Origin of civilization: Myth or Reality. New York: L. Hill.
      Edwards, I. E. S. 1961. The Pyramids of Egypt. London: Parrish.
      Eiwanger, J. 1987. “Die Archaologie der spaten Vorgeschichte: Bestand und Perspektiven.” In Problems and
                   Priorities in Egyptian Archaeology, ed. J. Assmann, G. Burkard, and V. Davies. London: Routledge &
                   Kegan Paul.
      Fairservis, W. 1972. “Preliminary Report on the First Two Seasons at Hierakonpolis.” Journal of the American
                   Research Center in Egypt 9:7–27, 67–99.
      ———. 1991. “A Revised View of the Na’rmr Paletette.” Journal of the American Research Center in Egypt
                   XXVIII:1–20.
      Farooq, M. 1973. “Historical Development.” In Epidemiology and Control of Schistosomiasis (Bilharziasis), ed.
                   N. Ansari. Baltimore: University Park Press.
      Fattovich, R. 1979. “Trends in the Study of Predynastic Social Structure.” First International Congress of Egyptology,
                   Cairo, Actes (Berlin): 17–39.
      Foster, J. L., illus. and trans., and Davies, Nina M., illus. 1992. Love Songs of the New Kingdom (Reprint ed.). Austin:
                   University of Texas Press.
      Frank, A. G. 1993. “Bronze Age World System Cycles.” Current Anthropology 34(4):383– 430.
      Frankfort, H., J. Wilson, and T. Jacobsen. 1949. Before Philosophy. Baltimore: Penguin.
      Friedman, J., and M. J. Rowlands. 1977. The Evolution of Social Systems. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
      Gautier, A. 1984. “Archaeozoology of the Bir Kiseiba Region, Eastern Sahara.” In Cattle-Keepers of the Eastern
                   Sahara. The Neolithic of Bir Kiseiba, ed. A. E. Close. pp. 49–72. New Delhi: Pauls Press.
      ———. 1987. “Prehistoric Men and Cattle in North Africa: A Dearth of Data and a Surfeit of Models.” In
                   Prehistory of Arid North Africa, ed. A. E. Close. Dallas: Southern Methodist University.
      Ghoneim, W. 1977. “Die Okonomische Bedeutung des Rindes im Alten Agypten.” Lexikon der Agyptologie 5:259.
                                                             THE ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN EGYPT                  399


Goedicke, H. 1967. Konigliche Dokumente aus dem alten Reich. Wiesbaden: Harrasowitz.
Grimal, N. 1991. A History of Ancient Egypt. Trans. I. Shaw. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.
Haaland, R. 1987. Socio-Economic Differentiation in the Neolithic Sudan. Oxford, England: British Archaeological
             Reports International Series 350.
Haas, H., J. Devine, R. J. Wenke, M. E. Lehner, W. Wolﬂi, G. Bonani. 1987. “Radiocarbon Chronology and the
             Historical Calendar in Egypt.” In Chronologies in the Near East, ed. O. Avrenche, J. Evin, and P. Hours.
             British Archaeological Reports 379:585–606.
Haas, J. 1982. The Evolution of the Prehistoric State. New York: Columbia University Press.
Hamilton, E. 1930. The Greek Way. New York: Norton.
Harlan, J. R. 1982. “The Origins of Indigenous African Agriculture.” In The Cambridge History of Africa, Vol. 1,
             ed. J. D. Clark. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Harlan, J. R., J. M. de Wet, and A. B. Stemler, eds. 1976. Origins of African Plant Domestication. The Hague:
             Mouton.
Harris, J. E., and K. R. Weeks. 1973. X-Raying the Pharaohs. New York: Scribner’s.
Hassan, F. 1986. “Desert Environment and Origins of Agriculture in Egypt.” Norwegian Archaeological Review
             19:63–76.
———. 1988. “The Predynastic of Egypt.” Journal of World Prehistory 2(2):135 –185.
———. 1992. “Primeval Goddess to Divine King. The Mythogeneis of Power in the Early Egyptian State.” In The
             Followers of Horus: Studies Dedicated to Michael Allen Hoffman, ed. R. Friedman and B. Adams.
             Oxford: Oxbow.
———. 1993. “Town and Village in Ancient Egypt: Ecology, Society, and Urbanization.” In The Archaeology of
             Africa, ed. T. Shaw, P. Sinclair, B. Andah, and A. Okpoko. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Hassan, F. A., and S. W. Robinson. 1987. “High-Precision Radiocarbon Chronometry of Ancient Egypt and
             Comparisons with Nubia, Palestine and Mesopotamia.” Antiquity 61(231):119–135.
Helck, W. 1971. Die Beziehungen Agyptens su Vorderasien im 3. und 2. Jahrtausend v. Chr. Wiesbaden: Harrasowitz.
———. 1974. Die altagyptische Gaue. Weisbaden: Harrassowitz.
———. 1975. Wirtschaftsgeschichte des alten Agyptens im 3. und 2. Jahrtausend vor Chr. Leiden-Koln: Brill.
Herodotus. 1972. Books I and II. Trans. A. D. Godley. London: Loeb Classical Library.
Hess, R. 1993. Amarna Personal Names. ASOR Diss. Series 9. Winona Lake, Indiana: Eisenbrauns.
Hoffman, M. 1980. Egypt Before the Pharaohs: The Prehistoric Foundations of Egyptian Civilization. New York:
             Knopf.
———. 1982. The Predynastic of Hierakonpolis—An Interim Report. Egyptian Studies Association, Publication
             No. 1. Cairo: Cairo University Herbarium and the authors.
———. 1989. “A Stratiﬁed Predynastic Sequence from Hierakonpolis (Upper Egypt).” In Late Prehistory of the
             Nile Basin and the Sahara, ed. L. Krzyzaniak and M. Kobusiewicz. Poznan: Poznan Archaeological
             Museum.
Hoffman, M. A., H. A. Hamroush, and R. O. Allen. 1986. “A Model of Urban Development for the Hierakonpolis
             Region from Predynastic Through Old Kingdom Times.” Journal of the American Research Center in
             Egypt 23:175–187.
Hoffmeier, J. K. 1994. “The Structure of Joshua 1-11 and the Annals of Thutmoses III,” in Faith, Tradition and
             History. Winona Lake: Eisenbrauns.
Jacquet-Gordon, H. 1962. Les Noms des Domaines Funeraires sous l’Ancien Empire Egyptien. Cairo: Institut
             Francais d’Archeologie Orientale.
Janssen, J. J. 1978. “The Early State in Egypt.” In The Early State, ed. H. J. M. Claessen and P. Skalnik. The Hague:
             Mouton.
Janssen, R., and J. Janssen. 1989. Egyptian Household Animals. Aylesbury, England: Shire.
Jeffreys, D. G. 1985. The Survey of Memphis I. London: The Egypt Exploration Fund.
ben-Jochannan, Y. B. 1972. Cultural Genocide in the Black and African Studies Curriculum. New York: ECA
             Associates.
Joffee, A. 1991. “Early Bronze I and the Evolution of Social Complexity in the Southern Levant.” Journal of
             Mediterranean Archaeology 4(1):3–58.
Johnson, A. L., and N. C. Lovell. 1994. “Biological Differentiation at Predynastic Naqada, Egypt: An Analysis of
             Dental Morphological Traits.” American Journal of Physical Anthropology 93:427–433.
Kaiser, W. 1964. “Einige Bermerkungen zur agyptische Fruhzeit.” Zeitschrift agyptische Sprache Altertumskunde
             91:86–125.
———. 1985. “Zur Sudausdehnung der vorgeschichtlichen Deltakulturen und zur fruhen Entwicklung
             Oberagyptens.” Mitteilungen des Deutschen Archaologischen Instituts Abteilung Kairo 41:61–87.
Kanawati, N. 1977. The Egyptian Administration in the Old Kingdom: Evidence on Its Economic Decline. London:
             Warminster, Aris & Phillips.
Kaster, J., trans. and ed. 1968. Wings of the Falcon. New York: Holt.
Kees, H. 1961. Ancient Egypt: A Cultural Topography. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
400   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      Kemp, B. J. 1977. “The Early Development of Towns in Egypt.” Antiquity 51:185–200.
      ———. 1982. “Old Kingdom, Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period in Egypt.” In The Cambridge
                  History of Africa, Vol. 1, ed. J. D. Clark. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
      ———. 1993. Ancient Egypt: Anatomy of a Civilization. New York: Routledge.
      Kitchen, K. A. 1989. “The Rise and Fall of Covenant, Law, and Treaty.” TynBul 40.
      ———. 1995. “The Patriarchal Age-Myth or History?” BAR 21(2). Biblical Archaeology Review 21(2):48ff.
      Kitto, H. D. F. 1951. The Greeks. Harmondsworth: Pelican.
      Knapp, A. B. 1988. The History and Culture of Ancient Western Asia and Egypt. Chicago: Dorsey.
      Kroeper, K. 1988. “The Excavations of the Munich East-Delta Expedition in Minshat Abu Omar.” In The
                  Archaeology of the Nile Delta: Problems and Priorities, ed. E. C. M. van den Brink. Amsterdam:
                  Foundation for Archaeological Research in Egypt.
      ———. 1989. “Settlement in the Nile Delta to the End of the Old Kingdom.” Doctoral dissertation. Warsaw:
                  Uniwersytet Warszawski Wydzial Historcyczny.
      ———. 1990. “Tell Ibrahim Awad North-eastern Delta.” Bulletin de Liaison 14:6–8.
      Kroeper, K., and D. Wildung. 1985. Minshat Abu Omar. Munich: Staatliche Agyptischer Kunst.
      Kromer, K. 1978. “Siedlungsfunde aus dem fruhen Alten Reich in Giseh.” Denkschriften, Oesterreichische Akademie
                  der Wissenschaften, Philosophisch-historische Klasse 136:1–130.
      Krzyzaniak, L. 1977. Early Farming Cultures on the Lower Nile: The Predynastic Period in Egypt. Warsaw: Polish
                  Academy of Sciences.
      ———. 1988. “Research on the Location of the Predynastic Settlement at Minshat Abu Omar.” Paper presented
                  at the Fifth International Congress of Egyptology, Cairo.
      Krzyzaniak, L., and M. Kobusiewicz, eds. 1989. Late Prehistory of the Nile Basin and Sahara. Poznan: Poznan
                  Archaeological Museum.
      Lehner, M. 1983. “Some Observations on the Layout of the Khufu and Khafre Pyramids.” Journal of the American
                  Research Center in Egypt 20:7–29.
      ———. 1985. The Pyramid Tomb of Hetep-heres and the Satellite Pyramid of Khufu. Mainz am Rhein: Philipp von
                  Zabern.
      Leprohon, R. Personal communication.
      Lovell, N. 1990. “Biosocial Consequences of the Development of Complex Societies in the Nile Valley and Delta.”
                  Proposal to the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada. Manuscript on ﬁle with
                  the author, Seattle, WA.
      Lubell, D., P. Sheppard, and M. Jackes. 1984. “Continuity in the Epipaleolithic of Northern Africa with Emphasis
                  on the Maghreb.” Advances in World Archaeology 3:143–168.
      Maisels, C. K. 1990. The Emergence of Civilization. London: Routledge Routledge & Kegan Paul.
      Marshall, F., and E. Hildebrand. 2002. “Cattle Before Crops: The Beginnings of Food Production in Africa.”
                  Journal of World Prehistory 16(2):99–143.
      McDonald, M. M. A. 1991. “Technological Organization and Sedentism in the Epipaleolithic of Dakhleh Oasis,
                  Egypt.” African Archaeological Review 9:81–109.
      Midant-Reynes, B. 2003. Aux origines de l’Égypte: du Néolithique à la emergence de l’État. Fayard.
      Millet, N. B. 1990. “The Narmer Macehead and Related Objects.” Journal of the American Research Center in Egypt
                  27:53–59.
      Mills, A. 1984. “Research in the Dakhleh Oasis.” In Origin and Early Development of Food-Producing Cultures in
                  North-Eastern Africa, ed. L. Krzyzaniak and M. Kobusiewicz. Poznan: Poznan Archaeological Museum.
      Moens, M., and W. Wetterstrom. 1989. “The Agricultural Economy of an Old Kingdom Town in Egypt’s West
                  Delta: Insights from the Plant Remains.” Journal of Near Eastern Studies 3:159–173.
      Morenz, S. 1973. Egyptian Religion. Trans. A. E. Keep. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
      O’Connor, D. 1982. “New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period, 1552– 664 b.c.” In Ancient Egypt. A Social
                  History, ed. B. G. Trigger, B. J. Kemp, D. O’Connor, and A. B. Lloyd. Cambridge, England: Cambridge
                  University Press.
      ———. 1987. “The Old Kingdom Town at Buhen.” Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American
                  Research Center in Egypt.
      ———. 1989. “New Funerary Enclosures (talbezirke) of the Early Dynastic Period at Abydos.” Journal of the
                  American Research Center in Egypt 26:51–86.
      ———. 1991. “Boat Graves and Pyramid Origins: New Discoveries at Abydos, Egypt.” Expedition 33(3):5–17.
      O’Connor, D., and D. Silverman, eds. 1994. Ancient Egyptian Kingship. New York: E. J. Brill.
      Oren, E. D. 1989. “Early Bronze Age Settlement in Northern Sinai: A Model for Egypto-Canaanite Inter-
                  connections.” In Proceedings of The Colloque d’Emmaus, British Archaeological Reports (527I):389–
                  405.
      Patterson, T. C., and C. W. Gailey, eds. 1987. Power Relations and State Formation. Washington, DC: American
                  Anthropological Association.
      Paynter, R. 1989. “The Archaeology of Equality and Inequality.” Annual Review of Anthropology 18:369–399.
                                                              THE ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN EGYPT                  401


Petrie, W. M. F. 1900. “The Royal Tombs of the First Dynasty, Part 1.” Egypt Exploration Fund Memoir 18. London.
Porten, B., and A. Yardeni. 1993. Textbook of Aramaic Documents from Ancient Egypt. 2 Vols. Jerusalem: The
            Hebrew University; Winona Lake: Eisenbrauns.
Posener-Krieger, P. 1976. Les Archives du Temple Funeraire de Neferirkare-kaki. 2 Vols. Cairo: Institut Francais
            d’Archeologie Orientale du Caire.
Quirke, S. 1990. The Administration of Egypt in the Late Middle Kingdom: The Hieratic Documents. New
            Malden: Sia.
———. 1992. Ancient Egyptian Religion. London: British Museum Press.
Quirke, S., and J. Spencer, eds. 1992. The British Museum Book of Ancient Egypt. New York: Thames and Hudson.
Redding, R. W. 1992. “Egyptian Old Kingdom Patterns of Animal Use and the Value of Faunal Data in Modeling
            Socioeconomic Systems.” Paleorient 18(2):99–107.
Redford, D. B. 1986. “Egypt and Western Asia in the Old Kingdom.” Journal of the American Research Center in
            Egypt 23:125–143.
———. 1989. “Prolegomena to Archaeological Investigations of Mendes.” Manuscript on ﬁle with Wenke,
            Seattle, WA.
———. 1992. Egypt, Canaan, and Israel in Ancient Times. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Reeves, C. 1992. Egyptian Medicine. Buckinghamshire, England: Shire.
Reeves, N. 1990. The Complete Tutankhamun. New York: Thames and Hudson.
Reeves, N., and J. H. Taylor. 1992. Howard Carter Before Tutankhamun. London: British Museum Press.
Rice, M. 1990. Egypt’s Making: The Origins of Ancient Egypt. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Rindos, D. 1984. The Origins of Agriculture. New York: Academic Press.
Rizkana, I., and J. Seeher. 1984. “New Light on the Relation of Maadi to the Upper Egyptian Cultural Sequence.”
            Mitteilungen des Deutchen Archaologischen Instituts Abteilung Kairo 40:237–252.
Saggs, H. W. 1991. Civilization Before Greece and Rome. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Seidlmayer, S. 1987. “Wirtschaftliche und gesellschaftliche Entwicklung im Ubergang vom Alten zum Mittleren
            Reich: Ein Beitrag zur Archaologie der Graberfelder der Region Qau-Matmar in der Ersten
            Zwischenzeit.” In Problems and Priorities in Egyptian Archaeology, ed. J. Assman, G. Burkhard, and
            V. Davies. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Service, E. 1975. Origins of the State and Civilization. New York: Norton.
Shafer, B. E., ed. 1991. Religion in Ancient Egypt: Gods, Myths, and Personal Practice. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University
            Press.
Shaw, I. 1991. Egyptian Warfare and Weapons. Aylesbury, England: Shire.
Sjoberg, G. 1960. The Preindustrial City. New York: The Free Press.
Smith, H. S., and D. G. Jeffreys. 1986. “A Survey of Memphis, Egypt.” Antiquity LX:88–95.
Spencer, A. J. 1982. Death in Ancient Egypt. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Strudwick, N. 1985. The Administration of Egypt in the Old Kingdom: The Highest Titles and Their Holders. London:
            KPI.
Tannahill, R. 1982. Sex in History. Briarcliff Manor, NY: Scarborough Books.
Teeter, E. 1993. Personal communication.
Trigger, B. G. 1979. “Egyptology and Anthropology.” In Egyptology and the Social Sciences, ed. K. Weeks. Cairo:
            American University in Cairo Press.
———. 1982a. “The Rise of Civilization in Egypt.” In The Cambridge History of Africa, Vol. 1, ed. J. D. Clark.
            Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
———. 1982b. “Archaeological Analysis and Theories of Causality.” Culture 2(2):31– 42.
———. 1984. “The Mainlines of Socioeconomic Development in Dynastic Egypt to the End of the Old Kingdom.”
            In Origin and Early Development of Food-Producing Cultures in North-Eastern Africa, ed. L. Krzyzaniak
            and M. Kobusiewicz. Poznan: Poznan Archaeological Museum.
———. 1985. “The Evolution of Pre-industrial Cities: A Multilinear Perspective.” Melanges offerts Jean Vercoutter.
            Paris: Editions Recherce sur les Civilisations.
———. 1990. “Monumental Architecture: A Thermodynamic Explanation of Symbolic Behavior.” World
            Archaeology 22:119–131.
Uphill, E. P. 1988. Egyptian Towns and Cities. Aylesbury, England: Shire.
Van den Brink, E., ed. 1988. The Archaeology of the Nile Delta: Problems and Priorities. Amsterdam: Amsterdam
            Foundation for Archaeological Research in Egypt.
Vinogradov, I. V. 1982. “The Predynastic Period and the Early and the Old Kingdoms in Egypt.” In Early Antiquity,
            ed. I. M. Diakonoff. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Von der Way, T. 1987. “Tell el-Fara’in-Buto, 2 Bericht mit einem Beitrag von Klaus Schmidt zu den lithischen
            Kleinfunden.” Mitteilungen des Deutschen Archaologischen Instituts Abteilung Kairo 3:241–250.
———. 1988. “Investigations Concerning the Early Periods in the Northern Delta of Egypt.” In The Archaeology
            of the Nile Delta: Problems and Priorities, ed. E. C. M. van den Brink. Amsterdam: Netherlands
            Foundation for Archaeological Research in Egypt.
402   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      ———. 1992. “Indications of Architecture with Niches at Buto.” In The Followers of Horus: Studies Dedicated to
                  Michael Allen Hoffman, ed. R. Friedman and B. Adams. Oxford: Oxbow.
      Waldrop, M. M. 1992. Complexity. New York: Touchstone.
      Wasylikowa, K., J. Mitka, F. Wendorf, and R. Schild. 1997. “Exploitation of Wild Plants by the Early Neolithic
                  Hunter-Gatherers of the Western Desert, Egypt: Nabta Playa as a Case-Study.” Antiquity 71:932–941.
      Watson, R. A. 1990. “Ozymandias, King of Kings: Postprocessual Radical Archaeology as Critique.” American
                  Antiquity 55(4):673–489.
      Wegner, J. 2000. “A Hundred Years at South Abydos: Reconstructing the Temple of Pharoah Senwosret III.”
                  Expedition 42(2):9–18.
      Wendorf, F., R. Said, and R. Schild. 1980. Prehistory of the Eastern Sahara. New York: Academic Press.
      Wendorf, F., R. Schild, and Associates. 2002. Holocene Settlement of the Egyptian Sahara, Vol. 1: The Archaeology
                  of Nabta Playa. New Youk: Kluwer Academic/Plenum.
      Wendorf, F., R. Schild, and A. Close. 1984. Cattle-Keepers of the Eastern Sahara. The Neolithic of Bir Kiseiba. New
                  Delhi: Pauls Press.
      ———. 1989. The Prehistory of Wadi Kubbaniya, Vols. 2 and 3. Dallas: Southern Methodist University Press.
      Wenke, R. J. 1981. “Explaining the Evolution of Cultural Complexity: A Review.” In Advances in Archaeological
                  Method and Theory, ed. M. B. Schiffer. New York: Academic Press.
      ———. 1986. “Old Kingdom Community Organization in the Western Egyptian Delta.” Norwegian
                  Archaeological Review 19(1):15–33.
      ———. 1989. “Egypt: Origins of Complex Societies.” Annual Review of Anthropology 18:129–155.
      ———. 1991. “The Evolution of Early Egyptian Civilization: Issues and Evidence.” Journal of World Prehistory
                  5(3):279–329.
      Wenke, R. J., and D. J. Brewer. 1996. “The Archaic—Old Kingdom Delta: The Evidence from Mendes and Kom
                  el-Hisn.” In House and Palace in Egypt, ed. M. Bietak. Vienna: Austrian Archaeological Institute.
      Wenke, R., J. Long, and P. Buck. 1988. “Epipaleolithic and Neolithic Settlement in the Fayyum Oasis of Egypt.”
                  Journal of Field Archaeology 15(1):29–51.
      Wenke, R. J., R. Redding, P. Buck, H. A. Hamroush, M. Kobusiewicz, and K. Kroeper. 1988. “Kom el-Hisn:
                  Excavations of an Old Kingdom West Delta Community.” Journal of the American Research Center in
                  Egypt xxv:5–34.
      White, L. 1949. The Science of Culture. New York: Grove Press.
      Wilson, H. n.d. Egyptian Food and Drink. Princes Risborough, England.
      Wilson, J. A. 1946. “Egypt: The Nature of the Universe.” In Before Philosophy, ed. H. A. Frankfort et al. Baltimore:
                  Penguin.
      ———. 1951. The Culture of Ancient Egypt. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
      ———. 1960. “Civilizations Without Cities.” In City Invincible, ed. C. H. Kraeling and R. McC. Adams. Chicago:
                  University of Chicago Press.
      Wittfogel, K. A. 1957. Oriental Despotism: A Comparative Study of Total Power. New Haven: Yale University Press.
      Wright, H. T. 1986. “The Evolution of Civilizations.” In American Archaeology, Past and Future, ed. D. J. Meltzer,
                  D. D. Fowler, and J. A. Sabloff. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
      Yoffee, N. 1979. “The Decline and Rise of Mesopotamian Civilization: An Ethnoarchaeological Perspective on the
                  Evolution of Social Complexity.” American Antiquity 44:5–35.
      Yoffee, N., and G. Cowgill, eds. 1988. The Collapse of Ancient States and Empires. Tucson: University of Arizona
                  Press.
      Younger, K. L. 1990. Ancient Conquest Accounts: A Study in Ancient Near Eastern and Biblical History Writing.
                  JSOT Supp. 98. JSOT Press: Shefﬁeld, England.



      NOTES
       1. The ﬁlm Mountains of the Moon is an entertaining story of the search for the origins of the Nile.
       2. Lates niloticus.
       3. Brewer and Friedman, Fish and Fishing in Ancient Egypt, p. 74.
       4. Butzer, “Long-Term Nile Flood Variation.”
       5. Numbers 11:4 –6.
       6. The archaeological argument for domestication of cattle was ecological. In the early Holocene, cattle bones
          are found at seasonal lake sites far out into the hyper-arid Sahara Desert. These sites are present because of
          wetter periods during the early Holocene that permitted human exploitation of areas away from the Nile
          Valley. The aridity of the desert, except for the seasonal lake areas, is thought to be a barrier to wild cattle
          being part of the local fauna; wild cattle are present, however, in the well-watered Nile Valley. Thus, the pre-
          sence of cattle at these early Holocene desert sites is thought to be the result of people bringing these animals
                                                               THE ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN EGYPT                   403


    to these locales (for example, see Wendorf et al., Holocene Settlement of the Eastern Sahara, Vol. 1: The
    Archaeology of Nabta Playa). Recently, studies of cattle DNA indicate that the archaeological interpretations
    of local domestication of cattle are likely correct (see Bradley et al., “Mitochondrial Diversity and the Origins
    of African and European Cattle”), and other scholars are increasingly accepting the local domestication of
    cattle in Africa (for example, Marshall and Hildebrand, “Cattle Before Crops: the Beginnings of Food
    Production in Africa”).
 7. Wendorf et al., Cattle-Keepers of the Eastern Sahara. The Neolithic of Bir Kiseiba; Wendorf et al., The Prehistory
    of Wadi Kubbaniya, Vols. 2 and 3; Close, Prehistory of Arid North Africa: Essays in Honor of Fred Wendorf;
    Lubell et al., “Continuity in the Epipaleolithic of Northern Africa with Emphasis on the Maghreb.”
 8. Aristida, Eragrostis, Panicum, and Echinocloa.
 9. Wendorf, Schild, and Close, Cattle-Keepers of the Eastern Sahara: The Neolithic of Bir Kiseiba, p. 428.
10. Ibid., p. 425.
11. Wasylikowa et al., “Exploitation of Wild Plants by the Early Neolithic Hunter-Gatherers of the Western
    Desert, Egypt: Nabta Playa as a Case-Study.”
12. Barich and Hassan, “A Stratiﬁed Sequence from Wadi el-Obeiyd, Farafra. New Data on Subsistence and
    Chronology of the Egyptian Western Desert,” cited in Midant-Reyes, Aux origines de l’Égypte: du Néolithique
    à l’émergence de l’État.
13. Hassan, “Desert Environment and Origins of Agriculture in Egypt”; Hassan, “The Predynastic of Egypt.”
14. Reviewed in Wenke et al., “Epipaleolithic and Neolithic Settlement in the Fayyum Oasis of Egypt.”
15. Although it should be pointed out that early Neolithic farmers in the Levant also incorporated many wild
    plant foods and wild animals in their diet (chapter 8). This combination of wild and domesticated subsistence
    economies merely reﬂects the lengthy transition from reliance mainly on wild foods to reliance mainly on
    domesticated foods. The Fayyum case in Egypt may thus reﬂect this type of transition rather than a resistance
    to the spread of agricultural lifeways.
16. Hassan, “The Predynastic of Egypt.” Also see Bard, From Farmers to Pharaohs.
17. Hoffman, Egypt Before the Pharaohs; Hoffman, The Predynastic of Hierakonpolis—An Interim Report; Hoffman
    et al., “A Model of Urban Development for the Hierakonpolis Region from Predynastic Through Old
    Kingdom Times.”
18. Reviewed in Wenke, “The Evolution of Early Egyptian Civilization: Issues and Evidence.”
19. von der Way, “Investigations Concerning the Early Periods in the Northern Delta of Egypt”; van den Brink,
    ed., The Archaeology of the Nile Delta: Problems and Priorities.
20. See van den Brink, ed., The Archaeology of the Nile Delta: Problems and Priorities; Wenke, “The Evolution of
    Early Egyptian Civilization: Issues and Evidence.”
21. Hassan, “The Predynastic of Egypt.”
22. Service, Origins of the State and Civilization, p. 228.
23. Butzer, Early Hydraulic Civilization in Egypt.
24. Trigger, “The Rise of Civilization in Egypt.”
25. Wenke et al., “Kom el-Hisn: Excavations of an Old Kingdom West Delta Community.”
26. Badawy, “The Civic Sense of the Pharaoh and Urban Development in Ancient Egypt,” p. 105.
27. Lehner, “Some Observations on the Layout of the Khufu and Khafre Pyramids.”
28. See Emily Dickinson’s “There’s a certain slant of light . . .” for a lovely meditation on this light and, of course,
    death.
29. Edwards, The Pyramids of Egypt.
30. O’Connor, “Boat Graves and Pyramid Origins: New Discoveries at Abydos, Egypt.”
31. Ibid., p. 14.
32. Lehner, “Some Observations on the Layout of the Khufu and Khafre Pyramids.”
33. Grimal, A History of Ancient Egypt, pp. 264–265.
34. Wilson, The Culture of Ancient Egypt, p. 79. See also Kemp, “Old Kingdom, Middle Kingdom and Second
    Intermediate Period c. 2686–1552 b.c.”; Trigger, “Egyptology and Anthropology,” pp. 32–50.
35. See O’Connor and Silverman, eds., Ancient Egyptian Kingship.
36. Ibid.; R. Leprohon, personal communication.
37. Kemp, “Old Kingdom, Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period c. 2686–1552 b.c.,” p. 108.
38. Trigger, “The Mainlines of Socioeconomic Development in Dynamic Egypt to the End of the Old Kingdom,”
    p. 107. See also Kanawati, The Egyptian Administration in the Old Kingdom. Evidence on Its Economic Decline,
    pp. 69–77; Goedicke, Konigliche Dokumente aus dem Alten Reich.
39. Butzer, “Pleistocene History of the Nile Valley in Egypt and Lower Nubia,” p. 278; Kemp, “Old Kingdom,
    Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period c. 2686–1552 b.c.,” p. 113.
40. Butzer, Early Hydraulic Civilization in Egypt, pp. 26–27.
41. Yoffee, “The Decline and Rise of Mesopotamian Civilization: An Ethnoarchaeological Perspective on the
    Evolution of Social Complexity”; Yoffee and Cowgill, The Collapse of Ancient States and Empires.
42. Strudwick, The Administration of Egypt in the Old Kingdom: The Highest Titles and Their Holders.
404   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      43. Ibid.
      44. Aldred, The Egyptians, p. 102.
      45. Kemp, “Old Kingdom, Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period c. 2686–1552 b.c.”
      46. Quirke and Spencer, The British Museum Book of Ancient Egypt, p. 40.
      47. O’Connor, “New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period, 1552–664 b.c.,” p. 190.
      48. Ibid., pp. 194–195.
      49. Ibid., p. 219.
      50. Tannahill, Sex in History, pp. 77–78.
      51. O’Connor, “New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period, 1552–664 b.c.,” p. 222.
      52. The fascination with all things Egyptian is clearly seen in the many recent stories in the newspapers that have
          focused on the “mystery” of Tutankhamun’s death at such an early age. Earlier surmises, based on pieces of
          skull bone found inside his brain case, suggested to some that Tutankhamun was murdered by a blow to the
          head. Recent CT scans, however, do not conﬁrm this; these broken pieces of skull are due to mishandling of
          the mummy when it was discovered in the early 1960s. Tutankhamun does appear to have suffered a badly
          broken leg prior to his death, and some speculation suggests that he succumbed to an infection related to the
          break.
      53. Carter’s donkey was named San Toy, and reportedly would wander through the excavation camp until she
          found Carter and then “bray with delight.” Reeves and Taylor, Howard Carter Before Tutankhamun, p. 60.
      54. O’Connor, “New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period, 1552–664 b.c.,” p. 222.
      55. This issue remains contentious. See Hess, Amarna Personal Names; Younger, Ancient Conquest Accounts: A
          Study in Ancient Near Eastern and Biblical History Writing; Kitchen, “The Rise and Fall of Covenant, Law, and
          Treaty”; Kitchen, “The Patriarchal Age-Myth or History?”; Hoffmeier, “The Structure of Joshua 1–11 and the
          Annals of Thutmoses III.”
      56. Wilson, “Egypt: The Nature of the Universe,” p. 73.
      57. Farooq, “Historical Development,” p. 2.
      58. Wilson, “Egypt: The Nature of the Universe,” p. 72.
      59. Ibid.
      60. Quirke and Spencer, The British Museum Book of Ancient Egypt, p. 150.
      61. Ibid., p. 129.
      62. Saggs, Civilization Before Greece and Rome, pp. 73–74.
      63. Ibid.
      64. Translation by John Foster, Love Songs of the New Kingdom, pp. 58, 61.
      65. See Frankfort, The Birth of Civilization in the Near East; Hamilton, The Greek Way; Kitto, The Greeks.
      66. Wittfogel, Oriental Despotism: A Comparative Study of Total Power; Hoffman, Egypt Before the Pharaohs: The
          Prehistoric Foundations of Egyptian Civilization, p. 315.
10
The Evolution of Complex Societies
in the Indus Valley

Enough has been said to show that India
confronts Egypt and Babylonia in the third
millennium [b.c.] with a thoroughly
individual, and independent civilization of her
own, technically the peer of the rest. And plainly
it is deeply rooted in India soil.
V. Gordon Childe1




A           ncient texts bring the people of the past to life much more vividly than do their
            bricks, bones, and pots, and thus it is particularly frustrating that the written
language of the ﬁrst great civilization of South Asia, the Harappan State (c. 2600–1900 b.c.)
(Figure 10.1), continues to defy decipherment. Since the discovery of its archaeological
remains early in the twentieth century, the Harappan civilization that ﬂourished in the
Indus Valley, in what is now Pakistan and India, in the third millennium b.c., has been
unfairly considered a sort of poor relation to the great states and empires that graced the
Mesopotamian alluvial plain and the Nile Valley. Not only did the Indus Valley cultures
mature many centuries later than those in Egypt and Southwest Asia, they also neglected
to leave much in the way of the pyramids, tombs, and palaces so prized by archaeologists.
Nor was the Harappan a particularly long-lived civilization; its mature phase lasted only
about ﬁve or six centuries2 (Figure 10.2).3 Perhaps the most important factor in the relative
neglect of Harappan culture by scholars is that until its ﬁrst great cities were discovered in
the ﬁrst half of the twentieth century (many by Sir John Marshall), no one had any idea of
its existence. Scholars knew that Alexander the Great invaded the northwestern Indus
Valley in 326 b.c., but they had no idea that 2,000 years earlier a great civilization had
ﬂourished and died in this area. As Gregory Possehl noted,4 we “do not know what these
people called themselves or their cities. . . . We have no king lists, no internal chronology
. . . no historical account of commerce, production . . . no historical record of the internal
social organization.”
       On the basis of its archaeological record, however, we know that the Harappan culture
is yet another example of the appearance of a pre-industrial “state,” whose major evolu-
tionary dynamics now appear to have been primarily self-contained, with only minor

                                                405
406   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                INDUS                                       aspects that were the results of outside
                                                            inﬂuences. In fact, the Indus Valley cul-
           A.D. 500                                         tures are of great interest for the study
                                                            of the origins of cultural complexity
                  0                                         for several reasons: (1) Backed brick
                       Alexander the Great
                                                            architecture, prototypes of the Indus
           500 B.C.    Persian invasions
                                                            square stamp seal, and town planning—
              1000                                          characteristics that help deﬁne Mature
                                                            Harappan civilization—may have
              1500     Demise of Harappan State             appeared very rapidly beginning during
                                                            a transitional phase between the Early
              2000     Spread of Harappan Civilization      and Mature Harappan stages, with a
                                                            highly urbanized society developing out
              2500     Mature Harappan Civilization
                                                            of a rather simple one in perhaps as little
              3000     Early Harappan Civilization          as 100 –150 years 5 —although others
                                                            dispute this view;6 (2) they constructed
              3500     Initial Settlement of Indus Alluvium massive cities with perhaps the most
                                                            advanced sense of town planning
              4000     Neolithic–Urban Transition           and provision of city services (e.g.,
                                                            a municipal water and sewage system)
              6500
                                                            in the ancient world until the advent of
              7000     Early Indo-Iranian Agriculture
                                                            the Romans; (3) their area of cultural
                                                            and political inﬂuence and control
              7500                                          extended over almost 1.3 million km2—
                                                            considerably more territory than any
                                                            other Old World civilization of this
                                                            period; (4) Harappan culture over this
                                                            large area appears very homogenous,
                                                            compared to Mesopotamia; and (5)
      although there were undoubtedly elite rulers, and other social classes, Harappan civilization
      has left us very little in the way of archaeological materials that point to unequal
      distribution of wealth and resources—lacking are sumptuous burials and accompanying
      burial good wealth, numerous images of rulers and their exploits, and concentrations of
      palaces and large residential houses for the ruling elite within the cities.7
            It is not an uncommon archaeological irony that the Indus civilization, so interesting
      in various ways, is one of the most archaeologically inaccessible. Some critical phases of its
      archaeological record are buried beneath meters of alluvium and beneath the water table.
      Along with the pleasures of sloshing through mud against a background whine of pumps,
      the archaeologist working on early complex societies in the Indus must be prepared for the
      collapse of huge walls of debris as he or she cuts down through the alluvium to the earliest
      levels. For this and other reasons, our knowledge of Harappan civilization is in some ways
      less than that of Egypt and Mesopotamia. One effect of this has been that interpretations of
      Harappan civilization have suffered the effects of “received wisdom”: In the absence of
      adequate data, characterizations of Harappan civilizations made in the 1950s and before
      have been repeated and recycled long past the time they have been shown to be inaccurate.
      Thus, as Jim Shaffer notes, Stuart Piggot’s characterization in 1950 of the Harappan
                                          THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN THE INDUS VALLEY                                                             407



                                                                          Saral Khola Hathial West
                                                                                                                             Manda
                                                                              Jhang

                        AFGHANISTAN                        Tarakai Qila Islam Chowki
                                                                              Mianwall          Riv
                                                                                                    er
                                                                 Lewan                       ab
                                                                                           n
                                                               Hathala              Jho
                                                                                      Ch
                                                                                         e
                                                         Rehman Dheri Gumla            kint
                                                                                                     r               e
                                                                                                                  Riv
                                              Periano Ghundai                                                vi
                                                                            Laiah                       Ra                                     Ropar
                        i ver                                                                                                        Bara
                   andR                                                                             Harappa                  Lakhmirwala
                                                                                                                                               Chandigarth
               irn                                                          Vainiwal                                                           Hulas Bargaon
             Ha                 Damb Sadast                                                             ive
                                                                                                             r
                                                       Dabar Kot                                   el R             Banawali              Rakhigarhi
                                Faiz Mohammad                                                 Sud                  Sothi
                                                                                      Kudwala Kalibangan Slswal          Alamgirpur
                                                                      Lurewala                                  Mitathal    Manpur
                                     Nausharo                                   an                                                                      Ya
                                             Judeirjo-daro                il st                                                                            n
                                Pathani Dambs                           o                    Lunkaransar Lake                Ga
                                                             r       Ch                                                         ng                      mu
                                                         ive                     Ganweriwala                                       es
                                                                                                                                                             aR
                        PAKISTAN                    u sR                         Ganger Lake                                          R                                    ivo
                                         Jhukar nd                                                Didwana Lake                                               ivo              r
               Kargushki Damb                   I                                                                                                              r
                                   Mohenjo-daro
                                                      Kot Diji Ahmad Khan Dherl
                             Mehi
      Shami Damb          Nindowari      Roheljo Kund                                        Sambhar Lake                    r
                                          Pandi Wahi                                                                      ive
                                                                                                                       rR
            Miri Qalat
                       Kulii Edith
                              Shahr SehwanGhazi Shah
                                                                              INDIA                            am
                                                                                                                  o ba
                                                     Chanhu-daro                         Pushkar Lake       Ch
                                        Amri                                      i v er
    Sutkagen-dor Sotka Koh                                                     iR
                                     Bala Kot                              Lun
                                                    Gharo Bhiro
                                     Allahdino

                                                     Kot Kori                                       Ri v
                                                                                                        er
                                        Koonj Soor         Dholavira Nagwada                    rmao                     r
                                                      Desalpur                                                    iR
                                                                                                                    ive
                                                            Surkotada                         S a oa          ah
           ARABIAN SEA                                                   Kuntasi                             M
                                                                               Lothal
                                                                                                                                            iver
                                               Nageshwar                    Rangpur                                                    ada R
                                                                                                                                   Narm
                                                                    Rojdi                              Megham                  0      100         200          300
                                                                                Padri                                                                                km

                                                                                                                               0            100                   200 mi
                                                                                                        Bhagatrav
                                                                      Somnath
                                                                                                          Malvan

FIGURE 10.1 The heartland of the Harappan civilization is the Indus Valley.

civilization as rigidly stratiﬁed, centralized, and authoritarian has
been “repeated in nearly every synthesis on the culture to date,”8
despite evidence that challenges these characterizations.9


THE ECOLOGICAL SETTING

Aristobulus . . . says that when he was sent upon
a certain mission [to Pakistan and India] he
saw a country of more than a thousand cities,
together with villages, that had been deserted
because [a great river] had abandoned its
proper bed.
Strabo (c. 63 b.c.–24 a.d.)10                                                                             FIGURE 10.2 Harappan writing.
408   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      Millions of years ago, movements of the earth’s crust forced the Indian subcontinent
      against the main Eurasian land mass with such pressure that the land in between was
      squeezed upward, creating the Himalayan Mountains. Every spring, melting snow in
      these mountains sends ﬂoods down the rivers that cross the lowlands to the sea. Of these
      rivers, the Indus and its ﬂoodplain form a large segment of the area between the borders
      of present-day Pakistan and India (see Figure 10.1). During the early Holocene, the
      large ﬂoodplains of this region apparently stabilized, when the development of soil
      occurred at a faster rate than alluviation (the process of sediment deposition by ﬂowing
      water).11
            So little rain falls on this plain during the average year that reliable agriculture is
      possible only through irrigation from the river, although geological work in the Lower
      Indus Valley suggests that—like Egypt—ﬂood inundation may have been the main way that
      agricultural areas received their water.12 The Indus civilizations, thus, are—like those in all
      other “pristine” cases except Mexico—the gift of large rivers. The stabilized ﬂoodplains that
      existed during the earlier part of the Holocene likely also contributed to the success of early
      settlements located here.
            Indus Valley cultures are really the products of two rivers, the Indus and the Ghaggar-
      Hakra, which is now extinct. In ancient times these two rivers ran roughly parallel to each
      other, creating a vast alluvial plain with great potential for farming and herding. The
      Ghaggar-Hakra was the legendary Saraswati River mentioned in later Sanskrit texts—and
      it may have been the river that had supported the settlements that Aristobulus (quoted
      earlier) saw abandoned. According to the archaeologist M. Mughal,13 the Ghaggar-Hakra
      supported many communities, including two cities that were as large as the two largest
      known Indus Valley cities, Mohenjo-daro and Harappa.
            Compared to the Nile, the Indus River, and probably the Ghaggar-Hakra River as well,
      were relatively unpredictable, with great annual ﬂuctuations in their volume and course.
      Frequently, the rivers ﬂowed across the countryside in devastating ﬂoods. Centuries of this
      ﬂooding have left the Indus ﬂoodplain a maze of old river channels and great deposits of
      silt, all smoothed down by the action of wind and water. The great fertility of these soils is
      complemented by the arid, hot climate, which, like that of Egypt and Mesopotamia,
      supports several crops a year and a great diversity of plant species.
            Recent research on avulsions—natural changes—in the course of the Indus River has
      yielded important information about the placement of its ancient course(s). Louis Flam has
      identiﬁed three major courses, the earliest of which is the Jacobabad (Early Holocene),
      followed by the Sindhu Nadi (Middle Holocene), and the Kandhkot (Late Holocene).14 At
      the time of the Early and Mature Harappan stages, the Sindhu Nadi Course was the path
      of the Indus River, and it ran considerably to the west of the modern course. Flam suggests
      that the placement of Harappan sites can be understood in part by examining their distance
      from the Sindh Nadi Course—for example, Mohenjo-daro is some 25 km to the southeast
      and thus outside the area of the worst of the unpredictable annual ﬂooding of the
      ﬂoodplain. The shift of the Sindhu Nadi Course to the east toward the end of the third
      millennium b.c.—about the same time that Mohenjo-daro declined—may have subjected
      this city to annual ﬂood ravages that persuaded people to relocate elsewhere.15
            Because the Indus River is navigable over much of its length, ships could sail between
      Harappan cities with goods and, presumably, transport the bureaucrats sent by the central
      government to collect taxes and administer the provinces.
                                    THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN THE INDUS VALLEY         409


      Like those of ancient Mesopotamia, the ancient cultures and polities of the Indus
Valley must be seen as the products of a wide sphere of long-term cultural interactions of
people far beyond the river plain itself. To the west of the hot Indus plains the arid foothills
and mountains of Pakistan, Afghanistan, and Iran sharply limit the extension of agriculture,
but they also provide valuable minerals, metals, animal products, and other goods and are
the homelands of pastoral and nomadic peoples who exerted great inﬂuence on lowland
civilizations. Because the Himalayas to the north posed a formidable barrier to transport,
the diffusion of new ideas, objects, and peoples into and out of the Indus Valley was mainly
along routes through these western borderlands, or along the thin coastal strip on the
Arabian Sea. The Great Indian Desert to the east of the Indus Valley reduced contacts with
the rest of the subcontinent. As a result, the Indus Valley was, like Egypt and Peru, an area
of rich agricultural lands sharply bounded by highlands, desert, and ocean.


THE NEOLITHIC BACKGROUND TO SOUTH ASIAN
CULTURAL COMPLEXITY (C. 7000–4300 B.C.)

One of the primary archaeological discoveries of the past decade in South Asia is that the
village farming way of life, which was once thought to have been a rather recent
development in this area, actually has deep and extensive roots.16 The ancestors of the
people who built the Indus civilizations spent thousands of years as small-time farmers and
herders in the highlands above the Indus; most of the plain was perhaps only lightly
occupied during these centuries. Domesticated wheat and the remains of domesticated
sheep and goats have been found in levels dating to about 7000 b.c. in several sites in
Afghanistan and Baluchistan, and the evidence suggests that thereafter the agricultural and
pastoral ways of life spread gradually, from west to east, throughout highland areas where
rainfall and streams provided sufﬁcient water.
     The Neolithic background to Harappan civilization has been clariﬁed by recent work
at several sites, including Kili Ghul Mohammad in the Quetta Valley, Baluchistan; Ghar-
i-Mar and Aq Kupruk II in Afghanistan; and especially at Mehrgarh, on the Kachi Plain,
in Pakistan.
     Mehrgarh was ﬁrst occupied shortly after 7000 b.c. by people who lived in simple,
multi-roomed mudbrick buildings and seem to have subsisted on a blend of cereal farming
and hunting (Figure 10.3). This community is the ﬁrst known
example in the Indus area of the basic domesticated plants,
animals, agricultural technologies, and the village form of
community organization, all appearing together as a func-
tioning entity—a form of economy and society that would be
the basic building block of all the civilizations that followed
in this part of Asia. Around the world, pottery is usually found
at locales where economies were based on domesticated cereals
since pottery is so useful in making the soups, stews, and
porridges (and beer) that take maximum advantage of cereals.
But like the earliest Neolithic peoples of Southwest Asia, the
people of early Mehrgarh did not use pottery to store their         FIGURE 10.3 Possible mudbrick storage
domesticated wheat and barley. Archaeologists have found            structures from Mehrgarh, Pakistan.
410   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      ovens in these buildings, so the people of Mehrgarh may have used these cereals for making
      bread. They also hunted extensively. Most of the bones from the earliest levels of Mehrgarh
      are from gazelle, deer, antelope, wild water buffalo, wild sheep and goat, wild cattle, wild
      pig, and even elephant.
           Soon after about 5500 b.c., however, the people of Mehrgarh had begun to specialize
      mainly on sheep, goat, and cattle, which Richard Meadow, a faunal analyst, thinks is an
      indication that these animals were being kept and in the process of domestication. He notes
      that some evidence from Mehrgarh indicates that they were using domesticated hump-
      backed cattle (“zebu”), and he suggests that the keeping and herding of zebu (Bos indicus)
      appeared on the eastern margins of the Middle East as early as non-humped cattle (Box
      taurus) were kept and herded the western areas of the Middle East.17 Moreover, beginning
      at about 5500 b.c. the people of Mehrgarh began to use a crude but serviceable kind of
      pottery. They also used copper tools and imported turquoise and lapis lazuli from Iran and
      Afghanistan and marine shell from the Arabian Gulf area—and they used some of these
      exotic items in the form of beads to decorate the corpses of their deceased.
           As the farming way of life spread over South Asia, people seem to have domesticated
      other animals, such as the pig, water buffalo, and the distinctive hump-backed cattle still
      found all over this area.18 And like their neighbors in Southwest Asia, they complemented
      wheat and barley with many other crops, including peas, lentils, and other legumes, which
      people all over the world discovered could provide the vegetable proteins so often needed
      in the uncertain circumstances of primitive agriculture.
           Like other early agriculturalists around the world, the early farming peoples of
      southern Asia solved the problem of clothing by domesticating a plant for ﬁber, speciﬁcally,
      cotton. Just as linen and wool were the staple textiles in Egypt and Mesopotamia, respec-
      tively, cotton became the primary source of cloth for South Asia—as it did in Peru and
      elsewhere. Textiles are by no means the invention only of agriculturalists, however: Various
      hunter-foragers around the world wove natural plant ﬁbers into clothing. The growing
      populations of early farming cultures, however, and the need for seasonally adaptable and
      cheap clothing seems to have resulted in the domestication of a plant that could be grown
      intensively and easily converted to textiles. Cotton was probably domesticated in several
      areas of southern Asia between about 7000 and 5000 b.c., but the evidence of precisely when
      and where this occurred is unclear.
           As humble as these beginnings of South Asian civilization might seem, they clearly
      involve the same elements that we have already seen in Egypt and Mesopotamia. By about
      7000 b.c. people from all over this area, though just a few thousand years removed from
      their hunter-forager ancestors, were experimenting with various economic strategies.
      Within a few thousand years these people had achieved a reliable, productive blend of
      economic activities that particularly suited their circumstances. They all solved the same
      basic problems of living. They found that cattle, pigs, sheep, and goats were a particularly
      productive mix of large domesticated animals, that wheat and barley could form the core
      of their food-production, that ceramic containers were ideal food-processing and storage
      vessels, that textiles could be made from a diversity of plants and animals, and that
      mudbrick buildings and permanent villages made effective residences.
           All of these developments may seem natural, almost inevitable, but they were not.
      We should not imagine that these people—from North Africa to India —ﬁne-tuned their
      economies from generation to generation until they all converged on essentially the same
                                   THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN THE INDUS VALLEY        411


solutions to these problems of living. People experimented with various aspects of these
economies to solve personal needs, and some solutions proved better than others. The
process for making durable pottery, for example, may well have been independently
“invented” scores, perhaps hundreds, of times in South and West Asia and North Africa.
Textile production, too, was probably independently “invented” many times.
     One gets the sense that necessity really was the mother of invention in many of these
developments. Pottery’s uses are probably most obvious. Primitive farmers in general had
to ﬁnd a way to water their plants effectively, store the grain, boil it, and serve it, and
although animal skins, wooden bowls, and other containers can meet some of these uses,
only pottery is cheap, durable, available everywhere, and reasonably effective at meeting all
these needs. Textiles, too, offer obvious advantages over animal skins and other possible
sources for clothing, bags, ropes, nets, and so forth. To make clothing out of animal skins,
which we have reason to believe were the primary source of clothing for almost all hunter-
foragers, one must truly “cut one’s coat to ﬁt one’s cloth,” as the old maxim has it. But
cotton, linen, or wool textiles can be mass-produced in variable sizes and textures in rela-
tively cheap and reliable fashion, as opposed to the exigencies of antelope or tiger hunting.
Moreover, although people could certainly have worn clothing of leather and other forms
of animal skin in the hot river valleys of the Nile, the Indus, the Tigris-Euphrates, and
elsewhere in the area, life must have been much more comfortable in the linens, cottons,
and thin wools that these people eventually wore.



THE NEOLITHIC–URBAN TRANSITION (C. 4300–3200 B.C.)

Harappan civilization, like those of the Nile Valley and Mesopotamia, seems so much a
creation of its speciﬁc environment that it is easy to lose sight of the wider ecological and
cultural contexts in which it was set. Harappan civilization, in particular, can be seen as a
direct product of the village farming tradition that spread all over the uplands of Iran,
Afghanistan, and Pakistan after 5000 b.c.19
     At this time, many settlements in the highlands west of the Indus were probably based
on simple wheat farming supplemented by sheep- and goat-raising and some hunting and
gathering. These farmers made pottery and used a few copper tools, but the sites of some
villages are so insubstantial that they suggest a relatively mobile population and perhaps
only seasonal occupation.20 Slowly, however, these villages grew and farming became the
way of life over an ever-larger area. To the south and east, too, Neolithic cultures were
forming. Rice may well have been cultivated on the Ganges Plain by 4500 b.c.; indeed, all
over South Asia at this time people made intensive use of many cereals, although most of
these never became staples like wheat and rice.21 In a sense, it is as if all of these farming
traditions coalesced on the Indus ﬂoodplain. Boosted by the great agricultural productivity
of this area and its easy riverine transport, these village-farming adaptations were
subsequently transformed into an urban civilization.
     Like the origins of farming itself, the cultural transformation of a simple agricultural
society into a state might appear in retrospect to be an automatic and inevitable outcome
of a favorable mix of agricultural economies and particularly productive conditions
for farming, but this is not the case. The Indus Valley civilizations seem another classic
412   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      demonstration of the discontinuous nature of cultural evolution. Rather than a smooth
      building process wherein Neolithic villages added the components of civilization trait by
      trait, we see in the Indus area the same pattern evident in Mesopotamia, where initial moves
      toward complexity stalled and disappeared, while areas that were once on the periphery
      became the core developmental regions.
           As Kenoyer notes,22 early interpretations of Indus civilizations were that these people
      derived from a single ethnic group, but the evidence suggests that the Indus civilizations
      —like those of Mesopotamia—were built of mosaics of ethnic groups, languages, and
      adaptations.
           Harappan civilization was much like Mesopotamia in its pattern of core-periphery
      relationships, and very much unlike Egypt, for example. Egypt was sheltered by poor
      harbors on the north, steep rapids in the south, and large and largely unpopulated deserts
      on the east and west; thus, the idea of a “core” and a “periphery” is not really applicable,
      except in the sense of the differences between the central government and provincial
      authorities and towns. In Mesopotamia, in contrast, hundreds of distinctive cultures and
      economies ﬂourished in the area from Anatolia to highland Iran and the Persian Gulf,
      although states centered in Mesopotamia repeatedly dominated these other cultures.23
           Daniel Miller sees a similar pattern of core-periphery relationships between the edge
      of the highlands bordering the Indus Plain and the plain itself. He notes that by 4000 b.c.
      communities all over what is now Pakistan traded in marine shells, lapis lazuli, and other
      goods; had a degree of overall planning evident in the architecture; and produced pottery
      in regional styles that may reﬂect competitive political entities.24
           Unfortunately, the ﬁrst critical steps toward complexity, in the form of growing
      differences in the size and socioeconomic and political power of some communities, are
      difﬁcult to document with settlement pattern data25 and other evidence. 26
           Miller observes that several regions on the Indus Plain and in eastern Iran at this time
      were “moving toward a greater degree of social complexity and urbanization,”27 although
      eventually the Indus Plain became the developmental center. And although some of the
      mature Harappan civilization can be found in these developments of the ﬁfth and fourth
      millennia b.c., the cultural changes that occurred as part of the Harappan civilization after
      about 2600 b.c. seem to have an indigenous and in some ways revolutionary character.28



      EARLY HARAPPAN CULTURE (C. 3200–2500 B.C.)

      As Possehl has noted,29 the emergence of Harappan civilization seems to have involved great
      continuity over thousands of years in such things as the production and use of items for
      basic subsistence, local trade, and personal decoration (such as chert knives, clay female
      ﬁgurines, and copper rings), but also considerable discontinuity in cultural trends: These
      discontinuities appear most pronounced in such things as degree of urbanism, social
      stratiﬁcation, and occupational specialization.
           These discontinuities—relatively abrupt changes in core aspects of these societies
      between about 3200 and 2600 b.c.—have been archaeologically exposed at only a few sites
      (e.g., Amri, Nausharo, and Harappa), but there are many other sites that date to this period.
      Possehl30 lists 463 sites of this period and notes that they do not seem to vary greatly in size
                                   THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN THE INDUS VALLEY        413


(and therefore, by inference, in population). Most are about 5 hectares in area, although
there are a few much larger communities in the 22- to 30-hectare range. As we noted in
chapter 8, one of the things archaeologists look at to infer changes in the sociopolitical
nature of a society is the degree of diversity in the population size of the communities in a
particular polity. States tend to have a wide range of communities of different sizes, ranging
from large cities to many tiny villages. But communities in areas that are not politically and
economically integrated and administered tend to be about the same size.
       There may have been only two general size groups, big cities and smaller towns and
villages,31 but overall, the population in the region appears to have more than tripled
between about 3200 and 2600 b.c. In addition, more remote areas, such as the Kuli complex
in Baluchistan, were brought into the Harappan cultural sphere. Between 3000 and 2400
b.c., settlements appeared at Kot Diji, Harappa, Kalibangan, and elsewhere, perhaps
founded by people moving in from the western highlands. The few excavated settlements
of this period reveal simple mudbrick houses in small villages scattered in areas where no
extensive irrigation would have been necessary. Some villages were walled, though there
was certainly no shortage of land or pressure on other resources at this time. These various
lowland settlements prior to 2600 b.c. show some stylistic uniformity and a great deal of
economic and architectural similarity, but they appear to have been economically and
politically independent and self-sufﬁcient and reﬂect none of the rigid planning typical of
later settlements here.
      When we look at the changes in the composition of these communities during this
same period of settlement pattern changes (i.e., between 3200 b.c. and 2600 b.c.), we see
some interesting developments. As noted in chapter 7, in every one of the world’s early
civilizations there was a gradual elaboration of “public,” often monumental, architecture,
in the form of pyramids, forts, temples, plazas, warehouses, municipal waterworks, and so
on. Given this, it is not surprising that until about 2600 b.c. few of the communities found
in the Harappan area have much evident public architecture. A few possible defensive walls
at Kot Diji and a few other sites have been found, but as Possehl notes, only 3 of the 463
known pre-urban sites of this formative period have walls around the community. Nor is
there much evidence of social stratiﬁcation, as would be indicated by elaborate tombs,
expensively constructed residences, and so forth. But after 2600 b.c. the major Harappan
cities are marked by large buildings, such as “citadels” and “warehouses,” and by differences
in residential structures that probably correlate with wealth and status.
      If we look for factors in the evolution of Harappan civilization, we ﬁnd the usual
correlates of early civilizations: an ecological setting that permitted relatively high
agricultural productivity with simple technology; a riverine system that facilitated transport
and command/control mechanisms; and a highly varied mix of cultures and natural
resources concentrated in a relatively small area by natural terrain features. But the
Harappan civilization may be one of the few cases where foreign trade was a powerful
stimulus to the development of this culture and many of its forms. Harappan communities
extracted minerals, metals, animal products, and many other commodities from the
surrounding foothills and mountains and circulated these not only through local and
regional trade, but also with Mesopotamian states via the sea lanes of the Persian Gulf
(Figure 10.4). The cities of Harappa, Mohenjo-daro, and Lothal, for example, seem to be
evenly spaced and optimally placed to exploit speciﬁc resources found in the areas around
them; they may have been “central places” (see chapter 7) in a commercial network of
                414          PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                                                               Fergana
Mediterranean
                                                                       Caspian
                                                                       Sea          Namazga Depe
Sea                                                                                                        Altyn Depe
                                  Mosul
       Belrut                                                                       Tureng Tepe
                  Damascus
                              MESOPOTAMIA                                 Tehran      Tepe Hissar
 Tel Aviv                                                       Humadan
                Amman                        Baghdad
                                                                                                                                      Kabul
                                 Knalajeh
                                      Kish                 Susa                               TURAN            Herat
                                                                                                                                              Peshawar
                                                 Al Hiba                  Isfahan
                                        Uruk                                                                     Mundigak
                                               Ur                                         Shahr-i Sokhta
                                                Basra                                     Shah Dad                Kill Ghul               Gumta
                                                                                                                Mohammad
                                                                                           Kerman                     Quetta                      Harappa
                                                                           Shiraz
                                                           Ar                                         Zahidan
                                                            ab
                                                              jan           Tepe Yahya
                                                                  Gu          Bandar Abbas
                                                                    lf
                                                                                                                                         MELUHHA
     Red
                                                                                           Bampur                Kulli
                                             DILMUN
      Sea                                        Rlyadh                                                        Sutkagen-dor    Karachl

                 Mecca
                                                                                                                                          Ahmedabad
                                                                           MAGAN                       Arabian Sea                           Lothal
                                                                                    Ras al Janayz                                        Rojdi



                                                                                                           0                   500

                                                                                                                  kilometers




                                                                                                                       modern city
                                                                                                                       ancient city



FIGURE 10.4 The Indus Valley region maintained trade contacts over a wide area of Middle Asia.


                             integrated local, regional, and foreign trade.32 Mesopotamian texts suggest that states in this
                             area regularly received commodities from far to the east, as well as from Magan and
                             Meluhha, two ports whose location is not certain but which may have been in the Indus
                             Valley. Gold, silver, copper, carnelian, lapis lazuli, ivory, oils, and many other commodities
                             probably ﬂowed west from the Indus to Mesopotamian towns, most of which were located
                             far from natural sources of these exotic goods. But the Mesopotamians could reciprocate
                             with cereals, leather, wool, and other products of their proliﬁc agricultural system. The
                             details of such trading patterns are poorly preserved in the archaeological record because
                             the foodstuffs would have been consumed, leaving no traces (not even pollen), while the
                             exotics, such as gold and precious stones, were fungible wealth: They could exchange hands
                             hundreds of times and be converted to many different kinds of wealth, obscuring their
                             original point of production and entry into the initial exchange network.
                                  In the contemporary world there are great “economies of scale” and other advantages
                             to international trade that are directly economic in impact. If individual nations concen-
                             trate on what they do best economically and exchange products in an integrated network,
                                     THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN THE INDUS VALLEY            415


great advantages accrue to all—at least according to classical economic theory. Modern
Japan and Singapore have few resources, but they have concentrated on highly efﬁcient
production of goods for export. In today’s world, oil from the Persian Gulf, fruit from
Central America, metals from Africa, ﬁnancial services from the United Kingdom, and tens
of thousands of other goods and services lock most of the world’s people into inter-
dependent economies that offer at least some beneﬁts to all, despite the exploitative labor
they stimulate and the destruction of rain forests and other environments that they cause
directly.
     But trade in the ancient world was not entirely the same thing. If the only transport
available is pack animals and primitive sailing ships, there is little advantage to shipping
dates from the Indus Valley to the Tigris-Euphrates Valley. Nor does it make much sense
to move pottery from Egyptian kilns to Mohenjo-daro. The pattern of trade we infer
between Harappan and Mesopotamian civilizations included some useful functional items,
but much was in the form of exotics such as gold, whose most direct use was in reinforcing
and elaborating the social distinctions between elites and commoners. One cannot consider
these exotics to be functionally worthless on this account, however, because class-
stratiﬁcation seems to have been a basic functional element in constructing the competitive
expansionist societies that all early states were.
     Trade may have been an important stimulus to the rise of Harappan civilization, but
Harappan civilization seems to have “taken off ” at a time when there is some evidence (in
the form of burned buildings) of regional warfare.33



MATURE HARAPPAN CIVILIZATION (C. 2500–1900 B.C.)

The appearance of large cities shortly after 2600 b.c., and the associated spread of a
distinctive constellation of artifacts and architectural styles over much of the Indus Valley,
marked the emergence of Harappan civilization. This system survived only about 600 years,
but managed to integrate much of the Indus Plain in a cultural unit.
     In the Indus area the sites that date to the Mature Harappan period (after about
2600 b.c.) include three relatively huge communities (c. 80–85 hectares). These cities—
Mohenjo-daro, Harappa, and Ganwariwala—are evenly spaced, as we would expect on the
basis of locational theory of state-level settlement patterns (see chapter 7), but there are
also clusters of sites in other size categories. Whether or not these corresponded to the
traditional sense of terms like capital, regional capital, provincial center, town, village, hamlet,
and so on is unclear. More than 800 Mature Harappan sites are known, and these are spread
over an area that at 1.25 million km2 is larger than the ﬁrst Egyptian state and the total area
of Sumer, Akkad, and Assyria.34
     Miller notes that Harappan civilization is not really a strictly riverine civilization,
for Harappan settlements are found in many ecological zones, and only after the main
Harappan developments were well underway did settlements begin to cluster along the
river. Most research on Indus sites has been devoted to the largest settlements, especially
Mohenjo-daro, Harappa, Chanhu-daro, Pathiani Kot, Judeirjo-daro, Kalibangan, and Lothal.
Doubtless many smaller Harappan settlements are buried beneath silt or have been washed
away by ﬂoods.
           416       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                         The largest Harappan
                                                                                    settlement, Mohenjo-daro
                                                                                    (Figure 10.5), covers at least
                                                                                    2.5 km 2 and may have had
                                                                                    40,000 inhabitants. M. Jansen
                                                                                    has argued that Mohenjo-daro
                                                                                    was not so regularly constructed
                                                                                    as archaeologists once thought,
                                                                                    and that only the central
                                                                                    “platform mound” area (about
                                                                                    100 hectares) 35 of the city
                                                                                    was planned—although there
                                                                                    were many more hectares of
                                                                                    suburban unplanned residen-
                                                                                    tial areas around the main
                                                                                    city center. Compared to
                                                                                    the jumbled anarchy of most
                                                                                    Mesopotamian city plans,
                                                                                    however, Mohenjo-daro was
FIGURE 10.5 Some elements of the “Citadel” at Mohenjo-daro are evident in           quite orderly.36 M. A. Fentress
this photograph (the large circular Buddhist shrine in the background was built     has questioned the overall
many centuries after Mohenjo-daro was abandoned).
                                                                                    similarity of Mohenjo-daro
                                                                                    and Harappa, but here too, by
                      Mesopotamian standards, these settlements are quite similar.37 Miller, in fact, notes that
                      even tiny Harappan hamlets seemed to try to emulate the grid pattern and other designs of
                      the major Harappan metropolises.38
                           Mohenjo-daro was bisected by a north-south street some 9 m wide that was ﬂanked
                      by drainage ditches. Public toilets and sewers and bathrooms in houses were connected to
                      the main sewage lines. Most residences were made of ﬁred brick, comprising several rooms
                      arranged around an open courtyard, and the majority appear to have had private showers
                      and toilets drained by municipal sewage systems. Some houses were two stories high and
                      larger and more elaborate than others, but the overall impression is one of uniformity. In
                      fact, A. Sarcina found that almost all houses at Mohenjo-daro were of two basic patterns:
                      those having a courtyard at one corner that was ﬂanked by rooms on two sides, or those
                      with a courtyard in the center and rooms on three sides.39 Also, almost all the houses were
                      of the same approximate size and construction: 77 percent of the buildings seem to have
                      been ordinary houses, while the rest were small shops and businesses distributed
                      throughout the living areas.40 If gross differences in wealth divided the inhabitants, these
                      inequities are not reﬂected in residential architecture, at least not to the extent that they
                      were in Mesopotamia.
                           At Mohenjo-daro and some other large sites, such as Harappa, the carefully arranged
                      residential areas were ﬂanked on the west by a large raised mound with a wall around it.
                      This mound (sometimes called a citadel or Mound of the Great Bath) is about 150 m to the
                      north of the area of settlement known as the Lower Town. These residential areas appear
                      to have been adjacent to areas that were devoid of any settlement and perhaps were
                      regularly ﬂooded by a branch of the river. It has even been suggested that this ﬂooding
                                   THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN THE INDUS VALLEY        417


may have been deliberate, to create a pool of water for bathing, ﬁshing, or some other
activity.
     One of the most interesting structures on the high mound itself is the Great Bath, a
swimming-pool-like building about 12-by-7 m and 2.5 m in depth with a sunken enclosure,
constructed of baked brick and lined with bitumen. Flanking the pool are what appear to
have been dressing rooms, carefully staggered to give maximum privacy.41 The Great Bath
may have ﬁgured in some religious activities, but it contained no obvious icons or other
religious elements and may have been mainly just a public bathing facility.
     Adjacent to the bath are various mudbrick platforms and rooms, variously—and
imaginatively—interpreted as granaries, assembly halls, and garrisons, but there is little
evidence with which to infer their functions. Overall, the Mound of the Great Bath was
about 450 m long and 90 m wide at its maximum extent—representing a major investment
of labor and materials. Thus, while there is nothing at Mohenjo-daro or any other Indus
city to compare with the Egyptian pyramids or the White Temple at Uruk, the Indus city-
dwellers nonetheless diverted considerable energy and resources to building projects. The
major difference seems to have been that, in contrast to the largely ceremonial public
architecture in Mesopotamia and Egypt, the Indus Valley constructions provided some
return in the way of administrative buildings, better defenses, and more storage space.
     There is at least a possibility that Harappan civilization was “cut off ” in the midst of
its development by invasion, ﬂood, interrupted trade routes, or some other factor, and that
more “wasteful” monumental architecture might eventually have appeared in the Indus
cities had they been allowed to develop for a longer period. The absence of easily accessible
building stone may also account for the comparatively utilitarian and drab Harappan
monumental architecture—although such limitations did not hamper Mesopotamian
monumental building efforts (see chapter 8).
     The thousands of people who lived at Mohenjo-daro included many craftsmen, such
as goldsmiths, potters, weavers, brick masons, architects, and many other specialists,
and streets were lined with stores and shops. Cereals—particularly barley, but also wheat—
were the basis of the economy, supplemented by dates, melons, sesame, peas, mustard,
and other crops. Cattle, sheep, goats, pigs, and domestic fowl were the major animal foods,
and buffaloes, camels, asses, dogs, and cats were also kept. A few elephant bones have even
been found. The horse apparently was rarely used until the very end of the Harappan
period.
     Most of the larger Harappan settlements were similar to Mohenjo-daro in architecture
and economy, but the site of Lothal, although only about 250–300 m in size, shows an
impressive complexity for a relatively small settlement42 (Figure 10.6). A large tank, which
the excavator, S. R. Rao, and others have interpreted as a dock,43 may not be44—its function
is unclear. There was a factory for making beads from carnelian, crystal, jasper, and other
stones and facilities for making ornaments out of bronze, elephant tusks, and many other
commodities. Possehl sees in Lothal’s precise layout and concentrations of exotic
commodities an entrepôt, a frontier settlement of entrepreneurs who were processing raw
materials from the hinterlands and sending products on to the great Harappan cities. He
also notes that Harappan urbanites and hunter-gatherers probably not only coexisted, they
were likely continually trading products, with such things as copper knives, pottery, and
steatite beads from Harappan communities, while hunter-gatherers supplied stone, meat,
beeswax, wood, charcoal, string, rope, reeds, and so on.45
418   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                            Lothal: Mature Harappan Town

                                                                 Ancie
                                                                         nt
                                                                                    Nulla
                                                                                          h
                                                                         kiln       metal
                                                                                    working




                 Cemetery
                                                                                    Lower Town
                                                                                    Habitation
                                             Lower Town                 street                                                               N
                                                               kiln
                                                                                                                               sure
                            Bead Factory
                                                                                       drain




                                                                                                       P l a t f o r m   Brick Lined Enclo
                                            Industrial Area

                                                      street
                                                                                 Acropolis
                                             kiln


                            Site Boundary
                                            street


       River                                                           bathing platforms


                                                                                         Warehouse




       Ancient
                                                                                                     Well
                                                                                 Site Boundary
                                             Entrance


                       0                                         100

                                             meters




      FIGURE 10.6 A plan map of the settlement at Lothal, India.


           We know little about the smaller Harappan settlements. The few that have been
      examined seem to have brick walls around a district within the site, perhaps in imitation
      of the citadels at the larger cities, and the basic arts and crafts and subsistence practices also
      appear to have been patterned after those of the larger cities.
           Relatively few Harappan cemeteries have been found, but the bodies so far excavated were
      buried with far fewer evidences of social differentiation than in Mesopotamia and Egypt.46
                                    THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN THE INDUS VALLEY           419


      Harappan settlements, with their precisely administered character, would seem to be
excellent subjects for the systematic analysis of settlement patterns. Such an analysis might
help archaeologists discern the economic and political forces that dictated where people
lived, but generally, archaeologists have not competed with each other for a chance to do
systematic surveys on the intensely hot, heavily populated Indus Plain.
      Scholars have debated whether Harappan civilization was a chiefdom, state, or empire.
As is discussed at length in chapter 7, such debates are usually unresolvable because few
people agree on what these political types are, and what kinds of archaeological evidence
reﬂect them. What we do know of Indus settlement patterns suggests at least four different
size categories (see chapter 7), comparable to, for example, those of Mesopotamia in the
third millennium b.c. If we consider three or more administrative levels to be evidence of
state-level political organization, then the Harappan civilization was certainly a state.
      If we discard political typologies and concentrate on things we can measure archae-
ologically, such as the size of the area over which we ﬁnd similar artifact styles, or differences
in the sizes of communities that existed at the same time, or the existence of a script, or a
standardized system of weights and measures, and so forth, the evidence from Harappa
civilization might be best interpreted within the context of the rise of urbanism or perhaps
as a reﬂection of the power of ideology.47 In fact, the Harappan population at the begin-
ning of the second millennium b.c. probably totaled at least 200,000 people, and the tightly
organized fabric of their lives suggests perhaps an empire-like political system, but we
may never know how complex the socioeconomic and political institutions of this culture
were.


The Indus Script and Weights and Measures
The similarity of Harappan cities, towns, and villages probably reﬂects a nation in which
various settlements were in regular and diverse communication with each other. Clay and
metal models of wheeled carts and river boats are the only artifacts remaining of a
transportation system that once probably moved large quantities of ﬂint tools, pots, and
other artifacts, some mass-produced at a few locations. The considerable degree of
occupational specialization evident in these artifacts suggests intensive local trade, but there
is a strong possibility that this was a kind of administered, noncapitalistic redistribution,
rather than a free-enterprise or peasant marketing system. One possible key to the
Harappan economic system is the hundreds of Harappan stamps and seals (Figure 10.7)
that have been found; these may have been used to denote ownership or make records of
transactions. The apparently ritual scenes depicted in so many of these might argue against
this interpretation, but the question will remain unresolved as long as the Harappan script
is undeciphered.
     Much of Harappan writing is in the form of inscriptions on these stamp seals. Many
other documents could have been written on palm leaves or some other long-since decayed
medium. The estimated number of unique symbols is between 350 and 425, which means
that the writing is almost certainly not alphabetic: Alphabetic languages use one symbol for
each unique sound in the spoken language, and no known language has more than about
50 alphabetic characters. Since the Indus script contains about 400 unique characters, it is
probably made up of symbols indicating syllables in the spoken language, plus some
determinatives and other marks to aid interpretation.
420   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY




      FIGURE 10.7 Harappan seals were inscribed with many different symbols in complex
      arrangements, suggesting a form of written language, but this language has not yet been deciphered.




           Parpola48 used a computer analysis to try to ﬁnd a language that ﬁt the apparent
      structure of the Indus script, but he concluded that it is not related to any known writing
      system. One of the Indus languages may have been Dravidian, from southern India, but no
      links have been conclusively demonstrated. Various scholars have suggested that the
      ancient Indus language was part of a group that extended from the Elamite-speakers of Iran
      into northern India, and that the Indus script represents this language family—not
      Dravidian itself.
           If other early scripts are any guide, the majority of these Indus documents and those
      that presumably have been lost may have had to do with such mundane matters as Farmer
      A selling 18 cows to Farmer B and paying the appropriate taxes; others may include a ritual
      prayer or blessing on the ruler, followed by some record of events and transactions of
      ordinary daily life. Computers now hum away, trying to ﬁnd patterns of co-occurrence
      among the 400 Indus symbols, and some day we may have a clear sense of what they mean.
                                   THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN THE INDUS VALLEY        421


But the texts are so few and the characters so stylized that it will not be easy to decipher
them.
     The most common form49 of Indus writing was on intaglio seals (i.e., an engraving on
stone or some other hard material so that when clay or some soft material is impressed with
it the engraved elements appear in shallow relief ). Impressions of seals have been found on
pottery, lumps of wet clay, and other materials. The script also appears as grafﬁti, scratched
or painted on clay surfaces. Examination of these reveals that the script was often written
from right to left, and from top to bottom, but in some longer inscriptions the lines are
boustrophedonic, meaning that the lines alternated (i.e., ﬁrst line from right to left, second
line from left to right, and so on). Most inscriptions are short, containing just ﬁve or six
signs—far fewer elements than most Egyptian or Mesopotamia documents.
     Archaeologists have tried to correlate the locations where these seals were found with
some notions of their use, but they seem to be distributed throughout the communities in
which they were used. George Dales and Mark Kenoyer50 have recently suggested that the
spatial distribution of the seals may suggest that the people who used them were restricted
to certain areas, such as along main streets and access routes.
     Unlike Mesopotamian writing, there is no evidence that Harappan writing evolved out
of the gradual elaboration of a simpler system. This writing seems to have appeared rapidly
and in full form—something like the ancient written Egyptian language. This might suggest
that the idea of writing was introduced from western Asian cultures and adapted to local
styles, but there are no clear similarities between the Indus script and others. Also, as with
ancient written Egyptian, we do not know whether the “suddenness” of the appearance of
the Indus script is simply a result of archaeological biases: Early forms of these languages
may have been written on materials that did not preserve or on materials that have not been
found in sufﬁcient numbers to trace the origins of these languages.
     The writing system was complemented by a standardized system of weights and
measures. Small, precisely cut pieces of chert in both binary and decimal arrangements were
used as counterweights in balances, and several measuring sticks marked off in units of
about 33.5 cm have been found; apparently this unit was the common measurement of
length, much like the English foot, for many of the buildings are precisely constructed to
this scale.51
     The writing, seals, and weights suggest substantial interregional—perhaps international
—trade, and we have some reports of Harappan colonies as far away as Afghanistan and
Oman.52 But as Miller claims, “It can, however, by now be asserted that there is a remarkable
lack of evidence for external trade in Harappan material.”53 Harappan peoples may have
traded principally in raw materials rather than the ﬁnished goods that would allow
identiﬁcation of trade patterns, but the overall evidence of foreign trade is slight when
compared with Mesopotamia at the same period of development.
     The Harappan art and religious architecture so far discovered seem less varied,
complex, and beautiful than that of the same period in Mesopotamia, but they have a
certain affecting quality (Figure 10.8). The most popular art was in the form of terra cotta
ﬁgurines, the majority of which were standing females, heavily adorned with jewelry.
For reasons that will probably forever remain unclear, the Harappan people simply did
not produce large amounts of “art” in the form of sculpture, ﬁgurines, paintings, or even
bodily adornment—or at least few such things have been preserved into our own time (Fig-
ure 10.9).
           422       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                  THE DECLINE
                                                                                  OF HARAPPAN
                                                                                  CIVILIZATION
                                                                                  (C. 1900–1000 B.C.)

                                                                                  As we have noted, most civil-
                                                                                  izations do not die the same
                                                                                  way that biological organisms
                                                                                  do. Civilizations are transmuted
                                                                                  by time and circumstance so
                                                                                  that they change, but usually
                                                                                  complexes of their constituent
                                                                                  elements live on for millennia
                                                                                  in languages, art, and other
                                                                                  forms.
                                                                                       The Harappan civilization
                                                                                  is part of the cultural stream
                                                                                  that connects even the present-
                                                                                  day inhabitants of the Indus
FIGURE 10.8 This Harappan toy cart is one of the earliest known models of         to their long and complex
wheeled vehicles.                                                                 ancestry, but archaeologists
                                                                                  have long wondered if the
                                                                                  Indus might really be that rare
                  civilization that, rather than being transformed, was obliterated, perhaps by ﬂood, drought,
                  invasion, or some other calamity. The principal archaeological evidences relating to the
                  demise of Harappan civilization are (1) the increasing heterogeneity of pottery and other
                  artifact styles within the same area that in earlier centuries had been so uniform stylistically;
                  (2) the “degradation” of art and architecture toward the end of the Harappan period—
                  which has led some imaginative scholars to suppose that the Harappans had lost their sense
                  of central unity and purpose; and (3) the discovery of about a score of human skeletons
                  “sprawled” in the streets and buildings of Mohenjo-daro (Figure 10.10), thought by some
                  to be perhaps the aftermath of an invasion.
                        Hydrologist Robert Raikes suggests that Harappan civilization was terminated by
                  destruction of their ﬁelds and settlements as a result of ﬂoods brought on by major shifts
                  of the earth’s crust near the mouth of the Indus River.54 Raikes notes the lack of settlements
                  in the area near the mouth of the river and points out that the fossil beaches are many miles
                  inland from the present coast. This is what one would expect if the river’s route to the sea
                  were blocked by an uplift of land near the mouth, since water would have been backed up
                  into a large lake that eventually could have inundated the Harappan area. Other viable
                  geological explanations include Flam’s work on the shift in the course of the Sindhu Nadi
                  which may have placed major Harappan cities more directly in the pathway of extensive
                  and damaging annual ﬂoods.55
                        Alternatively, Possehl notes that several strains of domesticated African millet were
                  introduced to South Asia at about the time of the Harappan decline. He suggests that
                  these domesticates were better suited to areas south of the Harappan homeland and
                                THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN THE INDUS VALLEY      423


that populations might have thus shifted to those
areas.56
     B. K. Thapar57 sees the demise of Harappa in a
destructive combination of several factors, includ-
ing (1) tectonic movements that made the Indus and
other rivers in this area prone to shifting courses and
ﬂooding at destructive levels; (2) wholesale destruc-
tion of forests and overgrazing in the Himalayan
foothills that led to erosion and subsequent changes
in stream courses as these channels built up their
beds with silt; and (3) tectonic movements and
marine regressions that stranded major ports several
kilometers inland and lowered the water table in
many areas.
     A more romantic suggestion is that the
Harappan civilization was destroyed by repeated
invasions of semi-nomadic peoples coming out of
Central Asia and Iran. The Rig Veda, the oldest
surviving Vedic Sanskrit text, describes the conquest
of the dark-skinned natives of the Indus Plain by
lighter-skinned Aryan invaders, and the Harappans
have traditionally been associated with the former.
The translation of Sanskrit literature, ﬁrst accom-
plished in the sixteenth century, revealed major
similarities between Sanskrit, Greek, and European
and Central Asian language families. These sim-
ilarities were eventually traced to origins in the
Caucasus Mountains of southern Russia and
adjacent areas and associated with tall, long-headed,    FIGURE 10.9 This lovely bronze ﬁgure from Mohenjo-
ﬁerce peoples collectively referred to as Aryans or      daro is one of the few examples of Harappan art.
Indo-Europeans. Some believe that shortly after
1900 b.c., these peoples apparently invaded and inﬂuenced the cultures of India, Central
Asia, Western Asia, and Europe.
     Bronze weapons and other artifacts traditionally associated with the Indo-Europeans
have been found in the upper levels of some Harappan sites, and some scholars have
identiﬁed these with the invaders referred to in the Rig Veda. It is difﬁcult to substantiate
these invasions, and many now believe that such invasions are either at most only a minor
part of the Harappan collapse or were simply migrations spread out over many millennia
and in the absence of major armed conﬂict.58 Kennedy speciﬁcally rejects the notion that
the bodies Sir Mortimer Wheeler found at Mohenjo-daro were massacred.59
     Overall, there may have been a gradual shift of power away from the Harappan
heartland to peripheral groups in the south and east, where the evolutionary potential may
have been higher because of the emergence there of rice or millet agriculture. Political and
cultural inﬂuence may well have gravitated to those areas outside the primarily wheat-
growing regions of the Harappan sphere of inﬂuence.60 Colin Renfrew has challenged the
old notion of Indo-European invaders who sacked the Indus civilizations and suspects that
           424       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                        the people of the Indus Plain
                                                                                        were already Indo-European
                                                                                        speakers.61 Rather than a viol-
                                                                                        ent spread of Indo-European
                                                                                        storm-troopers, there may well
                                                                                        have been a spread of the Indo-
                                                                                        European languages, along
                                                                                        with elements of crops and
                                                                                        agriculture.
                                                                                             The end of Harappan
                                                                                        civilization was probably a
                                                                                        result of many factors. Con-
                                                                                        tinued pressure from peripheral
                                                                                        groups, the altering courses of
                                                                                        the Indus River and the drying
                                                                                        up of other rivers as their
                                                                                        courses and sources changed,
FIGURE 10.10 These skeletons found lying in a public area of Mohenjo-daro               droughts, ﬂoods, earthquakes
were interpreted by some as evidence of an invasion, but there is little proof of this. —all may have contributed to
                                                                                        the gradual abandonment of
                                                                                        Harappan centers.
                            After the Harappan downfall, many diverse cultures appeared throughout India and
                      Pakistan, ranging from hunters and gatherers to highly sophisticated urban-based
                      civilizations. The centers of power and inﬂuence gradually shifted from the Indus Valley to
                      the great Ganges River Valley where, after about 1100 b.c., large cities were built and state-
                      level political systems were formed. Many Harappan elements appeared in these later
                      societies, including aspects of metallurgy, architecture, pottery styles, and agriculture.


                     SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

                     Scholars dispute general interpretations of the Indus culture history. Some stress the
                     ecological, demographic, and technological bases of life on the Indus Plain,62 while others
                     emphasize sociopolitical factors.63
                           It is difﬁcult to see an obvious equation between the simple ecological circumstances
                     of life on the ancient Indus Plain and the differences that distinguish Harappan settlements
                     from those in Mesopotamia or Egypt. The planning and execution of Harappan settlements
                     bespeak a powerful centralized authority, perhaps rivaling that of ancient Egypt, but there
                     is no evidence in Harappa of the great tombs, palaces, and pyramids that accompanied
                     theocratic states in Egypt and elsewhere.64
                           Because of its brevity, lack of monumental architecture, and absence of obvious wealth
                     differential and militarism, the Harappan civilization, some have argued, was not a true
                     state, merely a chiefdom.65 But as Jacobson notes, recent discoveries cast doubt on this
                     interpretation.66 Settlement pattern studies show considerable variation in the sizes of
                     communities and rates of population growth that are consistent with changes to state-level
                     societies.67 The Harappan civilization also featured a form of writing that, even if not
                                    THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN THE INDUS VALLEY          425


developed, may have conveyed a great deal of administrative and economic information—
should we be able to decipher it someday—and recent excavations show a degree of military
fortiﬁcation and economic stratiﬁcation not previously suspected.
     Shaffer concludes that in some ways the analytical models applied to Mesopotamia and
other early states are not really applicable to Harappan culture.68 He notes, for example,
that compared to Mesopotamia, the Harappan culture did not seem to exhibit the same
degree of cyclical rise and fall of state governments, and that in the Indus Valley, a
technologically advanced, urban, literate culture was achieved without the usually
associated social organization based on hereditary elites, centralized political government
(states, empires), and warfare.69
     Kenoyer suggests that
    the Indus state was composed of several competing classes of elites who maintained
    different levels of control over the vast region of the Indus and Ghaggar-Hakra Valley.
    Instead of one social group with absolute control, the rulers or dominant members in the
    various cities would have included merchants, ritual specialists, and individuals who
    controlled resources. . . . These groups may have had different means of control, but they
    shared a common ideology and economic system. . . . This ideology would have been
    shared by occupational specialists and service communities, who appear to have been
    organized in loosely stratiﬁed groups.”70
Long-distance trade, particularly the ﬂow of goods from the Indus Valley to Mesopotamia,
has frequently been suggested as a key factor in the development—and decline—of
Harappan civilization. Harappan seals and seal impressions have been found in limited
quantities in Mesopotamia and along the Persian Gulf, and there clearly was some
commerce between these areas, perhaps by way of ships sailing along the coast and caravans
traversing the Iranian Plateau. Exactly which commodities would have been shipped from
the Indus Valley westward is unknown, although steatite and a few kinds of semi-precious
stones and other minerals would have been likely trade items. Commerce appears to have
been very one-sided, however, with little going from Southwest Asia to the Indus area, and
this has suggested to some that Harappan civilization may have been established and
maintained mainly by Mesopotamian or Iranian states. Indeed, some Mesopotamian
elements exist in the Indus cultures—carved stone boxes, dice, faience, wheeled vehicles,
shaft-hole axes, religious art motifs, and the “ram-style” sculptural motif. But taken as a
whole, long-distance trade seems to have had little importance in the evolution of cultural
complexity in the Indus Valley. The volume of product exchange was very low and mainly
in luxury items, and the movement of goods appears to have been accomplished through
intermediaries in the Iranian Plateau, rather than through deliberate and directly
administered trade between Harappans and Mesopotamians.
     As in the case of Egypt and Mesopotamia, rates of population growth in the Indus
Valley appear to have been slow, and there is no evidence of pressure on the agricultural
systems until long after the Harappan civilization had collapsed.
     So in the case of the Indus civilizations we again see the divergence in modern
archaeological interpretation. For some, the ecological, technological, and demographic
factors are primary, and interpretations are limited quite closely to aspects of
administration, class differences, trade, and other aspects of the society that can be related
directly to artifacts. But others consider such analyses to be limited, and they stress, instead,
the ideological elements that determine a society.
426   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      BIBLIOGRAPHY
      Adams, R. McC. 1979. “The Natural History of Urbanism.” In Ancient Cities of the Indus, ed. G. L. Possehl. New
                   Delhi: Vikas Publishing House.
      Agrawal, D. P. 1971. The Copper Bronze Age in India. New Delhi: Manoharlal.
      ———. 1982. The Archaeology of India. Guildford: Curzon Press.
      ———. 1984. “Metal Technology of the Harappans.” In Frontiers of the Indus Civilization, ed. B. B. Lal and
                   S. P. Gupta. New Delhi: Books and Books.
      Agrawal, D. P., and S. D. Kusumgar. 1974. Prehistoric Chronology and Radiocarbon Dating in India. New Delhi:
                   Manoharlal.
      Allchin, F. R. 1960. Piklihal Excavations. Hyderabad, India: Government of Andhra Pradesh.
      ———. 1961. Utnur Excavations. Hyderabad, India: Government of Andhra Pradesh.
      ———. 1963. Neolithic Cattle-Keepers of South India. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
      ———. 1968. “Early Domesticated Animals in India and Pakistan.” In Man, Settlement and Urbanism, ed.
                   P. J. Ucko, R. Tringham, and G. W. Dimbleby. London: Duckworth.
      ———. 1969. “Early Cultivated Plants in India and Pakistan.” In The Domestication and Explanation of Plants and
                   Animals, ed. P. J. Ucko and G. W. Dimbleby. London: Duckworth.
      ———. 1974. “India from the Late Stone Age to the Decline of Indus Civilization.” Encyclopaedia Britannica
                   9:336 –348.
      ———. 1989. “City and State Formation in Early Historic South Asia.” South Asian Studies 5:1–16.
      Allchin, B., and F. R. Allchin. 1968. The Birth of Indian Civilization. Baltimore: Penguin.
      ———. 1983. The Rise of Civilization in India and Pakistan. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
      Allchin, F. R., and D. K. Chakrabarti, eds. 1979. A Source Book of Indian Archaeology, Vol. 1. New Delhi:
                   Munshirman Maroliarlal.
      Bhan, K. K. 1989. “Late Harappan Settlements of Western India, with Speciﬁc Reference to Gujurat.” In Old
                   Problems and New Perspectives in the Archaeology of South Asia, ed. J. M. Kenoyer. Madison: Wisconsin
                   Archaeological Reports, Vol. 2.
      Bisht, R. S. 1984. “Structural Remains and Town Planning of Banawali.” In Frontiers of the Indus Civilization, ed.
                   B. B. Lal and S. P. Gupta. New Delhi: Books and Books.
      Buchanan, B. “A Dated Seal Impression Connecting Babylonia and Ancient India.” In Ancient Cities of the Indus,
                   ed. G. L. Possehl. New Delhi: Vikas Publishing House.
      Chakrabarti, D. K. 1984. “Origins of the Indus Civilization: Theories and Problems.” In Frontiers of the Indus
                   Civilization, ed. B. B. Lal and S. P. Gupta. New Delhi: Indian Archaeological Society.
      Childe, V. G. 1953. New Light on the Most Ancient East. New York: Praeger.
      ———. 1979. “The Urban Revolution.” In Ancient Cities of the Indus, ed. G. L. Possehl. New Delhi: Vikas
                   Publishing House.
      Cunningham, A. 1979. “Harappa.” In Ancient Cities of the Indus, ed. G. L. Possehl. New Delhi: Vikas Publishing
                   House.
      Dales, G. F. 1964. “The Mythical Massacre at Mohenjo Daro.” Expedition 6(3):36 – 43.
      ———. 1965. “New Investigations at Mohenjo Daro.” Archaeology 18(2):145 –150.
      ———. 1966. “The Decline of the Harappans.” Scientiﬁc American 214(5):93 –100.
      ———. 1968. “Of Dice and Men.” Journal of the American Oriental Society 88(1):14 –23.
      ———. 1979. “The Balakot Project: Summary of Four Years of Excavations in Pakistan.” In South Asian
                   Archaeology 1977, ed. M. Taddei. Naples: Instituto Universitario Orientale.
      Dales, G. F., and J. M. Kenoyer. 1990. “Excavation at Harappa—1988.” Pakistan Archaeology 24:68 –176.
      Durante, S. 1979. “Marine Shells from Balakot, Shahr-i Sokhta and Tepe Yahya: Their Signiﬁcance for Trade and
                   Technology in Ancient Indo-Iran.” In South Asian Archaeology 1977, ed. M. Taddei. Naples: Instituto
                   Universitario Orientale.
      During-Caspers, E. L. C. 1984. “Sumerian Trading Communities Residing in Harappan Society.” In Frontiers of
                   the Indus Civilization, ed. B. B. Lal and S. P. Gupta. New Delhi: Books and Books.
      Dyson, R. H. 1982. “Paradigm Changes in the Study of the Indus Civilization.” In Harappan Civilization: A
                   Contemporary Perspective, ed. G. L. Possehl. New Delhi: AIIS.
      Fairservis, W. A., Jr. 1956. Excavations in the Quetta Valley, West Pakistan. NY: Anthropological Papers of the
                   American Museum of Natural History 45(2).
      ———. 1967. “The Origin, Character and Decline of an Early Civilization.” Novitates 2302:1– 48.
      ———. 1975. The Roots of Ancient India. 2nd ed. rev. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
      ———. 1984. “Archaeology in Blauchistan and the Harappan Problem.” In Frontiers of the Indus Civilization, ed.
                   B. B. Lal and S. P. Gupta. New Delhi: Books and Books.
      Fairservis, W. A., and F. C. Southworth. 1989. “Linguistic Archaeology and the Indus Valley Culture.” In Old
                   Problems and New Perspectives in the Archaeology of South Asia, ed. J. M. Kenoyer. Madison: Wisconsin
                   Archaeological Reports, Vol. 2.
                                           THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN THE INDUS VALLEY                       427


Fentress, M. A. 1976. Resource Access, Exchange Systems and Regional Interaction in the Indus Valley: An
             Investigation of Archaeological Variability at Harappa and Mohenjodaro. Ann Arbor: University
             Microﬁlms.
———. 1979. “Indus Charms and Urns, a Look at the Religious Diversity at Harappa and Mohenjodaro.” Man
             and Environment 3:9 –104.
———. 1985. “Water Resources and Double Cropping in Harappan Food Production.” In Recent Advances in
             Indo-Paciﬁc Prehistory, ed. V. N. Misra and P. Bellwood. New Delhi: Oxford and IBH.
Flam, L. 1991. “Excavations at Ghazi Shah, Sindh, Pakistan.” In Harappan Civilization: A Contemporary
             Perspective, 2nd ed., ed. G. L. Possehl. New Delhi: Oxford and IBH.
———. 1999. “The Prehistoric Indus River System and the Indus Civilization in Sindh.” Man and Environment
             24(2):35–69.
Frankfort, H.-P., and M.-H. Pottier. 1978. “Sondage Preliminaire sur l’Establissement Protohistorique Harapeen
             et Post-Harapeen de Shortugai.” Ars Asiatique 34:29 – 86.
Gadd, C. J. 1979. “Seals of Ancient Indian Style Found at Ur.” In Ancient Cities of the Indus, ed. G. L. Possehl. New
             Delhi: Vikas Publishing House.
Gadd, C. J., and S. Smith. 1979. “The New Links Between Indian and Babylonian Civilization.” In Ancient Cities
             of the Indus, ed. G. L. Possehl. New Delhi: Vikas Publishing House.
Gupta, S. P. 1978. Archaeology of Soviet Central Asia and the Indian Borderlands, Vol. 1. New Delhi: B. R. Publishing
             Co.
Jacobson, J. 1979. “Recent Developments in South Asian Prehistory and Protohistory.” Annual Review of
             Anthropology 8:467–502.
Jansen, M. 1979. “Architectural Problems of the Harappa Culture.” In South Asian Archaeology 1977, ed.
             M. Taddei. Naples: Instituto Universitario Orientale.
———. 1981. “Settlement Patterns in the Harappa Culture.” In South Asian Archaeology 1979, ed. H. Hartel.
             Berlin: Dietrich Reimer.
———. 1987. “Mohenjo-Daro—Stadt am Indus.” In Vergessen Städt am Indus, ed. M. Jansen and G. Urban.
             Mainz am Rhein: Phillip von Zabern.
Jarrige, J. F. 1981. “Economy and Society in the Early Chalcolithic/Bronze Age of Baluchistan.” In South Asian
             Archaeology 1979. Berlin: Dietrich Reiner.
———. 1984. “Chronology of the Early Period of the Greater Indus as Seen from Mehrgarh, Pakistan.” In South
             Asian Archaeology 1981, ed. B. Allchin. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Jarrige, J. F., and M. Lechevaleier. 1979. “Excavations at Mehrgarh, Baluchistan: Their Signiﬁcance in
             the Prehistorical Context of the Indo-Pakistan Borderlands.” In South Asian Archaeology 1977, ed.
             M. Taddei. Naples: Instituto Universitario Orientale.
Jarrige, J. F., and R. H. Meadow. 1980. “The Antecedents of Civilization in the Indus Valley.” Scientiﬁc American
             243(2):122–133.
Johnson, G. A. 1973. Local Exchange and Early State Development in Southwestern Iran. Ann Arbor: Museum of
             Anthropology, Anthropological Papers, University of Michigan, No. 51.
Joshi, J. P., and M. Bala. 1981. “Manda: A Harappan Site in Jammu and Kashmir.” In Harappan Civilization: A
             Contemporary Perspective, ed. G. L. Possehl. New Delhi: Oxford and IBH.
Kelly, D. H., and B. Wells. 1995. “Recent Progress in Understanding the Indus Script.” The Review of Archaeology
             16(1):15–23.
Kennedy, K. 1982. “Skulls, Aryans and Flowing Drains: The Interface of Archaeology and Skeletal Biology in the
             Study of the Harappan Civilisation.” In Harappan Civilization, ed. G. Possehl. Warminster, England:
             Aris & Phillips.
———. 1984. “Trauma and Disease in the Ancient Harappans.” In Frontiers of the Indus Civilization, ed. B. B. Lal
             and S. P. Gupta. New Delhi: Books and Books.
Kennedy, K., and G. L. Possehl, eds. 1976. Ecological Backgrounds of South Asian Prehistory. South Asia Occasional
             Papers and Theses, No. 4. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University South Asia Program.
Kenoyer, J. M. 1991. “The Indus Valley Tradition of Pakistan and Western India.” Journal of World Prehistory
             5(4):331–385.
———. 1998. Ancient Cities of the Indus Valley Civilization. New York: Oxford University Press.
Kohl, P. L. 1979. “The ‘World Economy’ of West Asia in the Third Millennium b.c.” In South Asian Archaeology
             1977, ed. M. Taddei. Naples: Instituto Universitario Orientale.
———. 1987. “State Formation: Useful Concept or Idée Fixe?” In Power Relations and State Formation, ed. T. C.
             Patterson and C. W. Gailey. Washington, DC: American Anthropological Association.
Lamberg-Karlovsky, C. C. 1967. “Archaeology and Metallurgical Technology in Prehistoric Afghanistan, India
             and Pakistan.” American Anthropologist 69:145 –162.
———. 1975. “Third Millennium Modes of Exchange and Modes of Production.” In Ancient Civilization and
             Trade, ed. J. Sabloff and C. C. Lamberg-Karlovsky. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press and
             the School of American Research.
428   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      ———. 1979. “Trade Mechanisms in Indus-Mesopotamian Interrelations.” In Ancient Cities of the Indus, ed.
                  G. L. Possehl. New Delhi: Vikas Publishing House.
      Lambrick, H. T. 1967. “The Indus Flood Plain and the ‘Indus’ Civilization.” Geographical Journal 133(4):483 – 495.
      ———. 1979. “Stratigraphy at Mohenjo Daro.” In Ancient Cities of the Indus, ed. G. L. Possehl. New Delhi: Vikas
                  Publishing House.
      Leshnik, L. S. 1968. “The Harappan ‘Port’ at Lothal: Another View.” American Anthropologist 70:911–922.
      Loftus, R. T., D. E. MacHugh, D. G. Bradley, P. M. Sharp, and P. Cunningham. 1994. “Evidence for Two
                  Independent Domestications of Cattle.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 91: 2757–2761.
      Mackay, E. J. H. 1979. “Further Links Between Ancient Sind, Sumer and Elsewhere.” In Ancient Cities of the Indus,
                  ed. G. L. Possehl. New Delhi: Vikas Publishing House.
      Mahadevan, I. 1979. “Study of the Indus Script through Bi-lingual Parallels.” In Ancient Cities of the Indus, ed.
                  G. L. Possehl. New Delhi: Vikas Publishing House.
      Mallory, J. P. 1988. In Search of the Indo-Europeans. New York: Thames and Hudson.
      Marshall, J. 1979. “Harappa and Mohenjo Daro.” In Ancient Cities of the Indus, ed. G. L. Possehl. New Delhi: Vikas
                  Publishing House.
      Meadow, R. H. 1984. “Animal Domestication in the Middle East: A View from the Eastern Margin.” In Animals
                  and Archaeology, ed. J. Clutton-Brock and C. Grigson. Vol. 3. Oxford: British Archaeological Reports,
                  S-202.
      ———. 1993. Harappan Civilization: A Recent Perspective, 2nd ed., ed. G. Possehl. New Delhi: Oxford and IBH
                  Publishing.
      Miller, D. 1985. “Ideology and the Indus Civilization.” Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 4(1):34 –71.
      Mughal, M. R. 1970. “The Early Harappan Period in the Greater Indus Valley and Northern Baluchistan.”
                  Doctoral dissertation, University of Pennsylvania.
      ———. 1974. “New Evidence of the Early Harappan Culture from Jalilpur, Pakistan.” Archaeology 27:106 –113.
      ———. 1990. “Further Evidence of the Early Harappan Culture in the Greater Indus Valley: 1971–90.” South
                  Asian Studies 6:175 –200.
      Oppenheim, A. L. 1979. “The Seafaring Merchants of Ur.” In Ancient Cities of the Indus, ed. G. L. Possehl. New
                  Delhi: Vikas Publishing House.
      Pande, B. M. 1973. “Inscribed Copper Tablets from Mohenjo Daro: A Preliminary Analysis.” In Radiocarbon and
                  Indian Archaeology, ed. D. P. Agrawal and A. Ghosh. Bombay: Tata Institute of Fundamental Research.
      Parpola, A. 1986. “The Indus Script: A Challenging Puzzle.” World Archaeology 17(3):399 – 419.
      ———. 1994. Deciphering the Indus Script. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
      Piggott, S. 1950. Prehistoric India. London: Pelican.
      Possehl, G. L. 1974. “Variation and Change in the Indus Civilization.” Doctoral dissertation, University of
                  Chicago.
      ———. 1976. “Lothal: A Gateway Settlement of the Harappan Civilization.” In Ecological Backgrounds of South
                  Asian Prehistory, ed. A. P. Kennedy and G. L. Possehl. South Asia Occasional Papers and Theses
                  4:118–131. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University South Asia Program.
      ———. 1977. “The End of a State and the Continuity of a Tradition in Proto-Historic India.” In Realm and Region
                  in Traditional India, ed. R. Fox. Durham NC: Duke University Program in South Asian Studies.
      ———, ed. 1979. Ancient Cities of the Indus. New Delhi: Vikas Publishing House Pvt Ltd.
      ———. 1980. “African Millets in South Asian Prehistory.” Mimeographed.
      ———. 1990. “Revolution in the Urban Revolution: The Emergence of Indus Urbanism.” Annual Review of
                  Anthropology 19:261–282.
      ———. 1992. “The Harappan Civilizations in Gujarat: The Sorath and Sindhi Harappans.” The Eastern
                  Anthropologist 45(1 & 2):117–154.
      ———, ed. 1993. Harappan Civilization: A Recent Perspective, 2nd ed. New Delhi: Oxford and IBH Publishing.
      ———. 1999. “Transformation of the Indus Civilization.” Man and Environment 24(2):1–33.
      ———. 2002. The Indus Civilization: A Contemporary Perspective. Walnut Creek, CA: Altamira.
      Possehl, G. L., and M. H. Raval. 1989. Harappan Civilization and Rojdi. New Delhi: Oxford and IBH and AIIS.
      Raikes, R. L. 1964. “The End of the Ancient Cities of the Indus.” American Anthropologist 66(2):284 –299.
      ———. 1965. “The Mohenjo-Daro Floods.” Antiquity 39:196 –203.
      Raikes, R. L., and R. H. Dyson, Jr. 1961. “The Prehistoric Climate of Baluchistan and the Indus Valley.” American
                  Anthropologist 63(2):265 –281.
      Ralph, E. K., H. N. Michael, and M. Han. 1979. “Radiocarbon Dates and Reality.” In Ancient Cities of the Indus,
                  ed. G. L. Possehl. New Delhi: Vikas Publishing House.
      Ramaswamy, C. 1968. “Monsoon over the Indus Valley During the Harappan Period.” Nature
                  217(5129):628 – 629.
      Rao, S. R. 1968. “Contacts Between Lothal and Susa.” Proceedings of the Twenty-sixth International Congress of
                  Orientalists, Vol. II, pp. 35 –37.
      ———. 1973. Lothal and the Indus Civilization. Bombay: Asia House.
                                           THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN THE INDUS VALLEY                      429


———. 1979. “A ‘Persian Gulf ’ Seal from Lothal.” In Ancient Cities of the Indus, ed. G. L. Possehl. New Delhi:
             Vikas Publishing House.
Ratnagar, S. 1981. Encounters, The Westerly Trade of the Harappan Civilization. Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Renfrew, C. 1988. “Archaeology and Language.” Current Anthropology 29(3):437– 468.
Sankalia, H. 1974. The Prehistory and Protohistory of India and Pakistan. Pune, India: Deccan College.
———. 1979. “The ‘Cemetery H’ Culture.” In Ancient Cities of the Indus, ed. G. L. Possehl. New Delhi: Vikas
             Publishing House.
Sarcina, A. 1979a. “The Private House at Mohenjodaro.” In South Asian Archaeology 1977, ed. M. Taddei. Naples:
             Instituto Universitario Orientale.
———. 1979b. “A Statistical Assessment of House Patterns at Mohenjodaro.” Mesopotamia 13/14:155 –199.
Schuldenrein, J., R. P. Wright, M. R. Mughal, and M. A. Khan. 2004. “Landscapes, Soils, and Mound Histories of
             the Upper Indus Valley, Pakistan: New Insights on the Holocene Environments Near Ancient
             Harappa.” Journal of Archaeological Science 31:777–797.
Service, E. 1975. Origins of the State and Civilization. New York: Norton.
Shaffer, J. G. 1978. Prehistoric Baluchistan. Delhi: B. R. Publishers.
———. 1982. “Harappan Culture: A Reconsideration.” In Harappan Civilization, ed. G. L. Possehl. New Delhi:
             Oxford and IBH.
———. 1984. “The Indo-Aryan Invasions: Cultural Myth and Archaeological Reality.” In The People of South
             Asia, ed. J. R. Lukacs. New York: Plenum Press.
———. 1988. “One Hump or Two: The Impact of the Camel on Harappan Society.” In Orientalia Iosephi Tucci
             Memoriae Dicata, ed. G. Gnoli and L. Lanciotti. Rome: IsMEO.
———. 1991. “The Indus Valley, Baluchistan and Helmand Traditions: Neolithic Through Bronze Age.”
             In Chronologies in Old World Archaeology, 3rd ed., ed. R. Ehrich. Chicago: University of Chicago
             Press.
Singh, G. 1979. “The Indus Valley Culture.” In Ancient Cities of the Indus, ed. G. L. Possehl. New Delhi: Vikas
             Publishing House.
Thapar, B. K. 1975. “Kalibangan: A Harappan Metropolis Beyond the Indus Valley.” Expedition 17(2):19 –32.
Tosi, M. 1984. “The Notion of Craft Specialisation and Its Representation in the Archaeological Record of Early
             States in the Turanian Basin.” In Marxist Perspectives in Archaeology, ed. M. Spriggs. Cambridge:
             Cambridge University Press.
Trigger, B. 1972. “Determinants of Urban Growth in Pre-Industrial Societies.” In Man, Settlement and Urbanism,
             ed. P. J. Ucko, R. Tringham, and G. W. Dimbleby. London: Duckworth.
Van Lohnizen-de Leeuw, J. E., and J. M. M. Ubagns, eds. 1974. South Asian Archaeology. Leiden, Netherlands:
             Brill.
Vishnu-Mittre. 1977. “Discussion on Local and Introduced Crops.” In The Early History of Agriculture: A Joint
             Symposium of the Royal Society and the British Academy, organized by J. Hutchinson. London: Oxford
             University Press.
Wheatley, P. 1972. “The Concept of Urbanism.” In Man, Settlement and Urbanism, ed. P. J. Ucko, R. Tringham,
             and G. W. Dimbleby. London: Duckworth.
Wheeler, Sir M. 1979. “Harappan Chronology and the Rig Veda.” In Ancient Cities of the Indus, ed. G. L. Possehl.
             New Delhi: Vikas Publishing House.
Wheeler, R. E. M. 1950. Five Thousand Years of Pakistan. London: Royal India and Pakistan Society.
Wolpert, S. A. 1977. A New History of India. London: Oxford University Press.
Wright, H. T. 1986. “The Evolution of Civilizations.” In American Archaeology Past and Future, ed. D. J. Meltzer,
             D. D. Fowler, and J. A. Sabloff. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
Wright, H. T., and S. Pollock. 1985. “Regional Socio-economic Organization in Southern Mesopotamia: The
             Middle and Late Fifth Millennium b.c.” In La Mesopotamie: Pre- et Protohistoire, ed. J.-L. Huot. Paris:
             C.N.R.S.
Wright, R. P. 1989. “The Indus Valley and Mesopotamian Civilizations: A Comparative View of Ceramic
             Technology.” In Old Problems and New Perspectives in the Archaeology of South Asia, ed. J. M. Kenoyer.
             Madison: Wisconsin Archaeological Reports, Vol. 2.
Yule, P. 1982. Lothal. Munich: C. H. Beck.
Zide, A. R. K. 1979. “A Brief Survey of Work to Date on the Indus Script.” In Ancient Cities of the Indus, ed.
             G. L. Possehl. New Delhi: Vikas Publishing.



NOTES
 1. Childe, New Light on the Most Ancient East, p. 183; cited by Possehl, “Revolution in the Urban Revolution:
    The Emergence of Indus Urbanism,” p. 267.
430   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


       2. Viewed from the perspective of its entire sequence (including development and demise), however, Harappan
          civilization has a much lengthier history, lasting from about 3200 through 1000 b.c. (see Possehl, The Indus
          Civilization: A Contemporary Perspective, p. 29).
       3. Kenoyer’s chronological divisions (see Kenoyer, Ancient Cities of the Indus Valley Civilization, p. 24) are some-
          what different from those proposed by Possehl (see Possehl, The Indus Civilization: A Contemporary
          Perspective, p. 29). Possehl’s chronology is followed in this chapter.
       4. Possehl, “Revolution in the Urban Revolution: The Emergence of Indus Urbanism,” p. 262.
       5. Possehl, The Indus Civilization: A Contemporary Perspective, p. 51.
       6. Kenoyer, “The Indus Valley Tradition of Pakistan and Western India”; Kenoyer, Ancient Cities of the Indus
          Valley Civilization, p. 49.
       7. Kenoyer, Ancient Cities of the Indus Valley Civilization, pp. 81– 82.
       8. Shaffer, “Harappan Culture: A Reconsideration.”
       9. Also see Possehl, “Revolution in the Urban Revolution: The Emergence of Indus Urbanism.”
      10. Strabo and many other Greek historians wrote about the eastern lands Alexander had conquered, but few
          of them appear to have seen them in person, and thus their accounts were based on travelers’ accounts and
          second-hand knowledge.
      11. Schuldenrein et al., “Landscapes, Soils, and Mound Histories of the Upper Indus Valley, Pakistan: New
          Insights on the Holocene Environments Near Ancient Harappa.”
      12. Flam, “The Prehistoric Indus River System and the Indus Civilization in Sindh,” pp. 61–64.
      13. Mughal, “Further Evidence of the Early Harappan Culture in the Greater Indus Valley: 1971–90.”
      14. Flam, “The Prehistoric Indus River System and the Indus Civilization in Sindh,” pp. 54 –55.
      15. Ibid., pp. 64 – 65.
      16. Possehl, “Revolution in the Urban Revolution: The Emergence of Indus Urbanism,” p. 261.
      17. Meadow, Harappan Civilization: A Recent Perspective, p. 311.
      18. The local domestication of the hump-backed cattle, Bos indicus, is supported by research on the DNA of
          cattle (see Loftus et al., “Evidence for Two Independent Domestications of Cattle”).
      19. Fairservis, “The Origin, Character and Decline of an Early Civilization.”
      20. Allchin, “India from the Late Stone Age to the Decline of Indus Civilization,” p. 337.
      21. Vishnu-Mittre, “Discussion on Local and Introduced Crops.”
      22. Kenoyer, “The Indus Valley Tradition of Pakistan and Western India,” p. 332.
      23. Miller, “Ideology and the Indus Civilization,” p. 38.
      24. Ibid., p. 39; Jarrige and Lechevaleier, “Excavations at Mehrgarh, Baluchistan: Their Signiﬁcance in the
          Prehistorical Context of the Indo-Pakistan Borderlands”; Gupta, Archaeology of Soviet Central Asia and the
          Indian Borderlands; Durante, “Marine Shells from Balakot, Shahr-i Sokhta and Tepe Yahya”; Fairservis,
          The Roots of Ancient India.
      25. Wright, “The Evolution of Civilizations.”
      26. Ibid., p. 337. In comparing the Indus Valley and Mesopotamia, Wright concludes that by the late ﬁfth and
          early fourth millennia b.c. some areas of the Indus Plain had settlements of such different sizes that we may
          suspect that they reﬂect hierarchically organized societies.
      27. Miller, “Ideology and the Harappan Civilization,” p. 40.
      28. Mughal, “The Early Harappan Period in the Greater Indus Valley and Northern Baluchistan.”
      29. Possehl, “Revolution in the Urban Revolution: The Emergence of Indus Urbanism,” p. 270.
      30. Ibid., p. 270.
      31. Ibid., p. 271.
      32. Possehl, ed., Harappan Civilization: A Recent Perspective.
      33. Wright, “The Evolution of Civilizations,” p. 340.
      34. Jansen, “Settlement Patterns in the Harappa Culture,” p. 252; Agrawal, The Archaeology of India, p. 135; Miller,
          “Ideology and the Harappan Civilization,” p. 40.
      35. Jansen, “Settlement Patterns in the Harappa Culture.”
      36. Shaffer, “Harappan Culture: A Reconsideration.”
      37. Fentress, Resource Access, Exchange Systems and Regional Interaction in the Indus Valley, pp. 136 –137.
      38. Miller, “Ideology and the Harappan Civilization.”
      39. Sarcina, “The Private House at Mohenjodaro”; Sarcina, “A Statistical Assessment of House Patterns at
          Mohenjodaro.”
      40. Miller, “Ideology and the Harappan Civilization,” p. 48; Sarcina, “The Private House at Mohenjodaro”;
          Sarcina, “A Statistical Assessment of House Patterns at Mohenjodaro.”
      41. Fairservis, The Roots of Ancient India, pp. 246 –247.
      42. Possehl, “The End of a State and the Continuity of a Tradition in Proto-Historic India.”
      43. Rao, Lothal and the Indus Civilization.
      44. Possehl, “The End of a State and the Continuity of a Tradition in Proto-Historic India.”
                                          THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN THE INDUS VALLEY                    431


45. Ibid. For Possehl’s analysis of the interactions between Harappans and hunter-foragers, see his “The Harappan
    Civilization in Gujarat: The Sorath and Sindhi Harappans,” especially pp. 125 –126.
46. Miller, “Ideology and the Harappan Civilization,” pp. 56 –57; but also see Fentress, “Indus Charms and Urns,
    a Look at the Religious Diversity at Harappa and Mohenjodaro.”
47. Possehl, The Indus Civilization: A Contemporary Perspective, pp. 249 –250.
48. Parpola, “The Indus Script: A Challenging Puzzle.” Wenke is indebted to Gregory Possehl (personal com-
    munication) for references and a summary of current interpretations for this paragraph on the language
    afﬁliation of the Indus script.
49. The following description of Indus writing is taken mainly from Kenoyer, “The Indus Valley Tradition of
    Pakistan and Western India.” Also see Kelly and Wells, “Recent Progress in Understanding the Indus Script.”
50. Dales and Kenoyer, “Excavation at Harappa—1988”; Kenoyer, “The Indus Valley Tradition of Pakistan and
    Western India.”
51. Allchin, “India from the Late Stone Age to the Decline of Indus Civilization.”
52. Frankfort and Pottier, “Sondage Preliminaire sur l’Establissement Protohistorique Harapeen et Post-
    Harapeen de Shortugai”; Miller, “Ideology and the Harappan Civilization,” p. 54.
53. Miller, “Ideology and the Harappan Civilization,” p. 55.
54. Raikes, “The Mohenjo-Daro Floods.”
55. Flam, “The Prehistoric Indus River System and the Indus Civilization in Sindh.”
56. Possehl, “African Millets in South Asian Prehistory.”
57. Tharpar, “Kalibangan: A Harappan Metropolis Beyond the Indus Valley.”
58. Possehl, The Indus Civilization: A Contemporary Perspective, p. 249.
59. Kennedy, “Skulls, Aryans and Flowing Drains: The Interface of Archaeology and Skeletal Biology in the Study
    of the Harappan Civilisation.”
60. Fairservis, The Roots of Ancient India, p. 311.
61. Renfrew, “Archaeology and Language.”
62. Shaffer, Prehistoric Baluchistan; Possehl, “African Millets in South Asian Prehistory.”
63. Miller, “Ideology and the Harappan Civilization.”
64. Service, Origins of the State and Civilization, p. 246.
65. Ibid.
66. Jacobson, “Recent Developments in South Asian Prehistory and Protohistory.”
67. Johnson, Local Exchange and Early State Development in Southwestern Iran.
68. Shaffer, “Harappan Culture: A Reconsideration.”
69. Ibid., p. 49; Miller, “Ideology and the Harappan Civilization.”
70. Kenoyer, “The Indus Valley Tradition of Pakistan and Western India,” p. 369.
11
The Evolution of Complex Societies
in China

     Let the past serve the present.
     Mao Zedong




     S        hortly after 3000 b.c., just a century or so after Harappan civilization began in the
              Indus region, the people of North China began a period of development that was
     to take them from simple agricultural tribes to one of the most brilliant and complex
     civilizations of antiquity (Figure 11.1). Because scientiﬁc archaeology in China is only a few
     decades old, however, and because much of the literature on Chinese archaeology has not
     been accessible to foreign scholars, ancient Chinese civilization has not had the place in
     Western scholarship that it deserves.
           Like ancient Egypt, China was, superﬁcially at least, intensely self-absorbed and inward
     looking, and it saw itself as the center of the world whose periphery was populated by
     vicious barbarians. But China has a far larger and more varied physical landscape than
     Egypt—or Mesopotamia, for that matter—and this and other factors made its civilization
     a rich amalgam of many diverse ethnic groups and cultures.
           Mesopotamia, Egypt, and Europe gave the world many great technological inventions,
     but ancient East Asia’s contributions include such fundamental advances as the magnetic
     compass, gunpowder, printing, paper, paddle-wheel propulsion, and many other
     inventions.1 China’s traditions, for example, its writing system, are also the only ones that
     have lasted until today.
           In analyzing history it is interesting that, although the Chinese invented gunpowder,
     they used it exclusively for ﬁreworks. Europeans quickly saw other interesting potential uses
     for it. China, thus, provides an object lesson in a rather brutal historical dynamic: China
     was once among the largest, most powerful, and most innovative civilizations in the world,
     but it too was eventually dominated by the rise of the West, which exploited it for centuries.
     As the twenty-ﬁrst century begins, however, there are indications that the world’s center of
     power is shifting back toward China. The world has become so interconnected politically
     and economically that the kinds of massive imbalances of power of nations that marked
     the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries may never occur again, but China’s enormous
     population, strong national sense of identity and culture, and rich natural resources may
     support a great expansion of its economy and power in this century. It would be truly

                                                 432
                                                 THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN CHINA   433


                                              CHINA

AD 618    Tang dynasty uniﬁes China empire based on Chang’an, world’s largest city
          (1 million inhabitants)
AD 220    Collapse of Han dynasty, China divided into three independent states

AD 150    Buddhism reaches China

AD 105    Paper comes into use in China

  50 BC   Chinese silk traded to Romans

 108 BC   Chinese take control of Korea establishing military outposts

 119 BC   Chinese iron industry becomes state monopoly

 206 BC   Accession of the Han dynasty

 210 BC   Emperor Shih Huang-ti interred in vast mausoleum with terracotta army

          Shih Huangh-ti ﬁrst Qin emperor builds the Great Wall

 221 BC   Uniﬁcation of China by the Qin dynasty

 350 BC   Crossbow invented

 403 BC   Warring States Period ﬁnds of bronze and iron weapons and city defenses

 500 BC   Beginning of coinage

 550 BC   First signiﬁcant iron production

 770 BC   Beginning of Eastern Zhou

1046 BC   Zhou dynasty replaces the Shang

1400 BC   First written inscriptions on oracle bones and bronze ritual vessels

1600 BC   Emergence of Shang civilization in northeast China

1900 BC   Erh-li-t’ou culture

2000 BC   Urban settlements

2500 BC

          First bronze artifacts

2700 BC   Evidence of silk weaving

3000 BC   Early Complex Societics Longshan Culture

5000 BC   Yangshao Culture Bampo Jiangzhai

6500 BC   Early Farmers Cishan Peiligang Dadiwan
           434       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                ironic, but it is entirely plausible that the archae-
                                                                ologists of the future will need to know Mandarin
                                                                in order to participate fully in their discipline.



                                                                THE ECOLOGICAL SETTING

                                                                Modern China incorporates an area slightly larger
                                                                than the contemporary United States. Within this
                                                                territory are vastly different environments, ranging
                                                                from the Himalayas to the Paciﬁc shore, and
                                                                ethnic groups throughout this vast expanse
                                                                played formative roles in shaping Chinese civil-
                                                                ization. K. C. Chang—whose work and writings
                                                                until recently provided much of what is known
                                                                about China in the West—deﬁned three ecological
                                                                zones as crucial areas in the evolution of ancient
                                                                Chinese civilization: the Huanghe (formerly
                                                                transliterated, under the Wade-Giles system, as
                                                                “Hwang Ho”) valley; the southern deciduous
                                                                zone; and the northern forests and steppes.2 He
                                                                also notes that for some thousands of years after
                                                                the end of the Pleistocene at about 12,000 years
                                                                ago, China’s climate was somewhat warmer and
                                                                moister than it is today, and much of the country
                                                                was probably heavily forested, from the temper-
                                                                ate forests of the north to the jungles in the
                                                                south. Chang observes that because of China’s
FIGURE 11.1 A portion of the terracotta army interred with
Emperor Shih Huang-ti.                                          mountainous nature and heavy post-Pleistocene
                                                                vegetative cover, people were probably restricted
                   to the river valleys at ﬁrst, since these would have been the richest sources of food and would
                   have offered the most open land for farming. Developments in these three ecological zones
                   eventually overlapped, and in later periods of antiquity the vast populations of nomads on
                   the northern and western frontier of China greatly inﬂuenced the character of Chinese
                   civilization.
                         During the Holocene, when Neolithic and later societies were present in China,
                   paleoclimate and paleoenvironment were inﬂuenced by the strength of the East Asian
                   monsoon.3 The East Asian monsoon is a precipitation—rainfall—belt that shifts gradually
                   northward during the period from winter to summer each year. Precisely where the heaviest
                   precipitation associated with this rainfall belt fell during different points in the past changed
                   over time because of changes in solar radiation and the conditions of the surface of the
                   Northern Hemisphere—for example, 9,000 years ago, the maximum northerly extent of
                   the monsoon belt was just to the north of some of the early Neolithic cultures of the
                   Huanghe River area.4 By 6,000 years ago, the maximum extent of the rainfall belt reached
                   only as far north as just north of the Yangtze River area. The East Asian monsoon is thus
                                               THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN CHINA         435


an important feature of the ecological setting of various Neolithic and later societies, as well
as in the levels of lakes, river ﬂooding, and growth of vegetation.
     Geological processes that likely had an impact on people living in the Huanghe area
include shifts in the course of the Huanghe River5—similar to avulsions seen in the
Mesopotamian Euphrates and Tigris rivers.
     Other geological factors that may have inﬂuenced some societies in China include
rising sea levels, perhaps acting in combination with increased rainfall during the middle
Holocene.6 In the delta of the Yangtze River, for example, Stanley and his colleagues have
documented a major inundation of the central delta area. This removed previously dry land
from the territory available to people for settlement and use for agriculture. Stanley and his
colleagues believe that this inundation is partly responsible for the disappearance of the local
Neolithic culture—the Liangzhu—about 4,200 years ago. After 3,900 years ago, when shifts
in climate resulted in some of the delta land being reexposed, a few of the Liangzhu sites
were reoccupied by people of the early Bronze Age—known locally as the Maqiao culture.7
     Wheat and barley supplied much of the energy that ran Mesopotamian and Egyptian
societies, but in China rice and millet were in many instances as important as wheat or
barley. North China’s developmental leadership was closely tied to its agricultural potential.
Pleistocene winds blowing off the Gobi Desert covered parts of North China with a layer
of loess (a ﬁne grain sediment) that reached a depth of several hundred meters. The
Huanghe River (or “Yellow River”—from the color given it by the loess it carries) cuts
through these loess plains, frequently changing its course, and through ﬂooding and
draining it has created a rich agricultural zone of lakes, marshes, and alluvial ﬁelds. Loess
is the agricultural soil par excellence: It is organically rich, requires little plowing, and
retains near the surface much of the sparse rain that falls on North China. Moreover, it can
yield large crops with little fertilization, even under intensive cultivation. The southern
alluvial plains, with their hot, humid climate, eventually became the great rice heartlands.
     Early farmers around the world converged in ﬁnding, through domestication and
agriculture, four key ingredients to the village-farming way of life: They all found (1) a
source for textiles; (2) a productive, high carbohydrate, main crop plant; (3) an edible oil
for cooking; and a (4) a reliable source of animal protein. The initial northern Chinese
solutions to these problems were hemp for textiles, millet for a main crop plant, rapeseed
and soybeans for edible oils, and pigs for meat. But east Asia—including Japan, Southeast
Asia, Korea, and other areas peripheral to the mainland—domesticated an impressive range
of other plants, perhaps more than any other area of the world. Wheat, barley, and perhaps
other plants may have been introduced from western Asia, but east Asian domesticates
and/or early cultivars include apricot, peach, pear, persimmon, and plum trees; soybeans,
mung beans, peas, and other legumes; buckwheat, various kinds of millet, barley, and rice;
safﬂower, rape, and other producers of edible oils; Chinese cabbage, radishes, and other
vegetables; and a variety of special-purpose plants such as the lacquer tree (lacquer), hops
(ﬂavoring agent), hemp (ﬁbers and drugs), and the bottle gourd (containers).


EARLY FARMERS (C. 7000–5000 B.C.)8

K. C. Chang suggested that one of the most signiﬁcant discoveries in the prehistoric
archaeology of North China is the discovery in eastern Shensi Province and other areas of
436   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY




      FIGURE 11.2 The earliest Neolithic cultures of North China appeared in several distinct regions,
      shown here in darker shading, with the approximate boundaries of their artifact style distributions
      shown in lighter shading.



      microlithic stone tools dating perhaps (the dating is uncertain) to about 13,000 years ago.
      These ﬁnds are important because little is known about the people of China as the
      Pleistocene ended or about their descendants, whose hunting-foraging culture gave way to
      the ﬁrst farmers. The distinctive artifact styles of these stone tools and other ﬁnds indicate
      that a large population of pre-agricultural peoples were widely distributed over much of
      China about 10,000 years ago. Most of these people were hunter-gatherers, with some
      groups specializing in ﬁshing near the coasts and large lakes.
           Although there are gaps in the archaeological record in the centuries just after these
      microlithic industries were in use, during the past decade many sites have been found that
      appear to have been the earliest Chinese farming communities. These villages date to
      between about 6500 and 5000 b.c. and have been grouped into regional clusters (Figure 11.2).
      These include the Cishan, Peiligang, and Dadiwan, as well as several other cultures.9 These
      settlements were located along the lower terraces of the western highlands, in the valleys of
      the Wei, Huanghe, and a few other rivers. This warm, moderately rainy area has great
      agricultural potential, especially in the alluvial plains, the loess plateau, and the hilly lands
      of the Shangdong peninsula. Early farmers in this area took advantage of these zones
      by staking their subsistence on several highly reliable and stable resources. Probably the
      most important food source was millet, a cereal grass (both foxtail millet [Setaria italica]
      and broomcorn millet [Panicum miliaceum]) that produces a very nutritious grain.
      Nutritionally as rich as wheat, millet is also quick-maturing and drought-resistant—making
      it admirably suited to North China—and its stems can be used for food, fuel, and fodder.
      Stone sickle blades, grinding stones, and other tools indicate that much farming was
                                                THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN CHINA         437


devoted to millet, which was complemented with vegetables, an edible vegetable oil (in the
form of rapeseed [Brassica]), and meat from domesticated pigs and chickens. The farmers
also collected walnuts, hazelnuts, and other wild plant foods and hunted deer. Like many
other peoples around the world, their ﬁrst domesticate was probably the dog, skeletons of
which have been found at various sites. These early farmers lived mainly in small (2–3 m
in diameter) subterranean houses. They already knew how to make pottery at this time,
and used an impressive diversity of ground stone grinders, bone needles, and many other
implements of stone, bone, and wood.
     The earliest agricultural sites in South China are only a bit later than those in the north,
but our knowledge of them is much less advanced. Several caves in China and Thailand
have deeply buried remains from this period, and some of these early levels contain cord-
marked pottery and what may be the remains of domesticated plants.


REGIONAL NEOLITHIC DEVELOPMENTS IN NORTH CHINA
(5000–3000 B.C.)

The largest and best-known early agricultural Chinese communities are those of the
Yangshao culture (see Figure 11.2). The Yangshao covered the same approximate area as
did the earlier P’ei-li-kang culture, and the similarities between these two indicate cultural
continuity. Most of the Yangshao settlements were distributed along the banks of the
Huanghe and other river systems in central China. Bones of most of the larger animals native
to this part of China, from rabbits to rhinos, have been found in Yangshao settlements, but
millet probably provided most of the calories, while sorghum and a few other crops were
also cultivated. Like their counterparts in the forests of temperate Europe, early Chinese
farmers probably cleared land for farming by slashing down vegetation with stone axes and
then burning it off when it had dried.10
     And like other early cultivators they took full advantage of game animals, wild plants,
and ﬁshing—as evidenced by the hundreds of hooks, ﬁsh gorges, and net weights found.
Pigs, domestic fowl, and, later, cattle, sheep, and goats were favored sources of meat.
     In a real sense, the ﬁrst ancestors of the civilization we know imprecisely as “China”
were probably the sturdy peasants of the Yangshao period (radiocarbon-dated to
c. 5100–2950 b.c.,11 who lived in villages like Bampo (formerly “Pan-p’o”). Wearing rough
clothes made of hemp, bunkered down in houses with ﬂoors dug several feet below ground
(Figure 11.3) to shield themselves from winter snows and summer heat, the people of
Bampo followed the familiar agricultural cycle of China. Other Yangshao sites have
evidence for above-ground houses (Figure 11.4). Millet was the staple; pigs and ducks
recycled wastes into the basic meats of what was even then perhaps a world-class cuisine;
and cattle, sheep, and goats contributed their all in the form of meat, milk, draft power,
leather, and wool. The few hundred people at Bampo, like most of their neighbors, were
probably self-sufﬁcient in everything that really mattered except marriageable women.
     Another Yangshao village that has been extensively excavated is Jiangzhai, in Shaanxi
Province.12 Over an area of about 50,000 m2 the people here built a neatly organized
community that was surrounded by a defensive moat and was arranged in ﬁve complexes,
each with a large house surrounded by 10–20 smaller ones. Most of the houses were semi-
           438        PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                       subterranean with wood super-
                                                                                       structures. Like other early
                                                                                       farmers, the people of Jiangzhai
                                                                                       buried their dead with house-
                                                                                       hold objects, which suggests a
                                                                                       belief in a life after death that
                                                                                       was something like their life in
                                                                                       this world. Children were buried
                                                                                       in ceramic urns—an ancient
                                                                                       practice that still continues in
                                                                                       parts of Asia.
                                                                                             Yangshao villages seem
                                                                                       to have been abandoned
                                                                                       and reoccupied periodically—
FIGURE 11.3 This reconstruction of a Neolithic house at Bampo (Pan-p’o-ts’un)          probably because these people
illustrates how early Chinese farmers protected themselves against the harsh north     practiced slash-and-burn farm-
China winters by living in pithouses.                                                  ing, wearing out the soil in the
                                                                                       area around their commun-
                                                                                       ity, then relocating the village,
                                                                                       and eventually returning to
                                                                                       the abandoned areas when
                                                                                       the fertility was renewed by
                                                                                       regrowth of vegetation.
                                                                                             Already by the time of
                                                                                       Bampo the Chinese aesthetic
                                                                                       sense is evident in the designs
                                                                                       and color of pottery, jade
                                                                                       carvings, and other artifacts.
                                                                                       Stylized ﬁsh and animals grace
                                                                                       some of the burnished pottery,
                                                                                       and some pots were marked
                                                                                       with symbols that may be early
                                                                                       expressions of written Chinese.
                                                                                       Around the houses were
                                                                                       many deep pits, presumably
                                                                                       for storing millet and other
                                                                                       commodities. No doubt most
                                                                                       villagers were full-time agricul-
                                                                                       turalists, but some engaged in
FIGURE 11.4 The foundation of a Yangshao culture house at Dadiwan, China.              silkworm cultivation, pottery
                                                                                       manufacture, jade carving, and
                                                                                       leather and textile production.
                            Bampo has been converted into an impressive museum, and more than 200 of the
                       original inhabitants of this community are still there, their skeletons protruding from house
                       ﬂoors and pits. Most of the site has been enclosed in a building, with some of the most
                       important houses and artifacts left in place. At some Yangshao sites the bodies of people
                                              THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN CHINA         439


seem to have been reburied in groups. K. C. Chang notes that at Yuan-chun-miao, 57 graves
were arranged “in six north-south rows, the earliest being the ﬁrst and fourth rows, the
latest the third and sixth rows. . . . This layout and chronological order have led to the
reasonable speculation that the cemetery was divided into two moieties, reﬂecting the two-
clan composition of the village.”13
      In the middle of Bampo was a distinctive building, much larger than the typical house
and of different construction. To the Chinese excavators, this building seems most likely
to have been a communal meeting hall; but one might also suspect that a bit of capitalistic
inequality had infected the Yangshao culture and that this was the house of a “big man” or
chief.14 However, there are no evident signs of varying status in other artifacts at the site.
      There are, however, some indications that Yangshao peoples occasionally buried
individuals with grave goods and other furnishings that might be interpreted as indicat-
ing status differences. One example is found at the site of Xishuipo in Henan Province.
The site, which extends over 50,000 m2, contains house foundations, pits for storage, and
burials.15 In Tomb 45, an adult male is buried in an extended position. Surrounding him
are three younger individuals. The most signiﬁcant aspect of this burial, however, is the
presence of two animal mosaics made of mollusk shells, as well as a triangular mosaic of
mollusk shells and two human tibia—lower leg bones.16 The animal mosaics include a
dragon and a tiger (Figure 11.5). One interpretation of this burial is that the adult male
was a shaman—a ritual specialist—with the animal images representing helpers in
communicating with the supernatural.17
      More than a hundred Neolithic sites (c. 5000–3000 b.c.) have been found in the Lake
T’ai-hu area, southeast of Nanjing. Rice cultivation provided the main staple, but the range
of animals hunted was impres-
sive, including boars, elephants,
alligators, deer, and many
other species. One example of
an early southern Neolithic
community is at Hemudu, in
northern Zhejiang Province,
where excavations in 1973
through 1978 revealed a 7,000-
year-old village of wooden
houses built on piles along
the shore of a small lake
(Figure 11.6). The preservation
of objects at this site is
spectacular. Excavators found
bone hoes, wooden shuttles for
weaving, ivory carvings, and
many plant and animal remains,
including rice, bottle gourds,
water chestnuts, domesticated
water buffalo, pigs, dogs, and
wild animals such as tigers,         FIGURE 11.5 This Yangshao culture burial from the site of Yangshao, China, is
elephants, and rhinoceroses.         accompanied by shell mosaics of a dragon (top) and tiger (bottom).
          440       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                      The extension of pottery
                                                                                 styles over much of North China
                                                                                 during the period between
                                                                                 5000 and 3000 b.c. is probably
                                                                                 the clearest early sign that by
                                                                                 this time people were develop-
                                                                                 ing the integrated economic
                                                                                 and political institutions on
                                                                                 which the later Chinese states
                                                                                 were constructed.


                                                                                 EARLY COMPLEX
                                                                                 CHINESE SOCIETIES
                                                                                 (3000–1900 B.C.)
FIGURE 11.6 Good organic preservation yielded the wooden structural remains
from the site of Hemudu, China.                                                    In the early third millennium
                                                                                   b.c., the people of North and
                                                                                   Central China—at least on the
                    basis of our limited archaeological evidence—seem the very picture of egalitarian, peaceful
                    villagers; but by the beginning of the second millennium b.c., signs of social rank and
                    violence are everywhere.
                         Chinese legend relates that the ﬁrst Chinese emperor was Huang Di, a northern
                    Chinese warlord who is reputed to have established a dynasty in 2698 b.c. Whatever the
                    validity of this legend, the archaeological record indicates rapidly increasing social com-
                    plexity, with the emergence of the Longshan and related cultures (Figure 11.7). Longshan
                    cultures, like the Yangshao, are deﬁned on the basis of similar styles of artifacts—in the
                    Longshan case by highly burnished, wheel-made, thin-walled black pottery in many
                    different vessel forms; these pots are found, with minor stylistic variations, from the
                    southeastern coast of China to the northern provinces. Very early Longshan pottery and
                    other diagnostic artifacts are found over most of the old Yangshao heartland. And
                    while Yangshao communities in some places seem to have given rise almost directly to
                    Longshan communities, the linkages between these periods and peoples are still quite
                    obscure.18
                         As with the Yangshao, the Longshan peoples lived mainly in villages made up of
                    pithouses arranged around a central “long house,” and virtually every Longshan adult male
                    was probably still a millet farmer who supplemented the family fortunes with hunting,
                    collecting, and part-time craft production of pottery, jade, or another commodity. But
                    Longshan villages were, on the average, signiﬁcantly larger than those of the Yangshao
                    period, and were likely occupied for longer periods of time.
                         Like their counterparts in other early civilizations, ancient Chinese farmers eventually
                    made a momentous transition: Instead of the slash-and-burn agriculture practiced in the
                    Yangshao period, shifting ﬁelds from year to year, they began in Longshan times to cultivate
                    the same ﬁelds each year. The costs of doing this are high: One has to use animal manure,
                    clovers, and discarded plants to renew fertility, or else irrigation water must be led to the
                                              THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN CHINA        441




FIGURE 11.7 Archaeological sites of the Longshan and related cultures.


ﬁelds through canals to replenish soil fertility. In some places, of course, in China as in
Egypt, the annual ﬂoods renew soil fertility, but in all ancient civilizations a point was
eventually reached where intensiﬁcation of agriculture was required to sustain life.
Longshan agriculture, although still based on millet and a few domesticated animals, seems
to have been more intensive than that of the Yangshao. Domestic poultry, sheep, and cattle
became more important, and there is evidence of the increasing signiﬁcance of rice
agriculture in some southern areas.
     There are also signs of change in social organization. Compared with Yangshao graves,
Longshan burials seem to differ between those of richer and those of poorer people, at least
as reﬂected in the pots, metal implements, and other items buried with these people. One
of the best examples is from the Taosi cemetery in southern Shanxi.19 The excavators
identiﬁed three groups of burials—the “richest” were all males, each of whom had a
wooden cofﬁn, powdered cinnabar (a bright red mineral), and 100–200 grave goods. The
very largest of these rich tombs had alligator drums and jade ritual objects, suggesting trade
in exotic items among the elite members of Longshan culture.20 In contrast, the “poorest”
group of burials were only narrow vertical burial pits and contained few if any burial
goods.21
     Longshan pottery and jade ornaments are so technologically sophisticated and
beautiful that they suggest the existence of at least some semi-specialized craftsmen.
     Based on an analysis of pig skulls in burials at several Neolithic sites, Seung-Og Kim
has argued22 that pigs were used as important status and wealth markers. Pigs were
supremely adapted to Neolithic Chinese agriculture. Evidence suggests that pigs were even
kept in household latrine areas and subsisted in part on human waste products—an early
442   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      indication of the extraordinary practicality of Chinese cuisine and their ability to convert
      materials from every stage of the food chain into appealing foods. Kim found that the
      Chinese Neolithic graves with the most wealth in the form of ivory and jade ornaments,
      pottery, and other goods also, on average, had more pig skulls and carved pig tusks in
      them. Kim suggests that these interred pig bones reﬂect a society in which the great
      economic value of the pig as the most important domestic animal (in terms of its popular-
      ity as a food) was complexly linked to the social context of ritual, wealth, and political
      prestige. He hypothesizes that pigs could be used as a form of exchangeable wealth and that
      some individuals could have risen in wealth and prestige by using pigs to acquire exotic
      prestige goods such as jade and turtle shell through long-distance trade. As Kim notes,
      ethnographic studies of Melanesian and other societies show that pigs often are viewed as
      a form of wealth and that pig slaughtering and meat distribution are important parts of the
      competition for power, wealth, and prestige in these “big-man” or tribal societies. Kim
      argues that between about 4000 and 2000 b.c. the elites in many Chinese communities used
      pigs as “concentratable and productive internal wealth in order to establish political
      authority.”23
           Longshan people sought knowledge through scapulimancy, the art of writing signs on
      bones, applying heat to the bone to crack it, and then interpreting the pattern of cracking
      to foretell the future. Archaeologist K. C. Chang interprets the appearance of this art in
      Longshan times as a reﬂection of the rise of at least a semi-professional class of shamans—
      an interpretation made credible by the fact that the character meaning “book” already
      appears on these bones and may signify the existence of specialized scribes.
           Chang also notes that the ﬁrst traces of town walls—which became a standard feature
      of later communities—are found at the Longshan site of Ch’eng-tzu-yai. It was built with
      the “stamped-earth” technique, in which layer after layer of ﬁne loess silts and clays were
      stamped by workers into a compact wall. The wall at Ch’eng-tzu-yai has now largely
      deteriorated, but from its traces the excavators estimate it was 6 m high and 9 m wide at
      the top.
           Longshan and related communities were probably still largely self-sufﬁcient and
      independent. Researchers such as Li Liu,24 however, have described the medium and large
      sites of the Longshan period as possible regional centers. Some of these sites are fortiﬁed
      while others are not. Evidence for residential segregation within larger communities
      consists of large well-constructed buildings, some of which are associated with human
      sacriﬁce, and all of which are separated from the houses of commoners. And there appears
      to be craft specialization and production in items such as textiles, pottery, stone tools, and
      maybe metallurgy. Another key aspect—like the situation in Mesopotamia—is that these
      regional centers are often located near river channels that are important water transporta-
      tion routes.25
           The transition to life in permanent villages and established agricultural ﬁelds was made
      over much of North China in the Longshan period, from the western highlands into the
      northern Manchurian highlands and well into southern China.
           K. C. Chang has summarized the overall developments of China in the third
      millennium b.c. in terms of eight features that, taken together, indicate evolving cultural
      interaction and complexity: (1) the beginnings of copper metallurgy; (2) the widespread
      use of sophisticated potters’ wheels and presumably the emergence of a specialized class of
                                               THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN CHINA         443


potters; (3) the stamped-earth walls found at some sites, and their implication of the need
for civil defense; (4) burials of bodies in wells, mass graves, and other conditions that
suggest warfare; (5) the use of animal and other motifs in art works in ways that indicate
emerging status differences; (6) decorated jade masks and other objects that suggest an
emerging ritual system practiced over a large part of the country; (7) the widespread use of
scapulimancy, also suggesting ritual interaction over a large area; and (8) signs of social
ranking and wealth differences in burials.26
     We can easily draw parallels here with Egypt, Mesopotamia, and the Indus Valley: the
Chinese use of jade, scapulimancy, and so forth are distinctive in their speciﬁcs, but the
general pattern is one of emerging and evolving class-consciousness, functional specializa-
tion, and administrative complexity.27



ERH-LI-T’OU CULTURE (C. 1900–1500 B.C.)

After about 2000 b.c., large towns and cities began to replace or emerge from the tens of
thousands of villages that marked earlier, simpler times. During the second millennium
b.c. China really became “China,” in the sense that this period marked the ﬁrst widespread
use of the distinctively Chinese forms of writing, architecture, art, and ideology. Also dur-
ing this period all the correlates of cultural complexity—such as monumental architecture;
large population concentrations; occupational specialization; written records; gross
differences in wealth, power, and prestige; and large public-works projects—appeared in
full measure.
     Legends and early texts suggest that the ﬁrst Shang kings established seven or more
capital cities in the central area of the Huanghe River basin. One of the earliest sites of this
transitional period to complexity is Erh-li-t’ou (Yen-shih) (Figure 11.8). Here lies a vast
complex of ruins, scattered over an area about 1.5-by-2.5 km, and extending to a depth of
4 m in some places (Figure 11.9).
     Among the most impressive features at Erh-li-t’ou are the foundations of two buildings
that some have called “palaces”: One is 108-by-100 m and is associated with a large earthen
platform. In one area of its foundation was a group of burials, including one person who
seems to have been buried with his hands bound. The other, smaller palace was drained
with a system of pottery pipes and associated with a large earthen tomb—long since
plundered of most of its wealth. The richness of Erh-li-t’ou’s jade, bronze, pottery, and
other artifacts; the indications of human sacriﬁce; and the large buildings all suggest a level
of emerging cultural complexity greater than that of previous periods.
     The Erh-li-t’ou culture is important because it documents the advent of the Bronze
Age in China at a period earlier than the Shang, with which the earliest Bronze Age formerly
was associated.28 In fact, some Chinese scholars have attributed the Xia Dynasty to the
Erh-li-t’ou culture, perhaps with the site of Erh-li-t’ou as the Xia capital.29 More than 200
sites of the Erh-li-t’ou culture have been found, and the settlement pattern is suggestive of
a four-tiered hierarchy characteristic of civilizations elsewhere—such as Mesopotamia—
with a major center at Erh-li-t’ou, two smaller regional centers, several large villages, and
numerous small villages.30
444   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY




      FIGURE 11.8 K. C. Chang’s (1986) reconstructions of (A) major Erh-li-t’ou Culture sites and
      traditional Hsia Dynasty capitals; (B) traditional Shang Dynasty capitals.
                                                     THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN CHINA                   445


SHANG CIVILIZATION                                                 Luo                                      Rive
                                                                                                                r
                                               N
AND ITS
CONTEMPORARIES
(C. 1600–1046 B.C.)                                                                           Erlitou


                                       Beixu
The Early Shang phase (or Erh-
li-kang phase) is best docu-
mented archaeologically at the
cluster of settlements largely                                                              Palatial area

buried under the modern
city of Zhengzhou (formerly                                                                          Palace #2
                                                                                                                     Gedangtou
“Chengchou”). The central area
of Erh-li-kang phase settle-                                                                            Palace #1

ment was a roughly rectangular
arrangement of buildings ex-                    0     200 m                                     Bronze casting area


tending about 3.4 km2, much
                                              location of houses
of which was enclosed by a                    location of pits    site boundary
pounded-earth wall some 36 m                  location of burials pottery manufacture
                                              modern village      bone artifact manufacture                         modern road
wide at the base and 9.1 m in                 excavated area      bronze casting
height—as estimated from the
                                      FIGURE 11.9 A sketch map of the urban center at Erh-li-t’ou, China.
segments still remaining.31 The
northeastern area of the site is
thought to have been the residence and ceremonial center of the ruling elite,32 and around
it were thousands of pithouses, animal pens, shops, storage pits, and other features that
make it clear that many of the people of Shang China lived lives radically different from
those of Neolithic times. Hundreds of skilled, full-time craftsmen probably resided at
Zhengzhou. In one area thousands of pieces of animal and human bone were recovered,
much of it already fashioned into ﬁsh hooks, awls, axes, and hairpins. In another area were
more than a dozen pottery kilns, each surrounded by masses of broken and overﬁred
pottery.
      But the Zhengzhou craftsmen really displayed their skill in working bronze (Figure
11.10). Large areas were given over to workshops for casting ﬁsh hooks, axes, projectile
points, and various ornaments. A kind of mass-production was achieved by using multiple
molds, made by impressing a clay slab with the forms of six arrowheads, with each impres-
sion connected by a thin furrow to a central channel. A second clay mold was placed over
the ﬁrst, the two bound together, and then molten bronze was poured in. After cooling, the
individual points could be sawed off from the central stem.
      In Western societies especially, there is a tendency to think of cultural change as often
being driven by technological change. The invention of the locomotive, for example,
radically altered nineteenth-century Western society. When we look at ancient China, there
is a temptation to see a culture shaped and formed by the invention of bronze-working and
iron-working. Bronze-working seems to have been an indigenous development, probably
made possible by the high-temperature kilns ﬁrst used to ﬁre pottery. The requisite copper
and tin could be found within several hundred kilometers of the Shang homeland, and
various processes using clay models and the lost-wax process were known. The ﬁrst great
          446       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                diffusion of Shang culture, which probably marked both the
                                                rise of national consciousness and the ramifying of political
                                                and economic networks that underlay the emergence of
                                                Shang civilization, was also marked by the spread of bronze
                                                artifacts.
                                                     But the use of bronze seems to have been mainly a stylistic
                                                phenomenon rather than a great technological advance.
                                                Though lovely to look at, the myriad bronze Shang vessels
                                                offer few culinary advantages over ceramics, and there is no
                                                evidence that bronze weapons revolutionized Shang-period
                                                warfare. And for clearing forests—an important part of the
                                                Shang expansion—stone axes and hoes would probably have
                                                worked at least as well as bronze tools, which were, in any case,
                                                a luxury item.
                                                     Bronze-making may have been invented at different times
                                                by different people. Already by 4500 b.c. people in Southeast
                                                Asia, at sites like Ban Chiang, in Thailand, were using cast-
                                                bronze spearheads and ornaments.33 We know relatively little
                                                about these early Southeast Asian bronze-using cultures, but
                                                it seems likely that their precocious use of bronze was a result
                                                of the proximity of copper and tin deposits. Their evolution to
                                                cultural complexity followed that of the north in all essential
                                                elements and occurred much later.
FIGURE 11.10 A bronze axe from the early             Both archaeological evidence and ancient documents
Shang period.                                   written  after the Shang period indicate that Shang society was
                                                headed by a king, who ruled through a hierarchically arranged
                nobility. Commoners were conscripted for public works and military service, there were
                highly organized and incessant military campaigns, and many settlements were apparently
                integrated into an organized intervillage system of commerce.34 It has not been determined
                if there were large-scale irrigation systems, but at Zhengzhou at least a canal system was in
                use, perhaps to carry water to the settlement or else to remove drainage water or sewage
                from the complex.35
                       The great mass of Shang people, however, probably lived much as their ancestors had,
                in villages of pithouses located along river systems, subsisting on the same kinds of crops
                and agricultural technology as people of previous millennia.
                       The last and most brilliant phase of Shang civilization, the Yinxu phase, seems to have
                begun about 1300 b.c., when the Shang King P’an-keng is reported to have moved his
                capital to the city of Angang (formerly “An-yang”), in Henan Province.
                       Excavations at Angang and contemporary sites in this area have been conducted
                intermittently since the 1920s, but the publication of this research is far from complete.
                Scores of sites within an area of about 24 km2 have been tested, and the evidence suggests
                that the complex at Angang includes a large ceremonial and administrative center sur-
                rounded by smaller dependent hamlets and craft centers.36 True to tradition, most peasants
                still lived in small pithouses—not very different from those of 2,000 years earlier. Scattered
                throughout the settlement were granaries, pottery kilns, storage pits, bone and bronze
                workshops, animal pens, ditches, and other familiar features of ancient Chinese life.
                                              THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN CHINA        447


      No city wall has been found at Angang, but monumental buildings were constructed.
The largest of these was about 60 m long, rectangular in form, with large stone and bronze
column bases, and founded on a large platform of compacted earth. There were at least 53
structures of this type (though somewhat smaller) in one group at Angang, arranged in
three main clusters. Although not lavish in construction, these buildings were surrounded
by scores of human and animal sacriﬁcial burials, as well as many pits containing royal
records written on oracle bones and numerous small structures thought to be for service
personnel.37 Near the cluster of buildings a cemetery held 11 large graves, replete with
lavish, expensive burial goods and many human sacriﬁcial burials—the whole complex
surrounded by 1,200 smaller, much less lavish burials.
      Elsewhere, a complex of ceremonial buildings at Hsiao-T’un was dedicated with what
appears to have been the sacriﬁce of 852 people, 15 horses, 10 oxen, 18 sheep, 35 dogs, and
5 fully equipped chariots and charioteers.38 A recent bumper sticker declared “If I can’t take
it with me, I ain’t going”—a sentiment probably very agreeable to Shang rulers. Tomb after
tomb was stocked with everything from chariots to rice. Like the early Mesopotamian
peoples, the Chinese probably believed that burying a ruler’s wives, servants, guards, and
other staff with him would provide him with full services in the afterlife. The Shang may
also have employed that most efﬁcient of all incentives to a devoted domestic staff—the
ritual murder of a king’s staff on the occasion of his own death. Unlike feudal European
nobility, few Shang nobles probably feared poisoning by members of their households.
In some Shang tombs bodies were found decapitated or dismembered, and some of them
had been bound before they died. How others of these people were killed—if they were—
before burial is not clear, but their orderly arrangement in these and other tombs would be
certain to arouse the suspicions of a coroner.
      The Shang ceremonial and administrative structures are perhaps not as impressive in
size or cost as the temples of Mesopotamia or the pyramids of Egypt and Mesoamerica, but
the level of occupational specialization, the immense wealth of the burials, and the intensity
of organization of the agricultural and economic systems remind one of the Mesopotamian
city-states of the late fourth millennium b.c.
      Outside the immediate Shang region were other Bronze Age cultures that have been
less intensively excavated and studied. These include the site of Sanxigdui in Sichuan
Province. A walled city covering some 3 km2 was discovered here and extensive excavations
were undertaken beginning in the late 1980s.39 In the south part of the walled city, two
sacriﬁcial pits were found. These contain literally thousands of artifacts of all kinds—jade,
pottery, seashells, gold and bronze masks, bronze vessels, bronze human heads, elephant
tusks, and more. Study of the artifacts suggests that they were made locally, but some have
features that indicate contact with Erh-li-t’ou and Shang cultures.40
      Late in the Shang period (about 1200 b.c.), the written language had evolved (perhaps
quite rapidly) to the point that texts from this period give us a detailed portrait of Shang
life. Over 3,000 phonetic, ideographic, and pictographic characters were in use—of which
about 1,200 have been identiﬁed—and more than 160,000 inscribed shells (of which only
some have been translated) and numerous inscriptions in bronze or stone date to this
period.41
      According to the texts, the late Shang rulers held sway over a territory extending from
the Paciﬁc shore to Shensi Province in the west, and from the Yangtze River in the south
to southern Hupeh in the north. At the apex of Shang society was the king, who ruled
448   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      directly on many affairs of state and was assisted by a complex hierarchy of nobles
      possessing considerable local autonomy in their respective territories. These lords were
      charged with defending the homeland, supplying men for armies and public-works
      projects, and collecting and contributing state taxes. Toward the end of the Shang period,
      many nobles apparently achieved almost feudal status and were virtually independent in
      their own domains. But the king was still considered to have superior supernatural powers
      and to be the pivot of all ritual procedures. The kingdom was viewed in the traditional
      Chinese fashion, with itself as the center of the universe but ringed by non-Shang
      “barbarians,” whom the Shang kings manipulated through force and diplomacy.42
           On occasion, royal armies of up to about 30,000 men were conscripted and led by the
      nobles against insurgent “barbarians” and neighboring principalities. The basis of the army
      was the horse-drawn chariot, supported by infantrymen armed with powerful laminated
      wood and bone bows and bronze-tipped arrows and equipped with small knives and/or
      halberds, which were large knives or axes mounted on the end of a wood shaft about 6 feet
      long. Royal records indicate that military campaigns often incurred and inﬂicted frightful
      casualties. No doubt many hundreds of thousands of people died in ferocious wars of which
      history no longer has any record. Staggering quantities of plunder were often taken, along
      with thousands of prisoners, most of whom were apparently sacriﬁced or enslaved.43
           The agricultural system seems to have been essentially the same as previously, with
      millet, wheat, rice, and vegetables the major crops; cattle, sheep, pigs, and poultry the main
      livestock; and water buffalo the only “new” domestic animal. The proportions of these
      crops and animals may have shifted somewhat, with wheat and rice expanding their range
      at the expense of millet, but the evidence for this is questionable. There is little record of
      large irrigation systems anywhere in the Shang domain, and hunting and gathering still
      supplied a substantial part of the diet. The mammalian faunal remains from Angang
      include massive quantities of boar, deer, bear, and other hunted animals, including a few
      elephants, rhinoceroses, leopards, and even part of a whale.44 Apparently intravillage trade
      in foodstuffs was voluminous.
           Local occupational specialization was considerable. Many villages lacked one or more
      of the more important handicraft workshops, suggesting that products were exchanged
      among these settlements.45 The discovery of large caches of agricultural implements (3,500
      stone sickles, new and used, in a single pit at one site, for example) may indicate a degree
      of centralized management of both agriculture and craft production.46 The Shang even had
      a type of money, in the form of strings of cowrie shells.
           Toward the end of the Shang period, there were many walled towns and villages in
      North and Central China, and, compared to earlier periods, a much greater proportion of
      the populace lived in these semi-urban settings. But if we compare the settlement size
      distribution of late Shang China—or rather what we estimate it to have been—with those
      of Mesopotamia or Mesoamerica at a comparable level of development, it is clear that
      Shang China was a much less urbanized society. There were no settlements the size of Ur
      or Teotihuacán.
           We cannot know the minds of the Shang Chinese in any detailed sense, but their
      artifacts give us clues as to what they thought of the world. Like many ancient peoples, they
      seem to have sought a basic symmetry in all things. All temples and tombs were oblong or
      square and oriented to the four cardinal directions. Bronzes were always symmetrical, and
      even the messages inscribed on turtle shells for divinations were repeated on the right and
                                               THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN CHINA        449


left sides. The world was conceived of as square, the wind as blowing from four quarters,
and four groups of foreigners were thought to live on China’s borders. Throughout their
art, architecture, and literature, elements appear two by two, four by four, and in other
intricate but symmetrical arrangements.
      The texts and inscriptions tell us that the Shang nobles felt in constant and clear
communication with their ancestors, whom they consulted through oracles about the best
actions to take in multitudes of situations.


EARLY IMPERIAL CHINA (1046 B.C.–A.D. 220)

The early phases of Chinese civilization are often called the “Three Dynasties”—the
Erh-li-t’ou being the ﬁrst, the Shang the second, and the Zhou (formerly known as “Chou”)
the third. Yet these three dynasties overlapped somewhat, and, as K. C. Chang notes,
the developmental pattern was one of “Early Shang, interacting with Erh-li-t’ou, and
proto-Zhou, interacting with Shang.”47
     Chang goes on to quote a poem dating to the Zhou Dynasty that ascribes the dynasty’s
origins to divine will:
    August is God on high;
    Looking down, he is majestic;
    He inspected and regarded the [states of] the four quarters,
    He sought tranquillity for the people.
    These two kingdoms [of Hisa and Shang],
    Their government had failed;
    Throughout those states of the four [quarters] he investigated and estimated;
    God on high brought it to a settlement;
    Hating their extravagance,
    He looked about and turned his gaze to the West,
    And there he gave an abode.48
The “West” of this lyric, chosen by God, was the Zhou state. Had we the means to see it in
all its splendor, ancient imperial China under the Zhou and later states may well have
appeared to us as the most complex and colorful civilization of all antiquity. After 1046 b.c.,
the Zhou Empire (Figure 11.11) and its successors arranged much of China in a feudal
system that led to the growth of cities, great cycles of peace followed by warfare, and
minutely differentiated administrative hierarchies.49 Again and again particular families of
nobles or commoners would rise to power, make war on their neighbors, extend their
kingdoms, and then collapse under the onslaught of competing warlords. Through it all,
exquisite bronzes, porcelains, pots, and jewelry were made and lavished on the rich; untold
thousands of people were sacriﬁced to be buried with their rulers; and millions lived and
died in the eternal agricultural cycle of rural China (Figure 11.12).
      By 500 b.c. iron-working became widespread, and iron agricultural tools were in
common use. Iron weapons, mass burials, and military annals tell of a savage form of
warfare, not at all like the depersonalized modern combat of tanks, missiles, and automatic
weapons. Men in armor fought at close quarters with swords and knives on battleﬁelds
swarming with chariots, cavalry, and bowmen.
           450       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                       At about the time iron was
                                                                                  introduced, Confucius (551–
                                                                                  479 b.c.) lived and taught and,
                                                                                  together with the spread of
                                                                                  Buddhism in the third century
                                                                                  a.d., moved much of Chinese
                                                                                  thought beyond the reach of
                                                                                  the foreigner.
                                                                                       Amid the panoply of arts,
                                                                                  crafts, and religion, the prosaic
                                                                                  elements of agriculture were
                                                                                  also changing. After 500 b.c.
                                                                                  great irrigation works were
                                                                                  brought into use, allowing the
                                                                                  intensive cultivation of wet-
                                                                                  rice species as well as many
                                                                                  other crops. This in turn sup-
                                                                                  ported the tremendous popu-
                                                                                  lation densities of China. Along
                                                                                  with the introduction of the
                                                                                  ox-drawn plow and the evolu-
FIGURE 11.11 From the original Shang-period state, China evolved into true        tion of precise crop-rotation
empires during the Zhou and Han dynasties, whose extents are indicated here.      practices, Chinese agriculture
                                                                                  underwrote the impressive cul-
                                                                                  tural elaborations we associate
                                                                                  with the Qin (221–206 b.c.)
                                                                                  and Han (206 b.c.–a.d. 220)
                                                                                  dynasties.
                                                                                       The great richness and
                                                                                  opulence of the Qin Dynasty
                                                                                  is lavishly displayed in the
                                                                                  Museum of Qin Shi Huang, in
                                                                                  Shaanxi Province. In a project
                                                                                  worthy of Egyptian pharaohs,
                                                                                  the emperor Qin Shi Huang
                                                                                  drafted 700,000 people to build
                                                                                  a huge mausoleum and palace
                                                                                  complex. The work lasted for
                                                                                  39 years, and when it was
                                                                                  ﬁnished it was full of rare and
                                                                                  beautiful objects. Historical
                                                                                  records of the time say that the
                                                                                  complex was lighted with
FIGURE 11.12 Some bodies in Chinese tombs were so well preserved that auto-       lamps fueled by the fat of giant
psies can reveal causes of death. Here a Chinese radiologist X-rays Lady Dai, a   salamanders. In 206 b.c. the
Han Dynasty noblewoman who died in 141 b.c. of a heart attack.                    whole complex was burned in
                                                THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN CHINA           451


a popular revolt. When archaeologists excavated they found 56.25 km2 of buildings and
features, including “tombs of immolated slaves, table pits, stone material processing
workshops, tombs of criminals, pits for the execution of slaves, pits of life-size terra cotta
warriors and horses, and pits of bronze chariots and horses.”50 The site so far has revealed
thousands of life-size statues of warriors and horses, all rendered in exquisite detail.
     One of the world’s ﬁrst imperial censuses was conducted in China in a.d. 1–2 and
tallied 57.7 million people, at least 10 percent of whom lived in rectangular wooden
buildings in towns with populations of up to about 250,000. Coins circulated, schools
ﬂourished, and a rich store of literature was created.
     Through it all, along the northern and western frontiers, the nomadic horsemen and
herders of Asia pressed on the periphery of successive empires. The Great Wall, begun
during the Warring States period and uniﬁed under Qin Shi Huang (246–209 b.c.) was
meant to keep the nomad out and the farmer in, but it was probably not too successful.
Throughout Chinese history there was a constant interchange between sedentary and
nomadic cultures.
     Westerners tend to think of China as a static civilization with ancient and ﬁxed forms.
But from the long-term perspective, it has been a varied, ineffably complex cultural
pageant.



SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

If we look at Chinese civilization for the standard markers of early civilizations, as described
in chapter 7, they are all evident: (1) an initial spread of regional styles of ceramics and
artifacts reﬂecting increasing intensity and scope of cultural interactions among Neolithic
farmers; (2) the appearance of burials indicating inherited wealth, power, and prestige
(Figure 11.13); (3) the gradual development of towns and cities, often ringed with defensive
walls, in which administrative bureaucracies and craft-production facilities were
concentrated; (4) a rising level of regional and national warfare; (5) an elaboration over
time in monumental architecture, writing, and other arts and crafts and the development
of a national religion and
ideology; and, (6) throughout
the whole sequence, an overall
increase in the population
density, technological produc-
tion, and size of competing
nation-states.
     Chinese civilization also
offers some contrasts to other
civilizations. Compared to
Mesopotamia, for example,
early Chinese societies were          FIGURE 11.13 Like their contemporaries in Egypt and Mesopotamia, early
less urban than the Sumerian          Chinese complex societies expended enormous amounts of wealth in mortuary cults.
peoples, although in later            This Chinese princess of the late second millennium b.c. was entombed in a suit
Chinese history the country           made of 2,000 jade tiles tied together with gold wire.
452   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      became heavily urbanized. Many hypotheses have been suggested for why people aggregate
      in settlements of different sizes under different conditions. Unfortunately, the archaeological
      evidence from China during the critical periods is not sufﬁciently complete to evaluate the
      several possibilities. Some have thought that warfare was important in determining the
      settlement size distribution in ancient China, and in fact warfare did have a profound
      inﬂuence on Chinese developments. But warfare, too, seems to be simply another—and
      somewhat variable—expression of more fundamental changes going on within societies as
      their complexity and differentiation increase.
           One factor of continual importance in all Chinese developments was the great spread of
      the nomadic and semi-nomadic peoples who lived on the borders of the agricultural heart-
      land. Some of the earliest documents attesting to the rise of the Chinese state, for example,
      imply that the Zhou Empire was initiated by the movement of the warlord Tai Wang to the
      central Shaanxi Province under pressure from his nomadic neighbors.51 And Owen
      Lattimore’s comprehensive history of relationships between nomad and farmer in China
      illustrated the crucial role of this relationship in the formation of all later Chinese empires.52
           Chinese civilization also appears to have placed women in positions of power to a
      much greater degree than some other civilizations. In all known ancient civilizations
      women of elite and royal families had special status and prerogatives, but in ancient China
      women were important bureaucrats, served as royal envoys, and in at least one instance
      commanded an army.53
           K. C. Chang suggests that Chinese civilization was extraordinarily absorbed with
      shamanism—the connection to another world, a world of the gods and magical powers,
      through priests. Chang also offers this condensed hypothesis about Chinese cultural
      evolution: “[T]he wealth that produced the civilization was itself the product of concen-
      trated political power, and the acquisition of power was accomplished through the accumu-
      lation of wealth.”54 Chang suggests that Chinese civilization operated on a profoundly
      religious basis, with kings, nobles, and commoners arranged in a layered universe, under a
      pantheon of gods, with communication between the physical and spirit worlds channeled
      through priests. Hence the abiding concern with divining the will of the gods through
      oracles—the king himself was credited with oracular powers. And, as Chang notes, techno-
      logy has a reduced importance in such a fundamentally religious and abstract cosmology,
      which may explain even some of the contemporary differences between East and West.
           China eventually became locked in the same cyclical pattern of expansion and collapse
      we documented in other ancient civilizations. Indeed, the apparent cyclicity of Chinese
      history has been the basis for many general models of cultural complexity, ranging from
      Marx to Marvin Harris.55 In these ancient empires it is as if some internal limiting factors
      exist that restrain growth past a certain point, at least until certain evolutionary conditions
      are present. Perhaps these were primarily technological limits in these early empires.
      Without modern means of information collection, storage, retrieval, and dissemination,
      political systems have very deﬁnite limits in terms of the numbers of people, projects, and
      provinces they can successfully integrate.


      BIBLIOGRAPHY
      Akazawa, T., and C. M. Aikens, eds. 1986. Prehistoric Hunter-Gatherers in Japan. Tokyo: University Museum,
                University of Tokyo, Bulletin No. 27.
                                                       THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN CHINA                 453


An, Zhimin. 1994. “China During the Neolithic.” In History of Humanity, Vol. 1: Prehistory and the Beginnings of
             Civilization, ed. S. J. De Laet. New York: Routledge.
Anonymous. 1982. Neolithic Site at Banpo Near Xian. Trans. Du Youliang [sic]. Guide to the Banpo Museum,
             printing data written in Chinese.
Barnard, N. 1961. Bronze Casting and Bronze Alloys in Ancient China. Canberra: Australian National University.
Barnes, G. L. 1990. Bibliographic Reviews of Far Eastern Archaeology 1990: Hoabhinian, Jomon, Yayoi. Oxford,
             England: Oxbow Books.
———. 1993. China, Korea, and Japan. London and New York: Thames and Hudson.
Bayard, D. 1979. “The Chronology of Prehistoric Metallurgy in North-East Thailand: Silabhumi or
             Samrddhabhumil.” In Early South-East Asia, ed. R. B. Smith and W. Watson. London: Oxford
             University Press.
———. 1986. “Agriculture, Metallurgy, and State Formation in Southeast Asia.” Current Anthropology
             25(1):103–105.
Bellwood, P. 1986. The Prehistory of the Indo-Malaysian Archipelago. Sydney: Academic Press.
Chang, K. C. 1976. Early Chinese Civilization: Anthropological Perspectives. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
             Press.
———. 1977. The Archaeology of Ancient China, 3rd ed. New Haven: Yale University Press.
———. 1980. Shang Civilization. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
———. 1981. “In Search of China’s Beginnings: New Light on an Old Civilization.” American Scientist
             69:148–158.
Chang, S. 1963. “The Historical Trend of Chinese Urbanization.” Annals of the Association of American
             Geographers 53:109 –143.
Chang, T. 1957. Archaeological Studies in Szechwan. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
———. 1963. Archaeology in China, Vol. 3: Chou China. Cambridge: Heffer.
De, Zhou Shi. 1987. “Classical Chinese Contributions to Shipbuilding.” Endeavour NS. 11(1):2 – 4.
Harris, M. 1977. Cannibals and Kings . New York: Random House.
Higham, C. 1989. The Archaeology of Mainland Southeast Asia. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University
             Press.
Kim, S. O. 1994. “Burials, Pigs, and Political Prestige in Neolithic China.” Current Anthropology 35(2):119 –
             142.
Lattimore, O. 1951. Inner Asian Frontiers of China. Boston: Beacon Press.
Li, C. 1957. The Beginnings of Chinese Civilization. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
Liu, L. 2003. “‘The Products of Minds as Well as of Hands’: Production of Prestige Goods in the Neolithic and
             Early State Periods of China.” Asian Perspectives 42(1):1– 40.
———. 2004. The Chinese Neolithic: Trajectories to Early States. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Meacham, W. 1977. “Continuity and Local Evolution in the Neolithic of South China: A Non-Nuclear Approach.”
             Current Anthropology 18:419 – 440.
Nelson, S. M., ed. 1995. The Archaeology of Northeast China: Beyond the Great Wall. New York: Routledge.
Olsen, S. J. 1987. “The Practice of Archaeology in China Today.” Antiquity 61(232):282–290.
Skinner, G. W. 1964. “Marketing and Social Structure in Rural China.” Journal of Asian Studies 24:3 – 43.
Stanley, D. J., Z. Chen, and J. Song. 1999. “Innundation, Sea-Level Rise and Transition from Neolithic to Bronze
             Age Cultures, Yangtze Delta, China.” Geoarchaeology 14(1):15 –26.
Stover, L. E. 1974. The Cultural Ecology of Chinese Civilization. New York: Pica Press.
Toynbee, A., ed. 1973. Half the World. New York: Holt.
Triestman, J. 1972. The Prehistory of China. Garden City, NY: Natural History Press.
Trigger, B. G. 1993. Early Civilizations: Ancient Egypt in Context. Cairo: American University in Cairo Press.
———. 1999. “Shang Political Organization: A Comparative Approach.” Journal of East Asian Archaeology
             13(1):43–62.
Wangping, S. 2000. “The Longshan Period and Incipient Chinese Civilization.” Journal of East Asian Archaeology
             2(1–2):195 –226.
Watson, W. 1971. Cultural Frontiers in Ancient East Asia. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
———. 1974. Ancient China. Greenwich, CT: New York Graphic Society.
Wheatley, P. 1971. The Pivot of the Four Quarters. Chicago: Aldine de Gruyter.
Wittfogel, K. A. 1957. Oriental Despotism: A Comparative Study of Total Power. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Wu, Z. 1985. “The Museum of Qin Shi Huang.” Museum 147:140 –147.
Yang, X., ed. 2004a. New Perspectives on China’s Past: Chinese Archaeology in the Twentieth Century. Volume 1:
             Cultures and Civilizations Reconsidered. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, and Kansas City: The
             Nelson-Atkins Museum of Art.
——, ed. 2004b. New Perspectives on China’s Past: Chinese Archaeology in the Twentieth Century. Volume 2: Major
             Archaeological Discoveries in Twentieth-Century China. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, and
             Kansas City: The Nelson-Atkins Museum of Art.
454   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      NOTES
       1. De, “Classical Chinese Contributions to Shipbuilding.”
       2. Chang, The Archaeology of Ancient China, pp. 95 –99.
       3. Liu, The Chinese Neolithic: Trajectories to Early States, p. 22.
       4. Ibid., pp. 23 –24.
       5. Ibid., pp. 20 –21.
       6. Stanley et al., “Inundation, Sea-Level Rise and Transition from Neolithic to Bronze Age Cultures, Yangtze
          Delta, China.”
       7. Ibid., pp. 20 –24.
       8. Recent work appears to show that “transitional” cultures between the late Paleolithic and Neolithic have
          evidence for very early pottery, as well as rice and millet—these sites date between 10,000 to 14,000 years ago,
          depending on the speciﬁc site (see Yang, New Perspectives on China’s Past: Chinese Archaeology in the Twentieth
          Century. Volume 2: Major Archaeological Discoveries in Twentieth-Century China, pp. 34 –37). This is some of
          the earliest pottery in the world, comparable in age to Jomon in Japan, where pottery is found associated with
          complex hunter-gatherers about 12,000 to 13,000 years ago (see Akazawa and Aikens, Prehistoric Hunter-
          Gatherers in Japan).
       9. An, “China During the Neolithic”; Yang, New Perspectives on China’s Past: Chinese Archaeology in the
          Twentieth Century. Volume 1: Cultures and Civilizations Reconsidered, p. 12.
      10. Triestman, The Prehistory of China.
      11. Yang, New Perspectives on China’s Past: Chinese Archaeology in the Twentieth Century. Volume 2: Major
          Archaeological Discoveries in Twentieth-Century China, pp. 46 –59.
      12. Ibid.
      13. Chang, “In Search of China’s Beginnings: New Light on an Old Civilization,” pp. 152–153.
      14. Watson, Ancient China.
      15. Yang, New Perspectives on China’s Past: Chinese Archaeology in the Twentieth Century. Volume 2: Major
          Archaeological Discoveries in Twentieth-Century China, p. 53.
      16. Ibid.
      17. Liu, The Chinese Neolithic: Trajectories to Early States, p.155.
      18. The following discussion of early complex Chinese societies is taken mainly from Chang, The Archaeology of
          Ancient China.
      19. Liu, The Chinese Neolithic: Trajectories to Early States, p. 135.
      20. Ibid., p. 136.
      21. Ibid.
      22. Kim, “Burials, Pigs, and Political Prestige in Neolithic China.”
      23. Ibid., p. 120.
      24. See also Wangping, “The Longshan Period and Incipient Chinese Civilization.”
      25. Liu, The Chinese Neolithic: Trajectories to Early States, pp. 111–113.
      26. See Chang, The Archaeology of Ancient China, for a review of the archaeological record of these cultural
          elements.
      27. In addition to Chang, The Archaeology of Ancient China, see also Triestman, The Prehistory of China.
      28. Yang, New Perspectives on China’s Past: Chinese Archaeology in the Twentieth Century. Volume 2: Major
          Archaeological Discoveries in Twentieth-Century China, p. 114.
      29. Ibid.
      30. Liu, The Chinese Neolithic: Trajectories to Early States, p. 226.
      31. Chang, The Archaeology of Ancient China, pp. 286 –294.
      32. Yang, New Perspectives on China’s Past: Chinese Archaeology in the Twentieth Century. Volume 2: Major
          Archaeological Discoveries in Twentieth-Century China, p. 121.
      33. Bayard, “The Chronology of Prehistoric Metallurgy in North-East Thailand: Silabhumi or Samrddhabhumil.”
      34. Chang, Early Chinese Civilization: Anthropological Perspectives.
      35. Wheatley, The Pivot of the Four Quarters.
      36. Ibid.
      37. Chang, Early Chinese Civilization: Anthropological Perspectives, p. 10.
      38. Wheatley, The Pivot of the Four Quarters, p. 93.
      39. Limited excavations and surveys in the 1930s originally identiﬁed the site (Yang, New Perspectives on China’s
          Past: Chinese Archaeology in the Twentieth Century. Volume 2: Major Archaeological Discoveries in Twentieth-
          Century China, pp. 144 –146).
      40. Ibid., p. 145.
      41. Chang, Early Chinese Civilization: Anthropological Perspectives, p. 48.
      42. Wheatley, The Pivot of the Four Quarters.
      43. Ibid., p. 63.
                                                      THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN CHINA   455


44. Ibid.
45. Chang, The Archaeology of Ancient China, pp. 138 –139.
46. Wheatley, The Pivot of the Four Quarters, p. 76.
47. Chang, “In Search of China’s Beginnings: New Light on an Old Civilization,” p. 156.
48. Ibid.
49. Wu Zilin, “The Museum of Qin Shi Huang,” p. 141.
50. Chang, “In Search of China’s Beginnings: New Light on an Old Civilization.”
51. Lattimore, Inner Asian Frontiers of China.
52. Ibid.
53. Trigger, Early Civilizations: Ancient Egypt in Context, p. 37.
54. Chang, The Archaeology of Ancient China, p. 414.
55. See, for example, Harris, Cannibals and Kings.
12
Later Complex Societies of the
Old World

     The day may come when, contemplating a
     world given back to the primeval forest, a
     human survivor will have no means of even
     guessing how much intelligence Man once
     imposed upon the forms of the earth, when he
     set up the stones of Florence in the billowing
     expanse of the Tuscan olive-groves. No trace
     will be left then of the palaces that saw
     Michelangelo pass by, nursing his grievances
     against Raphael; and nothing of the little Paris
     cafes where Renoir once sat beside Cezanne,
     Van Gogh beside Gauguin. Solitude, vicegerent
     of Eternity, vanquishes men’s dreams no less
     than armies, and men have known this ever
     since they came into being and realized that
     they must die.
     Andre Malraux




     T        o imply that the rich ancient civilizations of Greece, Ghana, Germany, Japan,
              Thailand, and other areas beyond the “primary civilizations” we have considered
     in earlier chapters were “secondary” in some sense is to imply an inappropriate sense of a
     hierarchy of importance. In many ways these later states and empires were largely
     independent developments—creations of their own environments, peoples, and unique
     histories, even if they incorporated elements from earlier civilizations. Interactions among
     the world’s many different cultures, moreover, have gradually increased in the past two
     millennia, with the balance of power and wealth frequently shifting from place to place and
     time to time.
           But ancient cultures of temperate Europe, Sub-Saharan Africa, Southeast Asia, and
     many other areas were, in fact, inﬂuenced by the ﬁrst civilizations, and to some extent were
     derivatives of them. And while European cultures, for example, eventually came to
     dominate the civilizations of Egypt, China, and Mesopotamia, they did so partly on the
     basis of the forms of agriculture and technology invented by these earlier civilizations.

                                                    456
                                                   LATER COMPLEX SOCIETIES OF THE OLD WORLD               457


      It is beyond the scope of this book
to review these later states and empires in
great detail,1 and, with the exception of                       A.D. 600   Settlers from the Society and Marquesas islands
Europe, only a few of them are described                                   reach Hawai’i in the Paciﬁc

brieﬂy at the end of this chapter to                              15 B.C.  Roman Conquest of central and western Europe

illustrate the diversity of ancient cultures
                                                                200 B.C.   Settlers from Fiji and Samoa reach the Society and
and the extent to which after about 3000                                   Marquesas islands in the Paciﬁc
b.c. the Old World became a mosaic                           475–15 B.C.   La `
                                                                              Tene period in Europe
of evolving cultures, none of which
developed in isolation. From the last few                   800–475 B.C.   Halstatt period in Europe
millennia b.c. onward, Old World his-
tory is a dizzyingly complex tapestry in                       1000 B.C.   Iron Age begins in Europe

which to separate individual strands
                                                               1000 B.C.   Fortiﬁed hilltop settlements appear in Europe
and even discern patterns is sometimes
difﬁcult. The reader may also wish to                          1000 B.C.   Mycenaean civilization begins
consider anew the biblical prophecy that
“the last shall be ﬁrst,” a sentiment                          1000 B.C.   Lapita pottery reaches Fiji and Samoa in the Paciﬁc
repeatedly demonstrated in Old World
culture history, where “peripheral” polit-                     1500 B.C.   Lapita pottery appears in the Bismarck
                                                                           Archipelago in the Paciﬁc
ical systems often rose to imperial power.
                                                               2000 B.C.   Minoan civilization begins
      Old World prehistory after about
4000 b.c. is in a sense an account of the                      2700 B.C.   Troy established as a city in the Aegean
division of the world into fewer and
fewer great empires and the slow eco-                          3000 B.C.   Beginning of the Beaker culture in Europe
nomic intermeshing of Europe, Asia,
and Africa. At about 2700 b.c. a citizen                  3500–2300 B.C.   Battle-axe culture in Europe

of Memphis, the capital of the Egypt
                                                               4000 B.C.   Gold and copper tools appear in central Europe
state, and a hunter-forager working the
north coast of France probably had not                         4500 B.C.   Megalith construction in western Europe begins
the slightest impact on each other’s lives,
not even as the end points of trading                          5000 B.C.   Food-producing economies well-established in the
networks in the most exotic of com-                                        Aegean

modities. But by about a.d. 200, north-                   5600–5000 B.C.   Bandkeramik culture in central Europe

ern France and Egypt were provinces in
                                                               5600 B.C.   Food-producing economies reach central Europe
the Roman Empire, and French veterans
of Roman armies were sometimes paid                       6000–2000 B.C.   Neolithic food-producing economies spread in
their pensions in the form of farms in          (8,000–4,000 years ago)    Europe
Egypt. That process of growing intercon-
nection occurred all over Europe, Asia,
and Africa, but it was greatly modiﬁed by
environments, transport routes, and
speciﬁc historic events. Ships plying the
Mediterranean coast linked millions of people in Asia, Europe and Africa, but the Sahara
desert cut much of Africa off from this intense interaction; the mountains of central and
western Europe had a similar effect for a time, as did the deserts, tundra, and other barriers
to the east.
458   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


           Today, however, nearly the whole world is interconnected and everywhere there are
      indications of a worldwide homogenization of cultures: Eskimos drive snowmobiles,
      Chinese drink American soft drinks, and a ﬁnancial tremor in the money markets of, say,
      Singapore, reverberates powerfully through the world’s economies. The rapid growth of
      the Internet and worldwide communications systems now links peoples in what can
      be considered a new form of organism, whose nervous system transcends distances and
      cultural differences. As different as our world today seems from the world of, say, 5,000
      years ago, however, what we see today is the continuation of the same basic trends that were
      evident already by 3000 b.c., when ships were beginning to sail the Mediterranean and
      farming was being extended into Europe, Asia, and Africa.



      TEMPERATE EUROPE

      Until about the seventh millennium b.c., “Barbarian Europe”—the great forests, grasslands,
      and mountain ranges beyond the Aegean Sea and extending north to Britain, Scandinavia,
      and Russia—was inhabited only by hunters and foragers. In succeeding millennia,
      Europeans developed complex forms of subsistence and adaptation and a rich cultural
      repertoire of technology and social systems, but throughout prehistory and well into the
      early centuries of the ﬁrst millennium a.d., European cultures were not the equal of those
      of Egypt, Mesopotamia, China, and other areas in most of the characteristics of cultural
      “complexity” (see chapter 7).
           One of the great questions of comparative history is how it happened that for
      thousands of years much of the creativity of the world was centered in Mesopotamia, China,
      the Indus, and the Mediterranean, and then, after the middle of the second millennium
      a.d., the cultural center of the world seemed to shift so decisively to Western Europe.
      Europeans seem to have incorporated many cultural elements of older, foreign cultures and
      then developed them in unique ways in an environment very different from that of these
      older civilizations. Karl Marx and others have argued that one key element in the eventual
      dominance of Western Europe was that its societies were based on rainfall agriculture,
      instead of the large riverine-canal systems of the older civilizations of Egypt, Mesopotamia,
      and China. Central governments can control every aspect of life, if their citizens are
      inextricably tied to an irrigation system fed by a great river through canal systems controlled
      by the government. In Western Europe, however, a central government could try to
      conquer smaller polities but it could not control the rainfall that was the indispensable
      element in farming the rich lands of temperate Europe. Marx used this environmental fact
      to explain much of the transition to feudalism and capitalism that made Western
      Europeans masters of so much of the world.
           Yet the economic and political history of the Old World cannot be easily or simply
      explained. Steven Shennan notes that many early scholars, especially V. Gordon Childe and
      the Marxists, saw history as a case in which “the Olympic torch of development was passed
      from East to West.”2 During the past several decades, research has suggested that many
      innovations were, in fact, independently invented in Europe, and in general there has been
      a critical reevaluation of the notion that to understand European prehistory one should
      look ﬁrst and always at Mediterranean civilizations.3
                                               LATER COMPLEX SOCIETIES OF THE OLD WORLD           459


Temperate Europe: Early Agriculture
As was discussed in chapter 6, the rough distinction between “farmers” and “hunter-
foragers” obscures great variations within and between these abstract socioeconomic types.
But debates about the origins of European agriculture have often been thought of in these
terms. Between about 6000 and 2000 b.c. hunting-foraging economies in most of temperate
Europe were replaced by agricultural economies based on cereals that had ﬁrst been
domesticated in the Middle East and introduced into Europe, including einkorn wheat,
barley, and rye; these crops were complemented by sheep and cattle—which also were
introduced as domesticates from the Middle East.4 As Robin Dennell notes, the only major
cereal crop domesticated in Europe was probably oats, which did not become economically
important until late in prehistory.5
     As with most such long-term, widespread, and radical processes of culture change,
archaeologists have tended to focus on the mechanisms of these cultural changes. One
traditional model offered to explain these mechanisms is that farmers from southern
Europe and the Middle East colonized temperate Europe over several millennia and
displaced hunter-foragers (Figure 12.1). As Marek Zvelebil and Paul Dolukhanov have
noted,6 this view focuses almost entirely on the circumstances and the processes of
colonization, but largely ignores the response of the hunter-foragers who were presumably
displaced. Other more recent models for the agricultural transition in Europe posit a
greater role for the indigenous hunter-foragers.7 Robin Dennell8 suggests that the climate
changes in Europe after the end of the ice ages favored the growth of grasses such as einkorn
and barley, and Europeans may have begun exploiting them in ways that led to domestica-
tion and cereal agriculture—a largely indigenous development, in other words, that may
have involved some introduced plants, and animals from Southwest Asia, but was not
simply the transplanting of Asians or their agricultural systems into Europe. Emmer wheat,
bread wheat, sheep, and other
crops and animals, nonetheless,
seem certainly to have been
domesticated in Southwest Asia
and then introduced to Europe.
     Unfortunately, the archae-
ological evidence with which
to evaluate some of these con-
trasting ideas, especially the
archaeology of post-glacial
hunter-foragers of Mesolithic
Europe, has only recently begun
to be treated systematically.9
The European Mesolithic is
deﬁned in terms of a shift in
stone tool types to an emphasis
on smaller geometric forms—
which may reﬂect primarily the
introduction and improving
efﬁciency of bows and arrows.10      FIGURE 12.1 The spread of agriculture into Europe from the Middle East.
460   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      As Douglas Price has noted, this transition may have been mainly the result of different raw
      materials available as the glaciers retreated and of the evolution of tool-making skills, rather
      than profound social or cultural changes.11 He also points out that we have lost much of
      the Mesolithic archaeological record because sea levels in northern Europe did not reach
      current levels until about 6000 b.c.; thus many regions available for settlement by
      Mesolithic peoples are now submerged.12
           Among the earliest evidence for cereal farming comes from Argissa-Maghula in
      Greece, where people were cultivating emmer wheat and barley and raising cattle, sheep,
      and pigs by 6800 b.c.
           On the Mediterranean fringes of European farming communities, agricultural villages
      were established on a reliable, productive mixture primarily of cereals, olives, and grapes
      in combination with sheep and goats. The processes by which domesticates and farming
      spread from the Middle East and Mediterranean areas into the great temperate forests of
      northern Europe remains one of the most interesting and intensively researched subjects
      in contemporary archaeology. Bogucki’s analysis of agricultural origins in the northern
      European Plain, particularly in the region of Poland, for example, suggests that for
      centuries Mesolithic foragers and primitive agriculturalists were increasingly symbiotic in
      their economies and that the ﬁrst agriculturalists, the Funnel Beaker People, involved the
      “selective incorporation of cultigens and domestic animals into an essentially Mesolithic
      way of life.”13 He also suggests that the great stone monuments and tombs that eventually
      appeared all over Europe were in fact territorial markers, which became important
      considerations as agriculture spread.
           There are great environmental differences between the semi-arid Mediterranean zone
      and the wetter, cooler regions of Britain, the Low Countries, northern Germany, and
      southern Scandinavia. A prehistoric farmer in southern Italy needed only a few hand-tools
      to farm successfully, but a peasant in northern Germany required capital-intensive
      equipment, such as the horse-drawn mouldboard plow. As Graeme Barker has observed,

          The object of Mediterranean plowing has always been to conserve the moisture content of
          the soil by scufﬂing the surface, whereas in northern Europe heavy equipment is needed to
          break up the thick mass of roots in order to release the soil nutrients from the lower depths.
          . . . The analysis of the early history of agriculture in particular, and of the productive
          economy in general, in the two areas has been characterized by a deﬁnite sense of
          entrepreneurial risk takers in the Mediterranean contrasting with their honest but stolid
          contemporaries in the north, rather like the familiar contrast between the respective
          football teams of southern and northern European countries today.14

      The rate and pattern of agriculture’s spread across Europe raise some interesting questions.
      To a certain extent, this spread can be assumed to be determined by the blunt forces of
      environment, technology, and demography. The genetic composition of cereals sets a strict
      limit to the rate at which species adapt to different environments, and without artiﬁcial
      fertilizers the yields of crops—and therefore human population densities—are narrowly
      constrained. But when we look at the problem of how small-time European farmers
      eventually produced complex societies here, we can begin to see how complexly interrelated
      are four dimensions of these ancient societies: climate-environment, farming technology,
      human population ﬂuctuations, and sociopolitical institutions.15 By 5600 b.c., a Mediter-
      ranean complement of domestic grains, cows, and sheep—and the technology to exploit
      them—had moved up the Danube into central Europe (see Figure 12.1). People lived in
                                           LATER COMPLEX SOCIETIES OF THE OLD WORLD       461


small clusters of wooden huts,
often with their animals, and
farmed narrow plots near
rivers and streams. Some of the
spread of this form of agricul-
tural settlement in Europe is
marked by pottery decorated
with incised, linear patterns—
the Bandkeramik style. The
Bandkeramik peoples and their
agricultural way of life appear
ﬁrst along the Danube in
central Europe, and by shortly
after 5000 b.c. had settled as far
                                     FIGURE 12.2 Reconstruction (top) and plan view (bottom) of a Linear
north as southern Holland.
                                     Bandkeramik longhouse in Europe.
These sturdy farmers lived in
small homesteads composed of
timber-and-thatch houses (Figure 12.2) and subsisted on barley, einkorn, wheat, cattle,
sheep, goats, and a variety of other crops and animals.
     Unlike that of the semi-arid plains of the Middle East and the Mediterranean littoral,
however, the agricultural way of life in Europe proper required clearing thick forests and
grasslands, at ﬁrst by cutting down the trees, later by plowing.
     Alasdair Whittle has reviewed the evidence for the variations in the location and
composition of Neolithic European sites and has shown that the distribution of loess and
alluvium and the forces of trade and social stratiﬁcation produce considerable vari-
ations in the density and sizes of settlements across the European Plain.16 Marek Zvelebil
and Peter Rowley-Conwy17 have argued that the transition to agriculture in much of
Europe involved a continuum of social and economic changes in which, at ﬁrst, hunter-
foragers and farmers encountered each other and traded a few products but were
largely independent of each other; over time, however, hunter-foragers and farmers began
to compete directly, as farmers moved into areas that had been exploited by hunter-
foragers; eventually, the superior economic resources of farmers probably enabled them to
displace hunter-foragers in the most productive areas—although crop failures and other
disasters probably forced farmers to rely on hunting and foraging to survive on many
occasions.
     The Zvelebil and Rowley-Conwy hypothesis represents the “traditional view” of the
settlement of Europe by Neolithic farmers. Recently, a wide variety of archaeologists
working on the origins of agriculture and the Neolithic in Europe have come to a some-
what different conclusion.18 While acknowledging that certain plants and animals were
introduced from the Middle East into Europe and that there were also some Neolithic
colonists who entered and spread throughout portions of Europe,19 archaeologists today
believe that local Mesolithic populations had a much greater role in the transition to food-
production and the appearance of Neolithic lifeways. The notion that hunter-gatherers
were simply displaced by or absorbed into groups of Neolithic immigrants is clearly far too
simplistic an explanation. As Douglas Price points out, indigenous Mesolithic populations
were the likely the main agents in the adoption and spread of agriculture especially for most
areas of Europe outside of southeastern and southern Europe.20
           462        PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                    After about 5000 b.c., as populations grew and
                                                              farmers adapted their crops and technologies to the
                                                              diverse European environments, larger communities
                                                              formed, some with apparent fortiﬁcations of earth-
                                                              works and enclosure walls of timber. Some people were
                                                              buried in large communal graves, marked by earthen
                                                              mounds and megaliths—large stone monuments
                                                              (Figure 12.3).
                                                                    By 3000 b.c. agricultural villages were to be
                                                              found from Great Britain far into eastern Russia.
                                                              There were hundreds of local resource specializations,
                                                              but most of these settlements subsisted mainly on
                                                              domesticated cereals and cattle. Copper axes and
FIGURE 12.3 A dolmen type of megalith. These struc-           ornaments were widely distributed, especially in
tures number in the tens of thousands in the maritime areas
                                                              central Europe and the Balkans.
of Western Europe.
                                                                    Population densities were heaviest in the central
                      European areas where rivers supplied broad alluvial ﬁelds, but after 3000 b.c. villages
                      appeared in light to heavy densities over almost every area where the environment
                      permitted stock-raising and cereal agriculture. The areas where this kind of subsistence was
                      possible were greatly expanded by the introduction (perhaps from the Middle East) of the
                      animal-drawn plow. In the absence of an arid climate or alluvial soils, it is difﬁcult for the
                      agriculturalist to compete with wild vegetation and renew the fertility of the soil. But the
                      plow gave these early European farmers a way to expose the soil for seeding, and it
                      contributed to weed control and soil fertility by plowing under vegetation (although the
                      deep plowing of modern times was a later invention).
                            Much of the archaeological work on the Neolithic in Europe has been focused on the
                      economic transformations, the interactions of colonists with local Mesolithic popula-
                      tions, and the involvement of Mesolithic hunter-gatherers in the adoption and spread of
                      the Neolithic way of life. There are, however, other perspectives on the Neolithic transition
                      in Europe. These are post-processual in orientation and they focus on ideological aspects
                      involved in the transition of society. Prominent among these have been the work of Hodder,
                      Thorpe, Tilley, and Edmonds, as well as others.21 While the aspects emphasized vary some-
                      what from scholar to scholar, they all share in common a focus on ideas, symbols, and the
                      way in which people view the world around them.
                            As we saw in chapter 6, for example, Hodder has stressed the notion of a contrast
                      between wild and tame, nature and culture, ﬁeld (agrios) and household (domus). These
                      concepts interact to create a social domestication of people as well as a domestication of
                      wild plants and animals. On the other hand, Tilley emphasizes the interactions and interplay
                      between people and material culture. In his viewpoint, items of material culture are used
                      by people to build, manipulate, and change the world around them. This results, over time,
                      in a different worldview and, in the case of the Neolithic, the introduction of social inequality,
                      the transformation of how the dead are treated via rituals, and how one perceives the
                      landscape around them.
                            Whichever pathway is used to better understand or explain the Neolithic, one aspect
                      is quite important—once most Europeans became agriculturalists, the stage was set for the
                      evolution of complex forms of social organization. Some of the factors that transformed
                      Europe were local, others international.
                                                LATER COMPLEX SOCIETIES OF THE OLD WORLD         463


Temperate Europe: Later Neolithic Through Bronze
Age Developments
Some of the earliest signs of social change in temperate Europe are, predictably, in southern
Europe, on the fringes of the Mediterranean world. For example, the Varna cemetery near
the Black Sea coast of Bulgaria, dating to about 4000 b.c., contained massive hoards of
golden and copper tools, suggesting not only great differences in economic classes in this
society, but also the existence of a metallurgical industry of considerable sophistication.22
Varna may well have ﬂourished on the basis of a Black Sea trade.
     Because they are so common and preserve well, metal and ceramic objects have been
used as the deﬁning characteristics of European peoples before the Romans. The Battle Axe
People, for example, is the general term for people who lived between about 3500 and 2300
b.c., whose copper and stone axes are found all over temperate Europe, mainly in graves,
along with their distinctive cord-marked pottery. These people seem to have originated in
central and eastern Europe, and they may have begun using the domestic horse and wheeled
carts as early as 3000 b.c. As usual, it is difﬁcult to determine if people in eastern Europe
physically migrated westward en masse, or if their art styles and economic impact spread
across Europe much in advance of any actual population movements.
     Another spread of artifact styles involved the Beaker Culture, named after the
distinctive pottery they produced. The Beaker Culture was evident in much of western and
central Europe just after 3000 b.c., and eventually the Battle Axe and Beaker cultures seem
to have coalesced.
     In talking about these cultures we must remember, of course, that nearly all the people
of this era were simple agriculturalists, with a few families living together in tiny hamlets.
Most would have lived out their lives in small houses and farms. Houses were simple
structures of logs, clay, and thatch.
     Another indication of the social changes that accompanied the spread of farming in
Western Europe are megaliths. By about 4500 b.c.—1,500 years and more before the
Egyptians began to build large stone buildings—farmers in Spain were using large stones
weighing many tons to build tombs, and over the next several millennia people all over
western Europe built large megalithic tombs. These tombs were often composed of several
interior rooms with stone walls, with large blocking stones covering entrances to the
complex and to its various compartments. These tombs were usually communal, with
numerous corpses in them, and there is some evidence that the dead were exposed to the
elements for a time and then their bones were entombed. Many tombs were covered by
earth and thus formed long “barrow” mounds (Figure 12.4).
     Tombs were not the only megalithic structures in Europe. Huge stones were raised
in complex designs in areas of France—for example, the thousands of standing stones
in the alignments that stretch over some three-quarters of a mile at Carnac. Stonehenge
(Figure 12.5), in England—the ﬁnal arrangement we see today dates to the Bronze Age—
is the most famous example of the circular arrangements of European megaliths.
     Like the pyramids of Egypt, the megalithic structures of Europe have elicited many
speculations about the societies and ideologies of which they were a part. Their spatial
arrangements in some cases suggest that they were positioned to mark boundaries
of some kind. Stonehenge and similar arrangements were probably ritual centers, and
some, perhaps, were used for astronomical observations and calculations. The long
“barrow” mounds that enclose megalithic tombs may have been evocations of the long
           464       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                     houses in which these early
                                                                                     farmers lived23—and thus per-
                                                                                     haps were a reﬂection of the
                                                                                     ties of community and kinship
                                                                                     that united these people in life
                                                                                     and death. Like the Egyptians,
                                                                                     these monuments no doubt
                                                                                     reinforced social hierarchies of
                                                                                     power and ideology and main-
                                                                                     tained the connections between
                                                                                     generations past, present, and
                                                                                     future.24
                                                                                            A somewhat different
                                                                                     question is, aside from what
                                                                                     the people who built these
                                                                                     monuments thought about
                                                                                     them, why did these structures
                                                                                     appear when they did and
                                                                                     where they did? As noted in
                                                                                     chapter 9, with regard to the
FIGURE 12.4 A passage grave type of megalith.




FIGURE 12.5 Stonehenge began as a series of ritual excavations about 2700 b.c. and was greatly elaborated between 2000
and 1000 b.c. The arranged stones probably had astronomical signiﬁcance. Stonehenge is just one example of thousands of
stone monuments built in this period in western Europe.
                                                LATER COMPLEX SOCIETIES OF THE OLD WORLD         465


Egyptian pyramids, these colossal monuments around the world (similar forms are
considered in later chapters on Mexico, Peru, and North America) seem to appear at times
of particular stress and rapid change. In North America, for example, as Robert C. Dunnell
has noted,25 great communal tombs not unlike the megalithic tombs of Europe appeared
in the Ohio and Mississippi river valleys just at the time when maize-beans-squash-based
agriculture was being established in these areas, and these monuments seem to appear on
the edges of the area where that agricultural adaptation was effective.26 Perhaps these great
“wastes” of energy and resources stabilized these societies by reducing population growth
and economic expansion. Viewed from this perspective, what the ancient Europeans
actually thought about these monuments is not just unknowable, it is not particularly
important: What is important is that these monuments had profound socioeconomic
impact on these societies. The prehistoric natives of Mississippi and of England may have
had vastly different ideas about the signiﬁcance of their monuments—yet each built them
at similar points in their cultural evolutionary history.
     The organization and planning required to build monuments like Stonehenge probably
reﬂect a society with at least incipient rank, class, and occupational specialization, and all
through the last few millennia b.c. expanding trade between Europe and the Mediterranean
and Aegean regions would have provided some stimulus to cultural change.
     Lewthwaite used the term Maﬁa model to describe views of the emergence of complex
societies in Europe in which “the motor for social change is the ambition of certain
individuals to dominate and control their fellow human beings, an ambition that can be
realized in certain ecological . . . circumstances.”27
     From burials not only of bodies but also of hoards of precious metals and artifacts, we
can speculate that warrior tribes contended all across Europe in the late second millennium
b.c., with their fortunes rising and falling to some extent with their success in maintaining
trading links with the Mediterranean and Aegean societies. Baltic amber, salt, metal tools,
and hundreds of other products ﬂowed along these ancient trade routes. By the end of this
period, fortiﬁed hilltop settlements were a characteristic of many parts of Europe, including
central Europe.28

Temperate Europe: Iron Age Developments: Hallstatt
and La Tène
Until about 1000 b.c. the secret of iron-making was a monopoly of the Hittite state in
Anatolia, but after this time knowledge of the technique spread north and west into Europe.
Iron is a much more utilitarian metal than bronze or gold: Iron tools could make a major
difference in efﬁciencies of plows, hoes, awls, knives, swords, arrowheads, and a thousand
other products.
     One early European iron-working culture, the Hallstatt, is reﬂected in the distinctive
artifacts of this tradition from Austria, southern Germany, the Czech Republic, and
Slovakia, between about 800 and 475 b.c. Archaeological evidence recovered in the past
several decades indicates that a number of earlier settlements, such as Heuneburg and
Hochdorf, grew into important manufacturing and trade centers during the Hallstatt
period, as well as the subsequent La Tène period29 (Figure 12.6). Differences between people
also became more accentuated during the Iron Age, with a proliferation of different design
elements and patterns on items such as belt plates.30 There is also ample evidence of status
466   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                western limits of Persian
                empire

           trade routes
                Greek

                Phoenician

                Etruscan
                                                                Gundestrup

                                                               Dejbjerg
                                                                                                    Baltic Sea
                                                               Hjortspring
                                                                                R.
                                                                                      El
                      Camulodunum (Cotoheitry)                                            be
                                                                                                   Biskupin
                                                                               R. N
             Atlantic Ocean                                                                           O
                                                                                                   R.
                                                                                                          r
                                                                                               Cliite   de        u la
                                                                                                                 st
                                    Mont Lassois Vix                                                              i
                                                           Hochodorf Hradiste                       R. V
                                                                   Heuneberg        Zavist
                                Avaricum Bourgesl                       Manching                                         p
                                               GAUL                           Hallstatt
                                                                                                                              ns
                                                             La Tene NORICUM                                               hia
                                                                     Villach                                             at
                                                                                    Maodarensbaig
                                                                              Vace
                               Pyren
                                     ees     Eotremont CISALPHE GAUL                Sticna
                                         (AIX-en-Pioyence)
                                  R.            Massilia Olbia                                                                     Baltic Sea
                                                                                         Singidunum
                                   Eb                                                      (Belgrade)
                                       ro                                      ET
                                                                               Ad
                                                                                RUria
                          IBERIA                                           IA         t
                                                                                      R ic S
                                                                                             ea

                                                                                Naples

                                                     Mediter
                                                                ran
                                                                      ea
                                                                           n
                                                                               Se
                                                                                      a




                                                                                                          Apolionia

      FIGURE 12.6 Some important Hallstatt and La Tène sites.



      differences between people, with some of the most notable examples coming from burial
      contexts. At Hochdorf, in Germany, for instance, a late Hallstatt burial of a 30-year-old
      male included a large mound with a burial chamber built of oak, abundant gold, feasting
      paraphernalia—drinking horns of iron and of aurochs (wild cattle) horn, bronze dishes, a
      bronze cauldron, a gold bowl, and so forth—elaborate textiles, a four-wheeled wagon, and
      a bronze couch (on which the deceased was laid).31
           Another well-known and impressive late Hallstatt burial is the so-called princess at Vix,
      Mont Lassois, in France (Figure 12.7).32 The 35-year-old woman laid to rest here was
      covered with a leather blanket and placed on the bed of a cart in the center of a large square
      chamber dug into the earth. The burial chamber was lined with wooden planks and covered
      with an earthen mound. Inside the chamber were a wealth of grave goods, including an
      enormous bronze cauldron—made in Greece and decorated with Greek warriors and
      chariots—used for serving and storing wine, bowls made of silver, gold, and bronze—one
      of which was from the Etruscan area of Italy—a gold collar, bronze brooches, and other
      items of personal adornment. Not far from this tomb is another structure containing life-
                                                LATER COMPLEX SOCIETIES OF THE OLD WORLD           467


size stone statues of a richly dressed
woman and a male warrior. Some
have speculated that the female
stature is a representation of the
“princess.”33
      An interesting reinterpretation
of the Vix burial has recently been
offered by Christopher Knüsel.34 He
argues that the traditional inter-
pretation of Vix contextualizes the
richly adorned female in terms of
male society, thus, a “princess.”
Knüsel, however, sees the combina-
tion of exotic goods, ritual treat-
ment, and physical characteristics of
the woman—which include skeletal
evidence for a waddling gait and a
wry-neck deformity that resulted in
her head held tilted to the right—as
evidence that she was a ritual spe-
cialist, perhaps placed in a socially
powerful or leadership position with
respect to control of trade relation-
ships with the Mediterranean region.
Richly adorned female ritual speci-         FIGURE 12.7 Plan map of the tomb of the “princess” at Vix, France.
alists are known from later La Tène
contexts such as Gündlingen in Germany.35
      Although trade relationships continued to be important in the following La Tène
period—from about 475 b.c. to the Roman Conquest in the last few years b.c.—the nature
of the goods imported from the Mediterranean area appears to have changed rather rad-
ically.36 Hallstatt burial assemblages include unique and “expensive” Greek bronze vessels
that were the result of extraordinary craftsmanship. La Tène burial assemblages, on the
other hand, contain the everyday Mediterranean items typical of the households of wealthy
Greek and Etrucscan social classes. The emphasis on the unique in La Tène society is instead
on local products such as gold neck and arm jewelry, leading to the development of
distinctive Celtic art and ornamentation. Quite interestingly, there is less and less evidence
for individual identity through time in La Tène culture, and burials change from single
inhumations to modest cremations or no evidence for burial at all.37 What seems to replace
an emphasis on burial of humans is a greater focus on landscape features such as water,
where “hoards” of swords, iron tools, gold coins, and gold rings have been found in
numerous places.38
      At about the same time as the decreased emphasis on individuals and individual iden-
tities, and the ﬂorescence of indigenous Celtic art styles, is the appearance of sites known
as oppida—enormous settlements, such as Manching, fortiﬁed by massive walls built of
earth, stone, and timber, and located in natural defensive positions. These vary in popula-
tion size from place to place, as well as in overall size, with some covering only 10 hectares
468   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      and others, 500 hectares.39 The oppida represent massive investments of time and labor,
      and thus are similar in effort and organization of work forces to monumental construction
      projects in Egypt, China, Mesoamerica, South America, and other early complex societies,
      civilizations, and states.
            The Hallstatt and La Tène cultures of ﬁrst millennium b.c. Europe ﬂourished in a
      period of rapid population expansion, migrations of various ethnic groups, reformation of
      trade routes along lines dictated by Mediterranean cultures, and other major social changes.
      The prehistoric European Iron Age, however, came to a relatively abrupt end with the
      Roman Conquest, which is conventionally dated to 15 b.c.40


      A BRIEF OVERVIEW OF OTHER LATER OLD WORLD
      COMPLEX SOCIETIES

      Earlier in this chapter we mentioned that there are numerous later states and empires in
      the Old World, all of which provide quite interesting examples of the many and varied
      trajectories in the development of complex societies. Each is certainly deserving of extended
      discussion, although here we can offer only a brief description of a few.


      The Aegean
      The “wine dark sea” of which Homer rhapsodized is the lovely expanse of the Aegean
      between Greece and Anatolia that encloses Lemnos, Lesbos, and hundreds of other islands.
      These islands and much of the mainlands of Asia and Europe that border on the Aegean
      and the Mediterranean seas are relatively arid, but they became very productive farmlands
      and also were an abundant source of metals, woods, and other materials.
           Domesticated wheat, barley, sheep, goats, grapes, olives, and other crops were
      established all over the Mediterranean by 5000 b.c., and by 3000 b.c. great volumes of com-
      modities were ﬂowing throughout the eastern Mediterranean world. By about 2700 b.c.
      Troy, Poliochni on the island of Lemnos, and other communities were already cities, with
      impressive stone buildings, efﬁcient roads, and a diversiﬁed economy that included
      specialized and lucrative production of objects in gold, tin, and other metals.
           These metals were, in a sense, not economically indispensable to the economies of the
      Aegean world of this age. Some bronze tools and weapons were no doubt useful, but much
      of this trade seems to have been in luxury goods without direct economic utility—gold
      ﬁgurines, for example. But a lot of the other products were basic staples and commodities.
      Probably the greatest volumes of trade were in commodities long since consumed and
      therefore archaeologically invisible, such as the millions of gallons of wine no doubt
      shipped all over the Mediterranean. In any case, it is really not quite accurate to think of
      golden ﬁgurines as economically useless: Status and the pursuit and social reinforcement
      of status were primary economic stimuli all over the ancient world.
           By about 2500 b.c., the Aegean islands, including Crete, and the Anatolian and Greek
      mainlands were dotted with hundreds of towns and villages. And while gold was a central
      element in trade among these communities, painted pottery, obsidian bowls, marble statues
      and ﬁgurines, dyed textiles, and hundreds of other products were not only widely traded,
                                               LATER COMPLEX SOCIETIES OF THE OLD WORLD         469


but also important as mortuary goods in the rich tombs here that indicate societies already
stratiﬁed into the rich and the poor, the powerful and the weak. Hissarlik, the “Troy” of the
Classical world, was a city at 2300 b.c., with fortress walls and many larger stone buildings,
is probably a good example of a typical large and powerful community of this era.
      Crete eventually came to dominate much of the Aegean world. By about 1900 b.c. the
many small towns and villages on Crete seem to have become linked increasingly into a
state-level political, economic, and religious system. This general pattern of change is
similar to that of all the other early civilizations: monumental architecture, increasingly
interdependent economies, rising population densities, and everywhere the signs of rank,
wealth, and power. The settlement at Knossos included a large palace that probably
functioned as a production center for many commodities, such as pottery, gold-work, and
lovely vessels in serpentine and other hard stones. A writing system, known as Linear A,
was developed, probably as a way to manage this complex economy.
      The culture of Crete of the second millennium b.c. is generally known as the Minoan
civilization, and throughout this era the wealth and power of Crete seems to have increased.
Minoan goods are found all over the
Aegean and the Greek and Anatolian
mainlands, and as far away as the
Levant and Egypt. Knossos probably
had a population of 10,000 people just
in the central areas of the settlement.
Great palaces and rich tombs are the
most obvious signs of the character
of this society, but it was all based on
a thriving economy. The warehouses
at Knossos held hundreds of huge
pottery storage vessels with enough
capacity to hold tens of thousands of
gallons of wine and olive oil.41
      Toward the end of the second
millennium b.c., Minoan culture
and power were supplanted over most
of the Aegean world by Mycenaean
civilization. The origins of Mycenaean
culture seem to have been on the
Argos Plain on the Greek mainland.
The stone fortress at Mycenae
(Figure 12.8) appears to have been the
center of a warrior kingdom, based
on an extensive trade network. The
rich shaft-graves found at Mycenae
reﬂect a luxurious yet violent society,
caught up in competition for eco-
nomic and political dominance of
not only the mainland but the Aegean       FIGURE 12.8 Heinrich and Sophia Schliemann seated to the right of the
islands and western Anatolia as well.      legendary Lion Gate at Mycenae in 1876.
470   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


          Scholars will never be able to resolve how much of Homer’s Iliad and Odyssey is ﬁction
      and how much fact, but these epics probably reﬂect much of the character of late
      Mycenaean civilization.


      Africa
      Africa is so rich in gold, silver, iron, jewels, ivory, palm oil, and other resources that one might
      expect it to have been a center of initial origins of cultural complexity, as it was for the ﬁrst
      three million years of hominin development. But Africa has formidable barriers that afﬂict
      the agriculturalist more than the hunter-gatherer.42 The enormous Sahara Desert, expanding
      and contracting with Pleistocene and post-Pleistocene climatic changes, has almost always
      isolated most of Africa from the critical mass of Middle Eastern and Mediterranean
      cultures. And even in the more humid Sub-Saharan regions the dense vegetation, poor
      soils, and unpredictable rainfall make large-scale intensive agriculture unproductive for the
      primitive cultivator. Nor do the great rivers, like the Niger, have the regular regimes, large
      semi-arid alluvial plains, or latitude that make the Nile, Tigris and Euphrates, and Yellow
      river valleys so productive. To make matters worse, Africa has a veritable horror show of
      diseases, including a tsetse ﬂy–borne cattle illness that barred pastoralists from many areas
      and malaria, which recurrently wiped out human populations in the more tropical areas.
           Given these and other ecological problems, early African societies are an object lesson
      in human inventiveness and adaptability in the face of an extreme environment.
           Sub-Saharan Africa of the last few millennia b.c. was probably a rich blend of hunting,
      foraging, ﬁshing, and agricultural societies, with extensive trade networks in gold, salt,
      and foodstuffs. We know comparatively little about the earliest phases of these societies
      because of the problems of preservation and inadequate archaeological research—although
      the intensity of research is increasing.43 The character of all these cultures was changed
      radically, however, by the introduction (beginning about 500 b.c.) of an iron-working
      technology. Complex societies quickly followed the introduction of iron in west Africa, and
      ﬁrst-millennium b.c. tombs in Nigeria and Senegal reﬂect great differences in wealth. At
      Igbo-Ukwu in Nigeria, one burial chamber contained cast-bronze objects and thousands
      of glass and carnelian beads.44 Arab accounts of these societies in the eighth through the
      eleventh centuries a.d. describe complex empires, with armies, kings, and massive craft
      industries.45 Many scholars have concluded that it was Arab commerce that stimulated west
      African cultural complexity, but McIntosh and McIntosh conclude that the spread of Arab
      goods and culture “reﬂects the grafting of Arab commerce onto a preexisting infrastructure
      of Saharan and Sub-Saharan networks. Such an explanation implies that earlier phases of
      development at Igbo-Ukwa were characterized by indigenous processes of trade expansion
      and increasing social stratiﬁcation.”46
           The ﬁrst ﬁve centuries a.d. saw the rapid spread over much of Africa of agriculturalists
      using iron tools and weapons and subsisting in part on indigenous domesticates like
      sorghum and squash and on domestic cattle and other animals (Figure 12.9). Only in a few
      arid wastelands were these agriculturalists unsuccessful in displacing the stone-age hunters
      who were the heirs of the millions-of-years-old tradition of African hunting-foraging.
           In contrast to the earlier-held view that the ﬁrst African states were “contact-states,”
      created by the economic and political “touch” of the established North African and
      Egyptian states, it now seems more reasonable to see Sub-Saharan indigenous states as
                                                                          LATER COMPLEX SOCIETIES OF THE OLD WORLD                               471


                                                                                                                 Mediterranean Sea



                                                           Ceuta                                                      Tunis
                                                                               Dried fruit,                            Kairouan
                                                            Fez                 imported
                                                                              goods, cloth                                 Tripoli
             Atlantic Ocean
                                                    Marrakesh                                      Wargla
                                                                  Sijilmasa
                                                                                             Ghadames                                Horses

                                                                                                                                           iro
                                                       Taghaza                                                                           Ca
                                                                                                                                      To
                                                              Salt
                                                                                                                                Murzuk
                                                                                                     Ghat

                                                             Taodeni
                                Wadan
                                                           Salt
                                                                                              AFRICA

                                                                                                    Air                       Bilma
                                       Walata              Timbuktu                                                            Salt
                                                                                                          Agades
                 Sene                                                                    Takedda
                     ga                Audoghast
                        l   R                                            Gao
                            .                                                            Copper
                                         GHANA
                                                          Jenné           Ni
                                Gold      MALI                                                                                       L. Chad
                Gambia R.                                                     gerR                   Katsina
                                                   Gold                              .
                                                                                                           Kano
                                                                                                                              Slaves
                                       Slaves

                                                                                                                      R.
                                                                                                                 ue
                                                                                                          Be n
                                                                  Kola
                                                                                                    Kola
                                                                  nuts
                                                                                                    nuts




                                                Gulf of Guinea



FIGURE 12.9 In the ﬁrst millennium a.d. trade routes in various commodities connected west
African kingdoms with each other and with coastal traders from the Middle East, Europe, and the
Mediterranean.

products of their own cultural matrix. The rapid population growth associated with the
introduction of agriculture to these areas; the rising spiral of trade in gold, copper, salt, and
slaves; and the sporadic inﬂuences of distant Mediterranean and Asian empires probably
all combined to produce the rich second millennium a.d. African chiefdoms and states.
Most seem to have been marked by some public buildings and were composed of a ruler
and an upper class who organized and taxed a complex economic system comprised of
farmers, herders, miners, iron-workers, traders, and religious leaders. Cemeteries often
show great variations of wealth and, presumably, social status.


COLONIZATION OF THE WESTERN PACIFIC ISLANDS

In one of the last great migrations in human prehistory, people colonized the southern
Paciﬁc (Figure 12.10), and the subtle variations of local climates and different times of
                                                                       472




                                                                       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY




FIGURE 12.10 Cultural areas of Micronesia, Melanesia, and Polynesia.
                                                 LATER COMPLEX SOCIETIES OF THE OLD WORLD          473


colonization have produced a varied cultural landscape that is, in the cliché, a giant cultural
laboratory.47 These areas have great signiﬁcance for a truly evolutionary analysis of the
past. In Polynesia, for example, during the last three millennia peoples spread out from
island to island, and the development of their languages, adaptations, and physical types
reﬂects the workings of basic evolutionary mechanisms.48 Patrick Kirch has argued that, in
some ways, the evolution of complex societies in Hawaii, Tonga, and other areas of
Polynesia agrees well with the “circumscription hypothesis” of Robert Carneiro49 (see
chapter 7).
     Scholars have long wondered how ancient peoples sailed across the tropical Paciﬁc from
west to east, when the prevailing winds and ocean currents move from east to west. Various
simulation models have been considered,50 and different colonizing rates and processes
are possible. Finney reports a voyage during 1986–1988 of the Hokule’a, a 19-m double-
hull canoe under the command of Hawaiian navigator Nainoa Thompson.51 By exploiting
occasional spells in which the prevailing winds shifted, the canoe was sailed from American
Samoa east to Tahiti, along the track the ancient settlers of these islands might have traveled.
Subsequent voyages of the Hokule’a, as well as a second ocean-going canoe, the Hawai’iloa,
have made voyages from the Marquesas Islands to Hawaii and back, as well as to Easter
Island (Rapa Nui).
     As always in human colonization, the timing and nature of the colonization depended
on the evolution of technologies and cultural adaptations that could provide sufﬁcient
food. Even Paciﬁc Islands with rich resources of animals and plants tended to be small
enough that hunting and foraging of wild plants and animals would not support many
people. The key to colonization was in the form of several domesticated plants and animals
that together provided a stable source of food. Domesticated pigs and chickens were
primary meat sources, along with ﬁsh and birds, but the mainstays of the diet were
cultivated tubers. One of the most important of these is taro, a perennial tropical plant with
large, starchy, tuberous roots. Lowland taro roots generally are prepared by heating them
to destroy the chemicals that give them a bitter taste, then they are ground and fermented
into an edible paste called poi (very much an acquired taste for most non-islanders). Taro
species native to dry lands produce corms that are eaten like potatoes in Japan, China, the
West Indies, and elsewhere.
     Another Paciﬁc Island staple is breadfruit, the globular fruit of the breadfruit tree. The
breadfruit tree grows to heights of 18 m (60 feet) or more. The yellow-green fruit is up to
30 cm (12 inches) in diameter, and its starchy pulp can be cooked in various ways to supply
a good source of carbohydrates.
     Among the most important foods of the Paciﬁc are yams, the tuberous roots of several
species of vines. Yams are grown and eaten much like potatoes and have a similar role as a
dietary staple and source of vitamins and carbohydrates. Yams look something like sweet
potatoes, but the two are not even distantly related. Some species of Paciﬁc yams produce
tubers weighing up to an impressive 45 kg (100 lb). These tubers have brown or black skin
and white, purple, or red ﬂesh. Like potatoes, yams are usually propagated by planting the
crowns of the large tuberous root or small whole small tubers. The climbing vines of yam
plants are supported on stakes or trellises to maximize yields.52
     One of the most interesting patterns in the colonization of the Paciﬁc is the spread of
the Lapita Cultural Complex. The people associated with this culture made a particularly
           474       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                  elaborately decorated pottery
                                                                                  that has come to deﬁne them,
                                                                                  in a sense. Lapita pottery
                                                                                  appears at about 1500 b.c. in
                                                                                  the Bismarck Archipelago
                                                                                  (Figure 12.11), an island group
                                                                                  in the southwest Paciﬁc that
                                                                                  includes part of Papua New
                                                                                  Guinea, New Britain, New
                                                                                  Ireland, the Admiralty Islands,
                                                                                  and other islands to the east of
                                                                                  Australia. These hot, humid,
                                                                                  volcanic islands form the core
                                                                                  of Melanesia (from the Greek
                                                                                  for “black islands”) and are
                                                                                  home to an impressive variety
                                                                                  of peoples, languages, and
                                                                                  cultures.
                                                                                       Lapita pottery occurs over
                                                                                  an area more than 5,000 miles
                                                                                  (8,100 km) long, encompassing
FIGURE 12.11 An example of Lapita pottery.                                        hundreds of islands stretching
                                                                                  as far east as Samoa and Fiji, and
                                                                                  the rapid spread—occurring
                 in about 500 years—of this pottery style over such a large area poses the same kinds of
                 questions we have seen elsewhere: Does this spread of a particular artifact style represent
                 people who migrated and carried with them their pottery and the rest of their culture? Or
                 were indigenous peoples incorporated into a growing exchange network in which they
                 eventually came to use pottery in Lapita styles, as well as obsidian and other commodities
                 traded among these many islands? Islands, like all varied environments, have the potential
                 for economic expansion through the exchange of commodities. If the costs of extracting or
                 producing goods and transporting them and exchanging them with neighbors is less than
                 their value in these exchanges, everyone—producers and consumers alike—is richer than
                 if they consumed only the resources they themselves produce. And it is not only food and
                 other utilitarian objects that have value. In the Paciﬁc as in every other human society of
                 our recent past, people used objects as status markers and ceremonial items. In the Paciﬁc
                 shells, pearls, and other commodities were circulated and used in ways that seem to have
                 deﬁned, facilitated, and maintained exchange networks and social hierarchies.
                       After reaching islands such as Samoa and Fiji, Lapita pottery “disappears” in the sense
                 that the archaeological sites of the islands colonized to the east and north do not have pottery.
                 Use of pottery for containers is likely replaced by investment in making wooden bowls and
                 jars, as well as containers of other organic materials. Sometime after about 200 b.c., some
                 groups from the area of Samoa and Fiji reached the Society and Marquesas Islands to the
                 east. And from there, they expanded outward to Hawaii, Easter Island, and New Zealand.
                       One of the most interesting examples of the evolution of sociopolitical complexity is
                 Hawaii. Hawaii was probably settled sometime around a.d. 600 or so, by settlers from the
                                               LATER COMPLEX SOCIETIES OF THE OLD WORLD           475


Marquesas or Society islands.
Although one might think that
Hawaii was isolated after
this initial wave of colonization
—after all, the trip to Hawaii
is more than 3,300 km (2,100
miles) from the Marquesas
and Society islands and takes
a minimum of 30 days of
open ocean voyaging—the oral
traditions of Native Hawaiians
say otherwise. Until as late
as about the mid-1200s a.d.,
these oral traditions document
long-distance ocean voyages
between Tahiti and Hawaii,
with newcomers from Tahiti
sometimes becoming ruling            FIGURE 12.12 A small heiau (temple) at the site of Kaunolu, island of Lana’i,
chiefs in Hawaii. 53 Tahitian        Hawaii.
settlers also introduced new
religious elements such as the war god, Ku, and the building of the luakini heiau—a special
type of Hawaiian temple that is associated with Ku. For reasons not recorded in the oral
traditions, these long-distance voyages appear to have ceased after the mid-1200s a.d.—
perhaps koa trees large enough to build the ocean-voyaging boats were no longer available
in the Hawaiian islands after this time.
      When Captain Cook and his crew “discovered” the Hawaiian Islands in 1778, they
found a society on the verge of becoming a state. Eighteenth- and nineteenth-century
ethnographic accounts provide a detailed account of this highly stratiﬁed society with
inherited power, prestige and wealth, a diversiﬁed economy—including intensiﬁcation of
food-production through the use of aquaculture (trapping of ﬁsh in both freshwater and
seawater ﬁshponds)—complex trade relationships, monumental architecture (Figure 12.12),
and many other elements associated with complex societies. The many different ideas about
how the ancient Hawaiians developed these cultural complexities reﬂect theoretical trends
in archaeology in general.54 Some scholars see population growth and various cultural
ecological features as primary factors in Hawaii’s cultural evolution; others appeal to
sociopolitical causes.



SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

The cultures on the periphery of the Old World, from northern Scandinavia to Hawaii,
repeat the common fact that most aspects of cultural complexity are the partial products
of technology and agricultural productivity. Battle Axe culture in Europe and ruling chiefs
in Hawaii represent gradients of cultural complexity, and in all these Old World areas
we see great diversity in the archaeological manifestations of these societies. Many are
476   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      characterized by monumental architecture, highly stratiﬁed social classes, and great
      disparities in wealth and access to other resources. Some had towns and regional political
      centers, while others are not recognizably urban at all. And, while all are indigenous
      developments, each was also inﬂuenced by peoples or events from other regions where
      complex societies had been in existence for some time.


      BIBLIOGRAPHY
      No attempt is made here to provide a comprehensive bibliography for the many secondary states and empires of
                    the ancient world.
      Aikens, C. M., K. M. Ames, and D. Sanger. 1986. “Afﬂuent Collectors at the Edges of Eurasia and North America:
                    Some Comparisons and Observations on the Evolution of Society Among North-Temperate Coastal
                    Hunter-Gatherers.” In Prehistoric Hunter-Gatherers in Japan, ed. T. Akazawa and C. M. Aikens. Tokyo:
                    University of Tokyo Press.
      Akazawa, T. 1982. “Cultural Change in Prehistoric Japan.” Advances in World Archaeology 1:151–212.
      Akazawa, T., and C. M. Aikens, eds. 1986. Prehistoric Hunter-Gatherers in Japan. Tokyo: University Museum,
                    University of Tokyo, Bulletin No. 27.
      Anderson, A. 1987. “Recent Developments in Japanese Prehistory: A Review.” American Antiquity 61(232):270–281.
      Barber, R. L. N. 1988. The Cyclades in the Bronze Age. Iowa City: University of Iowa Press.
      Barker, G., and C. Gamble. 1985. “Beyond Domestication: A Strategy for Investigating the Process and
                    Consequence of Social Complexity.” In Beyond Domestication in Prehistoric Europe, ed. G. Barker and
                    C. Gamble. New York: Academic Press.
      ———, eds. 1985. Beyond Domestication in Prehistoric Europe. New York: Academic Press.
      Bellwood, P. 1986. The Prehistory of the Indo-Malaysian Archipelago. Sydney, Australia: Academic Press.
      Bellwood, P., and J. Koon. 1989. “Lapita Colonists Leave Boats Unburned.” Antiquity 63(240):613 – 622.
      Bintliff, J., ed. 1984. European Social Evolution. Bradford, England: Bradford University Press.
      Bogucki, P. 1987. “The Establishment of Agrarian Communities on the North European Plain.” Current
                    Anthropology 28(1):1–24.
      ———. 1988. Forest Farmers and Stockherders. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
      Bradley, D. G., D. E. MacHugh, P. Cunningham, and R. T. Loftus. 1996. “Mitochondrial Diversity and the Origins
                    of African and European Cattle.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 93:5131–5135.
      Bronson, B. 1980. “South-east Asia: Civilizations of the Tropical Forest.” In Cambridge Encyclopedia of
                    Archaeology, pp. 262–266. New York: Crown Publishers/Cambridge University Press.
      Castleden, R. 1993. Minoans: Life in Bronze Age Crete. New York: Routledge.
      ———. 1994. The Making of Stonehenge. New York: Routledge.
      Cavalli-Sforza, L. L., and E. Minch. 1997. “Paleolithic and Neolithic Lineages in the European Mitochondrial Gene
                    Pool.” American Journal of Human Genetics 61:247–251.
      Charoenwongsa, P., and D. Bayard. 1983. “Non Chai: New Dates on Metalworking and Trade from Northeastern
                    Thailand.” Current Anthropology 24(4):521–523.
      Childe, V. G. 1958. The Prehistory of European Society. Baltimore: Penguin.
      Clist, B. 1987. “Early Bantu Settlements in West Central Africa: A Review of Recent Research.” Current
                    Anthropology 28(3):380 –382.
      Collis, J. 1984. The European Iron Age. London: Batsford.
      Connah, G. 2001. African Civilizations: An Archaeological Perspective. New York: Cambridge University Press.
      D’Arcy, P. 2003. “Warfare and State Formation in Hawaii: The Limits of Violence as a Means of Political
                    Consolidation.” Journal of Paciﬁc History 38(1):29 –52.
      Davidson, J. 1985. “New Zealand Prehistory.” Advances in World Archaeology 4:239 –292.
      Dennell, R. C. 1983. European Economic Prehistory: A New Approach. New York: Academic Press.
      ———. 1992 . “The Origins of Crop Agriculture in Europe.” In The Origins of Agriculture, ed. C. W. Cowan and
                    P. J. Watson. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
      Dickinson, O. 1994. The Aegean Bronze Age. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
      Donohue, R. E. 1992.“Desperately Seeking Ceres: A Critical Examination of Current Models for the Transition to
                    Agriculture in Mediterranean Europe.” In Transitions to Agriculture in Prehistory, ed. A. B. Gebauer
                    and T. D. Price, pp. 73 – 80. Madison, WI: Prehistory Press.
      Edmonds, M. 1999. Ancestral Geographies of the Neolithic: Landscapes, Monuments and Memory. New York:
                    Routledge.
      Ekholm, K. 1981. “On the Structure and Dynamics of Global Systems.” In The Anthropology of Pre-Capitalist,
                    Societies, ed. J. Kahn and J. Lobera. London: Macmillan.
                                                           LATER COMPLEX SOCIETIES OF THE OLD WORLD                    477


Fagan, B. 2004. People of the Earth, 11th ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall.
Finney, B. 1988. “Voyaging Against the Direction of the Trades: A Report of an Experimental Canoe Voyage from
             Samoa to Tahiti.” American Anthropologist 90(2):401– 405.
Fischer, A., P. V. Hansen, and P. Rasmussen. 1984. “Macro and Micro Wear Traces on Lithic Projectile Points.”
             Journal of Danish Archaeology 3:19–46.
Fornander, A. 1999a. Fornander Collection of Hawaiian Antiquities and Folk-lore. Vol. IV (with T. G. Thrum).
             Honolulu: ‘Ai Pohaku Press [facsimile publication; original publication 1916–1917, Honolulu: Bishop
             Museum Press].
———. 1999b. Fornander Collection of Hawaiian Antiquities and Folk-lore. Vol. V (with T. G. Thrum). Honolulu:
             ‘Ai Pohaku Press [facsimile publication; original publication 1918, Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press].
———. 1999c. Fornander Collection of Hawaiian Antiquities and Folk-lore. Vol. VI (with T. G. Thrum). Honolulu:
             ‘Ai Pohaku Press [facsimile publication; original publication 1919, Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press].
Gilman, A. 1981. “The Development of Social Stratiﬁcation in Bronze Age Europe.” Current Anthropology 22:1– 8.
Graves, M. W., and D. J. Addison. 1995. “Polynesian Settlement of the Hawaiian Archipelago: Integrating Models
             and Methods in Archaeological Interpretation.” World Archaeology 26(3):380 –399.
Green, M. 1993. Symbol and Image in Celtic Religious Art. New York: Routledge.
Gregg, S. A. 1988. Foragers and Farmers. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Grigg, D. B. 1982. The Dynamics of Agricultural Change. London: Hutchinson.
Hagelberg, E. 1993. “Ancient DNA Studies.” Evolutionary Anthropology 2(6):199 –207.
Hagelberg, E., S. Quevedo, D. Turbon, and J. B. Clegg. 1994. “DNA from Ancient Easter Islanders.” Nature 369:25–26.
Hall, M. 1987. The Changing Past: Farmers, Kings, and Traders in Southern Africa, 200 –1860. Cape Town, South
             Africa: David Phillip.
Harding, A. F. 1984. The Myceneaeans and Europe. New York: Academic Press.
Harlan, J., J. DeWet, and A. Stemler, eds. 1976. Origins of African Plant Domestication . The Hague: Mouton.
Higham, C. 1988. The Archaeology of Mainland Southeast Asia. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
———. 2000. “The Origins of the Civilization of Angkor.” Antiquity 74:27–28.
Hodder, I. 1990. The Domestication of Europe. Oxford. Blackwell.
Hood, S. 1973. The Minoans. London: Thames and Hudson.
Irwin, G. 1992. The Prehistoric Exploration and Colonisation of the Paciﬁc. Cambridge, England: Cambridge
             University Press.
Isager, S., and J. E. Sydsgaard, eds. 1995. Ancient Greek Agriculture: An Introduction. New York: Routledge.
Ivanov, I. S. 1978. “Les fouilles archéologiques de la nécropole chalcolithique à Varna (1972–1975).” Studia
             Praehistorica 1–2:13 –26.
Joffroy, R. 1962. Le Trésor de Vix. Historie et porteé d’une grande decouverte. Paris: Fayard.
Keeley, L. H. 1992. “The Introduction of Agriculture to the Western North European Plain.” In Transitions to
             Agriculture in Prehistory, ed. A. B. Gebauer and T. D. Price, pp. 81–95. Madison, WI: Prehistory Press.
Kinnes, I. 1982. “Les Fouaillages and Megalithic Origins.” Antiquity 56:24 –30.
Kirch, P. V. 1984. The Evolution of Polynesian Kingdoms. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
———. 1988. “Circumscription Theory and Sociopolitical Evolution in Polynesia.” American Behavioral Scientist
             31(4):416– 427.
———. 1990. “The Evolution of Sociopolitical Complexity in Prehistoric Hawaii: An Assessment of the
             Archaeological Evidence.” Journal of World Prehistory 4(3):311–345.
———. 2003. “New Archaeological Insights into Food and Status: A Case Study from Pre-Contact Hawaii.” World
             Archaeology 34(3):487– 497.
Kirch, P. V., ed. 1986. Island Societies. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Kirch, P. V., and R. C. Green. 1987. “History, Phylogeny, and Evolution in Polynesia.” Current Anthropology
             28(4):431– 454.
Kirch, P. V., and T. L. Hunt. 1988. Archaeology of the Lapita Cultural Complex: A Critical Review. Seattle: Burke
             Museum.
Knüsel, C. J. 2002. “More Circe Than Cassandra: The Princess of Vix in Ritualized Social Context.” European
             Journal of Archaeology 5(3):275 –308.
Kolb, M. J. 1994. “Monumentality and the Rise of Religious Authority in Precontact Hawaii.” Current
             Anthropology 35(5):521–548.
Kristiansen, K. 2002. “The Tale of the Sword—Swords and Swordﬁghters in Bronze Age Europe.” Oxford Journal
             of Archaeology 21(4):319 –332.
Lawson, A. 2001. “Recent Archaeological Research on Gambian Iron Age Habitation.” Nyame Akuma 55:32–35.
Lewis, D. 1972. We the Navigators. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.
Lewthwaite, J. 1981. “Comment on A. Gilman, ‘The Development of Social Stratiﬁcation in Bronze Age Europe.’ ”
             Current Anthropology 22:14.
McIntosh, S. K., and R. J. McIntosh. 1983. “Current Directions in West African Prehistory.” Annual Review of
             Anthropology 12:215 –258.
478   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      ———. 1988. “From Stone to Metal: New Perspectives on the Later Prehistory of West Africa.” Journal of World
                   Prehistory 2(1):89 –133.
      Nishida, M. 1983. “The Emergence of Food Production in Neolithic Japan.” Journal of Anthropological Archaeology
                   2(4):305 –322.
      Nygaard, S. E. 1989. “The Stone Age of Northern Scandinavia: A Review.” Journal of World Prehistory 3(1):71–116.
      Pawley, A., ed. 1991. Man and a Half. Auckland, New Zealand: Polynesian Society, Memoir 48.
      Pikirayi, I. 2001. The Zimbabwe Culture: Origins and Decline of Southern Zambezian States. Walnut Creek, CA:
                   Altamira Press.
      Pfeiffer, J. E. 1977. The Emergence of Society. New York: McGraw-Hill.
      Price, T. D. 1986. “The Earlier Stone Age of Northern Europe.” In The End of the Paleolithic in the Old World, ed.
                   L. G. Straus. Oxford: B.A.R. International Series 284.
      ———. 1987. “The Mesolithic of Western Europe.” Journal of World Prehistory 1(3):225 –305.
      ———. 2000. “Lessons in the Transition to Agriculture.” In Europe’s First Farmers, ed. T. D. Price, pp. 301–318.
                   New York: Cambridge University Press.
      Price, T. D., ed. 2000. Europe’s First Farmers. New York: Cambridge University Press.
      Price, T. D., and A. B. Gebauer. 1992. “The Final Frontier: First Farmers in Northern Europe. In Transitions to
                   Agriculture in Prehistory, ed. A. B. Gebauer and T. D. Price, pp. 97–116. Madison, WI: Prehistory Press.
      Renfrew, C. 1973. Before Civilization: The Radiocarbon Revolution and Prehistoric Europe. New York: Knopf.
      ———. 1978. “Varna and the Social Context of Early Metallurgy.” Antiquity 52:199 –203.
      Richards, M., V. Macaulay, A. Torroni, and H.-J. Bandelt. 2002. “In Search of Geographical Patterns in European
                   Mitochondrial DNA.” American Journal of Human Genetics 71:1168 –1174.
      Rowlands, M., M. Larsen, and K. Kristiansen, eds. 1987. Center and Periphery in the Ancient World. Cambridge,
                   England: Cambridge University Press.
      Rowley-Conway, P., M. Zvelebil, and H. P. Blankholm. 1987. Mesolithic Northwest Europe: Recent Trends.
                   Shefﬁeld, England: John R. Collis.
      Semino, O., G. Passarino, P. F. Oefner, A. A. Lin, S. Arbuzova, L. E. Beckman, G. De Benedictis, P. Francalacci,
                   A. Kouvatisu, S. Limborska, M. Marcikiae, A. Mika, B. Mika, D. Primorac, S. Santachiara-Benerecetti,
                   L. L. Cavallis-Sforza, and P. A. Underhill. 2000. “The Genetic Legacy of Paleolithic Homo sapiens
                   sapiens in Extant Europeans: A Y Chromosome Perspective.” Science 290:1155–1159.
      Shennan, S. J. 1987. “Trends in the Study of Later European Prehistory.” Annual Review of Anthropology 16:365–382.
      Sievers, S. 2002. “Manching Revisited.” Antiquity 76:943–944.
      Stahl, A. 1994. “Innovation, Diffusion, and Culture Contact: The Holocene Archaeology of Ghana.” Journal of
                   World Prehistory 8(1):51–112.
      Terrell, J. 1986. Prehistory in the Paciﬁc Islands. New York: Cambridge University Press.
      Thomas, J. 1991. Rethinking the Neolithic. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
      Thorpe, I. J. 1996. The Origins of Agriculture in Europe. New York: Routledge.
      Tilley, C. 1996. An Ethnography of the Neolithic. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
      Trump, D. 1980. The Prehistory of the Mediterranean. New Haven: Yale University Press.
      Weissleder, W. 1978. The Nomadic Alternative: Models and Models of Interaction in the African-Asian Deserts and
                   Steppes. The Hague: Mouton.
      Weisler, M. 1990. “Sources and Sourcing of Volcanic Glass in Hawai’i: Implications for Exchange Studies.”
                   Archaeology in Oceania 25:16 –23.
      Wells, P. 1994. “Changing Models of Settlement, Economy, and Ritual Activity: Recent Research in Late
                   Prehistoric Central Europe.” Journal of Archaeological Research 2(2):135–163.
      ———. 1998. “Identity and Material Culture in the Later Prehistory of Central Europe.” Journal of Archaeological
                   Research 6(3):239 –298.
      ———. 2001. Beyond Celts, Germans and Scythians. London: Duckworth.
      Whittle, A. 1987. “Neolithic Settlement Patterns in Temperate Europe.” Journal of World Prehistory 1(1):5 –52.
      ———. 1996. Europe in the Neolithic. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
      Zvelebil, M., ed. 1986. Hunters in Transition. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
      Zvelebil, M., and P. Rowley-Conwy. 1984. “Transition to Farming in Northern Europe: A Hunter-Gatherer
                   Perspective.” Norwegian Archaeological Review 17:104 –128.
      Zvelebil, M., and P. Dolukhanov. 1991. “Transition to Farming in Eastern and Northern Europe.” Journal of World
                   Prehistory 5(3):233 –278.



      NOTES
       1. See Fagan, People of the Earth, for a more detailed coverage of these later states and empires.
       2. Shennan, “Trends in the Study of Later European Prehistory”; see also Childe, The Prehistory of European Society.
       3. See, e.g., Harding, The Myceneaeans and Europe.
                                                          LATER COMPLEX SOCIETIES OF THE OLD WORLD                   479


 4. Bradley et al., “Mitochondrial Diversity and the Origins of African and European Cattle.”
 5. Dennell, “The Origins of Crop Agriculture in Europe,” p. 91.
 6. Zvelebil and Dolukhanov, “Transition to Farming in Eastern and Northern Europe.”
 7. See, for example, articles in Price, Europe’s First Farmers; and Thorpe, The Origins of Agriculture in Europe.
 8. European Economic Prehistory: A New Approach.
 9. See, e.g., Rowley-Conwy et al., Mesolithic Northwest Europe: Recent Trends; Price, “The Mesolithic of Western
    Europe”; Nygaard, “The Stone Age of Northern Scandinavia: A Review.”
10. Fischer et al., “Macro and Micro Wear Traces on Lithic Projectile Points.”
11. Price, “The Earlier Stone Age of Northern Europe,” p. 3. Although it should be noted that the shift to small
    backed microlithic stone tools is a widespread phenomenon throughout the Middle East and much of Europe
    in the late Pleistocene and early Holocene. This shift occurs earlier in the Middle East—about 20,000 years
    ago—but appears to be an independent innovation in Europe some 10,000 years later.
12. A good example of this phenomenon is the English Channel. Prior to about 8,000 or 9,000 years ago,
    Mesolithic hunter-gatherers in England could walk to what is now France over dry land. Rising sea levels even-
    tually cut England off from the continent and undoubtedly submerged many Mesolithic sites in the process.
13. Bogucki, “The Establishment of Agrarian Communities on the North European Plain,” p. 11.
14. Barker and Gamble, Beyond Domestication in Prehistoric Europe, p. 9.
15. Grigg, The Dynamics of Agricultural Change; Barker and Gamble, Beyond Domestication in Prehistoric Europe,
    p. 22.
16. Whittle, “Neolithic Settlement Patterns in Temperate Europe.”
17. “Transition to Farming in Northern Europe: A Hunter-Gatherer Perspective”; see also Zvelebil, Hunters in
    Transition.
18. See, for example, articles in Price, Europe’s First Farmers; and Thorpe, The Origins of Agriculture in Europe.
19. Genetic research has shown that there is some contribution of Middle Eastern genes to the European gene
    pool, suggesting that a population expansion from the Middle East did occur. See, for example, Cavalli-Sforza
    and Minch, “Paleolithic and Neolithic Lineages in the European Mitochondrail Gene Pool”; Semino et al.,
    “The Genetic Legacy of Paleolithic Homo sapiens sapiens in Extant Europeans: A Y Chromosome Perspective”;
    but see Richards et al., “In Search of Geographical Patterns in European Mitochondrial DNA,” for a some-
    what contrasting viewpoint.
20. Price, “Lessons in the Transition to Agriculture,” p. 302.
21. Hodder, The Domestication of Europe; Thorpe, The Origins of Agriculture in Europe; Tilley, An Ethnography of
    the Neolithic; Edmonds, Ancestral Geographies of the Neolithic; Whittle, Europe in the Neolithic; Thomas,
    Rethinking the Neolithic.
22. Ivanov, “Les fouilles archéologiques de la nécropole chalcolithique à Varna (1972–1975)”; Renfrew, “Varna
    and the Social Context of Early Metallurgy.”
23. Hodder, The Domestication of Europe.
24. Renfew, Before Civilization.
25. Personal communication to Wenke.
26. Also see Kinnes, “Les Fouaillages and Megalithic Origins.”
27. Lewthwaite, “Comment on A. Gilman, ‘The Development of Social Stratiﬁcation in Bronze Age Europe.’ ”
28. Wells, “Changing Models of Settlement, Economy, and Ritual Activity: Recent Research in Late Prehistoric
    Central Europe,” p. 138.
29. Ibid., p. 139.
30. Wells, “Identity and Material Culture in the Later Prehistory of Central Europe,” pp. 250 –251.
31. Wells, Beyond Celts, Germans and Scythians, pp. 46 – 47.
32. Joffroy, Le Trésor de Vix. Historie et porteé d’une grande decouverte.
33. Wells, Beyond Celts, Germans and Scythians, p. 48.
34. “More Circe Than Cassandra: The Princess of Vix in Ritualized Social Context.”
35. Wells, Beyond Celts, Germans and Scythians, pp. 58 – 60.
36. Ibid., pp. 60–61.
37. Wells, “Identity and Material Culture in the Later Prehistory of Central Europe,” pp. 251–254.
38. Ibid.
39. Wells, Beyond Celts, Germans and Scythians, pp. 84–90.
40. Wells, “Changing Models of Settlement, Economy, and Ritual Activity: Recent Research in Late Prehistoric
    Central Europe,” p. 151.
41. Pfeiffer, The Emergence of Society, p. 282.
42. Harlan et al., Origins of African Plant Domestication.
43. Stahl, “Innovation, Diffusion, and Culture Contact: The Holocene Archaeology of Ghana.”
44. Mcintosh and McIntosh, “From Stone to Metal: New Perspectives on the Later Prehistory of West Africa,”
    p. 110.
45. Ibid.
480   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      46. Ibid., p. 120.
      47. See Pawley, Man and a Half.
      48. Kirch and Green, “History, Phylogeny, and Evolution in Polynesia”; Kirch and Hunt, Archaeology of the Lapita
          Cultural Complex: A Critical Review.
      49. Kirch, “Circumscription Theory and Sociopolitical Evolution in Polynesia.”
      50. Reviewed in Terrell, Prehistory in the Paciﬁc Islands.
      51. Finney, “Voyaging Against the Direction of the Trades: A Report of an Experimental Canoe Voyage from
          Samoa to Tahiti.”
      52. These descriptions of Paciﬁc Islands and crops are based on entries in the Grolier Electronic Publishing, www.
          gme. grolier.com.
      53. See, for example, the three volumes by Fornander, Fornander Collection of Hawaiian Antiquities and Folk-lore.
      54. Reviewed in Kirch, “The Evolution of Sociopolitical Complexity in Prehistoric Hawaii: An Assessment of the
          Archaeological Evidence.”
13
The Evolution of Complex Societies
in Mesoamerica

During the morning we arrived at a broad
causeway and continued our march towards
Iztapalapa, and when we saw so many cities
and villages in the water and other great towns
on dry land and that straight and level
causeway going towards Mexico, we were
amazed and said it was like the enchantments
they tell of in the legend of Amadis, on account
of the great towers . . . and buildings rising from
the water, all built of masonry. And, some of
our soldiers asked whether the things we saw
were not a dream.
Bernal Diaz del Castillo1




I       n Easter week of 1519, the Spanish conquistador Hernan Cortés landed on the coast
        of Veracruz, Mexico, and began a military campaign that would end in the crushing
defeat of the indigenous Aztec civilization. (Figure 13.1) For tens of thousands of years
before Cortés’s arrival, the peoples of the Old and New Worlds had had so little contact
that they were physically different, spoke entirely different languages, and had no idea that
the others even existed. But here is the intriguing thing: When Cortés traveled the road
from Veracruz to the Aztec capital near Mexico City, he passed through cities, towns, villages,
markets, and irrigated ﬁelds, and he saw slavery, poverty, potentates, farmers, soldiers,
temples, massive pyramids, roads, boats, pottery, gold jewelry, and textiles; in short, he
encountered a world whose almost every aspect he could understand in terms of his own
experience as an urban Spaniard of the sixteenth century.
     There were, of course, many dissimilarities between the Spanish and Aztec peoples. And
the ideological differences between the Aztecs and their European conquerors were also pro-
found. The Spanish, despite their imperialism and murderous ferocity in warfare, viewed
the Aztecs’ preoccupations with death and human sacriﬁce with abhorrence, and the Aztecs
found many aspects of Roman Catholic Christianity both evil and incomprehensible.
     Yet despite profound differences in their respective morals and ideas, the Spanish and
the Aztecs were fundamentally alike in cultural respects: They lived in hierarchically

                                                 481
           482      PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                      organized, class-structured, expansionist empires in which state
                                      religions provided much of the context of life, supported by an economy
                                      of intensive agriculture and highly specialized and integrated systems of
                                      craft production.
                                           Spanish military technology, coupled with diplomacy with non-
                                      Aztec groups and the diseases the Spanish introduced, effectively ended
                                      the indigenous developments of Mesoamerican civilizations, and it is
                                      interesting to speculate about what the Europeans would have found in
                                      the Americas if they had come a few centuries later—would there have
                                      been a great Pan-American empire to rival that of Spain? Or is it possible
                                      that in, say about a.d. 1850, people living on the coast of England (or
                                      France or Spain) might have awakened to the sight of Aztec warships
                                      in their harbors? The latter scenario is unlikely because New World
                                      peoples did not develop two technologies fundamental to the powerful
                                      imperialism of Old World societies—iron in the form of tools and
                                      weapons and large domesticated animals capable of providing traction
                                      and transport (although New World peoples used metals in ornaments
                                      and had domesticated some beasts of burden, mainly the llama, in South
                                      America).
                                           In any case, scholars have assumed for centuries that the rise of
                                      agricultural and complex societies in the New World offered them a
FIGURE 13.1 Cortés haranguing his
                                      “Second Earth,” a comparative case, and that by examining these
troops.                               cultural developments in two somewhat different environments and
                                      times, the causes of these forms of cultural evolution might be more clearly
                 revealed. Despite contemporary reassessment of that premise,2 the early Mesoamerican
                 states, in combination and comparison with the Inka of the Andes, Sumerian Mesopotamia,
                 Old Kingdom Egypt, and other early polities, all illustrate that, whatever the factors are that
                 produced these societies, they operated similarly around the world and at different times.
                 Beyond these fundamental similarities of early civilizations, their unique arts and ideologies
                 provide ample material for particularistic studies that need not appeal to cross-cultural and
                 comparative analyses for intellectual justiﬁcation. In this regard, the early states of
                 Mesoamerica are some of the most fascinating in the world.
                       In previous chapters we have considered the issue of ethics and history: A central issue
                 here is the political consequences of interpretations of different cultures and their histories.
                 The European conquerors of the New World, for example, pointed to the prevalence of
                 warfare, human sacriﬁce, and ritual murder as evidence that the New World peoples were
                 barbarians who could only beneﬁt from the imposition of Western “civilization.” In this
                 chapter and in chapters 14 and 15 the evidence for these New World practices is reviewed,
                 and to some this may seem to perpetuate the stigmatization of New World peoples. But the
                 fact is that warfare, human sacriﬁce, and ritual murder, as well as every other kind of gross
                 exploitation of people, were common elements of cultures all over the world, from China
                 to England. The point of discussing the evidence here is not to titillate the morbidly inclined
                 reader; it is to confront the problem of the origins of ideologies and the nature of their
                 transformations—and to emphasize how cultures can make any behavior, no matter how
                 reprehensible in our own view, into a virtue that facilitates the workings of their political
                 systems.
                                                          THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN MESOAMERICA      483


                                                        MESOAMERICA

                       1900
                       1800
                       1700
                                                   Arrival of the Spanish
                       1600
                       1500
                                                                        AZTEC
                       1400
                                   LATE                                          OAXACA
                       1300     POST-CLASSIC                                     MIXTEC
                       1200                                                               Collapse of Maya in
                                                                                          Northern Lowlands
                       1100        EARLY
                                POST-CLASSIC                            TOLTEC
                                                                                     C. 900 COLLAPSE OF MAYA
                       1000
                                                                                     IN SOUTHERN LOWLANDS
                        900
                        800        EARLY
                                  CLASSIC                   EL
                        700                                TAJIN
                                                                                 MONTE
                        600
                                                                                 ALBAN
                        500        EARLY
                                  CLASSIC
                        400                                                                    MAYA
                                                                   TEOTIHUCAN               CIVILIZATION
                        300




MILLENNIA CENTURIES
                        200
                                               LATE
                        100                 FORMATIVE

                          0                                                                    IZAPAN
                              MIDDLE FORMATIVE
                       1000                               OLMEC                      OCOS CULTURE C. 1500 B.C.
                                   EARLY
                       2000
                                 FORMATIVE                                          BARRA CULTURE C. 1800 B.C.
                       3000
                       4000                             MAIZE IN USE
                                  ARCHAIC                BY 3500 B.C.
                       5000
                       6000
                       7000
                       8000
                       9000      Paleoindian
                      10000



                  20000
           484       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                   THE ECOLOGICAL
                                                                                   SETTING

                                                                                    As in other areas of early
                                                                                    civilization, the ﬁrst complex
                                                                                    societies did not appear in just
                                                                                    one area of Mexico and then
                                                                                    gradually expand to occupy
                                                                                    Mesoamerica; instead, there
                                                                                    were several developmental
                                                                                    centers, including the South
                                                                                    Gulf Coast, the Valley of Mexico,
                                                                                    the Valley of Oaxaca, and the
                                                                                    Maya lowlands and highlands
                                                                                    (Figure 13.2). Eventually some
                                                                                    of these regions coalesced
                                                                                    into larger polities, but only
                                                                                    after centuries of competition,
FIGURE 13.2 The geography of Mesoamerica. The darker shading identiﬁes              cooperation, expansion, and
developmental centers of early cultural complexity.                                 collapse.
                                                                                          In    each     of    these
                                                                                    Mesoamerican areas, cultural
                     evolution was much inﬂuenced by three general ecological conditions: (1) the millions of
                     years of mountain-building volcanic activity that left Mesoamerica a still-trembling land
                     of towering mountains and circumscribed valleys, and which in many areas compressed
                     extremely different ﬂora, fauna, and climates into proximity, thereby rewarding inter-
                     regional exchange, even though it made transport and communication difﬁcult; (2) the
                     absence of any domesticable animal suitable for providing milk, transport, or draft power;
                     and (3) the relative scarcity of large rivers with extensive alluvial plains in warm latitudes:
                     Unlike Egypt, Mesopotamia, the Indus Valley, North China, and Andean South America,
                     for example, Mesoamerica has few large, navigable rivers in the semi-arid environments
                     where primitive agriculture is highly productive.
                           All civilizations can be understood to a limited extent purely in thermodynamic terms.
                     From the food that keeps our bodies at proper metabolic temperature to the draft animals,
                     engines, or nuclear reactors that propel our vehicles, the connection between energy and
                     culture is close and causal. And, as in all early civilizations, in ancient Mesoamerica a few
                     plant and animal species were, in effect, the power base of cultural evolution. Not just any
                     domesticated plants and animals would do: There had to be a reliable, voluminous
                     carbohydrate source and nutritionally complementary plants and animals. In Mesoamerica
                     these foods were, principally, maize, beans, and squash, augmented by protein from rabbits,
                     deer, dogs, and, in some places, ﬁsh and shellﬁsh.3 The combination of maize and beans
                     was particularly important because it allowed populations to overcome signiﬁcant short falls
                     in protein that resulted from the small numbers of available hoofed animals. These rather
                     plain foodstuffs were enlivened in antiquity by the use of cacao (from which chocolate is
                     derived), incendiary peppers, numerous herbs and spices, and several natural hallucinogens.
                                      THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN MESOAMERICA         485


And like all ancient farmers, they used the magic of fermentation to improve the food
products of various high-sugar plants—cactus being the principal source of alcohol in
Mesoamerica.



EARLY MESOAMERICAN FARMING (C. 3500–1300 B.C.)

Between 9,000 and 4,000 years ago most of Mesoamerica was inhabited mainly by hunter-
foragers who lived in small bands that moved with the seasons to exploit cactus fruits, deer
herds, nuts, and the hundreds of other plant and animal species in their range, depending
on the season. Since these bands were small in size and never stayed in one place for a
sufﬁcient period of time to have much long-term effect on the plant and animal popula-
tions on which they subsisted, the hunter-foragers’ overall impact on their environment
was low. Some groups along the margins of the lake in the Valley of Mexico may have been
sedentary villagers, as were some groups along the coasts. They are likely to have had an
important role in the domestication of plants and animals and the eventual spread of
agriculture. Kirkby suggests that by about 4,000 years ago, maize cob size was large enough
that people over large areas of the Mexican highlands could subsist mainly on maize.4
Grinding corn and making tortillas out of it may not seem to be a great technological leap
forward from hunting-foraging, but maize, along with beans, squash, and a variety of other
plants, provided the reliable and productive source of food required for people to be able
to live in one place permanently.
     The recent redating of some of the supposedly earliest domesticated maize in
Mesoamerica to about 3500 b.c. raises the possibility, as Gayle Fritz notes,5 that initial
agriculture evolved out of intensiﬁed foraging by groups of people who were relatively
sedentary, perhaps living all or most of the year in one or a few places, and that they were
perhaps even in the process of developing social differences that increased the intensity
of their foraging. However maize was domesticated, and by whom, maize appears to have
reached sufﬁcient productivity to permit the village-farming way of life soon after about
2000 b.c., and agricultural communities appeared at about this time in many different
areas.6
     From the hot, wet Guatemalan lowlands to the arid Tehuacán Valley, the earliest
villages were quite similar in size and contents.7 Almost all houses (Figure 13.3) were built
using the wattle-and-daub method—sticks, branches, and cane were woven in-and-out
between vertical wall poles, then covered with a mud plaster, which was dried by the hot
sun. Houses, which were seldom larger than 4-by-6 m, featured thatched roofs and tamped
clay ﬂoors on which ﬁne sand was scattered.
     Most of the earliest farming communities were tiny hamlets, villages of 10 –12
houses that were home to about 50–60 people, but some communities were larger. Most
houses that have been excavated have yielded the same remains, mainly grinding stones,
storage pits, pieces of large ceramic storage jars, bones of cottontail rabbits, carbonized
maize fragments, and broken pieces of ceramic charcoal braziers.8 In addition, ovens,
middens, and graves are very common. While the proportion of plant and animal foods
varied somewhat, all villages probably grew maize, beans, squash, peppers, and some
other crops and hunted deer and rabbits. Each village, or each extended family, may have
           486        PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                     had a specialist who did pres-
                                                                                     sure ﬂaking of stone, leather-
                                                                                     working, or a similar craft, and
                                                                                     individual villages may have
                                                                                     concentrated on specialties
                                                                                     like salt production, feather-
                                                                                     weaving, shell-working, grind-
                                                                                     ing stone manufacture, and
                                                                                     the like.


                                                                                     THE
                                                                                     ARCHAEOLOGICAL
                                                                                     RECORD OF
                                                                                     EARLY COMPLEX
                                                                                     MESOAMERICAN
                                                                                     SOCIETIES
                                                                                     (C. 1300–500 B.C.)
FIGURE 13.3 Mexico’s ﬁrst agriculturalists lived in wattle-and-daub houses much
like these contemporary homes in Morelos, Mexico. The people in this village speak
Nahuatl, which is derived from the language of the Aztecs.                         As in Mesopotamia, China,
                                                                                   and elsewhere, the background
                                                                                   to the origins of complex
                      society in Mesoamerica was a great scatter of relatively simple agricultural villages in which
                      the mechanics of producing a reliable, expandable food supply had been mastered. Many
                      areas of Mesoamerica contributed to the overall rise of the ﬁrst Mesoamerican states, but
                      four areas appear to have been particularly important: the South Gulf Coast, the Valley
                      of Mexico, the Valley of Oaxaca, and the Maya highlands and lowlands. The Maya are
                      considered separately later in this chapter.


                      Early Complex Societies on the South Gulf Coast
                      An early and radical break with the simple village farming tradition of Mesoamerica
                      occurred in the sweltering lowlands of the South Gulf Coast. Here, beginning at about
                      1300 b.c., people built massive clay pyramids and platforms, lived in small-town groups of
                      hundreds or even thousands, intensively farmed a variety of ecological zones, and produced
                      what is one of the world’s most valued examples of stone sculpture.
                          These people are known to us as the Olmec, a name derived from an ancient American
                      word for rubber—doubtless a reference to the rubber trees that grow in this area—but a
                      name they themselves probably did not use.
                          Some scholars have considered the possibility that the Olmec culture was the cultura
                      madre (mother culture) of all later complex societies in Mesoamerica, and that they
                      were directly responsible for transforming their neighbors by military, political, religious,
                      or economic means into complex societies. 9 Other scholars, however, have argued
                      convincingly that the Olmec represent only one of several largely independent cases of the
                                     THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN MESOAMERICA           487


evolution of social complexity
in Mesoamerica.10 As we have
seen in other areas of the world,
civilizations seem not to have
developed, in general, because
of the behavior of a particular
group or the actions of a few
particularly gifted individuals:
Civilizations all appear to be
the products of broad regional
and long-term historical pro-
cesses that manifest them-
selves differently at different
places and times.
      The Olmec heartland is a
coastal strip approximately
350 km in length, extending
inland about 100 km (Figure
13.4). It was created by the          FIGURE 13.4 Centers of initial cultural complexity in ﬁrst millennium b.c.
alluviation of several rivers         Mesoamerica.
that run to the sea from the
highlands. Except for a few areas, the region is thickly forested. Torrential rains fall during
the summer, but the area is dry in the winter, which permits swidden, or slash-and-burn,
agriculture, as it is sometimes called. Swidden agriculture involves cutting down all the
vegetation in a particular area and then waiting for the dry season so that the cut vegetation
can be burned. Nutrients are thus returned to the soil—an important contribution since
manure and artiﬁcial fertilizers were not available (unlike the peasants of Mesopotamia, the
Olmec had no manure-producing cattle to graze on and replenish ﬁelds). After burning,
the land is sown, and the crops germinate and come to maturity in the rainy season. After
1 or 2 years of exploitation, however, the land must be left fallow, sometimes for 20 years
or more. If the cycle is accelerated, productivity falls rapidly. Until recent times, in the ﬂat
lowlands of the Olmec heartland as much as 70–90 percent of the land was fallow at any
one time.11
      Maize, beans, and squash were agricultural staples in early formative times,
supplemented by hunting and ﬁshing and collecting wild plant foods. In coastal areas,
mussels and other rich marine resources could also be collected. And while much of Olmec
agriculture may have been swidden-based, very productive farming was possible on the
river levees. Some river levees near the coast are annually inundated with water-borne silt
of such fertility that it was possible to raise two crops a year using swidden techniques.
Indeed, the precocity of the Olmec in developing one of the ﬁrst complex Mesoamerican
cultures was probably tied directly to the great agricultural potential and rich ﬂoral and
faunal resources of these riverine environments. The economic basis of Olmec culture is
still relatively poorly known. Although plant remains do not preserve well in the South Gulf
Coast, we know that most of the people were maize farmers. They ate some peccary and
deer, but ﬁsh and domestic dogs provided most of their protein. Human bones found at
San Lorenzo with obvious burning and butchering marks suggest cannibalism, undertaken
          488       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                    for either ritual or more secular motives. Obsidian, imported in large volumes from the
                    Mexican highlands to the west, was used for arrowheads, knives, and many other tools.
                         After many years of research, we ﬁnally have substantial data about the early formative
                    cultures of the South Gulf Coast, although we will probably never know with great precision
                    the population densities in the countryside in many periods because the tiny hamlets they
                    apparently lived in are covered by vegetation and easily missed in archaeological surveys.12
                         As a result, we know the Olmec primarily from their larger ceremonial centers, and on
                    this basis they are an impressive culture. People had been living since about 1500 b.c. On
                    the San Lorenzo plateau in southern Veracruz, for example, exploiting its good soil and
                    natural springs. Then, sometime after about 1250 b.c., the inhabitants of this area began
                    moving tons of earth and clay in baskets to level the plateau’s upper surface over an area
                    some 600-by-100 m. At ﬁrst, perhaps, they were simply trying to raise the elevation of their
                    residential areas above the ﬂood levels of the seasonally inundated plains on which they
                    lived. Within a century or two, however, they began to build pyramids and ceremonial
                    platforms adorned with monumental stone sculptures and other impressive monuments.13
                                                                  San Lorenzo actually is a group of sites within
                                                             about a 5-km area, a complex that reached its peak
                                                             between about 1150 and 900 b.c., when several
                                                             thousand people probably lived there; but after
                                                             about 900 b.c. construction of monuments ceased
                                                             and population densities appear to have declined.
                                                                  San Lorenzo’s ﬂorescence was followed by
                                                             that of another Olmec site, La Venta, located on a
                                                             small island in a coastal swamp near the Tonal
                                                             River (Figure 13.5). At this location the Olmec
                                                             constructed a series of mounds, platforms, courts,
                                                             and pyramids covering more than 5 km2. Much
                                                             of this has been destroyed by looters and an
                                                             oil well/processing installation, but excavations
                                                             have revealed a large portion of this site’s plan.
                                                             Dominating the area is a pyramid of clay, 128-by-
                                                             73 m at the base and 33.5 m high. Two long, low
                                                             mounds extend out to the north from the pyramid,
                                                             with a circular mound between them. All these
                                                             mounds are oriented eight degrees west of true
                                                             north.
                                                                  A particularly striking remnant of Olmec
                                                             culture at both San Lorenzo and La Venta are the
                                                             Olmec “heads” and other monumental sculptures
                                                             (Figure 13.6). The most impressive art works at La
                                                             Venta are four “Olmec heads,” some of which are
                                                             over 8 feet tall. They often depict a human with a
                                                             stern, not to say sneering, facial expression, and
                                                             usually are shown wearing a “helmet.” Presumably
FIGURE 13.5 The Olmec complex at La Venta included a         these sculptures are of Olmec rulers, but we will
30-m-high pyramid and several other lower mounds.            probably never know for certain. Since the Olmec
                                      THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN MESOAMERICA          489


had no metal tools, we assume they worked with grinding and
pecking stone implements, and it is difﬁcult to believe that
these sculptures were made by anyone other than skilled
specialists. Major Olmec sites often also included other
monumental stone carvings, such as those of free-standing
ﬁgures of kneeling men and carved stelae and “altars,” all
carefully executed from massive basalt blocks. On some of
them are engraved fantastic mythical creatures representing
hybrids of snakes, jaguars, and humans. The basalt for these
carvings was imported from 80 km or more away, probably
by being ﬂoated down rivers on rafts. Some of the heads weigh
more than 20 tons, so scores of people must have been
involved in quarrying, transporting, carving, and then erecting
the stone blocks in monumental compositions.
     The Olmec also decorated their ceremonial complexes
with many other kinds of expensive and exotic goods, such as
the “pavements” at La Venta. To form these mosaic-like pave-
ments, hundreds of serpentine (a green hard stone) blocks
about the size of small construction bricks were laid out in a
traditional Olmec design—a jaguar mask—and then carefully
                                                                      FIGURE 13.6 An Olmec stone head sculpture.
buried (Figure 13.7).
     Unfortunately, the acidic,
damp soils of the Olmec region
do not preserve bones well, and
we have only meager know-
ledge of Olmec burial prac-
tices. At La Venta a tomb in a
large mound near the central
pyramid was elaborately con-
structed of basalt columns,
and on its limestone ﬂoor two
juveniles were laid out in fabric
bundles heavily coated with red
paint. Buried with the bodies
were jade ﬁgurines, beads, a        FIGURE 13.7 Mosaic jaguar mask pavement at La Venta, Mexico.
shell ornament, a stingray spine,
and a few other items, and
these burials may reﬂect inherited wealth and prestige. Other types of evidence relating to
social complexity, such as residential architecture and settlement patterns, are not well
represented at La Venta. And while there is little residential debris there (except for pottery
and a few clay ﬁgurines), scholars now believe that the people who built La Venta did live
there permanently.14
     Other Olmec ceremonial centers were built at Laguna de los Cerros and elsewhere,
and between about 900 b.c. and 400 b.c. It is possible to have large buildings and other
trappings of social complexity on the basis of a very simple economic system, but the Olmec
also had an intensive and productive agricultural system. In addition, they traded jade, iron
           490       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                     ore, obsidian, bitumen, magnetite mirrors, shark teeth, stingray
                                                     spines, perhaps cacao and pottery, and many other goods in
                                                     complex patterns between the Olmec heartland and highland
                                                     Mexico and as far south as Guatemala.
                                                          As we have seen in other civilizations, a key element in
                                                     the development of most of them was some formative idea,
                                                     some set of religious or philosophical ideology that people
                                                     over a large area adopted and expressed in ways that linked
                                                     them in complex interrelationships. The core ideology of
                                                     the Olmec is hard to discern and decipher, however. Judging
                                                     from their art style, the Olmec seem to have believed that at
                                                     some distant time in the past a woman mated with a jaguar
                                                     and gave issue to a line of half-human/half-feline monsters,
                                                     or “were-jaguars.” These were portrayed in pottery, stone,
                                                     and other media in a highly stylized way, usually as fat infants
                                                     of no discernible sexuality (Figure 13.8). Their snarling
                                                     mouths, long canine teeth, and cleft heads give them a
                                                     strikingly bizarre quality that some scholars have explained as
                                                     an imitation of a birth defect of the neural tubes, or as the
                                                     deformities one would expect of a mating between a human
                                                     and a jaguar.15
                                                          “Olmec” ceramic and sculptural designs have also been
FIGURE 13.8 These Olmec ceramic “baby”               found  far outside the borders of the South Gulf Coast. Some
ﬁgurines were distributed over a large region of     bas-relief rock carvings at Las Victorias in highland El
central Mesoamerica.                                 Salvador strongly resemble those at La Venta, and similar
                                                     sculptures have been discovered in the highlands of Guerrero
                                                     and Morelos in western Mexico. At Chalcatzingo, in Morelos,
                      cliff sculptures include a standard Olmec motif of a human (probably male) seated in what
                      may have been meant as the mouth of a cave or a steaming monster (Figure 13.9). Olmec
                      styles of pottery, worked stone, jade, and other artifacts have also been found at several sites
                      in the Valley of Oaxaca, at Tlatilco and Tlapacoya near Mexico City, in Guatemala, and
                      elsewhere in Mesoamerica.
                            The later Olmec and their immediate successors may have formulated some of the
                      ideology that formed the basis of the Maya (see later), but the evidence is controversial. In
                      1902 a small jadeite ﬁgure of a person with what appears to be the bill of a duck was found
                      at San Andres Tuxtla. On it were engraved some glyphs that appeared to be a date, but
                      without the signs that would allow it to be converted to our calendar, and other glyphs,
                      some of which resembled those of later Maya writing but many others that did not. Scholars
                      disputed the signiﬁcance of this ﬁgure for many years, and in 1986 another ﬁnd helped
                      clarify its signiﬁcance. This was the La Mojarra Stela 1, found in southern Veracruz, where
                      writing was found that appeared to be the same script as that of the Tuxtla duck-billed
                      ﬁgurine. John Justeson and Terrence Kaufman16—whose work is controversial—have
                      argued that these inscriptions are in the Zoquean language, which is only distantly (if at all)
                      related to the language of the later Maya, and consists of separate glyphs for each
                      combination of the 11 consonants and 6 vowels of Zoquean (thus, 66 possible consonant-
                      vowel combinations). What is particularly important, however, is that this Epi-Olmec
                                         THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN MESOAMERICA                491


script contains logograms that
are semantically equivalent to
very similar-looking Maya
glyphs17 and that the Olmec were
using essentially the same calendar.
These Epi-Olmec inscriptions
refer to the accession of various
rulers, to what seems to be a war
between brothers-in-law, and to
other dynastic and calendrical
matters.
     Perhaps the most important
recent discovery of early writ-
ing, however, comes from San
Andrés, not far from La Venta.
Pohl and her colleagues18 report
ﬁnding a cylinder seal and a
greenstone plaque that contain
glyphs. These artifacts are from
contexts that date to about 650
b.c. and show that some of the
features of later Mesoamerican
writing systems, as well as the use
of the sacred 260-day calendar
and the association of glyphs
with rulers, were deﬁnitely pres-
ent in Olmec society.
     Whether or not the Olmec
can be credited with the origins of    FIGURE 13.9 Relief 1, Chalcatzingo, Morelos. One interpretation of this Olmec
Maya ideology, the Olmec were          motif is that it is a ruler within a cave or a stylized monster’s mouth, which gives
far different from their hunter-       off steam or smoke, while raindrops fall from above.
forager ancestors, and if we
match them against the checklist
of monumental architecture, burials of juveniles with wealth, voluminous craft production
and trade, writing, and so on, the Olmec were clearly a complex society. Their relatively
low population densities and small population numbers in centers is probably a direct
result of the constraints of their agricultural methods, although we may have an inaccur-
ate sense of their agriculture, which may have been more intensive than many scholars
think.
     La Venta appears to have been intentionally destroyed soon after about 400 b.c., or at
least we might infer this from the fact that some of its greatest stone monuments were
intentionally defaced. The history of the Olmec appears to have been one in which small
centers of power and prestige, such as San Lorenzo and La Venta, alternately became
dominant. And while the people of these centers probably shared core cultural elements,
ranging from language to theology, it is not certain that they ever formed a united,
integrated political unit over the entire Olmec region.
492   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      Early Complex Societies in the Valley of Mexico
      The Valley of Mexico is a large basin with no external drainage that is rimmed on three
      sides by high mountain walls cut by only a few passes; even in the north where there are no
      mountains, the valley is delimited by a series of low hills (see Figure 13.2). The valley has
      often been considered a “natural” analytical unit, bounded as it is by such impressive
      natural barriers, but archaeological research has revealed that almost from their arrival here
      the people of this area interacted with cultures far beyond the valley itself.19
           Although much of the Valley of Mexico lies beyond the temperature limits of maize
      agriculture, people were able to successfully pursue maize cultivation for several thousand
      years. They also beneﬁted from a large lake, which until the last 400 years, covered the low
      central portion of the valley, providing rich resources in the form of ﬁsh, fowl, turtles, algae,
      and reeds.
           There is not a single navigable stream or river in the whole Valley of Mexico today,
      and agriculture in most places in the valley would have depended on rainfall and small
      streams.20 Rainfall is sharply seasonal and varies considerably from north to south. Today,
      as in the past, the upper slopes of the Valley of Mexico provide many wood products, and
      in earlier times the slopes supported large deer herds that were an important part of the
      prehistoric and early historic diet.
           Modern urbanization in the Valley of Mexico has probably destroyed many of the
      earliest villages and towns there. What we do know suggests that by about 1000 b.c. there
      were small villages and hamlets in several areas of the valley. Only a few larger sites have been
      found, such as Tlatilco and Cuicuilco.21 The valley’s apparent two-tiered site size hierarchy,
      with a few large towns like Tlatilco and Cuicuilco and many small villages, suggests a simple,
      perhaps tribal, organization, and the distribution of settlements does not point to any
      political or social spacing. Settlements seem to be located principally around the edge of
      the great lake, although a few small villages have also been found in highland areas where
      the soil is particularly rich and deep. Differences in settlement size seem to be a result of
      local variations in agricultural potential.
           Nor is there much evidence of complex architecture at these settlements. A few small
      mounds and platforms may date to before 800 b.c., but none is on the scale of the pyramids,
      platforms, and other structures found later on the South Gulf Coast and in the Maya areas.
      No evidence of elaborate residential structures or monumental sculptures has been found.
           The cemetery at Tlatilco provides little evidence that the occupants of the Valley of
      Mexico were living in complex cultures. Burial goods include pottery, shell ornaments,
      obsidian tools, ﬁgurines, bone tools, and jade and serpentine objects. Some women seem
      to have been buried with more numerous and more expensive objects than other people in
      the cemetery, perhaps even with sacriﬁced men and children. But there is no evidence of
      lavish mortuary cults.
           From about 800 b.c. to about 500 b.c., the population density of the Valley of Mexico
      increased considerably. At least 10 sites were larger than 50 hectares (each inhabited by
      about 1,000 people), and one, Cuicuilco, probably had a population of about 2,500. All the
      larger sites are located along the lake margin, while scattered small hamlets have been found
      in the highlands. The larger settlements along the lake are fairly evenly spaced at 8- to
      10-km intervals, and they all used similar styles of pottery, suggesting some degree of social
      or political integration, but probably at a low level.
                                       THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN MESOAMERICA           493


Early Complex Societies in Oaxaca22
In the Olmec area the basis of cultural evolution was the productivity of the coastal zone
and river alluvium, while in the Valley of Mexico it was the lake shore and adjacent areas,
but in the Valley of Oaxaca, cultural evolution seems to have been based on the diversity
of ecological zones and the presence of some small river valleys (see Figure 13.2). On the
valley ﬂoor are large, fertile, ﬂat alluvial areas with a water table sufﬁciently high for
irrigation to be easily accomplished. Grading up into the mountains, the piedmont areas
are less fertile than the alluvium, but they can be productively farmed by diverting water
from the perennial streams that run toward the valley ﬂoor. The higher mountains are
cooler and wetter than the other zones and are still covered with pine and oak trees. Frost
here is not nearly the limiting factor on agriculture that it is in the Valley of Mexico,
although it can be a signiﬁcant determinant of productivity. Since formative times,
irrigation by means of canals and wells has been an important aspect of agriculture in
Oaxaca.
     Some of the most important resources of Oaxaca were the native iron ores, including
magnetite, ilmenite, and hematite. Small pieces of these materials were polished and used
as mirrors and ornaments, which were then traded widely over Mesoamerica and used as
marks of status.
     Shortly after 1400 b.c., the most productive areas of the piedmont and the alluvium
in the Valley of Oaxaca were occupied by small villages composed of perhaps 50 people
living in tiny wattle-and-daub structures. The ﬁrst signiﬁcant deviation from this pattern
of egalitarian farmers occurred sometime between 1350 b.c. and 1150 b.c., when the
inhabitants of at least one site (San José Mogote) at different times built several “public
buildings” of earth and adobe construction.23 Although these structures average only
5.4-by-4.4 m each, they are interpreted as public buildings because the ﬂoors were carefully
covered with a distinctive white lime plaster and swept clean, in contrast to the average
house of this period, the ﬂoors of which were usually stamped clay and sand and covered
with household debris.
     Other evidence suggests that these buildings at San José Mogote may have been
intended for special functions: They were repaired and reused over longer periods of time
than the obviously residential structures; at least one of them had an “altar” or step against
one wall; and they are oriented eight degrees west of true north, about the same as the major
monumental constructions at La Venta, in the Olmec heartland, which suggests that the
strong Mesoamerican tradition of imputing magic to place and arrangement (see later) was
already in force.
     Most of the other formative villages in Oaxaca lack such public structures, although
one, Tomaltepec, was found to have a large prepared mudbrick platform.24 In the ﬂoor of
this structure was a storage pit, considerably larger than any of the others at the site,
containing relatively large quantities of obsidian, ornamental seashell, and deer and rabbit
bones.25 Between 1400 and 1000 b.c., overlapping in time with the construction of this
platform, a large cemetery was created at Tomaltepec. Eighty burials containing a total of
about 100 individuals were found at the cemetery, and most of these burials had almost the
same goods, mainly ceramics and a few other small items. In four of the burials, small
quantities of obsidian, magnetite, and jade were found, but these differences in grave goods
seem fairly small in view of the overall similarity. And, interestingly, no juveniles or infants
494   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      were buried here; all the bodies were of adults, suggesting that this society had not yet
      achieved signiﬁcant social stratiﬁcation.
           Analysis of trade items in the valley between 1400 b.c. to 1000 b.c. also reinforces this
      impression of low-level community organization. A few items, such as obsidian, were
      traded, but in small amounts, and the trade was probably organized through individual
      households.26
           But archaeological evidence suggests that major changes were in process in the
      cultural organization of Oaxacan society between about 1400 b.c. and 1100 b.c. More
      crafts were apparently performed at San José Mogote than at other settlements in the
      valley at this time. Debris from working obsidian, jade, magnetite, shell, and other
      substances has been found here in concentrations proportionately greater than at other
      sites. There was a major increase in the volume of “exotic” traded materials in Oaxaca at
      this time also, perhaps in response to increasing social stratiﬁcation: These materials seem
      to have been used most frequently to make ornaments that reﬂect differences in social
      rank.
           As is discussed later in the context of the Maya, a widespread religious practice in
      Mesoamerica was ritual self-mutilation to produce blood—often in the form of cutting
      one’s tongue or (for men) penis with obsidian blades or stingray spines. This practice is
      thought to have been a way of materializing the gods and invoking their powers, and the
      presence of these materials at San José Magote may reﬂect this practice. The spread of
      common elements of ideology over Mesoamerica also seems reﬂected in other ways.
      There are clear resemblances between Olmec ﬁgurines and ones of comparable age from
      Oaxaca, for example, and some pottery with Olmec motifs reminiscent of the South Gulf
      Coast has been found in Oaxaca. Certainly, magnetite and obsidian were moved in
      substantial volumes between Oaxaca and the South Gulf Coast between 1100 b.c. and
      850 b.c.
           Kent Flannery and Joyce Marcus have challenged27 the notion that “Olmec” motifs on
      early Oaxaca pottery support the contention that somehow the South Gulf Coast cultures
      stimulated cultural developments in Oaxaca. They note that Oaxaca seems to have been more
      inﬂuenced by cultures in the Valley of Mexico than the South Gulf Coast and that Oaxaca
      society was, in any case, among the earliest in Mesoamerica to develop public architecture
      and other evidence of increasing cultural complexity.
           After about 850 b.c., variation in settlement size in Oaxaca increased; by 550 b.c.,
      San José Mogote, for example, grew to 15 times the size of the next largest community
      (Figure 13.10). Many settlements excavated have public architecture, and their distribution
      seems to mirror the growing importance of social and political factors in determining site
      location.
           It seems unlikely that cultural evolution in either Oaxaca or the Valley of Mexico was
      directly instigated by the Olmec through military imposition, economic exploitation, or
      slavish imitation.28 The wide distribution of Olmec styles of ceramics, ﬁgurines, and
      sculpture and the construction in Oaxaca and elsewhere of public buildings with astronom-
      ical orientations similar to those of the Olmec buildings seem to reﬂect interregional
      trade networks and perhaps the circulation of important people, but the archaeological
      evidence does not support the idea of uniﬁed political and military control of these three
      regions.29
                                                   THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN MESOAMERICA        495




                                                                                 Patch of
                                                                                 puddled
                                                                                 adobe ﬂoor
               Poorly preserved
               patch of puddled
               adobe ﬂoor
                                                                                 STRUCTURE 30




                                 ROOM 3

                  BURIAL 60
                 (below floor)           Jodes




                BURIAL 55
               (under wall)
                                                                                               Ash
                                 ROOM 2
                                                                         Red ochre with II
                                                                         obsidian projectile
                                                                         points
                                 ROOM 1
                                        Vessel 1                                                 Ash
                                        Vessel 2
                              Vessel 4
                                 Chert
          TOMB II                nodule Vessel
                                              5
                                     Vessel 3



                                                                                TOMB 10
                              STRUCTURE 26

            Mass of stones
            (possibly roof
                                                             PATIO
            removed from
            Tomb II)


                                                                     STRUCTURE 25,
                                                                        SOUTH

                                                                       Poorly preserved
                                                                       patch of puddled              Step
                         Well-preserved patch                          adobe ﬂoor                           STRUCTURE 25
                         of puddled adobe ﬂoor                                                                  EAST


                                                         N


                     0              1              2

                                 Meters




FIGURE 13.10 A plan view of structures at San José Mogote, Oaxaca, Mexico.
496   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      THE ARCHAEOLOGICAL RECORD OF MESOAMERICAN
      STATES IN THE VALLEYS OF MEXICO AND OAXACA

      As discussed in chapter 7, applying a static concept such as state to complex multi-dimensional
      cultural changes involves many difﬁculties, but as an informal descriptive term the notion
      of state implies a society based in part on socioeconomic classes; a centralized, hierarchically
      arranged bureaucratic structure; and the economic and functional integration of many
      settlements over a comparatively large area. Cuicuilco, with its early stone monuments,
      intensiﬁed agricultural system, and other developments, may be Mesoamerica’s ﬁrst state
      in this sense, but it is clear that other areas of Mesoamerica, especially the Valley of Oaxaca,
      were undergoing roughly contemporaneous and similar processes of state-formation.


      Early States in the Valley of Mexico (C. 500 B.C.–A.D. 800)
      Thanks to the hard work of William Sanders, Jeffrey Parsons, George Cowgill, Rene Millon,
      and many others in the Valley of Mexico, we can now reconstruct over 4,000 years of
      settlement history and other evidence related to the process of state-formation here.30
      Elizabeth Brumﬁel, for example, attempted to test the hypothesis that “population
      pressure” was an important factor in cultural evolution in the Valley of Mexico between
      500 b.c. and a.d. 1—the important interval just before the ﬂorescence of Teotihuacán.31
      She did this by estimating the agricultural productivity and the potential for intensiﬁcation
      of each settlement known for this period. Her argument is complex and mathematical, but
      one of her conclusions is quite simple: An important factor in the growth of smaller towns
      and villages was the imposition of tribute by elites in the largest communities. She found
      little convincing evidence of “population pressure” at the critical period—although, the
      data are not conclusive.32
            Several other analyses of these Valley of Mexico settlement patterns have been set in
      mathematical-locational geographical terms,33 and the results have stimulated a great deal
      of discussion about Mesoamerican cultural history and the applicability of these kinds of
      analytical techniques. The settlement pattern data we have here come from archaeological
      surveys where the procedure was to collect a sample of pottery from each site and then
      estimate the site size, periods of occupation, and distinctive architectural features. The
      limitations of such data have been intensively reviewed by Tolstoy and others, but this
      information can be quite useful.34
            For the period between about 500 b.c. and 200 b.c., there is persuasive evidence of
      changing cultural complexity in the Valley of Mexico. The population of the valley grew
      substantially in this period, and in most of Mesoamerica as well,35 and people were now
      living in larger settlements. Cuicuilco may have had as many as 7,500 people at this time
      —an unmanageable size without considerable social organization and control. Many
      other settlements of 80–100 hectares existed, intermediate and small settlements also
      increased in number, and there are some early signs of irrigation agriculture. Small
      “temple” platforms of stone and clay, some 3–4 m high, appeared in several areas, and
      Cuicuilco and other sites had large stone structures. Cuicuilco had the largest early pyramid
      structure in central Mexico, an anticipation of the great stone pyramids at Teotihuacán
      (see later).
                                        THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN MESOAMERICA            497


      As we saw in the case of Mesopotamia (chapter 8) and Egypt (chapter 9), early polities
that were developing centralized political authority, class-based social organizations, and
other elements of social complexity often seemed to begin building massive ceremonial
structures very early in this evolutionary process. That so many people around the world
chose the pyramid form has nothing to do with instinctive human aesthetics or the mystical
power of pyramids and everything to do with the simple engineering reality that people
with primitive tools who try to build a monumental structure capable of bearing its own
weight can only construct a few basic shapes. Of these, the pyramid is the easiest to build
in terms of raising materials to the top of the structure and the amount of materials and
labor needed. As discussed in previous chapters, monumental structures are functionally
efﬁcient in early complex societies, despite their apparent “waste” of resources and labor,
because they legitimize and focus the religious and social hierarchies of which they are an
expression, and they may also act to dampen unstable rates of population growth and
economic expansion.
      Before 200 b.c. the Teotihuacán area of the Valley of Mexico had been relatively
unimportant culturally, but it has large areas suitable for irrigated agriculture and possesses
large springs capable of supplying irrigation systems. Obsidian is also available nearby, and
the area is thought to have supported large stands of maguey cactus, used for its ﬁber and
to make pulque (a kind of beer), as well as edible nopal cactus, a plant species that is home
to an insect that can be rendered into a red dye highly prized in pre-Hispanic Mexico.
Moreover, Teotihuacán stands along a natural trade route to eastern Mesoamerica—an
important advantage given the difﬁcult terrain of this region.
      Between 150 b.c. and 1 b.c. the population growth rate exceeded that of any other
period, and Teotihuacán grew to some 6 – 8 km2, reaching about one-third its eventual
maximum size.36 Between about a.d. 1 and a.d. 150 Teotihuacán’s growth rate was still high
but had slowed; the average population during this period was probably between 60,000
and 80,000, and rose to 100,000 or more by a.d. 300.37
      During this time work was completed on the massive Pyramids of the Sun and the
Moon (Figure 13.11) and on at least 20 other important temple complexes.38 The Pyramid
of the Sun is 198 m long on each side of its base—as large an area as the Great Pyramid of
Khufu in Egypt—and rises 64 m (half the height of the Khufu pyramid). The pyramid seems
to have been built over an earlier, smaller structure made of sun-dried bricks and is ﬁlled
with an additional one million cubic meters of earth, stone, and rubble. In volume, this
probably equaled two million cubic meters of uncompressed ﬁll, which would have
required the excavation, transport, and shaping of the soil in an area 1.4 km2 to a depth of
1 m—a considerable effort by any standards. The Pyramid of the Moon is somewhat
smaller (150 m at the base, 45 m high), but of greater architectural sophistication, with a
series of inset trapezoidal platforms. Pottery fragments in the ﬁll of these pyramids indicate
that the pyramids were constructed by using material from earlier occupations near the
city. Considering the size of these structures, it is little wonder that the later Aztecs believed
that the pyramids had been constructed by giants and that some of the gods were buried
beneath them.
      By about a.d. 100 Teotihuacán had hundreds of workshops, with perhaps as much as
25 percent of its population employed as craft specialists, making products in obsidian,
ceramics, precious stones, slate, basalt, seashells, feathers, basketry, leather, and other
materials. Craft production was also extensive within households, and may have been taxed
           498       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY




FIGURE 13.11 The Pyramid of the Sun (upper left) and the Pyramid of the Moon (from which this photograph was taken)
were the ceremonial center of Teotihuacán. At times the city probably had a population of more than 100,000, and there
were hundreds of workshops and houses.



                     by the state.39 Massive public constructions were underway, considerable variability existed
                     in mortuary complexes and residential architecture, and the settlement patterns in the
                     surrounding areas were heavily inﬂuenced by the city.
                          The rest of the city is perhaps even more signiﬁcant in terms of its evidence of cultural
                     complexity (Figure 13.12). It was laid out in quadrants, formed by the Street of the Dead
                     intersected by streets running east to west. Some of the quadrants were more densely
                     occupied than others, and very different architectural styles and artifacts were found in
                     various zones of the city. Along the main north-south street were elaborate residences,
                     presumably for societal elites, as well as large and small temple complexes. Many of the
                     more impressive buildings were built on platforms and often faced inward on patios and
                     courtyards. Most buildings were one story high. In some temple complexes the walls were
                     decorated with beautiful murals depicting religious themes, warfare, imaginary animals,
                     and scenes from daily life.
                          The basic residential unit of Teotihuacán appears to have been large, walled, often
                     windowless compounds made of adobe bricks and chunks of volcanic rock. Many such
                                       THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN MESOAMERICA            499


compounds measured 60 m or more on a side
and internally were divided into many rooms,
porticoes, patios, and passageways. In some,
open patios let in sun and air and drained the
compounds through underground stone troughs.
Many walls were decorated with frescoes of
jaguars, coyotes, trees, gods, and people in
naturalistic settings.
     Some residential complexes at Teotihuacán
were found to have concentrations of artifacts
characteristic of distant areas of Mesoamerica,
with at least two enclaves with “foreign” asso-
ciations. 40 The Oaxaca Barrio, for example,
included ceramics, funeral urns, burials, and
other elements indistinguishable from the
artifacts used in Oaxaca—over 400 km to
the south—and very much in contrast to the
distinctive artifacts of the Teotihuacán natives.
These foreign “barrios” appear to have remained
culturally distinct and intact for at least several
centuries and may have been trade entrepôts or           FIGURE 13.12 A plan map of the central area of Teotihuacán,
ethnic “ghettos,” but no persuasive explanation          Mexico.
for these features has been made.
     The city’s people apparently ate large quantities of nopal and other kinds of cactus, as
well as maize, beans, squash, and a variety of other domesticated and nondomesticated
plants and animals. Deborah Nichols has shown how extensive was the irrigation system
that supported the intensive agriculture that fed Teotihuacán’s tens of thousands of
people. 41 Even at Teotihuacán’s peak, however, there was considerable hunting, as
evidenced by the fact that about 80 percent of the animal remains found were deer bones.
     By the time Teotihuacán reached its maximum size, it had apparently depopulated
much of the rest of the Valley of Mexico: Only one other major settlement appears in the
valley at about a.d. 500, and it is but a small fraction of the size of Teotihuacán. In fact, the
abandonment of rural sites correlates so closely with Teotihuacán’s growth that it appears
likely that populations were either drawn or coerced directly into the city.42 By a.d. 500
Teotihuacán-style ceramic vases were placed in the richly furnished burials of apparently
high-status individuals on the Gulf Coast, in Oaxaca, and elsewhere.
     Teotihuacán so dominated the Valley of Mexico that some have wondered if its power
extended far beyond the valley itself. It seems unlikely that the few hundred thousand
people at Teotihuacán were able to extend military control over the millions of people living
in the rest of Mesoamerica: Fighting a military campaign in the rough terrain of these
distant areas would have been suicidal. More likely, the Teotihuacános were tied to the
many other areas through trade networks. The city has no major defensive fortiﬁcations,
but it does have what appear to be large market areas, and the ecological diversity of
Mesoamerica would have put a high premium on large-volume trade in basic agricultural
and technological commodities. By circulating these many products, people would have
had a much higher standard of living and much greater protection against food shortages.
500   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      As we will see later, Teotihuacán was quite different from other Mesoamerican cities of the
      Classic period. In many respects, Teotihuacán was more comparable to Mesopotamian or
      Chinese cities.
           Sometime before a.d. 600, Teotihuacán’s size and inﬂuence began to decline. As the
      city shrank in population, new centers and settlements appeared throughout the Valley of
      Mexico, particularly on its edges. Signiﬁcantly, after a.d. 600 Teotihuacán styles in pottery,
      architecture, and other artifacts disappeared from the rest of Mesoamerica. It is as if a
      complicated exchange network had been beheaded, and local cultures began developing
      their own distinct traditions.
           Various factors appear to have diminished Teotihuacán’s population growth and
      inﬂuence after a.d. 600.43 Teotihuacán may have been eclipsed by other political systems
      based on more productive agricultural and economic resources: There is some evidence
      that at least part of its sphere of inﬂuence was encroached on by emerging states in the Maya
      areas. Even closer to home, political systems centered at Tula, Xochicalco, and elsewhere
      in the Valley of Mexico may have begun to block Teotihuacán’s access to needed raw
      materials and foodstuffs.
           There is some evidence that Teotihuacán was selectively burned down at about a.d. 650,
      with the targeted destruction of temples and elite residences, along with the smashing of
      idols.44 Whether this was an internal revolt or resulted from the actions of populations from
      other regional centers is not entirely clear. Some 40,000 people or so, however, did reinhabit
      the city after its destruction, although it never regained its former prominence or inﬂuence.
      Whatever malignant conjunction of wars, ﬁres, droughts, and other factors that destroyed
      it, Teotihuacán was one of the ﬁrst great states of the New World.


      Early States in the Valley of Oaxaca (C. 500 B.C.–200 B.C.)
      The rise of early states in Oaxaca paralleled that in the Valley of Mexico in many ways. Many
      years of intensive survey, for example, have shown that the settlement patterns changed
      from one in which small villages predominated to one in which villages proliferated in
      number but were also complemented by larger towns and villages.45
           Richard Blanton notes that shortly after about 500 b.c., Oaxaca experienced at least
      the following transformations: (1) Population density increased at a more rapid rate than
      in any previous period; (2) agricultural intensiﬁcation in the form of canal irrigation
      became important; (3) pottery manufacture became specialized and perhaps was part of
      the Valley’s ﬁrst market system; and (4) the settlement at Monte Albán, on a high plateau
      in the center of the Valley, grew to become a major regional center (Figure 13.13).46 Blanton
      has argued that the capital at Monte Albán was founded in an unpopulated area between
      various important settlements as an expression of a new confederation between people who
      previously may have been linked by rather low-level social and economic ties.47
           Blanton and his colleagues estimate that Monte Albán grew from an unoccupied,
      waterless mountaintop to a great religious and political complex of 5,000 people in fewer
      than 200 years.48 To accomplish this rate of increase, they suggest, people would have had
      to move up from settlements in the valley to their new home on the plateau, and agriculture
      in the valley and piedmont would have had to be intensiﬁed to support the town.
           By 200 b.c. the population of Monte Albán reached about 17,000—a great city, by
      ancient standards. Agriculture was intensiﬁed around Monte Albán as well, and rural
      population densities soared. Craft specialization in pottery and other commodities was
                                         THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN MESOAMERICA     501


sharpened, and the location
and products of kilns indicate
some degree of regional admin-
istrative control, although
Blanton concludes that Monte
Albán itself remained mainly a
ceremonial center with few
economic functions.49
     One of the main plaza
buildings at Monte Albán con-
tains a gallery of carved stone
reliefs whose main theme seems
to be the commemoration
of military conquests. Scores
of bodies are depicted with
open mouths, closed eyes, and
blood streaming from them
in ﬂowery patterns. 50 These
depictions have many parallels       FIGURE 13.13 Overview of Monte Alban, Valley of Oaxaca, Mexico.
in themes around the ancient
world, such as in the Egyptian Narmer Palette (chapter 9).
     In succeeding centuries, population densities and settlement patterns varied
considerably, but the investments in monumental architecture, the hierarchical
arrangements of towns in terms of the distribution of goods and services, and other markers
of cultural complexity persisted and became more elaborate. Thus, by 200 b.c. or shortly
thereafter, a state, by almost any deﬁnition, appears to have been operating in Oaxaca.
     It may be overstating the case to say that by 200 b.c. we have also moved from
prehistory to history in Mesoamerica, but the engraved signs and symbols at Oaxaca and
elsewhere in Mexico seem to be well on the way to the development of a true writing system.
     Although the rough outlines of Oaxacan cultural history have been established,
scholars argue about what forces determined this history. Sanders and Nichols stressed the
importance of irrigation agriculture and population growth as factors in the valley’s
ﬂorescence.51 Kowalewski and Feinstein, in a lengthy assessment of the development of
economic systems in Oaxaca, conclude that much of this “economic variation was largely
determined by the changing functions and degrees of chieﬂy or state power.”52 They
reconstruct a situation in which the power and predilections of elites changed, and with
them the permeability of the borders of Oaxacan political systems.53


THE MAYA

In Mexico the gods ruled, the priests interpreted
and interposed, and the people obeyed. In
Spain, the priests ruled, the king interpreted
and interposed, and the gods obeyed. A nuance
in an ideological difference is a wide chasm.
Richard Condon
502   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      At about the same time the civilization of Teotihuacán was developing in the Valley of
      Mexico, Maya civilization was emerging in southern Mexico, Guatemala, Belize, and
      Honduras (see Figure 13.2).
           Early Maya civilization may have been inﬂuenced to some minor degree by Teotihuacán,
      but it was largely its own creation. The Maya devised a complex writing system, built
      temples and palaces that are spectacularly beautiful monumental constructions, and are
      thought to have organized vast areas and many peoples in a series of independent states.
      The Maya were a civilization with cities although these cities were quite different in layout
      than our stereotypic notion of a city because Maya cities incorporated much farmland into
      their boundaries. Maya centers such as Tikal and Dzibilchaltun had thousands, perhaps
      tens of thousands, of people in permanent residence54—although these settlements never
      attained the population or physical size of Teotihuacán, and they had less diversity in
      residential architecture and perhaps less occupational specialization than existed in
      Teotihuacán or Oaxaca at a comparable time.
           It is difﬁcult to fault archaeologists who spend most of their time excavating the
      spectacular Maya ceremonial centers instead of surveying the snake-infested jungles for the
      rural settlements that supported these centers, but in recent years an increasing amount of
      research has focused on surveys of nonurban areas, and the general picture is much clearer
      than previously.55
           Much of the Maya homeland is hot, semitropical forest, but large areas are highlands
      created by a string of snow-capped volcanoes that extend from southeastern Chiapas
      toward lower Central America. In the highlands volcanic ash and millennia of wind and
      water erosion have created a rich thick layer of soil spread over a convoluted landscape of
      ravines, ridges, and valleys. Hard seasonal rains make this a fairly productive agricultural
      zone.
           The tropical lowlands at the steamy heart of Maya civilization cover the Petén and the
      Yucatan Peninsula, a massive limestone shelf lifted out of the seas over millions of years by
      tectonic movements. The land is rugged toward the southern part of the Petén, but most
      of the peninsula is ﬂat. There are few rivers or lakes because the porous limestone quickly
      drains away surface water.
           The lowland climate is hot and humid for most of the year, but drought can be a severe
      problem because the rainfall is seasonal and localized. In early spring a period of drought
      sets in, and the agricultural cycle slows. Trees are burned to open ﬁelds for crops, and the
      land dries. In May and June the rains begin, and the lowland landscape is transformed into
      a riot of life as plants green and animals multiply.
           Recent research has revealed large irrigation systems in some Maya areas and, during
      at least some periods, permanent ﬁeld agriculture with annual cropping, which was
      probably very important economically in the lowlands. Irrigation, however, was an
      exception. Labor intensive soil and water management for agriculture by the Maya mainly
      involved techniques such as slope terracing, water diversion, and wetland reclamation. In
      much of the Maya area, the ﬁelds used for maize, beans, squash, tomato, and pepper
      cultivation must be fallow for four to eight years after about three years of production. The
      Maya also converted land that today might be considered “unusable” through innovative
      techniques such as raised ﬁelds and seasonal use of bajos—swamp lands. Raised ﬁelds are
      created in bajos by digging channels and piling the excavated dirt between the channels. This
      produces a series of artiﬁcial areas on which agricultural crops can be grown year-round,
                                        THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN MESOAMERICA           503


although the raised ﬁeld technique is only viable where water levels remain relatively
stable.56 Seasonal use of the bajos occurs when they are dry—in other words, not during
the rainy season—and it is possible to grow one crop a year under these conditions.57
     When all the evidence of canals, raised ﬁelds, botanical remains from sites, and other
data are considered, it is clear that a variety of agricultural techniques, adapted to each local
ecology and regime, must be seen as the basis for Maya civilization.58 Most peasant
cultivators use animals, whether wild or domestic, to convert brush and hedgerow
vegetation into usable form, and the small Yucatec deer—which was intensively hunted—
apparently ﬁlled this role in the Maya lowlands, along with domestic dogs, rabbits, and
wildfowl. The Maya were sophisticated farmers who blended ﬁeld cultivation with a form
of tropical-forest management in which they were able to use foods from both in a
complementary, productive, and highly stable way.59


Maya Ideology
In Karl Marx’s somewhat self-contradictory and ambivalent view, state religions were seen
almost as by-products of state economies. He saw religions as ideologies that evolved as a
way of legitimizing state authority and of controlling the masses after the real causes of
state-formation—changes in the economic and technological base of the society—had
produced the socioeconomic classes and governmental structures of states.
     The case of the Maya, however, is one of many in history where one might argue for
the primacy of the idea of the state. The great agricultural productivity of the Maya area
was, of course, the base of Maya civilization and not only provided its energy but also
shaped its culture. But little about Maya civilization seems understandable apart from their
ideas of the divinity of kings and the nature of the cosmos.
     It is a truism, a cliché, that we can really never fully enter into the ideology of another
culture, whether that cultural ideology be the “dream time” of the Australian Aborigines,
the Marxist-Confucian ethos of modern China, or the spirit world of the ancient Maya.
And, unfortunately, much of a culture makes little “sense” unless one can share the cultural
perspective from which it derived. This is particularly true of the Maya, whose beautiful
monuments and intricate written language derive from a world-view and life-view that is
in so many ways fundamentally different from our own. So, we can only try to see the world
and time through the perspective of other cultures—try to get some sense of the
fundamental ideas that bound people together in time and place and community.
     For the Maya, the world manifested itself in two complementary dimensions—one in
which they lived out their lives, the other (the Otherworld) in which gods, ancestors, and
other supernatural beings existed—that were inextricably locked together.60 The Maya
apparently saw their dimension as three layered domains, “the starry arch of heaven, the
stony Middleworld of earth made to ﬂower and bear fruit by the blood of kings, and the
dark waters of the Underground below.”61 This world-view was highly structured, with 13
levels in the heavens and 9 levels in the underworld, each overseen by a particular god.62
     The Maya believed that these three regions—heavens, earth, and underworlds—were
interrelated, that shamans and rulers, for example, could penetrate the Underground world
via ecstatic trances. Above all, in the sky, was a great crocodilian monster who “made the
rains when it shed its blood in supernatural counterpoint to the royal sacriﬁces on the earth
below.”63 The human world was envisioned as ﬂoating in a primordial sea and was
504   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      sometimes represented as the back of a caiman (a crocodile-like animal) or a turtle. These
      various interrelated worlds and planes of existence, including the earth, were imbued by
      the gods with a sacredness that was especially concentrated at special points, such as caves
      and mountains. As Schele and Freidel note:

          The principal pattern of power points had been established by the gods when the cosmos
          was created. Within this matrix of sacred landscapes, human beings built communities that
          merged with the god-generated patterns and created a second human-made matrix of
          power points. These two systems were perceived to be complementary, not separate. . . .
          [The] world of human beings was connected to the Otherworld along the wacah chan [“six
          sky,” or “raised up sky”—a tree-like axis whose base was in the watery underworld and
          whose top was in the highest heavens of the Otherworld] which ran through the center of
          existence. This axis was not located in any one earthly place, but could be materialized
          through ritual at any point in the natural and human-made landscape. Most important, it
          was materialized in the person of the king, who brought it into existence as he stood
          enthralled in ecstatic visions atop his pyramid-mountain.”64

      Through proper ritual, the Maya believed that the power points on the earthly plane,
      whether they be places, people, or objects, could be intensiﬁed and become charged with
      accumulated energy. Kings, for example, rebuilt temples on the same spot time after time,
      thereby compounding the sacred power within them. These kings or holy rulers—K’uhul
      Ajaw—may have originally risen from the role of shaman in Maya society.65
           Blood-letting was a “focus ritual of Maya life.”66 The Maya believed that beings of the
      Otherworld could be materialized through the ritual shedding of blood. Men are shown in
      inscriptions using obsidian blades and other implements to pierce their tongues or penises,
      and women are shown piercing their tongues. Through blood-letting one could, in a sense,
      give “birth” to a god or ancestor, enabling it to materialize in physical form on the earthly
      plane of existence. Ritual blood-letting apparently was practiced not just by elites and
      priests but even by lowly peasant farmers in remote villages.
           Like many other cultures, the Maya rationalized and justiﬁed the great inequities of
      wealth, power, and prestige in their society by setting these inequities in a divine context.
      The king and his relatives deserved their wealth and power because the king was the pinnacle
      of the population and it was through him that contact could be made with the sacred, the
      Otherworld. Every Maya, from highest to lowest, beneﬁted from the king’s intercession
      with the divine world, and they all shared in the material wealth that the king provided the
      community through successful performance of his powers.67
           Like most early states, the Maya appear to have been strongly patriarchal—if the sex
      of people commemorated in royal inscriptions accurately reﬂects this society. But Maya
      royalty included women of high status. As Joyce Marcus notes,68 an inscribed stela records
      an occasion in which a royal woman from Calakmul improved the prestige of a particular
      lineage at El Perú by marrying the local ruler, who was socially beneath her.
           To the modern mind, the entire Maya world-view and life-view may seem bizarre and
      to represent a patent misunderstanding of how the cosmos operates. But by means of their
      ideology, the Maya in a sense invented a civilization. Schele and Freidel observed, “They
      invented ideas that harnessed social energy. . . . They invented political symbols that
      transformed and coordinated such age-old institutions as the extended family, the village,
      the shaman, and the patriarch into the stuff of civilized life.”69
                                      THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN MESOAMERICA          505


     Thus Maya civilization was as much an idea as a physical manifestation in towns and
villages, farms and monuments. The beginning of Maya ideology and its physical mani-
festations go back deep into the Mesoamerican past.70
     For the earliest Maya, as with the many other cultures we have considered in this book,
we come back to some basic and difﬁcult questions. Why and how did kings, priests,
writing, pyramid-building, and all the other facets of ancient civilization arise out of these
unprepossessing communities of farmers? For most Westerners it is difﬁcult to rid one’s
mind of the assumption that “civilization” is the “natural” outcome of agricultural life and
that complex societies will somehow develop out of societal competition, individual
strivings, the accumulation of technological advances, and other factors in all environments
(except for those in areas such as the Arctic, where there simply are not enough people and
not enough food and wealth to be expropriated). But archaeology shows us many examples
of cultures that did not automatically progress to “civilizations,” even in environments where
it would seem technically possible for them to have done so (e.g., aboriginal Australia).
     The early agricultural economy of the Maya shows that it had the potential for at least
one of the major common denominators of all ancient civilizations: agricultural production
of sufﬁcient quantity and diversity that it could be intensiﬁed, administered, and
expropriated.


The Preclassic Maya (1000 B.C.–A.D. 300)
Earlier views on the development of Maya civilization stressed explanations such as the
migration of people from the periphery of the Maya areas into the core areas of the lowlands
and highlands, the necessity for a political elite to manage trade, warfare, or population
pressures.71 Research since the 1980s, however, has considerably revised the chronology of
the Maya and has shown that these earlier explanations are simply no longer supported by
accumulating data. Monumental public architecture and ﬂourishing regional centers are
present by at least 600 b.c., with the best known example at Nakbe in the northern Petén.72
By 400 b.c., there are numerous examples of such centers in both the lowlands and
highlands, for example, at el Mirador, Kaminaljuyu, Calakmul, and Cuello.73
     Because these discoveries have been only recently made, and in many cases are ongoing,
scholars are reexamining earlier explanations, and undoubtedly there will be many exciting
hypotheses put forward in the next several years. How important, for example, was
irrigation agriculture? Some Maya canals are an impressive 1.6 km in length, 30 m in width,
and 3 m deep.
     Does the signiﬁcance lie instead in the development of Maya ideology? One element
may have been the growing Maya belief that dead ancestors could be conduits for power
from the Otherworld and that their relationship to the dead extended beyond just their
immediate families. All early states appear to have made a transition wherein people began
thinking of themselves as belonging to entities that extended far beyond the immediate
family. The ﬁrst suggestions we have that these changes were underway are found in burial
practices: Like ancient Chinese, Mesopotamians, and many others, the early Maya farmers
buried their closest relatives under their house ﬂoors, perhaps to retain in some remote way
the intimacy of family connections to house and home and to lay claim forever to the land
of their ancestors. At about 600 b.c., however, some Maya, such as those at K’axob,74 began
burying their dead in the core of large stone and earth platforms—which themselves are an
          506       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                               architectural reﬂection of important changes occurring in
                                               these formerly simple small villages.
                                                    As we saw earlier, some of the ﬁrst great stone Maya
                                               buildings, such as pyramids and platforms, appeared in the
                                               Maya area by at least 600 b.c. (at Nakbe). For the Maya as for
                                               many other ancient civilizations, monumental architecture
                                               appears as one of the ﬁrst signs of the transformation of the
                                               society. Between 600 b.c. and 400 b.c. people at Nakbe75 and
                                               other sites built lovely stone and masonry buildings on huge
                                               platforms and depicted gods and ancestors on building
FIGURE 13.14 A jungle river in Central         façades, stelae, masks, and other objects. If the people of
America.                                       Nakbe and other Preclassic Maya communities were already
                                               enmeshed in the formal Maya theology that we know from
               the later Maya, they probably regarded these buildings as important points from which to
               tap into the power of the cosmos and ampliﬁed their sacredness by building and rebuilding
               these impressive complexes.
                     The largest Preclassic Maya community was El Mirador, in the jungles (Figure 13.14)
               of the Guatemalan part of the Petén—an area so remote that even though the site had been
               sighted from an airplane in the 1930s, its inaccessibility prevented exact location and
               excavation until the 1970s. El Mirador is remarkable for its early dates, its massive size, and
               its anticipation of many core elements of later Classic Maya culture—including pyramid
               complexes, stucco mask representations of Maya gods, and Maya writing. Some of the
               earliest examples of Maya writing have been found here in the form of an inscribed pot
               sherd and inscribed symbols on stone sculpture.
                     Several pyramidal mounds 18 –20 m high at El Mirador appear to date to between
               600 b.c. and 300 b.c. Between about 150 b.c. and a.d. 50 the people of El Mirador built
               hundreds of large stone constructions, including buildings, pyramids, plazas, and
               causeways. The Tigre complex, for example, includes a pyramid that rises more than 50 m
               above the jungle ﬂoor, set amidst a temple and other buildings.76 Most of these buildings
               were coated with a white plaster and then painted deep red.77 To modern aesthetics the great
               stone buildings of the Maya, the Greeks, the Egyptians, and others have an elegant and simple
               beauty in their natural light stone colors, but ancient peoples undoubtedly had different
               aesthetic preferences, and they probably also painted their buildings in primary colors for
               cultic and ideological reasons, and not primarily, if at all, because of aesthetic preferences.
                     Shortly before about 50 b.c. at Cerros, where the New River, which runs through the
               eastern part of the Yucatán Peninsula, empties into Chetumal Bay, the Maya established a
               small community of farmers, ﬁshermen, and traders. At this time Cerros was unremark-
               able, just one of the hundreds of others like it in the Petén. But within the space of two
               generations, perhaps 40 or 50 years, the people of Cerros experienced a revolution: “The
               Coming of Kings.” As Linda Schele and David Freidel note, this transition appears to have
               been so rapid that many individuals probably personally experienced the transition from
               life in a simple village to one in which they became citizens of a large ceremonial city, living
               amid great stone temples, plazas, and other monuments and initiated into the full ideology
               of the Maya world-view and life-view.78
                     We will never know exactly what happened to effect this transformation at Cerros,
               but the archaeological evidence suggests that this was a conscious reformulation of a
                                      THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN MESOAMERICA         507


community: They apparently broke their pottery, jade ornaments, and other objects into
small bits and scattered them over their simple houses, buried ﬂowers and other talismanic
objects in the rubble, and then proceeded to build a new, vastly larger community around
and over the remains of their abandoned village. They began by building a temple at the
water’s edge (edges in the natural world were places of power in the Maya view79) and then
proceeded to build a large complex of temples, plazas, pyramids, stairways, causeways, and
other monuments—all laid out on the axis that connected this world to the other planes of
reality (see earlier). Decorating many of these structures were stucco representations of the
gods. Artisans made these by applying wet plaster to a wall and modeling the plaster, as well
as some appliqué pieces, into extremely complex designs. Few if any of these designs were
actual texts, but they can be read and they portray complex Maya religious ideas. On one
temple, for example, representations of the Jaguar Sun God on a south-facing wall would,
when lighted by the sun, present the sun “rising” on the east side of the wall and “setting”
on the west side as the sun made its daily trek across the sky.
     Despite all its beauty and magic, Cerros declined and all but disappeared as a com-
munity after only a few generations of glory—another example of a fundamental rhythm
of Maya political history, in which small communities all over their world were rapidly
transformed into great gleaming ceremonial settlements, home to tens of thousands of
people, only to fade and die in a relatively short time. Where many of the greatest Old
World cities, such as Memphis in Egypt and Warka in Mesopotamia, counted their histories
of dominance in millennia, most Mesoamerica centers ruled their particular worlds for
only 400–600 years at most.


The Classic Maya (A.D. 300–A.D. 900)
As we have seen in the case of the Harappan (Indus Valley) and ‘Ubaid (Mesopotamian)
ceramics, the spread of a distinctive, uniform artifact style over large areas often precedes
rapid and fundamental cultural change. By about a.d. 1, a distinctively styled pottery was
in use over the entire 250,000 km2 of the Maya lowlands, and pyramids, platforms, and
other large public buildings were being constructed at Dzibilchaltun, Uaxactun, and
elsewhere. Between a.d. 300 and a.d. 900, Maya civilization reached its climax as hundreds
of beautiful pyramids, temples, and other buildings were completed, and painting and
sculpture ﬂourished (Figure 13.15).
     The ﬁrst part of this period corresponds to the ﬂorescence of Teotihuacán, and the
extent to which interactions between the Maya area and Teotihuacán occurred is not
entirely clear. It is likely that this relationship included trade and alliances through
marriages, while other contacts might have been military or shared/adopted aspects of
religion or other ideological features.80 After a.d. 600, when Teotihuacán rapidly began to
lose inﬂuence and population, the Maya began a 300-year period of intense development.
Hundreds of temple complexes were constructed and beautiful stone sculptures executed—
many dated and inscribed.
     Stephen Houston has used archaeological evidence and interpretations of Maya
writing to estimate that most Maya polities were organized within areas of 70 km diameter
or less—with most of the settlements within a day’s walk of the major center.81 These dis-
persed agricultural hamlets were grouped around small ceremonial centers that included a
small temple pyramid and a few other stone constructions. Several districts of small
          508         PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY




                                                       UNITED STATES




                                                                                        Gulf of Mexico




                                                                                                                 Dzibilchaltun
                                                                                                                Chichen Itzá
                                                                                                             Uxmal

          Pacific
                                                                                                         Calakmul
          Ocean
                                                                                                                 Uaxactun
                                                                                               Palengue
   0         200 mi                                                                                            Tikal
                                                                                        Piedras Negras                 BELIZE
                                                                                                 Yaxchilan     Dos Pilas
   0     200 km
                                                                                                     GUATEMALA          Quirigua
 M EXI C O                                                                                            Kaminaljuyu      Copan



FIGURE 13.15 Some Classic period Maya sites.


                      ceremonial centers were congregated around the major ceremonial centers of Tikal,
                      Uaxactun, Palenque, Uxmal, and other sites. By this time much of southern Mesoamerica
                      featured beautiful, gleaming, white limestone pyramids and temples that were surrounded
                      by marvelously executed stone sculptures and decorated with wall paintings.
                           Most centers also had ball courts made of stucco-faced rock. We know little about how
                      the ball game was played.82 Apparently the objective of the game, played by two opposing
                      teams, was to try to get a rubber ball through a goal, probably not by throwing or batting
                      it, but by using knees, elbows, or torso. The ball apparently could not be held in the hands
                      when it was in play. As played by the Mesoamericans, this game was not a sport: The ball
                      may have represented the sun, and the court and play were imbued with ritual and
                      cosmological imagery. Losing players were sometimes executed. A relief panel from a ball
                      court at El Tajín, in Veracruz, Mexico, shows the captain of the losing team being stretched
                      out over a sacriﬁcial stone while the victor drives a knife into his chest.83 Maya representa-
                      tions of this ball game show a ball that, if the proportions are correct, would be larger than
                      a basketball, but the Maya may have simply been exaggerating these representations to
                      focus attention on the ball.
                           John Fox has argued that these ball courts were imbued with great and complex
                      ideological and social signiﬁcance and that they were the focus of feasts, competitions, and
                      other rituals that provided “strategic settings for the negotiations of power relations. These
                                     THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN MESOAMERICA         509


rituals centered on the redistribution of food and wealth and the symbolic renewal of
agricultural fertility.” He concludes that the ball courts, as places with “supernatural
associations, served as [stages] for rituals in which political conﬂict was mapped onto and
resolved through cosmological drama.”84


TIKAL AND UAXACTÚN85
Tikal and Uaxactún, two great Classic Maya communities, provide in their individual
elements and the history of their relationship to each other both an illustration of all the
essential elements of Maya civilization and also an object lesson regarding the political
history of early states in many parts of the world.
      Tikal and Uaxactún are located about 40 miles south of El Mirador in the hot lowland
jungles of the Petén, and much of their destiny was determined by the fact that they were
built only about 12 miles apart: Much of the social interactions of the ancient world were
determined by the distance a person could walk in a day or so—distances that linked
cultures in conﬂict and cooperation—and Tikal and Uaxactún were less than a day’s walk
for both traders and soldiers. In the end, it was the soldiers whose efforts shaped most of
the history of these communities.
      Tikal originated at about 600 b.c. in the form of a small farming village set on a small
hill in the middle of a swamp. Simple peasants these people may have been, but in one of
the burials of this period a severed human head was placed next to the corpse of a man—
perhaps an anticipation of the ritual decapitation of later Maya court rituals. Over
succeeding centuries the people of Tikal built one of the greatest ceremonial centers of the
New World. Temple I at Tikal (Figure 13.16), built about a.d. 700, captures much of the
architectural brilliance of the Maya. In previous centuries the people of Tikal had covered
the original village with a massive complex of temples, plazas, causeways—all the standard
elements of Maya ceremonial centers, but realized in particularly beautiful form. Well-
preserved tombs at Tikal included the bodies of kings and elites and rich offerings of
pottery, food, stingray spines, and other goods. One of the
richest tombs, Burial 85, contained a headless and thighless
body wrapped in a cinnebar-impregnated bundle along with a
marine shell and a stingray spine—common tools in ritual
blood-letting. Schele and Friedel suggest that the Maya may
have kept some of the bones of dead kings as relics and
talismans; they also note that the bodies of kings and elites
show that they were larger and more robust than the com-
moners of this community.86
      Computer simulations have been used to suggest that as
many as 77,000 people may have lived in Tikal’s immediate
environs at its peak,87 and probably 300,000 or more people
lived in the entire 965 square miles that this center dominated.
      Uaxactún’s ﬂorescence generally paralleled that of Tikal,
and by about a.d. 320 they were both the centers of large,
powerful kingdoms. Then an extraordinary Tikal king named
Great-Jaguar-Paw—Maya king names are based on the visual
imagery of their name signs, a device used prior to the             FIGURE 13.16 Temple 1 at Tikal, Guatemala.
510   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      phonetic decipherment of Maya signs in recent years—ascended the throne, and on
      January 16, a.d. 378, he conquered Uaxactún and installed a warrior from Tikal named
      Smoking-Frog as ruler. As Schele and Freidel note, before the ascension of Great-Jaguar-
      Paw, Maya warfare had a personal, almost formal quality: The Maya fought not to kill their
      enemies but to capture them, usually in hand-to-hand combat, so that the captured ruler
      and nobles could be carried back to the victorious city to be tortured and sacriﬁced in public
      rituals. But Great-Jaguar-Paw fought a war not of stylized, formalized combat aimed at
      taking captives for sacriﬁce for personal glory. Instead, he fought a war of conquest when
      he attacked Uaxactún: “This was war on an entirely different scale, played by rules never
      before heard of and for stakes far higher than reputations or lives of individuals. In this new
      warfare of death and conquest, the winner would gain the kingdom of the loser”.88 Great-
      Jaguar-Paw and his warriors not only physically killed the Uaxactún elites, but they also
      killed this community spiritually, cutting off the people from the guidance and protection
      of their ancestors and gods.
           Tikal and Uaxactún were two of the most prominent Classic Maya communities, but
      there were many others of interest. Some of the greatest of all known Maya frescoes are at
      Bonampak, dating to the end of the eighth century a.d. Here, in several rooms of murals,
      the paintings tell a story of warfare, torturing of prisoners of war, and celebration. The
      carefully drawn murals, which depict mutilated bodies, marching bands, richly dressed
      ﬁgures, and men with weapons, convey an extraordinarily vivid sense of militarism, royalty,
      and religion. Mary Ellen Miller has argued that these scenes are in part a depiction of raids
      to take prisoners. Unfortunately, these murals have been obscured by seepage through the
      composite limestone, so that they are only clearly visible when they are splashed with water
      or kerosene.89
           Themes of military triumph, the torture of captives, and the power of the ruling classes
      were also commonly depicted in bas-relief sculpture throughout the Classic period—even
      in the Valley of Oaxaca and the peripheral areas of the Maya sphere of inﬂuence. Individuals
      of presumably higher status were juxtaposed in stone carvings with persons of lower status,
      and differences of dress, bearing, and position sharpened the contrast. In some cases,
      representations of prisoners were carved into the facings of stone steps, so that they were
      trod on by the nobility—a not too subtle visual pun.90


      MAYA POLITICAL ORGANIZATION
      Scholars have advanced several different competing ideas about the political organization
      of the Maya. Joyce Marcus,91 for example, has suggested that the various Maya centers
      constituted a political hierarchy, with some royal families at particular centers being more
      powerful and prestigious than others, but with these various dynasties linked through
      marriage alliances and other ties. Stephen Houston, however, challenges this view,
      suggesting that the “Maya Lowlands may have consisted not only of centralized polities,
      with control some 30 km in any direction, but of ‘buffer zones’ in which smaller polities
      switched allegiance at will while remaining essentially independent. . . . Yet other areas may
      have been politically ‘neutral’ centers of pilgrimage.”92
           However, emerging data suggest that Maya polities were far more varied than center-
      dominated regions surrounded by buffer zones. Edward Schortman and Patricia Urban,93
      for example, examined the relationship of Maya communities on the periphery of the
                                       THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN MESOAMERICA           511


central Maya lowlands to centers such as Copán and Quirigua and concluded that these
relationships varied depending on whether one considers politics, economy, or ideology.
They suggest that despite the signs of great military domination by the most powerful
communities in the central Maya area, no community could dominate to the extent that
there was severe interregional exploitation in all dimensions of these relationships.
     These and other views of how the Maya were organized politically raise fundamental
questions about the nature of human societies in general. From the perspective of our own
world and time we can look back and see the cultures of the world inexorably being linked
closer and closer and ever more intensively. The United Nations, the European Union, and
other political and commercial organizations now affect the ﬂow of goods and ideas in even
the most distant corners of the world. But this long-term evolutionary pattern has been a
ﬁtful one, with frequent reversals and great variations through time and space. And it is not
clear that increasing complexity in these forms of organization are necessary or even
“good.” The various foreign conquests of the ancient Greek city-states, for example, are
traditionally attributed to the Greeks’ apparent inability to forge durable commercial,
military, and political ties and unite against their aggressors, but this lack of unity did not
seem to cripple these cultures intellectually—quite the opposite, in fact, when we consider
their cultural contributions.
     Basic geography certainly seems to explain part of the differences in level of political
organization that we see in the ancient world. The Maya, like the Greeks, did not have the
easy transport and communication channel that the Nile provided the ancient Egyptians,
for example. And the Maya did not have the domestic horses and donkeys that allowed
Middle Eastern societies to move goods, people, and information across a complex and vast
social landscape. As discussed in chapter 7, ancient civilizations are in essence ideas: Maya
ideology appears to have linked the many different centers that constituted this civilization,
but there is little evidence that this ideological unity ever culminated in political or
economic integration that extended beyond small regions.


MAYA WRITING
Maya writing is in many ways a more impressive achievement
than their pyramids and temples. Fortunately, we have many
Classic Maya texts in the form of inscriptions on stone and
pottery, written in the same writing system as the “books” that
followed 1,000 years later. These books consist of long strips
of bark paper covered with a layer of plaster and folded like
screens. Only a few of these “books” survive, but three are
quite long and informative: the Dresden, Madrid, and Paris
codices.
     The sixteenth-century Spanish cleric Bishop Landa
                                                                     FIGURE 13.17 Some Mayan glyphs and the
thought Maya writing (Figure 13.17) at ﬁrst to be entirely
                                                                     phonetic values assigned to them by Y. V.
alphabetic. Scholars quickly realized, however, that Maya            Knorosov. Research in the last two decades has
writing was to be read in double columns, from left to right         shown that ancient Maya writing is a ﬁnely
and from top to bottom, and by the turn of the last century          nuanced, beautiful orthography that probably
Maya glyphs had been identiﬁed for the “zero” and “twenty”           records the entire spoken language of these
signs, the cardinal points of the compass, the basic colors,         people.
512   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      Venus, the months of the year, and the “Long Count,” the system of reckoning by which
      the Maya ﬁgured how many years had elapsed since the beginning of their time.
           Unlike the case with Egyptian hieroglyphs and Mesopotamian cuneiform, Maya
      writing had to be deciphered without the aid of “parallel scripts”—that is, the expression
      of the same text in two different languages, one of which is known.94 As noted in chapter
      8, phoneticization is a key step in the evolution of a written language, for once the elemental
      sounds of the spoken language are represented by abstract characters, the complete
      language can be written. The Russian linguist Yuri Knorosov was the ﬁrst to demonstrate
      that Maya writing was indeed a phonetic system, and since his initial translations, many
      inscriptions have been almost entirely translated.95 Building on the work of Tatiana
      Proskouriakoff, Henrich Berlin, and Yuri Knorosov, a new generation of Mayanists has
      made great progress: David Stuart, Peter Mathews, Steve Houston, Karl Taube, James Fox,
      John Juteson, and Michael Coe are just some of the scholars of the past several decades
      whose combined efforts have shown that ancient Maya writing is a ﬁnely nuanced, beautiful
      orthography that probably records the entire spoken language of these people.96
           Maya script is somewhat similar to Egyptian hieroglyphs (chapter 9) in that it includes
      a mixture of signs, some representing whole words or ideas, others expressing syllables,
      sounds, and determinatives that clarify meanings.
           In the Middle East the ﬁrst writings are almost unrelievedly economic, but in
      Mesoamerica the surviving documents are primarily calendrical and historical, recording,
      for example, when a temple was begun, when a king defeated a rival, and what lands were
      under the control of the state. About the dull details of maize and men, they seemed much
      less concerned.97 Recently, however, the inscriptions on hundreds of ceramics have been
      translated, and they do provide a great deal of economic information. Michael Coe, Steve
      Houston, and others98 have shown that these texts recorded such information as the class
      of vessels a particular pot belonged to, its methods of adornment, the contents (e.g.,
      chocolate or ﬂavored maize gruel99), and occasionally the person who made or owned the
      vessel and its contents. As Houston also notes, the inscribed dates for the birth, accession,
      death, and other primary events in the lives of elites offer at least a speculative basis for
      estimating basic anthropological data about life spans. Justifying the fulsomeness of
      inscriptions on headstones and mortuary monuments, Samuel Johnson said, “In lapidary
      inscriptions a man is not upon oath,” and it may be that there is a ﬁctional element in the
      life-histories recorded for elite Maya. But the inscriptions ﬁt rather well with some
      anthropological data that indicate that the Maya rarely lived past 55-65 years.100
           The Maya were sophisticated mathematicians. They used a base-20 system in which
      they expressed the quantity 39, for example, as 19 numbers after 20, and the value 60 as
      three 20s.101 They discovered the concept of zero and used a place-value notation system
      that allowed them to express numbers beyond 100,000,000. They had no way to express
      fractions in mathematical notation, but they computed the length of the solar year to
      365.242000 days, compared to our own Gregorian calendar ﬁgure of 365.242500 days (the
      true value is approximately 365.242198 days). The Maya used two calendars. One was the
      familiar solar calendar in which a year equaled 365 days, but whereas we intercalate an extra
      day every four years to compensate for the year being actually 365.24 days long, the Maya
      blithely ignored this and let the seasons creep around the calendar. And in contrast to our
      system of 12 months of from 28 to 31 days, the Maya had 18 named months of 20 days
      each, with 5 days, which were considered highly unlucky, added to the end.
                                      THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN MESOAMERICA           513


     The second calendar
(which appears to have been in
use by the Olmec, a millennium
or so prior to the Maya)
involved a 260-day year, com-
posed by intermeshing the
sequence of numbers from 1
to 13 with 20 named days
(Figure 13.18). These two
calendars ran parallel, and thus
every particular day in the
260-day calendar also had a
position in the solar calendar.
The calendars’ permutations
are such that each named day
would not reappear in the
same position for 18,980 days,       FIGURE 13.18 One of the Maya calendars was calculated from the correlation of
or 52 of our solar years. Every      the numbers from 1 to 13 and 20 named days.
day on the Maya calendar had
its omens, and activities were rigorously scheduled in accordance with their astrological
signiﬁcance.
     In some of the later adaptations of the Maya calendar, it appears that people were
named after the day on which they were born and could not marry if they shared a
numerical coefﬁcient (e.g., Mr. “8 deer” could not marry Ms. “8 ﬂower”).102 The Maya were
thoroughly attuned to these calendrical cycles and used them to schedule many aspects of
daily life and ritual. The Maya’s “zero day,” from which they counted time (and which they
perhaps believed was the date on which the world was created) was August 13, 3114 b.c.
Contrary to some speculations, the Maya apparently did not believe the world will end on
December 24, a.d. 2011, but this date does mark the point at which the Long Count will
return to the symmetry of its beginning. Pacal, king of Palenque, predicted in one of his
inscriptions that the eightieth Calendar Round of his accession will be celebrated on
October 15, a.d. 4772—a man who took the long view, indeed.103


The End of the Classic Maya (C. A.D. 760–A.D. 1100)
For decades scholars have debated the “collapse” of Maya civilization. It is in part a Western
view of the world to see periods of rise and collapse in nations’ histories and to search for
causes. But the collapse of states, ancient and modern, never seems easily explained, and
this is especially true of the Maya.
      “Collapse” in the sense of what happened to the Maya has many meanings, since
hundreds of thousands of people who spoke Mayan and were the direct genetic descendants
of the classic ﬁrst millennium a.d. Maya were there to greet the ﬁrst Europeans on their
arrival in the sixteenth century. And as Andrews and others have noted, the “collapse” of
the Maya may be more apparent than real. A decline in temple construction and in the
production of lavish goods does not necessarily mean societal collapse. As we noted in the
discussion of changes in Egypt and elsewhere in the ancient world, declines in certain kinds
514   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      of “waste” seem to be more indicative of a changing economic basis and administrative
      structure than the destruction of a culture. Had the Spanish not arrived when they did, the
      people of the Maya areas might have been reformulated by time and circumstance into a
      larger, more powerful, nation-state.
           But Classic Maya culture did change—it lost many of its most important elements, and
      many formerly great communities were abandoned. One of the last kings of the Maya,
      Can-Ek, ruler of Itzá, met Cortés as he and his expedition crossed the Petén in a.d. 1525.
      But Maya culture was in decline long before that. As Anthony Andrews notes:

          In the eighth and ninth centuries the Maya area was a densely populated mosaic of large
          and small city-states ruled by regal and ritual dynasties who oversaw the great achievements
          of what we now call Classic Maya Civilization. These polities were also crossing the
          threshold of their demographic and ecological limits, which when coupled with managerial
          shortcomings, warfare, and the breakdown of political structure, led to a spectacular
          process of societal collapse. Cities throughout the southern lowlands were abandoned—
          some quickly. . . . Small populations survived in pockets . . . but for the most part they had
          severed their ties with the Classic past.104

      Until about a.d. 910, the Maya usually accompanied any new monumental building with
      a stone stela engraved with the date of its construction, and thus we know that while many
      buildings were completed during the eighth and ninth centuries a.d., by a.d. 889 only three
      sites were under construction, and by about a.d. 900, construction seems to have ended for
      good. On the basis of ceramics and other information, we know that depopulation of the
      countryside and centers apparently followed quickly.
           We know from inscriptions at Palenque, Dos Pilas, and other sites that the ninth
      century a.d. was a time of intense warfare and conquest, but there were also sporadic
      attempts to reestablish control and build communities in the ancient traditions. But the
      last king to erect a tree-stone, a traditional royal inscription to celebrate the end of a
      calendrical cycle, did so on January 20, a.d. 909, and after that the Maya traditions in the
      southern lowlands contracted and all but disappeared in the next few centuries.
           But in the northern lowlands the ninth and tenth centuries a.d. were a time of great
      expansion. Cities such as Chichén Itzá established empires that transcended in size and
      power those of the earlier Classic period. Despite these periods of regional ﬂorescence and
      empire, however, Maya writing fell out of use and, with it, perhaps, the central ideology of
      the Maya world—the complex ideas about the universe and human affairs that melded
      these people into a culture and inspired them to build their civilization.
           Many factors have been suggested as causes of the collapse, and also the development,
      of Maya civilization, and new interpretations sporadically appear. Not surprisingly, many
      involve the ecology of the Maya homeland, which seems at ﬁrst glance to be a major barrier
      to cultural evolution.
           A traditional archaeological approach to explaining the development of something is
      to imagine a set of problems to which the development is a solution. We might ask, given
      the Maya environment, under what conditions would it have been advantageous to
      organize into larger political and social units? Perhaps the answer lies in the necessity of
      local exchange to meet the threat of drought, disease, or disturbance. Rainfall is quite vari-
      able within the Maya area, and many other factors can adversely affect each community’s
      agricultural system. Because the communities were all so similar in the crops they grew and
                                         THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN MESOAMERICA            515


their techniques for growing them, a major drought, such as happens in this area every
8–10 years, could result in the starvation of many people in hundreds of hamlets. But this
could be avoided if many villages established exchange networks that spread the risks.
Each year earthquakes, droughts, disease, ﬂoods, warfare, or some other combination of
calamities might wipe out some sectors of the subsistence system, but if a village belonged
to an organization that included many hamlets, it could get help or give help, depending
on its fortunes. Population-control regulators were very important, hence the monumental
construction projects in this most unlikely of places.
     Whatever was at the root of the Maya cultural evolution, the collapse of this culture
poses equally interesting questions. We have argued that the evolution of Maya society
could probably be tied to the necessity of spreading the “risk” of life in this area by integrating
many different settlements under a centralized authority. But by the same token, such an
integrated system might eventually have encountered a series of catastrophes and internal
problems that were spaced so closely together and in such a sequence that their effects could
not be successfully fought off. “Murphy’s Law” stipulates that if anything can go wrong, it
will. This is especially true for cultural systems spanning millennia. Earthquakes, disease,
warfare, drought, crop disease—all have certain periodicities, and unfavorable conjunctions
must necessarily arise if the system is sufﬁciently long-lived.
     For the Maya lowlands, accumulating data suggest that drought played a signiﬁcant
role in the demise of much of the Classic Maya world.105 As we discussed earlier, the lowlands
are characterized by seasonal rainfall, with about 90 percent of the rain falling in the interval
between June and September.106 Exacerbating this ecological factor is the rarity of surface water
—water dissolves the limestone substrate in the Yucatan, forming caves and underground
rivers. Maya settlements, whether large or small, had to build reservoirs to trap rainfall or,
occasionally, where possible, dig into the bedrock to reach underground sources of water.
Throughout this period, dry conditions were always more prevalent in the northern
lowlands compared to the south. If less rainfall fell during the wet seasons for an extended
period of time, then reservoirs would not be sufﬁciently full to support both the water needs
of people and the water needed for irrigation and crop growing.
     Richardson Gill107 recently suggested that three major periods of drought occurred
during the latter part of the Classic Maya period: 760 to 810 a.d., around 860 a.d., and about
910 a.d. These would have differentially affected Maya settlements, with sites in the southern
lowlands being the earliest to suffer the consequences of reduced rainfall. This periodicity
of major droughts has recently received independent conﬁrmation from climatic data from
sediments off the shore of Venezuela.108
     While major droughts likely were an important factor, the demise of the Classic Maya
should be seen as a period when people began to restructure their society and culture to
meet various challenges, such as failure of rulership, increasing populations, and warfare,
as well as major droughts.109 Restructuring often results in archaeological signatures that
are different from what came before, and thus appear to be striking changes in the archae-
ological record. We see these most dramatically in the southern Maya lowlands, where the
Classic Maya “disappears.” It is now clear, however, that societal adaptations among the
Maya were quite variable. Chichén Itzá (see earlier) in the northern lowlands is a good case
in point. The great droughts occurred here, but Chichén Itzá grew in power, prestige, and
inﬂuence. Bruce Dahlin110 has provided one explanation for this pattern, suggesting that
the northern lowlands had access to a much wider diversity of resource zones. Chichén Itzá
516   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      capitalized on this access by intensifying trade networks and also through conquests.
      Chichén Itzá also may have beneﬁted from the endemic warfare between Tikal and
      Calakmul in the southern and central lowlands. Emphasis on obtaining a diversity of
      resources, especially those related to subsistence, and providing labor in the form of the
      military and services related to trade, led to some restructuring of society, particularly in
      political and economic organization. Chichén Itzá is now viewed by scholars as the last of
      the Classic Maya capitals—rather than as a phenomenon of the Postclassic period—not
      reaching its demise until sometime between a.d. 1000–1100, long after the abandonment
      of Classic Maya centers in the southern lowlands.111
           Global explanations for societal changes are rarely satisfactory. In the case of the
      Maya, regional variability in ecology, settlement, population, aptitude of individual rulers,
      droughts, warfare, and a host of other factors all appear to have contributed in varying
      degrees to the end of the Classic period. As we have seen, however, this demise did not occur
      over all the Maya region simultaneously, but took place over some 250 years.



      POSTCLASSIC MESOAMERICA (A.D. 900–A.D. 1521)

      As Maya political power in the lowlands was beginning to wane, much of highland Puebla,
      Mexico, and Hildago was apportioned among several competing power centers. One group,
      the Toltecs, began to dominate the Valley of Mexico after about a.d. 900. According to
      Aztec legends (the Aztecs claimed descent from the Toltecs), the Toltecs came to central
      Mexico from northwestern Mexico. The desert plateaus of northwestern Mexico were for
      many millennia the home of the Chichimeca, groups of nomadic hunter-foragers, and it is
      possible that some of these people migrated south and did, in fact, join with (or displace)
      local cultures to produce the Toltec culture. One of the major centers of the Toltec polity
      was at Tula, just north of the Valley of Mexico. Shortly after about a.d. 900, the Toltec built
      two stone pyramids and a ball court at Tula. On one of the pyramids they placed a temple
      dedicated to the Serpent god, Quetzalcóatl. On top of the pyramid (which is just over
      10 m high) they placed stone statues of warriors (Figure 13.19), which are about 4.6 m
      high, as supports for a temple, and these ﬁgures continue to dominate the site. The base of
      the pyramid is decorated with reliefs of prowling jaguars and coyotes and eagles eating
      hearts.112
           The Toltecs established trade and military outposts in many areas of northern and
      western Mexico and exported metal, gemstones, and other commodities as far north as
      Arizona and New Mexico. To the south, the Toltecs interacted with Chichén Itzá.
           Eventually, Toltec power weakened. Under the onslaught of the invading Chichimec
      from the north, the Toltecs broke up into many smaller, competitive groups. Tula itself was
      almost entirely destroyed by invaders at about a.d. 1156. Succeeding centuries saw the rise
      of various other cultural traditions in central Mexico, such as the Tarascan state.113 Chichén
      Itzá also went into a period of decline, to be replaced by a loose confederation of provinces,
      called the League of Mayapán, and the island of Cozumel, on Yucatan’s east coast, which
      was a major trading center between a.d. 1250 and the arrival of the Spanish in a.d. 1519.114
      But by the time of the arrival of the Spanish, the community at Mayapán had been abandoned
      and the Maya areas were a welter of small chiefdoms at war with one another.115
                                      THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN MESOAMERICA        517


The Aztec
(c. A.D. 1150–1521)
One of the last tribes to
invade central Mexico from the
north and west was the Aztecs.
Aztec histories and legends, as
recorded by the Spanish, tell
of their arrival in the Valley of
Mexico as rag-tag foragers
and primitive agriculturalists
who at ﬁrst were forced by
the established residents of the
valley to live in the swamps
around the lake, subsisting
on ﬂies, snakes, and vermin.
According to legend, rival
political groups in the valley
enlisted the Aztecs in their
campaigns but avoided other
contacts with them because
of the Aztecs’ predilections
for human sacriﬁce and other
barbarisms. At war with vari-
ous groups, the Aztecs were
forced to take refuge on islands
                                     FIGURE 13.19 Toltec warrior statues from Tula, Mexico.
in the lake where, according to
legend, they built their ﬁrst
city, Tenochtitlán (Figure 13.20). In time Tenochtitlán grew to become a massive complex
of pyramids, courts, and other buildings (now largely buried beneath the streets of
Mexico City).
      As allies of the Tepanec kingdom of Atzcapotzalco, the Aztecs conquered many of the
surrounding cities, and at about a.d. 1427 they turned on their erstwhile allies and through
savage warfare brought most of central Mexico under their control. Military expeditions
conquered peoples all the way to the Guatemalan border, and garrison towns were
established from the Paciﬁc Coast to the Gulf of Mexico. Considerable investment in
monumental construction characterized the capital at Tenochtitlán, but outside the capital,
as Mary Hodge points outs, “the Aztec Empire has been described as nearly ‘invisible’
because it did not invest in roads, administrative buildings, or walls.”116
      Although the Aztecs are usually associated with militarism, they also created an
impressive civil and commercial administration. Between about a.d. 1300 and a.d. 1520
they drained large areas of the Valley of Mexico, transforming them into productive
agricultural plots. Michael Smith has argued that the Valley of Mexico settlement pattern
during Aztec times was a hierarchically arranged marketing system of products with intense
local specialization in goods and services.117 Many commodities, including salt, reeds, ﬁsh,
stone, cloth, various crops, ceramics, gold, and wood, were exchanged among hundreds of
518   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY




      FIGURE 13.20 The most important Aztec cities were built around the lake that used to cover part
      of the Valley of Mexico. The lake margins were intensively farmed, and boats conveyed great quan-
      tities of food and craft products among these cities.


      communities (Figure 13.21). In fact, the improbable location of Tenochtitlán—on an
      island in the middle of the lake—is probably best understood in terms of its central role in
      these redistributive networks.118 In a.d. 1519 Tenochtitlán is estimated to have had about
      200,000–300,000 inhabitants, ﬁve times the population of London at that period, and there
      were many other large cities within the Aztec domain.119 Many cities had broad avenues,
      causeways, temples, pyramids, and other large buildings, often interspersed with gardens,
      courtyards, and large markets.
           It is estimated that between one and two million people lived in the Valley of Mexico
      in late Aztec times.120 The lake provided great and reliable quantities of food in the form of
      ﬁsh, waterfowl, and salamanders. In the southern areas of the valley’s lake system, maize,
      beans, squash, tomatoes, and other crops were grown on chinampas, long rectangular plots
      of ground created out of the lake bed by piling up layers of aquatic weeds, mud, human
      feces, garbage, and other materials. According to ancient documents, the Aztecs initially
      made the chinampas by braiding grass and reeds into thick mats that could ﬂoat, and thus
      they were able to ﬂoat entire ﬁelds from one place to another—an agricultural system
      unparalleled in the ancient world.121 The Aztecs and their successors planted trees,
      including the ahejote (a kind of willow), that eventually anchored most plots. Farmers who
                                     THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN MESOAMERICA        519




FIGURE 13.21 A Mexican tribute list (from the Codex Mendoza) describing the tribute paid to
the government by towns in Guerrero Province. Among the commodities described are uniforms,
shields, jade, gourds, sage, and amaranth.
520   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      still cultivate chinampas water the plots until they are the consistency of pudding and then
      use a rake to grid them into squares about an inch on a side. Seeds are placed in each square
      and covered with organic material to provide a greenhouse effect, and once the seedlings
      are at the proper size they are transplanted to other ﬁelds. As many as four crops per year
      can be grown on these exceptionally fertile plots of land.
            The Aztecs were organized into a highly stratiﬁed class system headed by a divine king.
      Beneath the king were the nobles, the pillitin, all of whom belonged to the royal house, while
      the great mass of the populace were commoners who were organized in large clans, called
      calpulli (“big house”). The calpulli were the basic units of Aztec society. Each was composed
      of several lineages, totaling several hundred people, one of whom was designated the
      calpule, or leader. Members of a calpulli usually lived in the same village or ward, fought
      together as a unit if drafted for war, held and worked land in common, paid taxes as a unit,
      and worshiped at the shrine maintained by the calpulli. The leaders of the calpulli were the
      direct link between the imperial government and the people. There was also a class of
      professional merchants called pochteca.
            The calpulli differed from one another in social rank. There was some social mobility
      for individuals—usually by virtue of extraordinary service to the state in warfare, trade, or
      religion. At the bottom of the social scale were the landless peasants and slaves, who worked
      the ﬁelds, performed other menial tasks, and were sacriﬁced in enormous numbers to
      various gods.
            The Aztecs believed that the present world was just one in a succession of creations by
      the gods and that constant effort was required to forestall the extinction of the sun and the
      utter disappearance of humanity. Human blood was an essential part of the ritual (Figure
      13.22) whereby the end of the world was postponed, and each time a human heart was
      ripped from a sacriﬁced person, another small step was taken toward prolonging the daily
      rebirth of the sun.122 At times long lines of sacriﬁcial victims snaked down the steps of the
      major pyramid mounds, on the top of which priests spent hour after hour engaged in the
      bloody process of heart removal. After the heart and blood had been offered to the gods,
      the body was thrown down the steps of the pyramid and subsequently ﬂayed and then,
      perhaps, eaten. Other victims slated for sacriﬁce were pitted in gladiatorial contests, or
      beheaded, or drowned, or cast into ﬁres. The Spanish conquistadors may have exaggerated
      the numbers of people sacriﬁced, but it seems inescapable that the Aztecs annually killed
      many tens of thousands and perhaps hundreds of thousands of people. This slaughter was
      accepted by the common people; in fact, it seems to have been widely supported. All war
      captives knew their fate, and it was an act of honor to accept a sacriﬁcial death. In addition,
      young men were selected each year to lead a life of luxury in which they were surrounded
      by complaisant young women and feasted on the best of food, realizing full well that at the
      end of the year they would be sacriﬁced. In addition, parents throughout the land turned over
      infants and children to government ofﬁcials for use in annual sacriﬁcial rites. One sixteenth-
      century (apparently) eyewitness account of the ritual execution of a woman who played the
      role of the goddess Uixtociuatl gives us a sense of what these rites may have been like:

          And after they had slain the captives, only [then] Uixtociuatl [’s impersonator] followed;
          she came only at the last. They came to the end and ﬁnished only with her.
                And when this was done, thereupon they laid her down upon the offering stone. They
          stretched her out upon her back. . . . They laid hold of her; they pulled and stretched out
                                          THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN MESOAMERICA                  521




FIGURE 13.22 These early drawings (from the Codex Florentino) describe the sequence of ritual human sacriﬁce. (A)
The priest is dressed in the skin of a sacriﬁced person; another person (B) was given a shield, mirror, and other ritual items
and played the part of the god Tezcatlipoca; the individual was then sacriﬁced (C) and eaten (D).



     her arms and legs, bending [up] her breast greatly, bending down her head taut, toward the
     earth. And they bore down upon her neck with the tightly pressed snout of a sword ﬁsh,
     barbed, spiny, spined on either side.
          And the slayer stood there; he stood up. Thereupon he cut open her breast.
           522       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                               And when he opened her breast, the blood gushed up high; it welled up far as it poured
                         forth, as it boiled up.
                               And when this was done, then he raised her heart as an offering [to the god] and placed
                         it in the green jar, which was called the green stone jar.
                               And as this was done, loudly were the trumpets blown. And when it was over, then
                         they lowered the body and the heart of [the likeness of] Uixtociuatl, covered by a precious
                         mantle.123

                      Many of the sacriﬁcial victims, as well as soldiers who died in battle, people struck by
                      lightning, and mothers who died in childbirth, were thought to spend eternity in various
                      paradises, cosseted with the pleasures of this world and the next.
                            With its emphasis on death, blood, and cosmic cataclysm, it is little wonder that Aztec
                      theology struck the Spanish as somewhat heterodox (Figure 13.23). Even anthropologists,
                      renowned for their cultural relativism, are impressed with the violence of Aztec religion.
                      But human sacriﬁce is an old and recurrent theme in the evolution of complex cultures: In
                      Mesopotamia, China, North America, and most other places, examples of warfare and
                      slaughter can be found that equaled that of the Aztecs in form, if not in intensity. Also, as
                      noted at the beginning of this chapter, the Europeans probably exaggerated the violence of
                      Mesoamerican life, for the Europeans had a political agenda well-served by depicting the
                      Native Americans as savages.
                            But human sacriﬁce and blood-letting were important elements in Mesoamerican
                      cultures, and it is an interesting anthropological problem to explain why these acts, so
                                                   repugnant to the modern mind, became so celebrated by the
                                                   ancients of Mesoamerica, China, Mesopotamia, and else-
                                                   where. It is not difﬁcult to posit “functional” explanations
                                                   that are plausible, if largely untestable. Michael Harner, for
                                                   example, has argued that the key to Aztec sacriﬁce is the
                                                   contribution the cannibalism of sacriﬁcial victims made to the
                                                   Aztec diet. 124 Mesoamerica lacks any large domesticated
                                                   animals that could have been effectively integrated with Aztec
                                                   agricultural strategies, and this animal protein and fat deﬁci-
                                                   ency may have been compensated for by cannibalism. But the
                                                   Mesoamerican diet is generally a rich one, with a nutritionally
                                                   adequate basis of maize, beans, squash, ﬁsh, frogs, birds, deer,
                                                   dogs, and other animals. This diet was sufﬁcient to have
                                                   supported long-term population growth and the needs of
                                                   hundreds of thousands of people who lived around what is
                                                   now Mexico City. There is little doubt that the Aztecs engaged
                                                   in cannibalism, since several sixteenth-century Europeans
                                                   described it as it happened, but we have insufﬁcient evidence
                                                   with which to evaluate Harner’s thesis.
                                                        Despite their death cults, the Aztecs in everyday life were
                                                   a colorful and in some ways engaging people. The Spanish
                                                   remarked on their love of ﬂowers and natural beauty, and their
FIGURE 13.23 The supreme Aztec divinity was        poetry contains many references to the joys of the natural
Tezcatlipoca, whose skull is modeled here in jade  world. The Spanish were amazed to ﬁnd that Aztecs bathed
and crystal.                                       their entire bodies most days—a level of personal cleanliness
                                        THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN MESOAMERICA         523


that would have struck even most eighteenth- and nineteenth-century Europeans as bizarre
and unhealthy.
     Dress for men and women often consisted of a loincloth and a woven cloak, and
brightly colored cotton fabrics were used for ornamentation. In the countryside women
often went about naked to the waist, but middle- and upper-class urban women wore
decorated blouses.125
     The diet of the Aztecs centered on maize, beans, squash, and tomatoes, although the
wealthier people could eat various fruits, nuts, meats, and other exotic foods. The relatively
unvaried diet was enlivened with peyote and other natural hallucinogens and by tobacco
and pulque, a cactus-derived alcoholic drink with impressive powers to revive the weary.


THE SPANISH CONQUEST

    The captain Alonso Lopez de Avila . . . captured during the war . . . a young Indian woman
    of lovely and gracious appearance. She had promised her husband, fearful lest they should
    kill him in the war, not to have relations with any other man but him, and so no persuasion
    was sufﬁcient to prevent her from taking her own life to avoid being deﬁled by another
    man; and because of this they had her thrown to the dogs.126

The melancholy history of the conquest of Mesoamerica by Spanish adventurers in the early
sixteenth century was recorded in detail by the Spanish themselves. Accounts on both sides
of this meeting of worlds provide a fascinating look at the clash of cultures.127
     In a.d. 1519 Corte’s left Cuba with a sizable force of ships, men, armaments, and horses
and sailed to the coast of Veracruz. With the advantage of diplomacy with non-Aztec
groups, horses, cannons, war dogs, and an extraordinary esprit de corps, Cortés and his
men were able to march directly into the Aztec capital at Tenochtitlán, where they were at
ﬁrst welcomed by the Aztec king, Moctezuma, who was under the delusion that the Spanish
were gods returning to their ancestral homeland. He could hardly have been more wrong.
Within a short time, the Spanish had kidnapped and jailed him and were forming alliances
with local non-Aztec peoples, who were only too happy to help the Spanish displace the
Aztecs. Moctezuma and many of his people were eventually killed in a ﬁerce battle at
Tenochtitlán, after which Aztec resistance stiffened; but within a few years the Spanish had
captured most of the Aztec heartland. In 1524 they hanged the last Aztec king, and
thereafter Spanish domination of Mexico was rapid. When the Spanish ﬁrst arrived, the
population of the heartland of the Aztec empire was probably more than a million; 150
years later it probably held fewer than 70,000 people—the survivors of war, European
diseases such as smallpox, slavery, and the other plagues of this epic clash of cultures.


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

As in all the other cases of early cultural complexity we have considered, it is clear that
aspects of economy, ecology, and demography explain much of what happened in the New
World. The Olmec, Teotihuacán, Oaxacan, Maya, Aztec, and other Mesoamerican societies
appeared where they did and not in Newfoundland or Nebraska because of the exceptional
524   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      productivity of the South Gulf Coast, Oaxaca, and other areas of Mesoamerica, given a
      simple farming technology and the maize-beans-squash complex.
           We see in Mesoamerica, too, the stimulus to development provided by irrigation
      agriculture, environmental circumscription, interregional exchange, and other factors.
           Once we get beyond an ecological level of analysis, we encounter a welter of variability
      in sociopolitical forms, economic histories, settlement patterns, and the other elaborations
      in these complex societies. In the absence of sufﬁcient written documents, it is difﬁcultto
      apply Marxian or other sociopolitical models to Mesoamerica. So we are left with a case
      of cultural evolution that is so striking a parallel to what happened in, for example,
      Mesopotamia, that we must consider both areas examples of a single developmental pattern.
           From a nonscientiﬁc point of view, in some ways the most interesting thing about early
      Mesoamerican societies is the psychological contrast they make with ourselves. We may be
      sure that the average Olmec town of 500 b.c. had a full range of human personality types
      and an agricultural existence that we can all imagine. But in their cosmologies, world-views,
      and life-views, ancient Mesoamericans were profoundly different from the Spanish who
      ﬁrst met them. Indeed, their views were probably profoundly different from those of any
      of the other western European traditions.


      BIBLIOGRAPHY
      Adams, R. E. W., ed. 1977. The Origins of Maya Civilization. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
      Adams, R. E., W. E. Brown, Jr., and T. P. Culbert. 1981. “Radar Mapping, Archaeology, and Ancient Mayan Land
                   Use.” Science 213:1457–1463.
      Alden, J. R. 1979. “A Reconstruction of the Toltec Period Political Units in the Valley of Mexico.” In
                   Transformations: Mathematical Approaches to Culture Change, ed. C. Renfrew and K. L. Cooke. New
                   York: Academic Press.
      Anderson, A. O., and C. Dibble, eds. 1978. The Florentine Codex. Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press.
      Andrews, A. P. 1990. “The Fall of Chichen Itza: A Preliminary Hypothesis.” Latin American Antiquity
                   1(3):258 –267.
      ———. 1993. “Late Postclassic Lowland Maya Archaeology.” Journal of World Prehistory 7(1):35 –70.
      Andrews, A. P., E. W. Andrews, and F. R. Castellanos. 2003. “The Northern Maya Collapse and its Aftermath.”
                   Ancient Mesoamerica 14:151–156.
      Andrews V, E. W. 1990. “Early Ceramic History of the Lowland Maya.” In Vision and Revision in Maya Studies,
                   ed. F. S. Clancy and P. D. Harrison, pp. 1–19. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
      Andrews V, E. W., and N. D. C. Hammond. 1990. “Redeﬁnition of the Swasey Phase at Cuello, Belize.” American
                   Antiquity 54:570–584.
      Armillas, P. 1971. “Gardens on Swamps.” Science 174:653 – 661.
      Arnold, J. E., and A. Ford. 1980. “A Statistical Examination of Settlement Patterns at Tikal, Guatemala.” American
                   Antiquity 45:713 –726.
      Ashmore, W., ed. 1981. Lowland Maya Settlement Patterns. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
      Bell, E. B., M. A. Canuto, and R. J. Sharer. eds. 2004. Understanding Early Classic Copan. Philadelphia: University
                   of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology.
      Berlo, J. C., ed. 1992. Art, Ideology and the City of Teotihuacan: A Symposium at Dumbarton Oaks 8th and 9th
                   October 1988. Washington, DC: Dumbarton Oaks.
      Berrin, K., and Pasztory, R., eds. 1994. Teotihacan. London: Thames and Hudson.
      Blanton, R. E. 1972. “Prehistoric Adaptation in the Ixtapalapa Region, Mexico.” Science 175:1317–1326.
      ———. 1978. Monte Albán: Settlement Patterns at the Ancient Zapotec Capital. New York: Academic Press.
      ———. 1980. “Cultural Ecology Reconsidered.” American Antiquity 45:145 –151.
      ———. 1983. “Advances in the Study of Cultural Evolution in Prehispanic Highland Mesoamerica.” In Advances
                   in World Archaeology, Vol. 2, ed. F. Wendorf and A. E. Close. New York: Academic Press.
      Blanton, R. E., S. A. Kowalewski, G. Feinman, and J. Appel. 1981. Ancient Mesoamerica, a Comparison of Change
                   in Three Regions. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
      Blomster, J. P., H. Neff, and M. D. Glascock. 2005. “Olmec Pottery Production and Export in Ancient Mexico
                   Determined Through Elemental Analysis.” Science 307:1068–1072.
                                               THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN MESOAMERICA                     525


Braswell, G., ed. 2003. The Maya and Teotihuacan: Reinterpreting Early Classic Interaction. Austin: University of
             Texas Press.
Brumﬁel, E. 1976. “Regional Growth in the Eastern Valley of Mexico: A Test of the ‘Population Pressures’
             Hypothesis.” In The Early Mesoamerican Village, ed. K. V. Flannery. New York: Academic Press.
———. 1983. “Aztec State Making: Ecology, Structure, and the Origin of the State.” American Anthropologist
             85(2):261–284.
Chase, D. V. 1990. “The Invisible Maya: Population History and Archaeology at Santa Rita Corozal.” In Prehistoric
             Population History in the Maya Lowlands, ed. T. P. Culbert and D. S. Rice, pp. 199 –214. Albuquerque:
             University of New Mexico Press.
Chippendale, C., N. Hammond, and J. Sabloff. 1988. “The Archaeology of Maya Decipherment.” Antiquity
             62(234):119 –122.
Clancy, F. S., and P. D. Harrison, eds. 1995. Vision and Revision in Maya Studies. Albuquerque: University of New
             Mexico Press.
Clark, J. E. 1997. “The Arts of Government in Early Mesoamerica.” Annual Review of Anthropology 26:211–234.
Clendinnen, I. 1991. The Aztecs: An Interpretation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Coe, M. D. 1965. “The Olmec Style and Its Distribution.” Handbook of Middle American Indians 3:739 –775.
———. 1968. America’s First Civilization: Discovering the Olmec. New York: American Heritage.
———. 1970. “The Archaeological Sequence at San Lorenzo Tenochtitlán, Veracruz, Mexico.” Contributions of
             the University of California Archaeological Research Facility 8:21–34.
———. 1992. Breaking the Maya Code. London and New York: Thames and Hudson.
———. 1994. Mexico, 4th ed. New York: Thames and Hudson.
Coe, M., and R. Diehl. 1980. The Land of the Olmec: The People of the River, Vol. 2. Austin: University of Texas
             Press.
Coe, M., D. Snow, and E. Benson. 1986. Atlas of Ancient America. New York: Facts on File.
Coe, W., and W. A. Haviland. 1982. Introduction to the Archaeology of Tikal, Guatemala. Philadelphia: University
             Museum, University of Pennsylvania.
Coggins, C. 1985. The Sacred Cenote of Sacriﬁce. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Collier, G. A., R. I. Rosaldo, and J. D. Wirth, eds. 1982. The Inca and Aztec State. New York: Academic Press.
Conrad, G. W., and A. A. Demarest. 1984. Religion and Empire: The Dynamics of Aztec and Inca Expansionism.
             Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cook, S. 1946. “Human Sacriﬁce and Warfare as Factors in the Demography of Precolonial Mexico.” Human
             Biology 18:81–102.
Cordova, C., A. L. M. del Pozzo, and J. L. Camacho. 1994. “Palaeolandforms and Volcanic Impact on the
             Environment of Prehistoric Cuicuilco, Southern Mexico City.” Journal of Archaeological Science
             21:585–596.
Cowgill, G. 1974. “Quantitative Studies of Urbanization at Teotihuacán.” In Mesoamerican Archaeology: New
             Approaches, ed. N. Hammond, pp. 363–396. Austin: University of Texas Press.
———. 1997. “State and Society at Teotihuacan, Mexico.” Annual Review of Anthropology 26:129 –161.
Cowgill, U. 1971. “Some Comments on Manihot Subsistence and the Ancient Maya.” Southwest Journal of
             Anthropology 27:51– 63.
Culbert, T. P. 1973. The Classic Maya Collapse. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
———. 1988. “Political History and the Decipherment of Maya Glyphs.” Antiquity 62(234):135 –152.
Culbert, T. P., and D. S. Rice, eds. 1995. Precolumbian Population History in the Maya Lowlands. Albuquerque:
             University of New Mexico Press.
Dahlin, B. H. 2002. “Climate Change and the End of the Classic Period in Yucatan.” Ancient Mesoamerica
             13:327–340.
Demerest, A. 2004. Ancient Maya: The Rise and Fall of a Rainforest Civilization. New York: Cambridge University
             Press.
Demarest, A., and G. W. Conrad, eds. 1992. Ideology and Pre-Columbian Civilizations. Santa Fe, NM: School of
             American Research Press.
DePalma, A. 1993. “Mexico City Restoring Area Tilled by Aztecs,” New York Times, Sept. 14, 1993, p. B7.
Diaz del Castillo, B. 1928. The Discovery and Conquest of Mexico. London: Routledge.
Dickson, D. B. 1981. “Further Simulations of Ancient Agriculture and Population at Tikal, Guatemala.” American
             Antiquity 46:922–926.
Diehl, R. A., and M. D. Coe. 1996. “Olmec Archaeology.” In The Olmec World: Ritual and Rulership, pp. 10 –25.
             Princeton, NJ: The Art Museum of Princeton University.
Dunning, N. P. 1996. “An Examination of Regional Variability in the Prehispanic Maya Agricultural Landscape.”
             In The Managed Mosaic: Ancient Maya Agriculture and Resource Use, ed. S. L. Fedick, pp. 53 – 68. Salt
             Lake City: University of Utah Press.
Dunning, N. P., T. Beach, P. Farrell, and S. Luzzadder-Beach. 1998. “Prehispanic Agrosystems and Adaptive
             Regions in the Maya Lowlands.” Culture and Agriculture 20:87–101.
526   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      Dunning, N. P., T. Beach, and D. Rue. 1997. “The Paleoecology and Ancient Settlement of the Petexbatun Region,
                   Guatemala.” Ancient Mesoamerica 8:255 –266.
      Fash, W. L. 1991. Scribes, Warriors and Kings: The City of Copan and the Ancient Maya. New York: Thames and
                   Hudson.
      Fedick, S. L. 1994. “Ancient Maya Agricultural Terracing in the Upper Belize River Area.” Ancient Mesoamerica
                   5:107–127.
      ———, ed. 1996. The Managed Mosaic: Ancient Maya Agriculture and Resource Use. Salt Lake City: University of
                   Utah Press.
      Feinman, G. M., and L. M. Nicholas. 1990. “At the Margins of the Monte Alban State: Settlement Patterns in the
                   Ejutla Valley, Oaxaca, Mexico.” Latin American Antiquity 1(3):216 –246.
      Flannery, K. V. 1968. “The Olmec and the Valley of Oaxaca: A Model for Inter-Regional Interaction in Formative
                   Times.” In Dumbarton Oaks Conference on the Olmec, ed. E. P. Benson. Dumbarton Oaks, Washington,
                   DC: Dumbarton Oaks.
      ———. 1976a. “The Early Mesoamerican House.” In The Early Mesoamerican Village, ed. K. V. Flannery. New
                   York: Academic Press.
      ———. 1976b. “Evolution of Complex Settlement Systems.” In The Early Mesoamerican Village, ed. K. V.
                   Flannery. New York: Academic Press.
      ———. 1976c. “Contextual Analysis of Ritual Paraphernalia from Formative Oaxaca.” In The Early Mesoamerican
                   Village, ed. K. V. Flannery. New York: Academic Press.
      ———, ed. 1982. Maya Subsistence: Studies in Memory of Dennis E. Puleston. New York: Academic Press.
      Flannery, K. V., and J. Marcus. 1976. “Evolution of Public Building in Formative Oaxaca.” In Cultural Change
                   and Continuity, ed. C. E. Cleland. New York: Academic Press.
      ———. 1994. Early Formative Pottery of the Valley of Oaxaca, Mexico (with a technical ceramic analysis by W. O.
                   Payne). Memoirs of the Museum of Anthropology 27. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
      ———. 2000. “Formative Mexican Chiefdoms and the Myth of the ‘Mother-Culture.’ ” Journal of Anthropological
                   Archaeology 19:1–37.
      Flannery, K. V., J. Marcus, and S. A. Kowalewski. 1981. “The Preceramic and Formative of the Valley of Oaxaca.”
                   In Supplement to the Handbook of Middle American Indians, pp. 48 –93. Austin: University of Texas
                   Press.
      Flannery, K. V., and M. C. Winter. 1976. “Analyzing Household Activities.” In The Early Mesoamerican Village,
                   ed. K. V. Flannery. New York: Academic Press.
      Folan, W. J., E. R. Kintz, and L. A. Fletcher. 1983. Coba: A Classic Maya Metropolis. New York: Academic Press.
      Fox, J. G. 1996. “Playing with Power. Ballcourts and Political Ritual in Southern Mesoamerica.” Current
                   Anthropology 37(3):483 –509.
      Fox, J. W. 1987. Maya Postclassic State Formation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
      Freidel, D. A., and J. A. Sabloff. 1984. Cozumel: Late Maya Settlement Patterns. New York: Academic Press.
      Fritz, G. J. 1994. “Are the First American Farmers Getting Younger?” Current Anthropology 35(3):305 –309.
      Fry, R., and S. Cox. 1974. “The Structure of Ceramic Exchange at Tikal, Guatemala.” World Archaeology
                   6:209 –225.
      Gill, R. B. 2000. The Great Maya Droughts: Water, Life, and Death. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
      Grennes-Ravits, R., and G. Coleman. 1976. “The Quintessential Role of Olmec in the Central Highlands of
                   Mexico.” American Antiquity 41:196 –205.
      Grove, D. C. 1992. “Ideology and Evolution at the Pre-State Level.” In Ideology and Pre-Columbian Civilizations,
                   ed. A. Demarest and G. W. Conrad. Santa Fe, NM: School of American Research Press.
      Grove, D. C., ed. 1987. Ancient Chalcatzingo. Austin: University of Texas Press.
      Hammond, N. 1995. Ancient Mayan Civilization. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers.
      Hansen, R. D. 1990. Excavations in the Tigre Complex, El Mirador, Petén, Guatemala. Papers of the New World
                   Archaeological Foundation 62. Provo, UT: New World Archaeological Foundation.
      ———. 2001. “The First Cities: The Beginnings of Urbanization and State Formation in the Maya Lowlands.”
                   In Maya: Divine Kings of the Rainforest, ed. N. Grube. Cologne, Germany: Könemann.
      Harner, M. 1977. “The Ecological Basis for Aztec Sacriﬁce.” American Ethnologist 4:117–135.
      Harris, M. 1977. Cannibals and Kings: The Origins of Cultures. New York: Random House.
      Hodge, M. 1991. “Land and Lordship. The Politics of Aztec Provincial Administration in the Valley of Mexico.”
                   In Land and Politics in the Valley of Mexico: A Two-Thousand Year Perspective, ed. H. R. Harvey.
                   Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
      ———. 1995. “Polities Composing the Aztec Empire’s Core.” In Economies and Polities in the Aztec Realm, ed.
                   M. E. Smith and M. G. Hodge. Albany: State University of New York.
      ———. 1998. “Archaeological Views of Aztec Culture.” Journal of Archaeological Research 6(3):197–238.
      Houston, S. D. 1988. “The Phonetic Decipherment of Mayan Glyphs.” Antiquity 62(234):126 –135.
      ———. 1989a. “Archaeology and Maya Writing.” Journal of World Prehistory 3(1):1–32.
      ———. 1989b. Maya Glyphs. Berkeley: University of California Press.
                                               THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN MESOAMERICA                     527


Hunt, R. C., and E. Hunt. 1976. “Canal Irrigation and Local Social Organization.” Current Anthropology 17:389–411.
Ifrah, G. 1985. From One to Zero. Trans. L. Bair. New York: Viking Penguin.
Johnston, K. J. 2004. “The ‘Invisible’ Maya: Minimally Mounded Residential Settlemnt at Itzán, Petén,
            Guatemala.” Latin American Antiquity 15(2):145 –175.
Joyce, R. A. 1986. “Terminal Classic Interaction on the Southeastern Maya Periphery.” American Antiquity
            1986:313–329.
Joyce, R. A., and J. S. Henderson. 2001. “Beginnings of Village Life in Eastern Mesoamerica.” Latin American
            Antiquity 12(1):5 –24.
Justeson, J. S., and T. Kaufman. 1993. “A Decipherment of Epi-Olmec Hieroglyphic Writing.” Science 259:1665–
            1796.
Kelley, D. H. 1993. “The Decipherment of Epi-Olmec Script as Zoquean by Justeson and Kaufman.” The Review
            of Archaeology 14(1):29 –32.
Killion, T. W., and J. Uraid. 2001. “The Olmec Legacy: Cultural Continuity and Change in Mexico’s Southern
            Gulf Coast Lowlands.” Journal of Field Archaeology 28(1–2):3 –25.
Kirkby, A. 1973. The Use of Land and Water Resources in the Past and Present Valley of Oaxaca, Mexico. Ann Arbor:
            Memoirs of the Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan, No. 5.
Kowalewski, S. A. 1990. “The Evolution of Complexity in the Valley of Oaxaca.” Annual Review of Anthropology
            19:39–58.
Kowalewski, S. A., and L. Feinstein. 1983. “The Economic Systems of Ancient Oaxaca: A Regional Perspective.”
            Current Anthropology 24(4):413 – 441.
Knorozov, Y. 1982. Maya Hieroglyphic Codices. Trans. S. D. Cole. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Kunen, J. L., T. P. Culbert, V. Fialko, B. R. McKee, and L. Grazioso. 2000. “Bajo Communities: A Case Study from
            the Central Petén.” Culture and Agriculture 22(3):15 –31.
Kurtz, D. V. 1987. “The Economics of Urbanization and State Formation at Teotihuacán.” Current Anthropology
            28(3):329–353.
Landa, D. de. The Maya Account of Affairs of Yucatan. Chicago: J. O’Hara.
Lees, S. H. 1973. Sociopolitical Aspects of Canal Irrigation in the Valley of Oaxaca. Ann Arbor: Memoir of the
            Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan, No. 6.
Lounsbury, F. G. 1991. “Distinguished Lecture: Recent Work in the Decipherment of Palenque’s Hieroglyphic
            Inscriptions.” American Anthropologist 93(4):809 – 825,
Lowe, J. W. G. 1982. “On Mathematical Models of the Classic Maya Collapse: The Class Conﬂict Hypothesis
            Reexamined.” American Antiquity 47:643 – 652.
Manzanilla, L. 1996. “Corporate Groups and Domestic Activities at Teotihuacan.” Latin American Antiquity
            7(3):228–246.
———. 1999. “Emergence of Complex Urban Societies in Central Mexico: The Case of Teotihuacan.” In
            Archaeology in Latin America, ed. G. G. Politis and B. Alberti, pp. 93 –129. New York: Routledge.
Marcus, J. 1973. “Territorial Organization of the Lowland Classic Maya.” Science 180:911–916.
———. 1974. “The Iconography of Power Among the Classic Maya.” World Archaeology 6:83 –94.
———. 1976a. “The Origins of Mesoamerican Writing.” Annual Review of Anthropology 5:35 – 68.
———. 1976b. “The Iconography of Militarism at Monte Albán and Neighboring Sites in the Valley of Oaxaca.”
            In The Origins of Religious Art and Iconography in Preclassic Mesoamerica, ed. H. B. Nicholson. Los
            Angeles: Latin American Center, UCLA.
———. 1993. Mesoamerican Writing Systems: Propaganda, Myth, and History in Four Ancient Civilizations.
            Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Masson, M. A., and D. A. Freidel, eds. 2002. Ancient Maya Political Economies. Walnut Creek, CA: Altamira.
Matheny, R. T. 1986. “Early States in the Maya Lowlands During the Late Preclassic Period: Edzná and El
            Mirador.” In City-States of the Maya, ed. E. P. Benson, pp. 1– 44. Denver: Rocky Mountain Institute
            for Pre-Columbian Studies.
Matheny, R. T., and D. L. Gurr. 1983. “Variation in Prehistoric Agricultural Systems of the New World.” Annual
            Review of Anthropology 12:79 –103.
McAnany, P. 1994. Living with the Ancestors: Kinship and Kingship in Ancient Maya Society. Austin: University of
            Texas Press.
Miller, M. E. 1986. The Murals of Bonampak. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Miller, M., and K. Taube. 1993. The Gods and Symbols of Ancient Mexico and the Maya. London and New York:
            Thames and Hudson.
Millon, R. 1974. “The Study of Urbanism at Teotihuacán, Mexico.” In Mesoamerican Archaeology: New
            Approaches, ed. N. Hammond. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Millon, R., R. B. Drewitt, and G. L. Cowgill. 1973. Urbanization at Teotihuacán, Mexico, Vol. 1, Parts 1 and 2.
            Austin: University of Texas Press.
Moctezuma, E. M. 1988. The Great Temple of the Aztecs. New York: Thames and Hudson.
Murdy, C. N. 1981. “Congenital Deformities and the Olmec Were-Jaguar Motif.” American Antiquity 46:861– 869.
528   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      Nations, J. D. 1980. “The Evolutionary Potential of Lacondon Maya Sustained-Yield Tropical Forest Agriculture.”
                   Journal of Anthropological Research 36:1–30.
      Nichols, D. L. 1982. “A Middle Formative Irrigation System Near Santa Clara Coatitlan in the Basin of Mexico.”
                   American Antiquity 47:133 –144.
      ———. 1988. “Infrared Aerial Photography and Prehispanic Irrigation at Teotihuacán: The Tlajinga Canals.”
                   Journal of Field Archaeology 15:17–27.
      ———. 1995. “The Organization of Provincial Craft Production and the Aztec City-States of Otumba.” In
                   Economies and Polities in the Aztec Realm, ed. M. Hodge and M. Smith, Albany: Institute for
                   Mesoamerican Studies, State University of New York.
      Niederberger, C. 1979. “Early Sedentary Economy in the Basin of Mexico.” Science 203:131–146.
      O’Brien, M. J., J. A. Ferguson, T. D. Holland, and D. E. Lewarch. 1989. “On Interpretive Competition in the
                   Absence of Appropriate Data: Monte Albán Revisited.” Current Anthropology 30(2):191–199.
      O’Brien, M. J., R. D. Mason, D. E. Lewarch, and J. A. Neely. 1982. A Late Formative Irrigation Settlement Below
                   Monte Albán. Austin: University of Texas Press.
      Offner, J. A. 1981. “On the Inapplicability of ‘Oriental Despotism’ and the ‘Asiatic Mode of Production’ to the
                   Aztecs of Texcoco.” American Antiquity 46:43 – 61.
      Parsons, J. R. 1971. Prehistoric Settlement Patterns in the Texcoco Region, Mexico. Ann Arbor: Memoir of the
                   Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan, No. 3.
      ———. 1974. “The Development of a Prehistoric Complex Society: A Regional Perspective from the Valley of
                   Mexico.” Journal of Field Archaeology 1:81–108.
      Pelzer, R. J. 1945. Pioneer Settlement in the Asiatic Tropics. Special Publications, No. 29. New York: American
                   Geographical Society.
      Pendergast, D. M. 1993. “Late Postclassic Maya Archaeology.” Journal of World Prehistory 7(1):35 –70.
      Peterson, L. C., and G. H. Haug. 2005. “Climate and the Collapse of Maya Civilization.” American Scientist
                   93:322–329.
      Pires-Ferreira, J. W. 1975. Formative Mesoamerican Exchange Networks with Special Reference to the Valley of
                   Oaxaca. Ann Arbor: Memoirs of the Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan, No. 7.
      Pohl, M. E. D., K. O. Pope, and C. van Nagy. 2002. “Olmec Origins of Mesoamerican Writing.” Science
                   298:1984 –1987.
      Pollard, H. P. 1980. “Central Places and Cities: A Consideration of the Protohistoric Tarascan State.” American
                   Antiquity 45:677– 697.
      Porter, M. N. 1953. Tlatilco and the Pre-Classic Cultures of the New World. New York: Viking Fund Publications
                   in Anthropology, No. 19.
      Puleston, D. E., and O. S. Puleston. 1971. “An Ecological Approach to the Origins of Maya Civilization.”
                   Archaeology 24:330–336.
      Rathje, W. L. 1971. “The Origin and Development of Lowland Classic Maya Civilization.” American Antiquity
                   36:275–285.
      ———. 1973. “Classic Maya Development and Denouement: A Research Design.” In The Classic Maya Collapse,
                   ed. T. P. Culbert. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
      Reilly, K. 1991. “Olmec Iconographic Inﬂuences on the Symbols of Maya Rulership: An Examination of Possible
                   Sources.” In Sixth Palenque Round Table, 1986, ed. V. M. Fields, pp. 151–74. Norman: University of
                   Oklahoma Press.
      Robertson, R. A., and D. A. Freidel, eds. 1988. Archaeology at Cerros, Belize, Central America. Volume I: An Interim
                   Report. Dallas: Southern Methodist University Press.
      Rust, W., and R. Sharer. 1988. “New Settlement Data from La Venta.” Science 242:102–104.
      Sabloff, J. A. 1990. The New Archaeology and the Ancient Maya. New York: Scientiﬁc American Library.
      Sabloff, J. A., and D. A. Freidel. 1984. Cozumel: Late Maya Settlement Patterns. New York: Academic Press.
      Sahagun, F. B. de. 1976. A History of Ancient Mexico. Trans. F. R. Bandelier. Glorieta, NM: Rio Grande Press.
      Sanders, W. T., and D. L. Nichols. 1988. “Ecological Theory and Cultural Evolution in the Valley of Oaxaca.”
                   Current Anthropology 29(1):33 – 80.
      Sanders, W. T., J. R. Parsons, and R. S. Santley. 1979. The Basin of Mexico: Ecological Processes in the Evolution of
                   a Civilization. New York: Academic Press.
      Sanders, W. T., and D. Webster. 1978. “Unilinealism, Multilinealism, and the Evolution of Complex Societies.”
                   In Social Archaeology, ed. C. L. Redman et al., pp. 249–302. New York: Academic Press.
      Schele, L., and D. Freidel. 1990. A Forest of Kings. New York: Morrow.
      Schele, L., and E. Miller. 1986. The Blood of Kings. Austin: University of Texas Press.
      Schortman, E. M., and P. A. Urban. 1994. “Core and Periphery in Southeastern Mesoamerica.” Current
                   Anthropology 35(4):401– 430.
      Sempowski, M. L., and M. W. Spence. 1995. Mortuary Practices and Skeletal Remains at Teotihuacán, ed. R. Millon.
                   Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press.
      Sharer, R., and D. Grove, eds. 1989. Regional Perspectives on the Olmec. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
                                              THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN MESOAMERICA                     529


Sheets, P. D. 1979. “Environmental and Cultural Effects of the Ilopango Eruption in Central America.” In Volcanic
             Activity and Human Ecology, ed. P. D. Sheets and D. K. Grayson, pp. 525–564. New York: Academic
             Press.
———. 2000. “Provisioning the Ceren Household: The Vertical Economy, Village Economy, and Household
             Economy in the Southeastern Maya Periphery.” Ancient Mesoamerica 11:217–230.
Sheets, P. D., ed. 1983. Archeology and Volcanism in Central America. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Siemens, A. H., and D. E. Puleston. 1972. “Ridged Fields and Associated Features in Southern Campeche: New
             Perspectives on the Lowland Maya.” American Antiquity 37:228 –239.
Sisson, E. B. 1970. “Settlement Patterns and Land Use in the Northwestern Chontalpa, Tabasco, Mexico: A
             Progress Report.” Ceramica de Cultura Maya 6:41–54.
Smith, M. E. 1979. “The Aztec Marketing System and Settlement Pattern in the Valley of Mexico: A Central Place
             Analysis.” American Antiquity 44:10 –24.
———. 2003. “A Quarter-Century of Aztec Studies.” Mexicon 25(1):4 –10.
Smith, M. E., and L. Montiel. 2001. “The Archaeological Study of Empires and Imperialism in Pre-Hispanic
             Central Mexico.” Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 20:245 –284.
Soustelle, J. 1961. Daily Life of the Aztecs. Trans. P. O’Brian. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Stark, B., L. Heller, F. W. Nelson, R. Bishop, D. M. Pearsall, D. S. Whitley, and H. Wells. 1985. “El Balsamo
             Residential Investigations: A Pilot Project and Research Issues.” American Anthropologist
             87(1):100–111.
Steponaitis, V. P. 1981. “Settlement Hierarchies and Political Complexity in Non-market Societies: The Formative
             Period in the Valley of Mexico.” American Anthropologist 83:320 –363.
Stoltman, J. B., J. Marcus, K. V. Flannery, J. H. Burton, and R. G. Moyle. 2005. “Petrographic Evidence Shows
             That Pottery Exchange Between the Olmec and Their Neighbors was Two-Way.” Proceedings of the
             National Academy of Sciences 102(32):11213 –11218.
Storey, R. 1985. “An Estimate of Mortality in a Pre-Columbian Urban Population.” American Anthropologist
             87(3):519–535.
———. 1992. Life and Death in the Ancient City of Teotihuacán. Birmingham: University of Alabama Press.
Symonds, S. C. 1997. “Settlement System and Population Development at San Lorenzo.” In Olmec to Aztec, ed.
             B. L. Stark and P. J. Arnold III. Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
Thomas, P. M. 1981. Prehistoric Maya Settlement Patterns at Becan, Campeche, Mexico. New Orleans: Middle
             American Research Institute, Tulane University.
Todorov, T. 1984. The Conquest of America. Trans. R. Howard. New York: Harper & Row.
Tolstoy, P. 1981. “Advances in the Basin of Mexico, Pt. 1.” The Quarterly Review of Archaeology 2:33 –34, 36.
Tolstoy, P., and A. Guinette. 1965. “Le Placement de Tlatilco dans le Cadre du Pre-Classique du Basin de Mexico.”
             Journal de la Societe des Americanistes (Paris) 54:47–91.
Tolstoy, P., and L. Paradis. 1970. “Early and Middle Preclassic Culture in the Basin of Mexico.” Science
             167:344–351.
Townsend, R. F. 1992. The Aztecs. London and New York: Thames and Hudson.
Trigger, B. G. 1993. Early Civilizations: Ancient Egypt in Context. Cairo: American University in Cairo Press.
Turner, B. L., and P. D. Harrison, eds. 1978. Prehispanic Maya Agriculture.
———. 1984. Pulltrouser Swamp: Ancient Maya Habitat, Agriculture, and Settlement in Northern Belize. Austin:
             University of Texas Press.
Urban, P. A., and E. M. Schortman, eds. 1986. The Southeast Maya Periphery. Austin: University of Texas
             Press.
Webster, D. 1988. “Copan as a Classic Maya Center.” In The Southeast Classic Maya Zone, ed. E. Boone and
             G. Willey. Washington, DC: Dumbarton Oaks.
———. 1992. “Maya Elites: The Perspective from Copan.” In Mesoamerican Elites, ed. D. Chase and A. Chase.
             Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
Webster, D., and N. Gonlin. 1988. “Household Remains of the Humblest Maya.” Journal of Field Archaeology
             15(2):169–190.
Whalen, M. E. 1976. “Zoning Within an Early Formative Community in the Valley of Oaxaca.” In The Early
             Mesoamerican Valley, ed. K. V. Flannery. New York: Academic Press.
———. 1981. Excavations at Santo Domingo Tomaltepec: Evolution of a Formative Community in the Valley of
             Oaxaca, Mexico. Ann Arbor: Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan, No. 12.
Wilcox, V. L., and D. R. Scarborough, eds. 1993. The Mesoamerican Ballgame. Tucson: University of Arizona
             Press.
Wilk, R. R., and W. Ashmore, eds. 1987. House and Household in the Mesoamerican Antiquity 62(237):703 –707.
Winter, M. 1972. “Tierras Largas: A Formative Community in the Valley of Oaxaca, Mexico.” Doctoral thesis.
             Tucson: University of Arizona.
———. 1976. “The Archaeological Household Cluster in the Valley of Oaxaca.” In The Early Mesoamerican
             Village, ed. K. V. Flannery. New York: Academic Press.
530   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      NOTES
       1. Bernal Diaz del Castillo, The Discovery and Conquest of Mexico, pp. 190 –191.
       2. Reviewed in Trigger, Early Civilizations: Ancient Egypt in Context.
       3. Harner, “The Ecological Basis for Aztec Sacriﬁce.”
       4. Kirkby, The Use of Land and Water Resources in the Past and Present Valley of Oaxaca, Mexico.
       5. Fritz, “Are the First American Farmers Getting Younger?”
       6. See, for example, Joyce and Henderson, “Beginnings of Village Life in Eastern Mesoamerica.”
       7. Flannery, “The Early Mesoamerican House,” pp. 13 –15.
       8. Flannery and Winter, “Analyzing Household Activities,” p. 36.
       9. For example, Diehl and Coe, “Olmec Archaeology.” Recently, Blomster et al., “Olmec Pottery Production
          and Export in Ancient Mexico Determined Through Elemental Analysis,” have provided some support for
          the notion of Olmec priority. Not all Mesoamerican researchers agree, however. See Stoltman et al.,
          “Petrographic Evidence Shows That Pottery Exchange Between the Olmec and Their Neighbors was Two-
          Way,” for a different viewpoint.
      10. A good review of this can be found in Flannery and Marcus, “Formative Mexican Chiefdoms and the Myth
          of the ‘Mother Culture.’ ”
      11. Pelzer, Pioneer Settlement in the Asiatic Tropics.
      12. Sisson, “Settlement Patterns and Land Use in the Northwestern Chontalpa, Tobasco, Mexico: A Progress
          Report.”
      13. Coe and Diehl, The Land of the Olmec: The People of the River.
      14. Rust and Sharer, “New Settlement Data from La Venta.”
      15. Murdy, “Congenital Deformities and the Olmec Were-Jaguar Motif.”
      16. Justeson and Kaufman, “A Decipherment of Epi-Olmec Hieroglyphic Writing.”
      17. Kelley, “The Decipherment of Epi-Olmec Script as Zoquean by Justeson and Kaufman,” p. 31.
      18. “Olmec Origins of Mesoamerican Writing.”
      19. Sanders, Parsons, and Santley, The Basin of Mexico: Ecological Processes in the Evolution of a Civilization.
      20. Nichols, “A Middle Formative Irrigation System Near Santa Clara Coatitlan in the Basin of Mexico.”
      21. Parsons, “The Development of a Prehistoric Complex Society: A Regional Perspective from the Valley of
          Mexico,” p. 91.
      22. This section relies heavily on Kowalewski’s review article, “The Evolution of Complexity in the Valley of
          Oaxaca.”
      23. Flannery, “Contextual Analysis of Ritual Paraphernalia from Formative Oaxaca,” p. 335; Flannery and
          Marcus, “Evolution of Public Building in Formative Oaxaca,” in Cultural Change and Continuity.
      24. Whalen, “Zoning Within an Early Formative Community in the Valley of Oaxaca.”
      25. Whalen, Excavations at Santo Domingo Tomaltepec: Evolution of a Formative Community in the Valley of
          Oaxaca, Mexico.
      26. Winter, “The Archaeological Household Cluster in the Valley of Oaxaca.”
      27. Flannery and Marcus, Early Formative Pottery of the Valley of Oaxaca, Mexico.
      28. Despite some evidence to the contrary (Coe, “The Olmec Style and Its Distribution”).
      29. Blanton et al., Ancient Mesoamerica, A Comparison of Change in Three Regions, pp. 180–183; Flannery, “The
          Olmec and the Valley of Oaxaca: A Model for Inter-Regional Interaction in Formative Times”; Grennes-
          Ravits and Coleman, “The Quintessential Role of Olmec in the Central Highlands of Mexico”; Flannery,
          Marcus, and Kowalewski, “The Preceramic and Formative of the Valley of Oaxaca.”
      30. See, for example, the works of William Sanders (Sanders, Parsons, and Santley, The Basin of Mexico:
          Ecological Processes in the Evolution of a Civilization), Jeffrey Parsons (Parsons, Prehistoric Settlement Patterns
          in the Texcoco Region, Mexico; idem., “The Development of a Prehistoric Complex Society: A Regional
          Perspective from the Valley of Mexico”), and Richard Blanton (Blanton, “Prehistoric Adaptation in the
          Ixtapalapa Region, Mexico”); O’Brien et al., “On Interpretive Competition in the Absence of Appropriate
          Data.”
      31. Brumﬁel, “Regional Growth in the Eastern Valley of Mexico: A Test of the ‘Population Pressure’
          Hypothesis.”
      32. Ibid. See Tolstoy, “Advances in the Basin of Mexico, Pt. 1.”
      33. Alden, “A Reconstruction of the Toltec Period Political Units in the Valley of Mexico.”
      34. Tolstoy, “Advances in the Basin of Mexico, Pt. 1.”
      35. Grove, “Ideology and Evolution at the Pre-State Level.”
      36. Cowgill, “Quantitative Studies of Urbanization at Teotihuacan.”
      37. Cowgill, “State and Society at Teotihuacan, Mexico,” pp. 129 –130.
      38. Millon, “The Study of Urbanism at Teotihuacan, Mexico,” p. 42.
      39. Cowgill, “State and Society at Teotihuacan, Mexico,” p. 144; see also Manzanilla, “Coporate Groups and
          Domestic Activities at Teotihuacan.”
                                             THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN MESOAMERICA                     531


40. Cowgill, “State and Society at Teotihuacan, Mexico,” p. 139.
41. Nichols, “Infrared Aerial Photography and Prehispanic Irrigation at Teotihuacán.”
42. Parsons, “The Development of a Prehistoric Complex Society: A Regional Perspective from the Valley of
    Mexico.”
43. Kurtz, “The Economics of Urbanization and State Formation at Teotihuacan”; Blanton, “Advances in the
    Study of Cultural Evolution in Prehispanic Highland Mesoamerica.”
44. Cowgill, “State and Society at Teotihuacan, Mexico,” pp. 156 –157.
45. Kowalewski, “The Evolution of Complexity in the Valley of Oaxaca,” p. 44.
46. Blanton, “Advances in the Study of Cultural Evolution in Prehispanic Highland Mesoamerica,” pp. 261– 262;
    Blanton et al., Ancient Mesoamerica, A Comparison of Change in Three Regions, p. 67.
47. Blanton, “Cultural Ecology Reconsidered.”
48. Blanton et al., Ancient Mesoamerica, A Comparison of Change in Three Regions.
49. Ibid. See also Blanton, “Advances in the Study of Cultural Evolution in Prehispanic Highland Mesoamerica,”
    p. 2.
50. Marcus, “The Iconography of Militarism at Monte Albán and Neighboring Sites in the Valley of Oaxaca.”
51. Sanders and Nichols, “Ecological Theory and Cultural Evolution in the Valley of Oaxaca.”
52. Kowalewski and Feinstein, “The Economic Systems of Ancient Oaxaca: A Regional Perspective,” p. 425.
53. See Current Anthropology 29(1):52 – 80 for a discussion of this point.
54. Culbert and Rice, Precolumbian Population History in the Maya Lowlands.
55. Flannery, Maya Subsistence. Studies in Memory of Dennis E. Puleston; Ashmore, Lowland Maya Settlement
    Patterns; Dunning, “An Examination of Regional Variability in the Prehispanic Maya Agricultural
    Landscape.” In recent years we have seen greatly increased research on the smaller Maya sites. See Robertson
    and Freidel, Archaeology at Cerros, Belize, Central America: Volume I: An Interim Report; Sheets,
    “Provisioning the Ceren Household: The Vertical Economy, Village Economy, and Household Economy in
    the Southeastern Maya Periphery”; Chase, “The Invisible Maya: Population History and Archaeology at
    Santa Rita Corozal”; Johnston, “The ‘Invisible’ Maya: Minimally Mounded Residential Settlement at Itzán,
    Petén, Guatemala.” See also Clancey and Harrison, eds., Vision and Revision in Maya Studies.
56. Fedick, “Ancient Maya Agricultural Terracing in the Upper Belize River Area”; Dunning, “An Examination
    of Regional Variability in the Prehispanic Maya Agricultural Landscape”; Dunning et al., “The Paleoecology
    and Ancient Settlement of the Petexbatun Region. Guatemala.”
57. Kunen et al., “Bajo Communities: A Case Study from the Central Petén.”
58. Fedick, The Managed Mosaic: Ancient Maya Agriculture and Resource Use”; Turner and Harrison,
    Pulltrouser Swamp: Ancient Maya Habitat, Agriculture, and Settlement in Northern Belize; Dunning et al.,
    “Prehispanic Agrosystems and Adaptive Regions in the Maya Lowlands.”
59. Coe and Diehl, The Land of the Olmec.
60. Ibid., p. 65.
61. Ibid., p. 66.
62. Demarest, Ancient Maya: The Rise and Fall of a Rainforest Civilization, p. 179.
63. Schele and Friedel, Forest of Kings, p. 66.
64. Ibid., pp. 67–68.
65. Demarest, Ancient Maya: The Rise and Fall of a Rainforest Civilization, p. 206.
66. Schele and Friedel, Forest of Kings, p. 70.
67. Ibid., p. 98.
68. Marcus, Mesoamerican Writing Systems.
69. Schele and Friedel, Forest of Kings, p. 97.
70. See Andrews, “Early Ceramic History of the Lowland Maya,” and Schele and Freidel, A Forest of Kings.
71. For example, articles in Adams, The Origins of Maya Civilization; Rathje, “Classic Maya Development and
    Denouement: A Research Design”; Sheets, “Environmental and Cultural Effects of the Ilopango Eruption in
    Central America.”
72. Hansen, “The First Cities: The Beginnings of Urbanization and State Formation in the Maya Lowlands.”
73. Demarest, Ancient Maya: The Rise and Fall of a Rainforest Civilization, pp. 83 – 86.
74. McAnany, Living with the Ancestors: Kinship and Kingship in Ancient Maya Society.
75. Hansen, “The First Cities: The Beginnings of Urbanization and State Formation in the Maya Lowlands.”
76. Hansen, Excavations in the Tigre Complex, El Mirado, Petén, Guatamala.
77. Matheny, “Early States in the Maya Lowlands During the Late Preclassic Period: Edzná and El Mirador”;
    Coe, Breaking the Maya Code, p. 63.
78. Schele and Freidel, A Forest of Kings, p. 103.
79. Ibid., p. 102.
80. Braswell, The Maya and Teotihuacan: Reinterpreting Early Classic Interaction.
81. Houston, “Archaeology and Maya Writing,” p. 26.
82. Wilcox and Scarborough, eds., The Mesoamerican Ballgame.
532   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


       83. This scene is well illustrated in Coe, Snow, and Benson, Atlas of Ancient America, pp. 108 –109.
       84. Fox, “Playing with Power: Ballcourts and Political Ritual in Southern Mesoamerica.”
       85. The following discussion is based largely on Schele and Freidel, A Forest of Kings.
       86. Ibid., p. 135.
       87. Dickson, “Further Simulations of Ancient Agriculture and Population at Tikal, Guatemala.”
       88. Schele and Freidel, A Forest of Kings, p. 145.
       89. Miller, The Murals of Bonampak.
       90. Marcus, “The Iconography of Power Among the Classic Maya,” p. 92.
       91. Marcus, “The Origins of Mesoamerican Writing.”
       92. Houston, “Archaeology and Maya Writing,” p. 26.
       93. Schortman and Urban, “Core and Periphery in Southeastern Mesoamerica.”
       94. Chippindale, Hammond, and Sabloff, “The Archaeology of Maya Decipherement”; Demarest, Ancient Maya:
           The Rise and Fall of a Rainforest Civilization, pp. 47– 48.
       95. Knorosov, Maya Hieroglyphic Codices.
       96. Reviewed in Coe, Breaking the Maya Code.
       97. See Houston, Maya Glyphs.
       98. Reviewed in Houston, “Archaeology and Maya Writing.”
       99. Ibid., p. 13.
      100. Reviewed in Houston, “Archaeology and Maya Writing.”
      101. Ifrah, From One to Zero, p. 404.
      102. Marcus, “The Origins of Mesoamerican Writing.”
      103. Schele and Freidel, A Forest of Kings, p. 82.
      104. Andrews, “Late Postclassic Lowland Maya Archaeology,” p. 54.
      105. Gill, The Great Maya Droughts: Water, Life, and Death; Peterson and Haug, “Climate and the Collapse of
           Maya Civilization”; Dahlin, “ Climate Change and the End of the Classic Period in Yucatan.”
      106. Peterson and Haug, “Climate and the Collapse of Maya Civilization,” p. 322.
      107. Gill, The Great Maya Droughts: Water, Life, and Death.
      108. Peterson and Haug, “Climate and the Collapse of Maya Civilization,” pp. 326 –328.
      109. Andrews et al., “The Northern Maya Collapse and Its Aftermath.”
      110. Dahlin, “Climate Change and the End of the Classic Period in Yucatan.”
      111. Andrews et al., “The Northern Maya Collapse and Its Aftermath.”
      112. Tula is well illustrated in The Atlas of Ancient America, Coe, Snow, and Benson, eds., pp. 134 –135.
      113. Pollard, “Central Places and Cities: A Consideration of the Protohistoric Tarascan State.”
      114. Freidel and Sabloff, Cozumel: Late Maya Settlement Patterns.
      115. Andrews, “Late Postclassic Lowland Maya Archaeology,” p. 55.
      116. Hodge, “Archaeological Views of Aztec Culture,” pp. 199–200.
      117. Smith, “The Aztec Marketing System and Settlement Pattern in the Valley of Mexico: A Central Place
           Analysis.”
      118. Parsons, “The Development of a Prehistoric Complex Society: A Regional Perspective from the Valley of
           Mexico,” p. 107.
      119. Coe, Mexico, p. 151.
      120. Parsons, “The Development of a Prehistoric Complex Society: A Regional Perspective from the Valley of
           Mexico.”
      121. Some of this description is taken from DePalma, “Mexico City Restoring Area Tilled by Aztecs.”
      122. Soustelle, Daily Life of the Aztecs, p. 97.
      123. Quoted in Harris, Cannibals and Kings, p. 101.
      124. Harner, “The Ecological Basis for Aztec Sacriﬁce.”
      125. Soustelle, Daily Life of the Aztecs, p. 135.
      126. Diego de Landa, Relacion de las Cosas de Yucatan, p. 32 (quoted in Todorov, The Conquest of America).
      127. Todorov, The Conquest of America; Collier, Rosaldo, and Wirth, The Inca and Aztec State.
14
The Evolution of Complex Societies
in Andean South America

In the lands assigned to Religion and to the
Crown, the Inka kept overseers and
administrators who took care in supervising
their cultivation, harvesting the products and
putting them in storehouses. The labor of
sowing and cultivating these lands and
harvesting their products formed a large part of
the tribute which the taxpayer paid to the king.
. . . The people assembled to cultivate them in
the following way. If the Inka himself . . . or
some other high ofﬁcial happened to be present
he started the work with a golden [spade] . . .
and following his example, all did the same.
However the Inka soon stopped working, and
after him the other ofﬁcials and nobles stopped
also and sat down with the king to their
banquets and festivals which were especially
notable on such days.
       The common people remained at work . . .
each man put into his section his children and
wives and all the people of his house to help
him. In this way, the man who had the most
workers ﬁnished his suyu ﬁrst, and he was
considered a rich man; the poor man was he
who had no one to help him in his work and
had to work that much longer.
Father Bernabe Cobo (c. a.d. 1653)1




F      ather Cobo’s observations remind us of a point reviewed in detail in chapter 7 and
       other previous chapters: Ancient civilizations varied greatly in many respects, but
one of the fundamental ways in which they were all profoundly similar is that each and
every one evolved social institutions that not only permitted the pervasive exploitation of

                                               533
           534       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                    the many by the few, but also made that exploitation into a
                                                    religious and civil virtue. Few “artifacts” demonstrate this
                                                    “exploitation” more vividly than the well-preserved corpse
                                                    (Figure 14.1) of a seven-year-old Inka boy whose body was
                                                    found in the high Andes.2 He was dressed in beautifully woven
                                                    cotton clothes—embroidered with geometric and other
                                                    designs—and was wearing a plume headdress, a turquoise and
                                                    Spondylus shell necklace, and woven sandals. Ritual offerings
                                                    found nearby include six small statues of gold and carved
                                                    Spondylus shells. The statues of humans were clothed and
                                                    adorned with ornaments, while the others have camelid
                                                    features—likely representing animals such as the llama and
                                                    alpaca. Perhaps this was a ritual sacriﬁce to some deity asso-
                                                    ciated with the mountains. We simply shall never know—
                                                    but this boy and many similar ﬁnds in ancient civilizations
                                                    around the world exemplify behavior that we think of as
                                                    exploitation, but which the boy and his culture probably saw
                                                    as necessary and virtuous acts of faith that kept the cosmos
                                                    in order.
                                                         When European explorers reached Peru and the other
                                                    countries of Andean South America, they found a civilization
                                                    that was very strange to them in many ways, including ritual
FIGURE 14.1 An Inka mummy of a seven-
                                                    human sacriﬁce, but they recognized immediately that the
year-old boy, Mount Aconcagua, Argentina.           Inka were organized in a rigidly stratiﬁed class society under a
                                                    supreme monarch—just as the Europeans themselves of that
                                                    era were.
                           As with other New World political systems, one has to wonder how it would all have
                     turned out had the Spanish not beheaded this civilization in the sixteenth century through
                     murder, warfare, and the spread of European diseases. The Spanish themselves did not
                     know about the origins of smallpox and other diseases that so terribly afﬂicted aboriginal
                     Americans, but their imposition of slavery and intentional destruction of South American
                     civilizations (see later) seem particularly barbaric in retrospect, even in the context of the
                     bloody sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.
                           Andean South American civilizations paralleled other early complex cultures in
                     their intensive farming systems, massive pyramids and temples, large cities, powerful
                     armies, and hierarchies of wealth, power, and prestige. But they were different from other
                     early civilizations in interesting ways. The Inka Empire, for example, was the only one of
                     the six “primary” (see chapter 7) ancient civilizations that did not develop a written
                     language, despite the fact that it was the largest political system ever to evolve in the pre-
                     Columbian New World. The Inka and some of their predecessors compensated to some
                     extent for the lack of a written language by using the knot-system for transmitting
                     information (see later) and by building a massive system of roads that linked people to the
                     central government and to each other (Figure 14.2). Neither the Inka nor any other New
                     World people, however, ever developed the wheeled chariots, wagons, and other vehicles
                     that were a major reason why Old World civilizations were able to dominate the world
                     for centuries.
                                                 THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN ANDEAN SOUTH AMERICA                  535


                                                          SOUTH AMERICA

                        1900
                        1800
                        1700
                                                                                LATE
                        1600                                                   HORIZON
                                                                                                            Arrival of the
                        1500
                                                                                                  Inka         Spanish
                        1400
                                                                                                                 Chimú
                        1300
                                                                                 LATE
                        1200
                                                                             INTERMEDIATE
                        1100                                                    PERIOD

                        1000
                         900   New migration
                                and ceramic
                         800
                                   styles                                       MIDDLE
                         700                                                   HORIZON
                                                              Integration                                       Tiwanaku
                         600




MILLEINNIA CENTURIES
                                                                 period
                                                                                                         Wari
                         500
                         400
                                 Ballgame                   Regional
                         300     in Antilles              Development
                               new immigrants                period
                         200
                                                                                EARLY
                         100                                              INTERMEDIATE PERIOD
                                                     San                                        Moche
                           0                        Agustin                 EARLY HORIZON
                                                               Chorrera                         Chavín
                        1000                                                 INITIAL PERIOD
                                  Arawak
                        2000     migration                     Valdivia
                                 to Antilles                   culture
                        3000
                                           Ceramics at                        PRECERAMIC
                        4000
                                        Puerto Hormiga,
                        5000           Columbia c. 3000 B.C.

                        6000              Hunter-gatherers
                        7000
                        8000                   Paleoindians

                        9000
                       10000



                   20000
           536      PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                     THE ECOLOGICAL SETTING

                                                                          Ecological complementarity was a
                                                                          major human achievement, forged
                                                                          by Andean civilizations to handle a
                                                                          multiple environment, vast popula-
                                                                          tions, and hence high productivity. It
                                                                          helps us understand the unique place
                                                                          of the Andean achievement in the
                                                                          repertory of human histories; it may
                                                                          even point to future possibilities.
                                                                                                   John Murra3
                                                                     Like most other complex societies that
                                                                     developed independently, Andean South
                                                                     American civilization was possible because
                                                                     of—indeed, to an extent it can be deﬁned
                                                                     as—the economic integration of the
                                                                     resources from highly varied physical
                                                                     environments.4 Ancient Egypt (chapter 9)
                                                                     is something of an exception to this
                                                                     pattern, in that its resources were quite
                                                                     similar over the length of the Nile Valley
                                                                     and Delta, but in Andean South America
                                                                     there were great economic advantages to
                                                                     integrating the different natural resources
                                                                     of highlands and lowlands, ocean and farm.
                                                                     The Andes rise so sharply from the Paciﬁc
                                                                     that only a thin strip of land, less than
                                                                     about 60 km at its widest point, separates
FIGURE 14.2 A stone-lined trail that served as part of the Inka road
system.                                                              the mountains from the sea. And because
                                                                     the Andes shield the coast from the rain-
                  bearing air currents crossing the continent from the Atlantic, most of this coastal strip is
                  one of the world’s driest deserts, a region where rain falls only once or twice every ﬁve years.
                  In a few places winter fogs along the coast keep skies overcast and in most years this
                  phenomenon provides enough moisture through condensation to support vegetation
                  zones (called lomas). But most of the coastal strip is utterly dry, and when the wind blows,
                  dunes can quickly cover houses and choke irrigation canals.
                        This desert is habitable only because of the 50 or so small rivers that ﬂow down from
                  the mountains, across the plain, and into the sea. Many contain water during only part of
                  the year, but the larger, permanent ones support forests and shrubs and their attendant
                  wildlife, and in some areas the rivers keep the water table sufﬁciently high so that cultivation
                  is possible without irrigation. Near the mouths of the rivers are ﬁsh, freshwater shrimp, and
                  other resources, and in some valleys rivers have created broad alluvial plains of potentially
                  rich farmlands. The coast has extraordinarily rich concentrations of ﬁsh, birds, birds’ eggs,
                  sea mammals, mollusks, crustaceans, kelp, and other plant foods. Human life along the coast
                  is tied directly to these rivers and streams because they provide the only drinking water.
                            THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN ANDEAN SOUTH AMERICA            537


     These rich marine resources are produced by a fascinating interplay of wind and ocean
currents in which winds drive water north along the coast while the earth’s rotation from
east to west pushes the water westward, creating an upwelling of water from the ocean ﬂoor.
Carried with these deep waters are tremendous concentrations of phosphates and other
nutrients that support countless billions of microscopic plants, and these form the basis of
a complex food chain comprising anchovies and other small ﬁsh that eat the plants; larger
ﬁsh, birds, and sea mammals that eat the anchovies; and, ultimately, people, who exploit
many links in the chain.
     Occasionally, shifts in wind and water change the water temperatures and the plants
die, cutting off the base of the food chain. When this happens, rotting plant and animal life
ﬁll the air with clouds of hydrogen sulﬁde that can blacken ships and houses.5 Several years
may pass before the fertility of the sea is restored. The frequency in prehistory of el Niño (a
reference to the Christ child), as this disturbance is called, is unknown, but it has occurred
somewhat regularly in historical times, and recently it has been recurring about once
every two to seven years and usually lasts about a year. By late 1995 this area had been
experiencing el Niño continuously for nearly four years, which seems exceptionally long.
Recent research using sedimentary cores from land and lake deposits, however, indicates
that major el Niño events in prehistory were not that common. The work of Fontugne and
his colleagues, for example, documents a major el Niño at 8980 b.c. and another one
sometime after 3380 b.c.6 In the interval between these events were 10 humid episodes
separated by dry phases. During the humid periods, the upwelling was stronger and there
was increased moisture condensation in the form of fogs—these correlate with increased
evidence for human occupation.
     In the mountains are lush valleys, large basins, and high grassy plateaus (called punas).
Hunters and gatherers here were succeeded after 4000 b.c. by farmers of potatoes, maize,
quinoa, and other crops and by herders of llama and alpaca (domesticated New World
camels).
     The eastern slopes of the Andes, the montaña, are wet and heavily forested, and the
combination of steep slopes and intense rain apparently limited exploitation by prehistoric
peoples. East of the Andes is the Amazon Basin, a tropical rain forest from which feathers
and other products were harvested and brought into early Andean South American
economic systems, but which was never directly controlled by Andean peoples. The earliest
known pottery in the New World dates to between 6000 b.c. and 5000 b.c. and comes from
the lower Amazon Basin, in Brazil, where it was apparently made by hunter-foragers who
specialized in shellﬁshing.7 But ceramics were independently invented many times in the
New World, and the extent to which these tropical cultures may have inﬂuenced those of
the Andean regions remains unclear.



EARLY HUNTERS AND GATHERERS

A few South American sites have been dated (controversially) to 20,000–15,000 years ago,
but not until about 10,000 years ago is there substantial evidence of people in the mountains
and coasts of Andean South America. John Rick has surveyed large areas of these uplands,
and in caves and rock shelters he has found projectile points, scrapers, knife blades, and
538   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      other traces of these early Peruvians: They ate a lot of deer, guanaco, and vicuña (an animal
      related to the llama, both of which are New World forms of camels), and in some cases were
      perhaps even able to live year-round in small areas.8 In the beginning they also hunted giant
      ground sloths and a few other animals that became extinct about 10,000 years ago.
           Some of these people were probably “transhumant,” meaning that they moved up and
      down the mountains to exploit various resources as they came in season. Many people
      made these seasonal moves once alpacas and llamas were domesticated because these
      animals require constant tending and frequent moves to new pasturages, thus making it
      possible for people to exploit the different environments at different times of year. The
      “thin” air, intense cold, blizzards, and thick fogs of the highlands make movement difﬁcult,
      and over millennia of adapting to these conditions, natural selection has produced Andean
      peoples with extraordinary cardiovascular systems. Genetics and life-long exposure to the
      strains of life at high altitudes have produced people who can work hard in air extremely
      low in oxygen, while others unadapted to this environment can hardly function.
           We may never know if coastal Andean South America was occupied before or at the
      same early date as the mountains because long stretches of what were beaches and inland
      areas before 3000 b.c. have been ﬂooded by rising sea levels.9 In areas that escaped ﬂooding
      there is evidence of communities as early as 10,000 years ago, so some scholars suspect that
      coastal populations may have been substantial at an early date.10



      THE AGRICULTURAL BASIS OF ANDEAN CIVILIZATION

      As was discussed in chapter 6, maize phytoliths (the microscopic hard remains of some
      plant cells) and pollen have been found at a few South American sites that date earlier than
      1500 b.c. In reviewing the evidence, though, Deborah Pearsall concluded that maize
      probably did not become an important crop until after 1500 b.c.11
           Maize was just one of the important food crops in Andean South America, and in
      some areas potatoes, beans, and quinoa were the staffs of life. Quinoa seeds has one of the
      highest protein contents of any plant, and this plant was grown in many Andean regions.
      Domesticated potatoes were found in sites in Peru’s Casma Valley mountains in occupa-
      tions dating around 2250 b.c. to 1775 b.c.,12 and there are traces of cultivation that may go
      back as early as about 4400 b.c.13 This proliﬁc plant is well suited to wet, cold soils where
      cereals do not do well, and the ancient South Americans partially solved a major problem
      of any agricultural system based on tubers—speciﬁcally, that tubers do not store well for
      long periods—by developing a method of storing potatoes by freeze-drying them.
           The domestication of cotton between about 4000 b.c. and 1200 b.c. provided a
      relatively cheap source of textiles, and cotton textiles were complemented by a highly
      developed weaving craft in which reeds and other grasses were woven into sandals, clothes,
      and many other products. Ancient Andean cotton textiles are a lovely fusion of form and
      function. Many Andean textiles of various periods have survived because human corpses
      were frequently wrapped in them and buried in the coastal deserts, which desiccated and
      preserved both the textiles and the bodies. Using mineral and plant-derived dyes, ancient
      Andeans decorated many of their textiles with a wide variety of motifs, including geometric
      ﬁgures and stylized people and animals.
                            THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN ANDEAN SOUTH AMERICA              539


     The role of animal domestication in early Peru is unclear, but llamas and guinea pigs
were certainly domesticated in central Peru by 3500 b.c. As in Mexico, however, hunting
continued to play an important role in many areas until quite late.14 Evidence from several
highland sites suggests that by about 4000 b.c. guinea pigs had been domesticated—if they
were not domesticated by this time, then these Andean peoples were formidable hunters of
these rodents, for guinea pig bones are thickly spread through many layers of occupational
refuse. Guinea pigs do so well in captivity, are so proliﬁc and easy to feed, and are so suitable
in terms of size for the modern diet that one wonders why international food conglomerates
have not yet renamed and successfully marketed them.


THE FIRST COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN ANDEAN SOUTH
AMERICA

The formative period of Andean South American civilization can be thought of in terms
of two periods, the Late Preceramic period (c. 3200 b.c.–1800 b.c.) and the Initial period
(c. 1800 b.c.–900/600 b.c.).15
     Like their archaeological colleagues working on early civilizations in other parts of the
world, archaeologists in Peru have tried to identify when ancient Peruvian societies ﬁrst
made those fateful transitions in the direction of cultural complexity—complexity in the
sense of the evolution of the kind of society represented by the Inka, with its bureaucratic
hierarchies, class divisions, monumental architecture, economic differentiation and
integration, expansionistic militarism, and elaboration of arts, crafts, and ideology.
     As we have seen in other chapters, every early civilization around the world solved
similar problems of nutrition and adaptation. Each found a reliable and productive plant
to provide carbohydrates (rice, wheat, potatoes, maize, etc.), a legume to provide high-
quality vegetable proteins (beans, peas, vetch, etc.), an animal protein source (usually a
blend of hunting, ﬁshing, and herding), and a textile to provide clothing (wool, linen,
cotton, etc.). Not every society that evolved these adaptations became a great civilization
(e.g., Polynesian societies based on tubers, pigs, and bark cloth), but all that did converged
in their solutions to essentially the same problems of adaptation.
     Peru offers an interesting possible variation on this theme because its sea coasts offer
such a proliﬁc source of food, in the form of many species of birds, shellﬁsh, and ﬁsh—
particularly schooling ﬁsh, such as anchovies. Even without farming, or with some minimal
gardening, these coasts may have proffered enough reliable food to support many people—
people who could live for all or much of the year in the same communities.
     In the 1970s archaeologist Michael Moseley suggested that the initial stage of the rise
of Andean societies was based on people who lived in villages and began to evolve some
simple social stratiﬁcations on the basis of a ﬁshing and foraging economy along the marine
coasts rather than agriculture—at least at ﬁrst. At one level this suggestion might not seem
particularly radical. We know that all that is required for sedentary communities and the
ﬁrst appearances of complex societies is a highly productive and reliable blend of animal
and plant foods, and it is not important whether these foods are agricultural (chapter 6) or
not. Native Americans on the northwest coast of North America managed to live in non-
agricultural sedentary communities that were stratiﬁed by wealth and an elementary sense
540   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      of class, for example, as did many others, including the hunter-foragers of Southwest Asia,
      whose descendants became the denizens of the great Sumerian and Babylonian empires
      (chapter 8).
           Also, the Inka Empire managed to tie together a great diversity of upland and lowland
      environments in an economy that was fundamentally agricultural when the Spanish
      encountered it, so it is interesting to see what role maritime resources played in the overall
      cultural evolution of this area, both before agriculture became the dominant source of food
      and afterward.
           We know that by at least 6000 b.c. quite a few people lived on the Paciﬁc coast,
      probably moving between the river valleys, the lomas (fog-oases), and the coast.16 For
      several millennia thereafter, these societies seemed to change little as they adapted to this
      rich complex of environments. Anyone who has had the good fortune to live at the interface
      between sea, plains, and mountains, where oysters, clams, and ﬁsh can be combined with
      the wealth of terrestrial foods, can appreciate the stability and diversity of such economies,
      and the Andean coast is among the richest such zones in the world.

      The Late Preceramic Period in Andean South America
      (c. 3200 B.C.–2000 B.C.)
      Just prior to the beginning of the third millennium b.c., the appearance of sedentary,
      complex societies becomes a feature of both the coastal and highland areas. As we have seen
      in other areas of the world, one feature of such cultures is monumental construction–plazas,
      pyramids, and courts (discussed later). These sites also appear to be politically organized
      at a level above egalitarian villages.17
            Excavations at Paloma,18 on the coast of the Chilca Valley, 65 km south of Lima,
      illustrate some aspects of life in such regions (Figure 14.3). Paloma was located about 3.5 km
      from the ocean and 7.5 km from the Chilca River, on the edge of the lomas zone, where
      fogs supported some vegetation. Beginning about 8,000 years ago, people were living there
      in reed huts, probably already putting together a varied economy of plant collecting,
      hunting, and foraging. But shortly before 3000 b.c., some people apparently moved from
      the lomas in order to concentrate on the interface of coast and river valley, and small, dis-
      persed settlements began to appear in these zones.19 By about 2500 b.c., many small sedentary
      communities had appeared along the Andean coast. In some cases, the diet of these
      communities seems to have been based mainly on marine resources, with wild or domestic
      plants of only secondary importance,20 but there was great variability from site to site.
            At Alto Salaverry,21 which was occupied from about 2500 b.c. to 1800 b.c., people
      cultivated and subsisted mainly on plants, but a lot of the calories in their diet came from
      sharks, bonito, mussels, and many other types of marine foods. In several communities of
      this period, skeletons show a pattern of bone growth in the inner ear that is common among
      people who spend a lot of time diving in cold water.22
            At Chilca, the primary meat source appears to have been sea lions, but mussels, other
      invertebrates, and a variety of collected plants were also important. At other sites the
      remains of sharks, rays, cormorants, gulls, pelicans, and other animals attest to the
      importance of the resources of the coastal shallows, as does the presence of ﬁsh hooks, nets,
      and lines. No boats have been found at any of these sites, but the kinds of ﬁsh and
      invertebrates usually eaten along the coast are easily taken with simple nets.
                            THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN ANDEAN SOUTH AMERICA                   541



  P E RU                                                                             COLOMBIA
  0       150 mi                                       ECUADOR
  0   150 km




                                                                                                BRAZIL
                                          Alto Salaverry      La Galgada
                                                                     Chavin de Huantar

                                               Cevro Sechin      Sechin Alto
               Pacific                                                           Kotosh

               Ocean                Forteleza River                 Piedra Parada
                                     Patavilca River
                                                           el Paraiso   La Florida
                                                                          Cardal
                                                                          Asia


                                                                                                 BOLIVIA




FIGURE 14.3 Some sites of the Preceramic and Initial periods.



     By about 2000 b.c., numerous communities dotted the Andean coastline, many of
them on river deltas and bays. Most of these seem to have been quite simple foraging-based
communities, and few had more than several hundred inhabitants. At Chilca, examination
of the burials of 30 adults and 22 children and adolescents indicated only minor differences
in grave goods or positioning of the corpses. Some people were interned with spindles and
spindlewhorls, others with ﬁsh hooks and lines, still others with cotton and weaving tools
or a pointed stick and spatula kit that may have been used in shellﬁsh gathering.
     Once the Andean coast was fairly thickly settled, people here, like those in Egypt,
Mesopotamia, China, and other early developmental centers, began building monumental
architecture. It is absurd to think that people generally have some innate desire to build big
stone buildings, but in Andean South America, too, no sooner had people devised
economies of some reasonable reliability and richness than they began “wasting” massive
amounts of their wealth in temples, tombs, and pyramids.
     As was discussed in chapter 7 and other earlier chapters, the appearance of monumental
architecture was one of the earliest signs of social transformations of cultures around the
world. Andean South American civilization also followed this pattern. In the third
millennium b.c., people in dozens of communities along the coast began to build impres-
sive stone buildings and complexes of plazas, sunken pits, courts, truncated pyramids, and
other large and formally arranged architecture.
          542       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                   Many sites are known
                                                                              from the coastal area at this
                                                                              time—they are distributed in
                                                                              several ecological zones in the
                                                                              coastal valleys, and inland sites
                                                                              continue to have maritime
                                                                              resources as an important com-
                                                                              ponent of their subsistence. In
                                                                              the Pativilca and Fortaleza
                                                                              River Valleys in the Norte
                                                                              Chico region, for example,
                                                                              Haas and his colleagues have
                                                                              documented a minimum of
                                                                              16 sites with late Preceramic
                                                                              occupations.23 Each of these is
                                                                              characterized by monumental
FIGURE 14.4 A structure at el Paraiso, Peru.                                  architecture, large plazas, and
                                                                              large ceremonial structures.
                                                                              The rectangular, terraced
                  pyramids (mounds) range in size from 3,000 to 100,000 m2, and there are between one and
                  seven mounds present at each of the 16 sites.
                        Of the other early monumental buildings along the coast in the Preceramic period,
                  most seem to have had a clear ritual purpose. Their alignment with mountain peaks, small
                  inner rooms, internal burials, and other characteristics suggests ritual purposes, although
                  like other early ceremonial structures around the world, they probably were centers for
                  economic exchange and administration. Religion and economy, as we have noted, are
                  inextricably intertwined throughout human history.
                        At the end of the late Preceramic period, a new form of construction appears in the
                  coastal regions, the U-shaped mound complexes.24 An example of this development is El
                  Paraíso, on the banks of the Rio Chillón, about 2 km inland from the sea (Figure 14.4). This
                  site is dominated by seven mounds that form a U-shape covering some 58 hectares, with a
                  large plaza situated between the mounds. The structures were built over a period of several
                  centuries and contain some 100,000 tons of stone masonry; the two largest structures rise
                  to a height of over 5 m.25 One structure is reported to have been painted a bright red and
                  has evidence of burning on the ﬂoor, perhaps as a result of rituals.
                        There is much variability in early Andean South American monumental architecture,
                  but there are also regularities that suggest that the builders of these structures shared a
                  complex ideology and aesthetic. In previous chapters we have noted that early civilizations
                  seem to have been built around a core of fundamental beliefs that integrated peoples over
                  large areas and motivated them to work in concert within and between communities.
                  Traces of this ideology seem to be expressed at El Paraíso. As Jeffrey Quilter noted,26 the
                  principal mounds at both El Paraíso and another coastal site, Piedra Parada,27 are oriented
                  to north 25 degrees east. This orients the sites

                        toward the NE and SW maxima of the Milky Way, and the axis perpendicular to this
                        orientation is directed to the rising of the sun at the Summer Solstice (December) in the
                              THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN ANDEAN SOUTH AMERICA               543


    east and the setting of the sun [at] the Winter Solstice (June), as calculated for the years ca.
    [1450 b.c.].28 . . . This suggests that the astrocosmological concepts known to have been
    important for the Inka were established in Preceramic times.29

     Other complexes of this period have different orientations, but most of them have a
formal, almost stylized use of speciﬁc architectural elements and arrangements. Ancient
Peruvians used the interplay of rectilinear arrangements with circular or rounded elements,
as well as the placement of sunken courts, terraces, and other constructions at different
levels of elevation. These arrangements may have been intended, like those of Egyptian
temples, to take the individual who enters the complex through a progression of “sacred”
spaces.30 At El Paraíso, Huaca Florida, and other sites, people built complexes in a U
pattern, in which people presumably entered the open part of the U-shaped complex of
platforms and buildings and then proceeded through interior forecourts, sunken courts,
and other structures.
     People in the Andean highlands also built monumental structures. At Kotosh, at about
the 1,800-m level on the eastern slopes of the Andes, a large complex may have been begun
before 1800 b.c. The earliest structure—a temple—was built on a stone-faced platform
some 8 m high. At least 10 superimposed building levels were found. A good example of
one of these structures is the Temple of the Crossed Hands, which is approximately square
in shape—just over 9 m on a side—and about 2 m high. A stylized white serpent is painted
on the staircase leading to this temple, and its entrance is plastered and painted red. A cir-
cular ﬁrepit, built into the ﬂoor, has subﬂoor ﬂues to facilitate complete burning of materials
placed into the ﬁrepit. Other features include ﬁve wall niches, and just below the two niches
that ﬂank a large central niche are clay-sculpted pairs of crossed hands—the feature used
to name this temple.31 Richard Burger estimates that perhaps as many as 100 such chambers
are present at the site, and interestingly these chambers appear to have been deliberately
buried—for example, the Temple of the Crossed Hands was ﬁlled in with river cobbles.32
     Richard Burger and Lucy Salazar-Burger have suggested33 that much of the architecture
of Andean South America between about 1900 b.c. and 1000 b.c. expresses a common
religious ideology, the Kotosh Religious Tradition (named after the site of Kotosh). We will
never know precisely what this religion comprised, but an important element appears to
have been ritual ﬁres, placed in the ﬁrepits of the temple chambers. Quilter notes34 that El
Paraíso’s sunken pit, a rectangle about 4.5-by-4.25 m, shows evidence of considerable
burning. Benches around these pits are common in constructions of this period, and
Quilter suggests that in ritual use 10–12 adults sat around these ritual ﬁres and offered
marine shells, meat, quartz, or other goods in sacriﬁces—perhaps while under the inﬂuence
of coca or alcohol. As Charles Stanish35 points out, however, the architectural constructions
of the highlands and the coastal areas are considerably different. This makes it somewhat
unlikely that the Kotosh Religious Tradition was widely shared across this entire region,
especially in the context of little overall site planning or formal designs for sites in the
highlands as compared to those in the coastal areas.
     Contacts between highlands and lowlands, however, were important and included
marine ﬁsh and shellﬁsh. Another aspect appears to have been trade in salt. At the site of
La Galgada in the highlands, for example, one burial yielded a salt crystal that had been
placed under a woman’s head, while two other burials were underlain by a bed of salt
crystals.36
544   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      The Maritime Foundations of Andean South American
      Civilization?
      As noted earlier, Michael Moseley has argued that early Andean South American complex
      societies, as represented by El Paraíso and similar sites, were initially based on an essentially
      non-agricultural economy.37 If so, this would be interesting but would not alter our basic
      understanding of cultural complexity, for what is important in cultural evolution at this
      stage is the overall productivity of an environment rather than the speciﬁc ways in which
      it is productive.
            As Quilter and Stocker38 point out, ﬁsh can be dried or converted to a paste that has
      at least some shelf life. People who know anchovies only from the oversalted horrors on
      pizzas may underestimate the appeal and nutritive potential of this staple of Andean South
      American life. This ﬁsh was served fresh, dried, or as a kind of paste that, as every cook
      knows, is a marvelous addition to many tomato-based sauces. And anchovies are only one
      of many species of ﬁsh available in great numbers on the Peruvian coast. Sea mammals,
      too, can be rendered into storable oil, and they provided a reliable source of meat in ancient
      times.
            Although inhabitants in coastal sites relied heavily on marine resources, they also used
      wild and domesticated plant crops. These include gourds, legumes, squash, achira, beans,
      sweet and white potatoes, peanuts, and cotton.39 Sites that were a bit farther inland obtained
      marine resources through exchange, while cultivating agricultural crops and collecting wild
      plant foods. Trade with the highland sites allowed coastal groups to obtain potatoes, oca,
      and ullucu.40
            Moseley’s hypothesis for the maritime origins of Andean complex societies, however,
      is not applicable to developments in the highlands, where, as we saw earlier, sites with
      monumental architecture are of similar age to sites in the coastal region. While highlands
      inhabitants received some marine resources through trade, their subsistence economies
      were based on rainfall and small-scale irrigation agriculture—potatoes, oca, ullucu, quinoa,
      and some maize—as well as hunting of wild animals such as deer, guanaco, and vicuña.41
            As these various sites indicate, cultural evolution rests not on any particular form of
      economy—all that is required is sufﬁcient and reliable production.

      The Initial Period in Andean South America
      (c. 1800 B.C.–900/600 B.C.)
      During the Initial period, settlements in the coastal and highlands regions increased in size
      and complexity of architectural construction. U-shaped construction becomes a common
      feature along both the coast and in the central part of the highlands. In the south-central
      highlands—the Titicaca Basin—public architecture makes its ﬁrst appearance.42 Construc-
      tion of centers, changes in settlement patterning, and population growth appear to have
      resulted from the construction of irrigation systems in the upper coastal valleys.
           A particularly important Initial period area is the Casma Valley, located on the north-
      central coast. Eight important centers were present here during the Initial period, including
      Sechin Alto, Cerro Sechin, and Pampa de las Llamas-Moxeke. At about 1400 b.c. or earlier,
      Sechin Alto had the largest monumental architecture to be found anywhere in the New
      World.43 Its U-shaped construction is anchored by an adobe-block pyramid mound that
                           THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN ANDEAN SOUTH AMERICA               545


measures 250-by-300 m and stands 44 m high.44 Several large plazas, some of which have
sunken circular courts, are associated with the pyramid.
     Some 2 km away is the site of Cerro Sechin, with a three-tiered stepped platform with
two smaller buildings on each side.45 A possible sunken circular court is present in front of
the platform. As noted by several researchers, one of the most striking aspects at Cerro
Sechin are the 302 small and large basalt sculptures that were originally placed in alternating
sizes—large and small—along the outer wall of the platform-pyramid. These sculptures
depict military scenes of war, victims of captivity, and victors. Some of the defeated are
shown decapitated or cut so that their intestines are spilling out, while other sculptures
simply show severed heads, legs, arms, and so forth.46 There would seem to be little doubt
that some level of violence was a part of life during the Initial period, although Initial period
sites do not appear to have defensive constructions such as walls. Perhaps such gruesome
scenes were not the fabric of everyday life, but rather—as suggested by some archaeologists
—a record of a mythological event that helps establish and sustain the ceremonial or ritual
nature of these monumental constructions.47
     Farther inland in the Casma Valley lies the site of Pampa de las Llamas-Moxeke
(Figure 14.5). This site has two massive platform-pyramid mounds that are separated by
an enormous terraced plaza, as well as more than 70 smaller aligned platforms and buildings
that were likely residences. The two platform-pyramids are aligned along the site’s central
axis, and the larger of the two—the Moxeke mound—has painted clay sculptures and
geometric designs along the sides of the third platform terrace, about 10 m above ground
surface.48 The clay sculptures show humans wearing tunics, short skirts, and loose mantles
—some hold two-headed snakes with forked tongues in upraised hands—or massive
heads.49 This frieze would have been quite visible to people in the plaza below the platform-
pyramid, likely reinforcing the ideology common to Initial period culture in the Casma Valley.
     These developments in the Casma Valley have been variously interpreted. Jonathan
Haas and Sheila and Thomas Pozorski favor a relatively complex sociopolitical organization
—perhaps even a theocratic state—that features distinct, highly stratiﬁed social classes.50
Richard Burger,51 on the other
hand, believes that the evid-
ence best supports a variety
of small societies that have
social divisions that are weakly
developed. He points to a lack
of economic specialization, as
well as variability in the layout
of the ceremonial centers, as
indicative of independent local
groups rather than a single
political entity. Their religious
traditions are, however, well
developed, and may have served
to loosely connect the various
centers through shared symbols.
     Another example of Initial
period U-shaped constructions         FIGURE 14.5 Overview of Pampas de las Llamas-Moxeke, Peru.
546   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      comes from the coastal area site of Caral in the Lurín Valley. This ceremonial center was
      built and occupied in the late Initial period, from about 1300 to 900 b.c.52 It contains a
      ceremonial road that travels between two enormous enclosures and two sunken circular
      courts, leading to the raised central plaza. From the plaza level is a 34-step staircase leading
      to the top of the central pyramid. One of the most impressive decorations is arranged so
      that one would pass through it when reaching the top of the staircase and is described as a
      “massive mouth band with interlocking teeth and large upper fangs on either side of the
      entryway into the central atrium. This awesome motif is clearly visible from the central
      plaza.”53
           Caral also contains evidence for habitation, with most house structures located to the
      south of the ceremonial central area. The population is estimated to be no more than 300
      people.54 As Burger and Salazar-Burger observe, this is a relatively small number of people
      considering the size of the ceremonial complex and the labor required to build and
      maintain that complex. They hypothesize that most of the population served by this
      ceremonial center lived in scattered farmsteads around Cardal. A small number of
      residences and burials were also found on top of the platform-pyramid—these may have
      been the homes for people of elite status, but few burial goods are present, suggesting that
      inequities in access to resources were not signiﬁcant during the Initial period.
           In summary of the Initial period, we see clear evidences of important social changes in
      these monumental complexes in the highlands and along the coast, but it seems likely that
      these communities remained relatively simply organized compared to the cultures that
      followed them. When we look at mortuary practices, for example, the small amount of very
      sketchy evidence we have shows a certain formalization of burial practices and some
      elaboration of them, but there is no clear evidence of massive disparities in wealth, power,
      or prestige. At the site of Asia, for example, 49 funeral bundles were recovered in which
      bodies and a few utilitarian goods were wrapped in reed mats and placed below the ﬂoor
      of a rectangular compound.55 Differences in these burials may indicate some status
      differences, and there are a few “trophy heads” and headless bodies in this group that may
      indicate raiding or warfare, but overall the burial practices until about 900 b.c. suggest a
      society that is somewhat non-egalitarian, perhaps, but one that is not organized on the basis
      of class.
           More important, insofar as the scanty evidence indicates, while these people traded
      products and evolved common ideologies, these communities were not functionally
      integrated to any great extent. There is little evidence of functional specialization within
      and among communities.


      THE EARLY HORIZON (C. 900/600 B.C.–A.D. 1)

      It is a fallacy of historical analysis to assume that increasing complexity is a natural, inherent
      quality in human societies. The idea of “progress” is so much a part of Western culture that
      it sometimes blinds people to the ﬁts and starts of cultural evolution. Such is the case with
      the apparent collapse of many of the coastal complex societies just before the beginning of
      the Early Horizon.56 Yet at the same time, sites in the central highland areas show consider-
      able new investment in monumental construction, shared artistic and religious motifs, and
      perhaps power and inﬂuence.
                            THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN ANDEAN SOUTH AMERICA              547


      The monumental constructions at El Paraíso, Cerro Sechin, Cardal, Kotosh, and other
sites anticipate the cultural changes underway in this period, and there are many other signs
that the Andean world was changing after about 1000 b.c. As we saw in the cases of Egypt,
Mesoamerica, and elsewhere, “art” was not just a minor peripheral part of the rise of
ancient civilizations: Art was an integral part of this process. In all early states, the cities,
rank-wealth hierarchies, and functionally interdependent economies that arose were
presaged by the spread of an art style that was usually expressed mostly directly in pottery.
In the case of Andean South America, novel religious elements also appear to have been
quite pervasive in this process.
      Peru was no exception to this pattern. After about 900 b.c., people living at Chavín de
Huántar (Figure 14.6) and other sites in the highlands of northern Andean South America
began to use the same styles of decoration in their pottery, architecture, and other artifacts.
Over succeeding centuries, tens of thousands of people over a great area participated in the
Chavín Horizon, as this complex of stylistic elements is called.
      The main motifs of Chavín art include fantastic depictions of hybrid combinations of
people and jaguars, as well as snakes, bats, ﬁsh, crabs, and crocodile-like ﬁgures (Figure 14.7).
In its fusion of tropical forest elements, such as snakes, jaguars, and caiman, Chavín art
may reﬂect earlier cultural inﬂuences from the forests east of the Andes, but the “story” of
Andean South American civilizations is that of integrating different zones—coasts,
mountains, and lowland forests. The spread of Chavín styles is probably a harbinger of the
functional integration of these areas in later periods. In some areas these motifs spread at
about the same time as apparent increases in product exchange, activity specialization,
population densities, and investments in monumental buildings, but the general tenor of
the Chavín diffusion is reminiscent of the initial spread of Olmec art in Mesoamerica—a
relatively simple extension of aesthetic and perhaps religious traditions in the absence of
elaborate political hierarchies or economic elites.
      Chavín de Huántar, the site after which the art style is named (though it is probably
not the earliest or even most important Chavín settlement), was occupied for all or most
of the period between about 900 b.c. and 200 b.c.57 It boasts a ceremonial complex
composed of two low platform mounds, a massive terraced platform, and a sunken circular
plaza, 21 m in diameter and paved with stone. This complex is arranged in the U-form
(discussed earlier) that was established some centuries earlier at El Paraíso. The most
prominent feature of this complex is the Old Temple (remodelled during the Early Horizon
into the New Temple), which was built of alternating thick and thin slabs of granite,
sandstone, and limestone. These large stone blocks form the exterior of the temple, while
the interior was ﬁlled with earth and rock ﬁll into which were built numerous narrow
passageways, canals, ducts for ventilation, and underground rooms.58 The best known of
these galleries is the Lanzón Gallery—named after the granite sculpture with a lance-like
shape, carved as a fanged deity. Aspects of the sculpture’s position in the chamber and its
associated features—such as a vertical channel from the gallery above and a depression
located at the top of the Lanzón sculpture—have led to interpretations such as pouring the
blood of human sacriﬁces into the vertical channel and letting it drip into the depression
and run down the Lanzón sculpture, as well as the use of the Lanzón sculpture as an oracle.59
      By the fourth century b.c. as many as 2,000–3,000 people may have lived in and around
the monumental complex at Chavín de Huántar—a large number of people—and there
was probably some signiﬁcant craft-specialization. Gold was the medium of the ﬁnest art
548   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY




      FIGURE 14.6 As in other early civilizations, initial cultural complexity in Andean South America
      was prefaced by the rapid spread of particular styles of pottery and other artifacts. Chavín-style
      artifacts have been found throughout the area indicated here.


      in the Chavín era, as craftsmen cut, embossed, annealed, cast, and welded it into ear spools,
      nose ornaments, plaques, crowns, and face coverings for corpses. Copper and silver were
      also extensively used for making ornaments, and weaving became a ﬁne art as well.
           The central religious symbols of Chavín were widely distributed over the northern
      and central coasts, and Chavín-style ceramics and architecture are found even in small
      villages.
                            THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN ANDEAN SOUTH AMERICA           549


      The Chavín cult, like other early religions, may have been an effect-
ive means of stimulating people to act in coordinated ways. After all, the
expenses of large buildings and the “furs and feathers” of ofﬁce are cheap
compared to their power in directing the population toward speciﬁc
economic and political goals. The Amazonian animals typical of Chavín
designs and the distribution of these designs suggest that the center at
Chavín de Huántar may have been an intermediate point on routes
connecting the coasts with the exotic, rich world of the interior Amazon.
      But were Chavín and its contemporaries a state-level form of polit-
ical organization? Archaeologists have disagreed in their interpretations
on this point. Some see the large Early Horizon sites as well-organized
pilgrimage centers, regional cult complexes, or oracle centers. Others
believe that these Early Horizon polities represent complex chiefdoms.
Still others would attribute the classiﬁcation of “secondary state” to        FIGURE 14.7 An example of an
Chavín, in part, because these scholars think that earlier sites, such as     artistic motif from the Chavín art
                                                                              style.
Pampa de las Llamas-Moxeke, represent primary states.60


THE EARLY INTERMEDIATE PERIOD (A.D. 1–A.D. 600):
EARLY STATES

In the ﬁrst millennium a.d., Andean South American societies were transformed from
relatively simple, small political units that we might call chiefdoms into much larger and
more populous militaristic cultures that we can legitimately term states.61 Within this
period the population of Andean South America rose from a few hundred thousand to
approximately four or ﬁve million, large cities appeared in scores of places, armies
conquered thousands of square kilometers, irrigation systems brought rich harvests to the
desert and mountains, and the ceramic, architectural, metallurgical, and textile arts reached
great heights.62
     This transformation seems to have arisen out of the disintegration of the Chavín cult
at about 200 b.c., which was followed by the emergence of as many as 15 different centers
of regional development. Ceremonial centers can be found in many places in the southern
Andean South American highlands at this time, as well as in the Nazca Valley and other
coastal regions. Some of these were sizable towns, such as Tambo Viejo in the Acari Valley
(Nazca area), which contains hundreds of rectangular rooms, most of which seem to have
been residences. But the Nazca polity probably remained a mix of villages and towns.63 Also
numerous along the northern coast were great fortresses of terraced adobe platforms with
room complexes and defensive peripheral walls.
     One of the best known examples of Early Intermediate period cultures are the Moche
whose area appears to have contained two political units—one to the north and one to the
south. The Moche culture was concentrated in about a 400-km coastal strip that extended
about 50 km inland and used an elaborate irrigation system. The population of the Moche
Valley itself was likely more than 50,000 people (Figure 14.8). By 200 b.c. the community
at Cerro Arena, for example, contained hundreds of houses and public buildings that
extended over an area of about a square mile. The economic basis of this and other
          550       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY



  PE R U                                                                COLOMBIA
  0      150 mi                                 ECUADOR
  0   150 km




                                                 Pampa Grande
                                          Sipan    Galindo
                                         Moche                                              BRAZIL
                                  Huaca de la Cruz       Moche area
                                                             
                                  Pampa de la Incas        →

               Pacific
               Ocean



                                                                                             BOLIVIA




FIGURE 14.8 The Moche area of inﬂuence and several Moche sites.




                    communities was an irrigation system in which mud canals were built high in the hills,
                    diverting water through kilometers of canals that snaked along the mountainside and down
                    to the valleys. Because the Moche worked only with mud, the construction of these canal
                    systems had to be done with great precision; if the water ﬂowed too slowly, silt would
                    accumulate so rapidly as to make the canal a vast waste of effort, while if it ﬂowed too
                    quickly, the whole system could be eroded. Cleaning the wind-blown sand from these
                    systems probably required the annual orchestration of thousands of laborers.
                         In chapter 7 the premise that irrigation systems like these are primary determinants
                    of cultural evolution was discussed and, for the most part, rejected. Often in prehistory,
                    great irrigation systems seem more the products of states than their immediate cause. But
                    in the case of the Moche Valley and many other examples, irrigation agriculture and
                    cultural evolution are perhaps better viewed as closely interrelated, with an increase in the
                    complexity of administrative and economic systems going step by step with increases in
                    the complexity of irrigation systems.64
                         We know much about life in Andean South America during this period because the
                    people recorded their activities in great detail in ceramics, sculpture, paintings, and tapestries.
                    Pottery vessels depict people hunting deer with spears and clubs, ﬁshermen putting to sea
                    in small canoes, blowgun hunters taking aim at birds, weavers working under the direction
                           THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN ANDEAN SOUTH AMERICA            551


of a foreman, and many people engaging in war, human sacriﬁce, and violence. People are
also shown being carried on sedan chairs, seated on thrones, receiving tribute, and
presiding at executions.
      One of the most spectacular archaeological discoveries of the last decade of the
twentieth century was the Moche royal burial complex at Sipán, about 420 miles northwest
of Lima. These burials are particularly important because, unlike most known Moche sites,
they had not been completely looted (the tomb was rescued and protected from local
thieves by Walter Alva) and also because they express many elements of Moche culture. By
now the reader, having surveyed Egypt, Mesopotamia, Mesoamerica, and other early
civilizations in previous chapters, will not be surprised to learn that ancient Moche culture
was based on massive inequalities in wealth, power, and prestige; that warfare was gloriﬁed
and celebrated with the ritual executions of captives; that loving skill and precious materials
were lavished on making beautiful objects—many of which were buried with dead elites—
and that the entire society comprised an expansionistic and militaristic state.
      The Sipán burials that reﬂect these aspects of Moche culture were found in the interior
of a large mudbrick pyramid. In one burial a man identiﬁed by archaeologist Christopher
Donnan65 as a “warrior-priest” was found lying on his back in a wooden cofﬁn. He was
wearing gold nose and ear ornaments, turquoise bead bracelets, and copper sandals and
was surrounded by other exotic goods, including spears, war clubs, shields, atlatl darts,
seashells, feather ornaments, lovely cotton fabrics, hundreds of pots, a dog, two llamas, and
other goods (Figure 14.9). This man was also buried with what one might consider the most
valuable of all commodities, three young women and two men. As we have seen in other
ancient cultures, many of these societies were based on ideologies
that sanctioned these sacriﬁces and probably promised the
participants an eternal and joyful afterlife. Although we will never
know for certain what was going on in the minds of these
nonliterate peoples, it seems a reasonable speculation that the
Moche believed that by supplying this man with a few female and
male attendants, food, tools, and some personal ornaments, they
were assuring him of a reasonably comfortable eternity.
      Depictions on Moche pots provide a “text,” of sorts, for
hundreds of them show similar scenes, apparently recording
rituals in which warrior-priests slit the throats of war-captives,
distributed the blood to be drunk, and then dismembered the
bodies.
      Among the other ideological expressions in ceramics of this
period are the frank depictions of sexual practices. While every
conceivable sexual variation is amply illustrated, oral sex and
heterosexual coitus are common themes. Pots representing sexual
themes in the most explicit terms may have been used in ordinary
daily life, and to drink from them is to perform, symbolically at
least, acts still considered illegal in some states in the United
States. If the sexual practices depicted in pottery are in any way a
reﬂection of the proclivities of the people—and reports of the
Spanish and the Inka suggest this was the case—then the Moche             FIGURE 14.9 Some of the burial objects
may have devised a very efﬁcient system of birth control.66               from Sipán, Peru.
552   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


           If Moche pottery is an accurate reﬂection of daily life, men hunted, farmed, ﬁshed, and
      fought in wars, while women cooked food and performed other basic domestic services.
      Based on pottery representations and later ethnographic accounts, women also produced
      all or most of a primary kind of wealth in the form of textiles. Ethnographic evidence from
      the time of European contact to the present suggests that nearly all women wove textiles,
      and even the most elaborate fabrics may have been produced by peasant women working
      individually in villages.
           The overall archaeological record of the Moche reveals the central patterns of all early
      complex societies. The evidence of warfare, for example, in ceramic depictions is supported
      by settlement patterns: Every well-surveyed coastal valley has been found to have fortresses
      and fortiﬁed settlements dating to this period, and weapons are common in these sites,
      particularly along the southern coast. Trophy heads and mummiﬁed corpses showing signs
      of violence are frequently found in cemeteries.
           Occupational specialization was still at a rather simple level, but skilled craftsmen must
      have been full-time specialists to be able to produce the intricate objects in gold, silver,
      copper, and many other commodities found here.
           The economic productivity of the Moche, their class-based society, and their ideology
      were also expressed in monumental architecture. At various places in the Moche Valley they
      built large clay platforms, ramps, temples, pyramids, and other constructions. One Moche
      pyramid, Huaca del Sol, was 340-by-160 m at the base, stood 40 m high, and comprised an
      estimated 140 million mudbricks.
           In general, the Moche and other small states of this period appear to have been
      caught up in spirals of warfare, but they were also linked by trade mechanisms. Like other
      early states around the world, they seem to have expanded and contracted as the fortunes
      of war changed and as differences in the agricultural potential of various regions took
      effect.


      THE MIDDLE HORIZON (C. A.D. 600–A.D. 1000):
      COMPETING STATES

      At about a.d. 600, the many rival “states” and other competing polities of Andean South
      America began to give way to several larger competing political systems, one centered at
      Wari in the Manteco Basin; another at Tiwanaku, at the southern end of Lake Titicaca; and
      a third in the Moche-Chimú area. In these and perhaps other areas, wars of conquest may
      have brought large territories under the control of centralized, hierarchically-organized
      governments and lessened regional isolation.67
           Tiwanaku is one of the ﬁrst and largest “states” to be based in large part on potatoes,
      which were intensively cultivated with other crops on raised ﬁelds reclaimed from the lake
      marshes. The people of Tiwanaku also herded vast numbers of llamas—invaluable beasts
      of burden in this high country of thin air, and where in the classic Andean tradition the
      resources of highlands and lowlands could best be exploited via voluminous trade.
           The people of Tiwanaku included master stonecarvers, who produced monumental
      gates, statues, and other buildings that are some of the most impressive in all Andean South
      America. Tiwanaku itself—from a.d. 100 to 700 or later—is an enormous and planned
                            THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN ANDEAN SOUTH AMERICA              553


urban capital with state build-
ings, palaces, pyramids, temples,
and streets (Figure 14.10). At
its height, the population of the
Tiwanaku state may have been
approximately 100,000.68
      Unlike the wars of
conquest model (see earlier),
the work of Juan Albarracin-
Jordan 69 examines the rise
of the Tiwanaku state from
the perspective of how local
hierarchies became integrated
into a larger political entity. He
uses ethnohistoric information
to suggest that local hierarchies
were developed to manage the
exploitation of the resources
from multiple ecological zones.         FIGURE 14.10 Stone pillars at the North and East Sides of Agapana, Tiwanaku,
Through reciprocity relation-           Bolivia.
ships, shared ideologies, and
aggregation of population in
larger centers, leaders of these local hierarchies—which may have represented distinct ethnic
groups—began to participate in larger political organizations as intensiﬁcation in manage-
ment of the resources of the multiple ecological zones occurred. There is some evidence
that some of these groups concentrated on certain specializations, such as particular crafts
or the production of speciﬁc staples.
      Wari existed as a political system for only a century or two, but at its high point it
carried out political and economic activities over most of the coast and highlands between
Cajamarca in the north and Sicuani in the south. The evidence for the Wari “empire” comes
mainly from the distribution of speciﬁc art styles and religious symbols over a wide area of
the central highlands and from its roads and provincial centers. Signiﬁcantly, the art motifs
show up most frequently in the burials of individuals whose associated mortuary goods
appeared to reﬂect particularly high status. The city of Wari expanded to an impressive
15 km2—making it one of the largest residential sites in the ancient New World—and the
proportion of its domestic and nondomestic architecture along with its overall size are
similar to Tiwanaku.
      It is probably signiﬁcant that some of ancient Peru’s major roadways may have been
constructed during this period, for such roads would have been very important in
facilitating the exchange of goods and services over an area as large as the one apparently
administered from Wari.
      The worldwide pattern of early states is one in which ever-larger polities compete
with each other, with many expansions and contractions, but with a long-term increase in
the size of the polities and the scale of the conﬂict. Wari, Tiwanaku, and other early states
probably reﬂect this evolutionary paradigm, although Tiwanaku and Wari seem to have
had little interaction except for their shared ideology.
554   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      THE LATE INTERMEDIATE PERIOD (C. A.D. 1000–A.D. 1476):
      EARLY EMPIRES

      With the collapse of the Wari and Tiwanaku political systems between a.d. 800 and a.d. 1000,
      at least seven different areas in Andean South America became power centers, the best
      known and most developed of which was the Chimú state centered in the Moche Valley
      on the northern coast. A major center of the Chimú political system was the beautiful city
      of Chan-Chan, a partially planned settlement covering nearly 11 km2—one of the largest
      pre-Columbian cities in the New World. It contained 10 major compounds, each with
      houses, terraces, reservoirs, parks, roads, and public buildings. By the time Chan-Chan was
      built, Andean societies were rigidly stratiﬁed: Fiedel notes that in one area of Chan-Chan
      the skeletons of between 200 and 300 young women were found, “probably members of
      the royal harem, [who] were sacriﬁced either at the time of the deceased ruler’s funeral or
      at later commemorative ceremonies.”70
           Gold-working, silver-working, ceramics, weaving, and sculpture were all highly
      developed crafts. Chimú society seems to have been rigidly stratiﬁed according to wealth
      and prestige, and the extension of political and economic control appears to have been
      based on a highly efﬁcient army.71
           Perhaps the most signiﬁcant development in Andean South America during this period
      was the multiplication of urban centers. Much of southern Peru remained largely rural, but
      in the northern half of the country some of the greatest cities of the pre-conquest period
      were built.72


      THE LATE HORIZON (C. A.D. 1476–A.D. 1532): THE IMPERIAL
      TRANSFORMATION

      The largest and most highly integrated ancient political system ever to appear in the New
      World evolved in Andean South America within the space of only 87 years. Centered in
      the Cuzco Valley, the Inka Empire (more properly known as the Empire of Tawantinsuyu
      [“the four parts together”]) eventually stretched from Colombia to central Chile and from
      the Paciﬁc to the eastern jungles, tying together under the administration of a single royal
      lineage many diverse regional economic and political systems. At its height, as many as
      10–12 million people may have been living under Inka rule in one of the most intricately
      ordered societies of all time.73 Like Egypt, the Inka polity was a “hegemonic-territorial”
      state74—one that dominated other polities—with its population spread rather thinly over
      a large area but with effective government control over most aspects of life.
           Native and Spanish accounts say that the Inka began their rise to power out of the
      dissolution of the many small competing Andean South American states of the thirteenth
      and fourteenth centuries a.d. The people of Cuzco were attacked by a rival ethnic group—
      the Chankas—at about a.d. 1438 and managed to prevail. Succeeding monarchs at Cuzco
      added new provinces to the empire by conquest, treaty, and simple annexation. The Inkas’
      oral histories—recorded by the Spanish—speak of military campaigns in which Inka kings
      smashed the rival power of Chan-Chan in the 1460s, put down large-scale revolts in the
      1470s, and greatly expanded the empire in the 1480s.75
                           THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN ANDEAN SOUTH AMERICA          555


     The backdrop to this story of the development of the Inka as a state, however, is more
complex than these accounts, and likely took place over a greater period of time. Alan
Covey,76 for example, has recently proposed that the Inka began their rise to regional
domination in the period just after the fall of the Wari state—about a.d. 1000–1200. During
this time, the Inka strengthened their control of the Cuzco Basin and some of the areas to
the south of Cuzco. Using marriage alliances, they also established close relationships to
the north and west of the Cuzco Basin. Two beneﬁts were immediately available: Alliances
and warfare created a labor supply for tending agricultural ﬁelds and construction work,
and consolidation of the region opened opportunities for agricultural intensiﬁcation.
Another major factor was a dramatic population increase in the Cuzco Basin as people
migrated in from surrounding areas.
     As Covey77 points out, Cuzco Basin elites capitalized on the need for administration of
this growing polity, and these rulers began to practice nepotism—appointing their relatives
to various positions of power in the military, religious, and administrative hierarchy. The
Inka rulers also legitimized their rulership through control of commodities such as coca,
cloth, and precious metals; through feasting (see later); and through the redistribution of
some of these precious commodities to their allies and subjects. During the fourteenth
century a.d., the Inka continued to expand their territories and establish long-distance
diplomatic relationships. Eventually, the Inka began military campaigns against groups
outside their region as they sought to enlarge their empire.
     The economic basis of the Inka Empire was a highly integrated system of ﬁshing,
herding, farming, taxation, textile production, metallurgy, and so on. Rivers were channeled
through stone-lined canals, while lowland irrigation systems, which had existed for
thousands of years, were extended and brought under a centralized authority. Llamas and
alpacas were raised for wool, while dogs, muscovy ducks, and guinea pigs provided most
of the meat. But the staple foods were maize, beans, potatoes, quinoa, oca, and peppers.
     The food-storage methods used by the Inka were very important in establishing
imperial food reserves. Potatoes were alternately dried and frozen to produce a black, pulpy
product called chuño; meat was turned into jerky; and grain was brewed into chicha, a
nutritious beer. Archaeologists familiar with this combination say it is not as bad as it
sounds.
     Christine Hastorf and Sissel Johannessen have studied changes in the use of maize as
the political system of Andean South America changed between a.d. 500 and 1500,
particularly among the Inka. The Inka and their immediate predecessors converted maize
into beer and then deﬁned this beer as a prestige item and associated it with imperial power
and the theology of the Inka state. People were brought together in communal feasts in
which beer was consumed, and at these feasts the elites could reinforce their position: By
providing beer in this context they could underscore the indebtedness of the peasantry to
them and put the labor that the peasantry did for the elites in the context of the national
religion and the highly stratiﬁed class system.78
     The people of the empire were organized in a complex way according to a decimal
system in which there were administrators for every unit of taxpayer from 10 to 10,000.
Most people were members of large kin groups, called ayllu; marriages were between mem-
bers of the same ayllu. The ayllu were usually economically self-sufﬁcient units that held
land in common, and their members were bound together by complex patterns of reciprocal
obligations, such as requiring members to work in each other’s place when one was absent
           556        PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                       and to support widows and the inﬁrm. Farmers worked a
                                                       certain amount of time on state-owned plots, while craftsmen
                                                       and specialists such as runners, weavers, and goldsmiths
                                                       contributed according to their particular talents.
                                                            Records of taxes, transactions, and census ﬁgures were
                                                       kept with the aid of the kipu, a set of strings tied into knots at
                                                       different levels (Figure 14.11) and used by a special hereditary
                                                       class of accountants to memorize the information.79 A writing
                                                       system of the type used in early Mesopotamia would no doubt
                                                       have conveyed more religious and philosophical informa-
                                                       tion, but for simple information storage and retrieval, the kipu
                                                       appears to have been an adequate substitute for writing, when
                                                       complemented by the enormous Inka bureaucracy.80
                                                            Gold, fabrics, and other luxury goods were collected from
                                                       around the empire for distribution among the elites. Women,
                                                       too, were treated as commodities. Government agents visited
                                                       each village periodically and took selected girls of about age
                                                       10 back to provincial capitals where they were taught spinning,
                                                       weaving, and cooking. They were then apportioned out as
                                                       wives for the emperor and the nobles.
                                                            The Inka Empire both created and was created by its
                                                       system of roads (Figure 14.12).81 Most villages were largely
                                                       self-sufﬁcient, but the ﬂow of goods and information and,
FIGURE 14.11 The Inka never developed a
                                                       most important, armies required to create the empire were
written language, but administrators used the
kipu, a set of knotted strings, to keep records.
                                                       dependent on the road system, comprising an overall network
                                                       of about 40,000 km of paved roads. Road beds were excavated
                                                       through hillsides, swamps were crossed by drained causeways,
                        walls were built along roadways to protect the traveler from the ﬁerce gales of the uplands,
                        and wide rivers and ravines were crossed by suspension bridges made of woven vines hung
                        from stone towers. All along the roads were storehouses and administrative outposts, and
                        runners stationed about a kilometer apart were reputed to carry messages over distances as
                        great as 2,400 km in just ﬁve days.82
                             Although they were master builders, most Inka lived in rural villages, not great
                        metropolises. Typical Inka residential units were rectangular walled houses of stone or
                        adobe, subdivided into smaller units. Most public constructions were in the form of
                        palaces, temples, granaries, fortresses, barracks, and highway stations. The skill used in
                        these constructions is amazing, considering the simple tools employed. The Inka cut stones
                        into huge blocks simply by chipping and abrading them with harder stones, and they then
                        ﬁtted them together (without the use of mortar) so precisely that, as the cliché goes, a
                        knifeblade could not be inserted between them.
                             The cultural order and social structure of the Inka were expressed not only in its public
                        monuments, but even in its domestic architecture. Susan Niles has catalogued how, in one
                        particular case, the buildings constituting the ﬁfteenth-century estate of a noble family were
                        arranged to reﬂect the rigid class hierarchy of the Inka polity.83
                             The capital city of Cuzco was an orderly arrangement of houses, monumental
                        buildings, and streets, well-provided with a municipal water and drainage system. The great
                            THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN ANDEAN SOUTH AMERICA                557


temple of Qori Kancha here had exterior walls measur-
ing 68-by-59 m and a semi-circular annex that rose to a
height of more than 34 m. A gold frieze about a meter
wide ran along the exterior wall, and the entranceway
was heavily sheathed in gold plate. Many other struc-
tures at the capital were lavishly decorated with gold
and silver.
     The comparatively great internal security of the
empire made it unnecessary to defend most settlements,
except with occasional hilltop forts. The heart of the
Inka army was the common foot-soldier, who was
armed with club, mace, battle axe, or lance. Slings,
bolas, and spear throwers were used prior to the main
attack, but brutal hand-to-hand combat usually decided
the issue. One successful tactical innovation of the Inka
was the practice of holding back a large body of troops
who were thrown in at a critical juncture—a simple
tactic similar in a way to Napoleon’s successful use of
reserves.


THE EUROPEAN CONQUEST

Archaeological research in some areas of Andean South
America was interrupted in the 1980s and early 1990s
by peasant revolutions and armed conﬂict between the
government and rebels. The colonial history of Andean
South America explains a lot about the origins of these
conﬂicts.
     After sporadic, occasionally hostile contacts with
the Inka people in the a.d. 1520s, the Spanish under
Francisco Pizarro set out toward the provincial capital
at Cajamarca, the residence of Atawallpa, the Inka king.     FIGURE 14.12 The Inka road system connected
The Inka sent a reception force of 20,000 to meet            almost every settlement to two main north-south routes
the Spanish, but did not seem to have appreciated the        and facilitated voluminous transports of goods and effec-
                                                             tive administration.
threat that the Spanish represented. In any case, the
Andean South Americans soon had cause to regret their
difﬁdence. Pizarro and his men entered the city on November 15, 1532, and found it to be
surprisingly nearly deserted. After establishing himself with a couple of cannons and his
few score of soldiers, Pizarro and de Soto—accompanied by a troop—visited the Inka king
at Konoj. The next day the emperor came to Cajamarca, borne on a litter and preceded by
thousands of soldiers, attendants, and subjects. The ﬁrst Spaniard to approach the king was
the chaplain who, as part of Pizarro’s contract with the king of Spain and the Pope, was
charged with spreading the Christian faith. The chaplain immediately began to harangue
the king, through an interpreter, about the creation of the world, the fall of Adam and
Eve, the Virgin Birth, the establishment of the papacy, and other dogma, culminating his
558   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      speech with the announcement that the Pope had given the Inka Empire to King Charles
      of Spain.
           Not surprisingly, the Inka king took exception to parts of the chaplain’s speech. He
      wanted to know how the Pope could give away something that was not his, and how it
      had happened that the god of the Christians had died, since the Inka deity, the Sun, was
      immortal.84 When Atawallpa asked how the chaplain knew all these things, he was handed
      a breviary. The king looked brieﬂy and no doubt uncomprehendingly inside, and then
      threw it away. At this point the Spanish attacked, and then the inexplicable happened:
      Instead of killing the Spanish, the Inka ﬂed, dropping their weapons and killing themselves
      in their panicked ﬂight, and the Spanish were able to dispatch thousands and capture the
      king with little trouble. They remained in Cajamarca for some months, detaining the king,
      who tried to win his release by offering to ﬁll a room (supposed to have been 6.5-by-4.5 m
      in size) once with gold and twice with silver. The Spanish, meanwhile, took masses of gold
      and silver in ransom payments for the king, as well as from the sack of Cuzco, most of it in
      the form of exquisitely wrought ﬁgures, which they melted into ingots.
           Rumors of insurrections in the countryside convinced the Spanish to execute the
      Inka king. They did so, but considered themselves enlightened for giving him the option
      of being garroted rather than burned at the stake—a reward to the king for allowing himself
      to be baptized. Atawallpa’s death and the ensuing factionalism among rival claimants to
      the throne, as well as the devastation brought on by introduced diseases and the horror
      wrought on the populace through warfare and the destruction of the irrigation system,
      proved crippling. The population of Andean South America is thought to have dropped
      from 10–12 million to about six million within a 50 years of the conquest.



      SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

      The reader by now will not be surprised to learn that most scholars interpret the rise of
      civilization in Andean South America to be the result of a multiplicity of factors.
            Robert Carneiro’s hypotheses linking warfare, population growth, and environmental
      circumscription (chapter 7) to the rise of states seems particularly applicable to Andean
      South America. There are some suggestions that warfare was in fact an important “stress”
      that stimulated some kinds of complexity (though perhaps not in the manner suggested by
      Carneiro).85 But sustained warfare seems to have been more of an important factor well
      after the appearance of such things as monumental buildings, the coordination of regional
      economies, craft specialization, and the rise of great religious traditions.
            How, then, are we to account for Andean South American complex societies? Obviously,
      the rich maritime and agricultural resources were essential ingredients in this development.
      In only a few areas of the world is it possible to produce and gather enough food to run
      complex cultures on the basis of primitive technologies, and Andean South America is one
      of these regions.
            An important “negative” element in the evolution of Andean South America appears
      to have been the fact that, unlike ancient China, Egypt, Mesopotamia, or the Indus Valley,
      Andean South America was geographically isolated from other highly complex political
      systems. Evolving Old World civilizations soon came into contact with one another, and
                                  THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN ANDEAN SOUTH AMERICA                           559


their political, economic, and social interchanges appear to have transformed each of them
to some degree. But, except for Mesoamerica—which was very distant and cut off by ocean
and jungle—Andean South America evolved alone.
     The absence of a domesticable draft animal also was a limit on Andean South American
development. Llamas compensated for this to a degree, but they cannot compare with the
transport or plowing abilities of horses, mules, or oxen. It is difﬁcult to judge the effects the
presence of a domesticable draft animal in Andean South America would have had, but it
may be signiﬁcant that almost all agricultural areas of Andean South America today are
plowed.
     Thus, in summary of Andean South American prehistory, we see that cultural develop-
ments there paralleled those in other centers of independent complex society formation
in most important details, including the initial spread of a religious cult, the presence of
a highly productive economy, the widespread occurrence of monumental architecture,
and the gradual emergence of highly stratiﬁed, economically integrated state and imperial
political systems.



BIBLIOGRAPHY
Albarracin-Jordan, J. 1996. “Tiwanaku Settlement System: The Integration of Nested Hierarchies in the Lower
            Tiwanaku Valley.” Latin American Antiquity 7(3):183 –210.
Alva, W., and C. Donnan. 1993. Royal Tombs of Sipán. Los Angeles: Fowler Museum of Cultural History, UCLA.
Ascher, M., and R. Ascher. 1982. Code of the Quipu: A Study in Media, Mathematics, and Culture. Ann Arbor:
            University of Michigan Press.
Bauer, B. S. 1992. The Development of the Inca State. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
Bawden, G. 1995. “The Structural Paradox: Moche Culture as Political Ideology.” Latin American Antiquity
            6(3):255–273.
Bennfer, R. A. 1982. “The Lomas Site of Paloma (5000 to 7500 b.p.), Chilca Valley, Peru.” In Andean Archaeology,
            ed. R. Matos, pp. 27–54. New York: Academic Press.
———. 1984. “The Challenges and Rewards of Sedentism: The Preceramic Village of Paloma, Peru.” In
            Paleopathology and the Origin of Agriculture, ed. M. N. Cohen and G. J. Armelagos. New York:
            Academic Press.
Billman, B. R. 2002. “Irrigation and the Origins of the Southern Amoche State on the North Coast of Peru.” Latin
            American Antiquity 13(4):371– 400.
Browman, D. L. 1974. “Pastoral Nomadism in the Andes.” Current Anthropology 15:188 –196.
———. 1975. “Trade Patterns in the Central Highlands of Peru in the First Millennium b.c.” World Archaeology
            6:322–330.
Burger, R. L. 1992. Chavin and the Origins of the Andean Civilization. London and New York: Thames and Hudson.
Burger, R. L., and L. Salazar-Burger. 1980. “Ritual and Religion at Huaricoto.” Archaeology 33:26 – 32.
———. 1985. “The Early Ceremonial Center of Huaricoto.” In Early Ceremonial Architecture in the Andes, ed.
            C. B. Donnan. Washington, DC: Dumbarton Oaks.
———. 1986. “Early Organizational Diversity in the Peruvian Highland: Huaricoto and Kotosh.” In Andean
            Archaeology, Papers in Memory of Clifford Evans, Monograph 27, ed. M. R. Matos, S. A. Turpin, and
            H. H. Eling, Jr. Los Angeles: University of California, Institute of Archaeology.
———. 1991. “The Second Season of Investigations at the Initial Period Center of Cardal, Peru.” Journal of Field
            Archaeology 18(3):275 –296.
Burger, R. L., and N. Van Der Merwe. 1990. “Maize and the Origin of Highland Chavin Civilization: An Isotopic
            Perspective.” American Anthropologist 92(1):85 –95.
Carneiro, R. 1970. “A Theory of the Origin of the State.” Science 169:733 –738.
Cobo, Bernabe. 1990 (orig. c. a.d. 1639). Inca Religion and Customs. Trans. and ed. Roland Hamilton. Austin:
            University of Texas Press.
Collier, G. A., R. I. Rosaldo, and J. D. Wirth, eds. 1982. The Inka and Aztec States, 1400 –1800. New York: Academic
            Press.
Conlee, C. A. 2003. “Local Elites and the Reformation of Late Intermediate Period Socipolitical and Economic
            Organization in Nasca, Peru.” Latin American Antiquity 14(1):47– 65.
560   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      Covey, R. A. 2003. “A Processual Study of Inka State Formation.” Journal of Anthropological Archaeology
                   22:333–357.
      D’Altroy, T. N. 1992. Provincial Power in the Inka Empire. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
      Dillehay, T. D. 1990. “Mapuche Ceremonial Landscapes, Social Recruitment and Resource Rights.” Journal of
                   World Archaeology 22(2):223 –241.
      Dillehay, T. D., P. Netherly, and J. Rossen. 1989. “Early Preceramic Public and Residential Sites on the Forested
                   Slope of the Western Andes, Northern Peru.” American Antiquity 54(4):733 –758.
      Donnan, C. B. 1973. Moche Occupation of the Santa Valley, Peru. University of California Publications in
                   Anthropology, No. 8. Berkeley: University of California
      ———. 1976. Moche Art and Iconography. Los Angeles: UCLA Latin American Center Publications.
      ———. 1990. “Master Works Reveal a Pre-Inca World.” National Geographic Magazine 177(6):34 – 49.
      ———. 2001. “Moche Burials Uncovered.” National Geographic Magazine 199(3):58–73.
      Donnan, C. B., ed. 1985. Early Ceremonial Architecture in the Andes. Washington, DC: Dumbarton Oaks.
      Engl, L., and T. Engl. 1969. Twilight of Ancient Peru. Trans. A. Jaffe. New York: McGraw-Hill.
      Feldman, R. A. 1980. Aspero, Peru: Architecture, Subsistence Economy, and Other Artifacts of a Preceramic Maritime
                   Chiefdom. Ph.D dissertation, Department of Anthropology, Harvard University.
      Fernández, J., H. O. Panarello, and J. Schobinger. 1999. “The Inka Mummy from Mount Aconcagua: Decoding
                   the Geographic Origin of the ‘Messenger to the Deities’ by Means of Stable Carbon, Nitrogen, and
                   Sulfur Isotope Analysis.” Geoarchaeology 14(1):27– 46.
      Fiedel, S. J. 1987. Prehistory of the Americas. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
      Fontugne, M., P. Usselmann, and C. Hatté. 1999. “El Niño Variability in the Coastal Desert of Southern Peru
                   During the Mid-Holocene.” Quaternary Research 52:171–179.
      Haas, J. 1987. “The Exercise of Power in Early Andean State Development.” In The Origins and Development of
                   the Andean State, ed. J. Haas, S. Pozorski, and T. Pozorski. New York: Cambridge University Press.
      Haas, J., W. Creamer, and A. Ruiz. 2004. “Dating the Late Archaic Occupation of the Norte Chico Region in Peru.”
                   Nature 432:1020–1023.
      Haas, J., S. Pozorski, and T. Pozorski, eds. 1987. The Origins and Development of the Andean State. New York:
                   Cambridge University Press.
      Hastorf, C. A., and S. Johannessen. 1993. “Pre-Hispanic Political Change and the Role of Maize in the Central
                   Andes of Peru.” American Anthropologist 95(1):115 –137.
      Hoopes, J. W. 1994. “Ford Revisited: A Critical Review of the Chronology and Relationships of the Earliest
                   Ceramic Complexes in the New World, 6000 –1500 b.c.” Journal of World Prehistory 8(1):1– 49.
      Hyslop, J. 1984. The Inka Road System. New York: Academic Press.
      Idyll, C. P. 1973. “The Anchovy Crisis.” Scientiﬁc American 228:22 – 29.
      Isbell, W. H. 2004. “Mortuary Preferences; A Wari Culture Case Study from Middle Horizon Peru.” Latin
                   American Antiquity 15(1):3 – 32.
      Japanese Scientiﬁc Expedition to Nuclear America. 1979. Excavations at La Pampa in the North Highlands of Peru,
                   1975. Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press.
      Jennings, J., and W. Y. Alvarez. 2001. “Architecture, Local Elites, and Imperial Entanglements: The Wari Empire
                   and the Cotahuasi Valley of Peru.” Journal of Field Archaeology 28(1/2):143–159.
      Jennings, J., and N. Craig. 2001. “Politywide Analysis and Imperial Political Economy: The Relationship Between
                   Valley Political Complexity and Administrative Centers in the Wari Empire of the Central Andes.”
                   Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 20:479 –502.
      Jones, G. D., and R. R. Kautz, eds. 1981. The Transition to Statehood in the New World. Cambridge: Cambridge
                   University Press.
      Kaplan, L., T. Lynch, and E. E. Smith, Jr. 1973. “Early Cultivated Beans (Phaseolus vulgaris) from an Intermontane
                   Peruvian Valley.” Science 179:76 –77.
      Keatinge, R. W. 1974. “Chimú Rural Administration Centers in the Moche Valley, Peru.” World Archaeology
                   6:66 – 82.
      ———. 1988. Peruvian Prehistory: An Overview of Pre-Inka and Inka Society. New York: Cambridge University
                   Press.
      Lanning, E. P. 1967. Peru Before the Inkas. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
      Lathrap, D. W. 1973. “The Antiquity and Importance of Long-Distance Trade Relationships in the Moist Tropics
                   of Pre-Columbian South America.” World Archaeology 5:170–186.
      Lynch, T., ed. 1980. Guitarrero Cave: Early Man in the Andes. New York: Academic Press.
      MacNeish, R. S., R. K. Vierra, A. Nelken-Terner, R. Lurie, and A. G. Cook. 1983. Prehistory of the Ayacucho Basin,
                   Peru, Volume IV: The Preceramic Way of Life. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
      Masuda, S., I. Shimada, and C. Morris, eds. 1985. Andean Ecology and Civilization. Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press.
      Milliaire, J.-F. 2004. “The Manipulation of Human Remains in Moche Society: Delayed Burials, Grave Reopening,
                   and Secondary Offerings of Human Bones on the Peruvian North Coast.” Latin American Antiquity
                   15(4):371– 388.
                                 THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN ANDEAN SOUTH AMERICA                         561


Morris, C. 1985. “From Principles of Ecological Complementarity to the Organization and Administration of
             Tawantinsuyu.” In Andean Ecology and Civilization, ed. S. Masuda, I. Shimada, and C. Morris. Tokyo:
             University of Tokyo Press.
Moseley, M. E. 1975. The Maritime Foundations of Andean Civilization. Menlo Park, CA: Cummings.
———. 1985. “The Exploration and Explanation of Early Monumental Architecture in the Andes.” In Early
             Ceremonial Architecture in the Andes, ed. C. Donnan, pp. 28 –58, Washington, DC: Dumbarton Oaks.
———. 2001. The Incas and Their Ancestors. London and New York: Thames and Hudson.
Moseley, M. E., and K. C. Day, eds. 1982. Chan Chan: Andean Desert City. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico
             Press.
Murra, J. 1958. “On Inka Political Structure.” In Systems of Political Control and Bureaucracy in Human Society,
             ed. V. F. Ray. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
———. 1965. “Herds and Herders in the Inka State.” In Man, Culture and Animals. Washington, DC: American
             Association for the Advancement of Science.
———. 1985. “The Limits and Limitations of the ‘Vertical Archipelago’ in the Andes.” In Andean Ecology and
             Civilization, ed. S. Masuda, I. Shimada, and C. Morris. Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press.
Murra, J., and C. Morris. 1976. “Dynastic Oral Tradition, Administrative Records, and Archaeology in the Andes.”
             World Archaeology 7:269 –279.
Niles, S. A. 1988. Callachaca. Iowa City: University of Iowa Press.
Ortloff, C. R., M. E. Moseley, and R. A. Feldman. 1982. “Hydraulic Engineering Aspects of the Chimú/Chicama-
             Moche Intervalley Canal.” American Antiquity 47:572 –595.
Parsons, J. 1968. “An Estimate of Size and Population for Middle Horizon Tiahuanaco, Bolivia.” American
             Antiquity 33:243 –245.
———. 1977. Personal communication to Wenke.
Parsons, M. 1970. “Preceramic Subsistence on the Peruvian Coast.” American Antiquity 35:292 –303.
Patterson, T. C. 1971. “Central Peru: Its Population and Economy.” Archaeology 24:316 –321.
———. 1983. “The Historical Development of a Coastal Andean Social Formation in Central Peru, 6000 to
             500 b.c.” In Investigations of the Andean Past, Papers from the First Annual Northeast Conference on
             Andean Archaeology and Ethnohistory, ed. D. H. Sandweiss. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Latin
             Studies Program.
———. 1985. “The Huaca La Florida, Rimac Valley, Peru.” In Ceremonial Architecture in the Andes, ed. C. B.
             Donnan. Washington, DC: Dumbarton Oaks.
———. 1992. The Inca Empire. London: Berg.
Pearsall, D. M. 1992. “The Origins of Plant Cultivation in South America.” In The Origins of Agriculture. An
             International Perspective, ed. C. W. Cowan and P. J. Watson. Washington: Smithsonian Institution
             Press.
Pearsall, D. M., and D. R. Piperno. 1990. “Antiquity of Maize Cultivation in Ecuador: Summary and Reevaluation
             of the Evidence.” American Antiquity 55(2):324 – 337.
Pickersgill, B. 1969. “The Archaeological Record of Chile Peppers (Capsicum spp.) and the Sequence of Plant
             Domestication in Peru.” American Antiquity 34:54 – 61.
Pickersgill, B., and A. Bunting. 1969. “Cultivated Plants and the Kon-Tiki Theory.” Nature 222:225 – 227.
Pozorski, S. 1987. “Theocracy vs. Militarism: The Signiﬁcance of the Casma Valley in Understanding Early State
             Formation.” In The Origins and Development of the Andean State, ed. J. Haas, S. Pozorski, and
             T. Pozorski. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Pozorski, T. 1987. “Changing Priorities Within the Chimu State: The Role of Irrigation Agriculture.” In The
             Origins and Development of the Andean State, ed. J. Haas, S. Pozorski, and T. Pozorski. New York:
             Cambridge University Press.
Pozorski, S., and T. Pozorski. 1979. “Alto Salaverry: A Peruvian Coastal Preceramic Site.” Annals of the Carnegie
             Museum of Natural History 49:337–375.
———. 1986. “Recent Excavations at Pampa de las Llamas-Moxeke, A Complex Initial Period Site in Peru.”
             Journal of Field Archaeology 13(4):381–401.
———. 1987. “Chavín, the Early Horizon, and the Initial Period.” In The Origins and Development of the Andean
             State, ed. J. Haas, S. Pozorski, and T. Pozorski. New York: Cambridge University Press.
———. 1988. Early Settlement and Subsistence in the Casma Valley, Peru. Iowa City: University of Iowa Press.
———. 1990. “Huaynun, a Late Cotton Paraceramic Site on the North Coast of Peru.” Journal of Field Archaeology
             17(1):17–26.
———. 1994. “Early Andean Cities.” Scientiﬁc American 270(6):66 –72.
Prescott, W. H. 1908. History of the Conquest of Peru. London and New York: Everyman’s Library.
———. 1989. Life and Death at Paloma: Society and Mortuary Practices in Preceramic Peruvian Village. Iowa City:
             University of Iowa Press.
Protzen, J.-P. 1986. “Inca Stonemasonry.” Scientiﬁc American 254(2):94 –105.
Quilter, J. 1985. “Architecture and Chronology at El Paraíso, Peru.” Journal of Field Archaeology 12(3):274 –298.
562   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      ———. 1991a. “Late Preceramic Peru.” Journal of World Prehistory 5(4):387– 438.
      ———. 1991b. “Problems with the Late Preceramic of Peru.” American Anthropologist 93(2):450 –454.
      ———. 2002. “Moche Politics, Religion, and Warfare.” Journal of World Prehistory 16(2):145 –195.
      Quilter, J., and T. Stocker. 1983. “Subsistence Economies and the Origins of Andean Complex Societies.”
                    American Anthropologist 85(3):545–562.
      Ramenovsky, A. 1987. Vectors of Death. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
      Raymond, J. S. 1981. “The Maritime Foundations of Andean Civilization: A Reconsideration of the Evidence.”
                    American Antiquity 46:806 – 820.
      Reitz, E. J. 1988. “Faunal Remains from Paloma, an Archaic Site in Peru.” American Anthropologist 90(2):310–322.
      Richardson, J. B., III. 1981. “Maritime Adaptations on the Peruvian Coast: A Critique and Future Directions.” Paper
                    presented at the 47th Annual Meeting of the Society for American Archaeology, San Diego, California.
      Rick, J. W. 1980. Prehistoric Hunters of the High Andes. New York: Academic Press.
      Rodbell, D. T., G. O. Seltzer, D. E. Anderson, M. B. Abbott, D. B. Enﬁeld, and J. H. Newman. 1999. “A 15,000-
                    Year Record of El Niño-Driven Alluviation in Southwestern Ecuador.” Science 283:516 –520.
      Rowe, J. H. 1946. “Inka Culture at the Time of the Spanish Conquest.” Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin
                    143:183 –331.
      ———. 1967. “Form and Meaning in Chavín Art.” In Peruvian Archaeology: Selected Readings. Palo Alto: Peek
                    Publishers.
      Schreiber, K. J. 1987. “Conquest and Consolidation: A Comparison of the Wari and Inka Occupation of a
                    Highland Peruvian Valley.” American Antiquity 52(2):266–284.
      Scott, R. J. 1981. “The Maritime Foundations of Andean Civilization: A Reconsideration.” American Antiquity
                    46:806 – 821.
      Shady, R., and A. Ruiz. 1979. “Evidence for Interregional Relationships During the Middle Horizon on the North-
                    Central Coast of Peru.” American Antiquity 44:670 – 684.
      Silverman, H. 1988. “Cahuachi: Non-Urban Cultural Complexity on the South Coast of Peru.” Journal of Field
                    Archaeology 15(4):403 – 430.
      Stanish, C. 2001. “The Origin of State Societies in South America.” Annual Review of Anthropology 30:41–64.
      Ugent, D., S. Pozorski, and T. Pozorski. 1984. “New Evidence for Ancient Cultivation of Canna edulis in Peru.”
                    Economic Botany 38(4):417– 432.
      Von Hagen, V. W. 1952. “America’s Oldest Roads.” Scientiﬁc American 187:17–21.
      Willey, G. R. 1962. “The Early Great Art Styles and the Rise of Pre-Columbian Civilizations.” American
                    Anthropologist 64:1–14.
      Wilson, D. J. 1981. “Of Maize and Men: A Critique of the Maritime Hypothesis of State Origins on the Coast of
                    Peru.” American Anthropologist 83:93 –114.
      ———. 1983. “The Origins and Development of Complex Prehispanic Society in the Lower Santa Valley, Peru:
                    Implications for Theories of State Origins.” Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 2:209–276.
      Wing, E. S. 1977. “Animal Domestication in the Andes.” In Origins of Agriculture, ed. C. A. Reed. The Hague:
                    Mouton Publishers.



      NOTES
       1. Father Cobo’s description here is from various sections of his Inca Religion and Customs.
       2. Fernández et al., “The Inca Mummy from Mount Aconcagua: Decoding the Geographic Origin of the
          ‘Messenger to the Deities’ by Means of Stable Carbon, Nitrogen, and Sulfur isotope Analysis,” pp. 30 –32.
       3. Murra, “Andean Ecology and Civilization,” p. 11, in Masuda et al., eds., Andean Ecology and Civilization.
       4. Masuda et al., eds., Andean Ecology and Civilization.
       5. Idyll, “The Anchovy Crisis.”
       6. Fontugne et al., “El Niño Variability in the Coastal Desert of Southern Peru During the Mid-Holocene.”
       7. Hoopes, “Ford Revisited: A Critical Review of the Chronology and Relationships of the Earliest Ceramic
          Complexes in the New World, 6000 –1500 b.c.,” p. 41.
       8. Rick, Prehistoric Hunters of the High Andes.
       9. Richardson, “Maritime Adaptations on the Peruvian Coast: A Critique and Future Directions,” pp. 140 – 45.
      10. Quilter and Stocker, “Subsistence Economies and the Origins of Andean Complex Societies,” p. 547.
      11. Pearsall, “The Origins of Plant Cultivation in South American,” p. 192.
      12. Ugent et al., “New Evidence for Ancient Cultivation of Canna edulis in Peru.”
      13. Reviewed in Pearsall, “The Origins of Plant Cultivation in South America,” p. 190.
      14. Rick, Prehistoric Hunters of the High Andes.
      15. See Quilter, “Late Preceramic Peru,” p. 387, for a discussion of these dates; see also Stanish, “The Origins of
          State Societies in South America,” and Haas et al., “Dating the Late Archaic Occupation of the Norte Chico
          Region in Peru.”
                                  THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN ANDEAN SOUTH AMERICA                          563


16. Patterson, “Central Peru: Its Population and Economy.”
17. Stanish, “The Origins of State Societies in South America,” p. 45.
18. Benfer, “The Challenges and Rewards of Sedentism: The Preceramic Village of Paloma, Peru”; Reitz, “Faunal
    Remains from Paloma, an Archaic Site in Peru.”
19. Quilter and Stocker, “Subsistence Economies and the Origins of Andean Complex Societies,” p. 545.
20. Parsons, “Preceramic Subsistence on the Peruvian Coast,” p. 297.
21. Pozorski and Pozorski, “Alto Salaverry: A Peruvian Coastal Preceramic Site.”
22. Benfer, “The Challenges and Rewards of Sedentism.”
23. Haas et al., “Dating the Late Archaic Occupation of the Norte Chico Region in Peru,” p. 1021.
24. Ibid., p. 1022.
25. Quilter, “Architecture and Chronology at El Paraíso, Peru.”
26. Quilter, “Late Preceramic Peru,” p. 417.
27. Quilter, “Late Preceramic Peru,” citing Feldman, Aspero, Peru: Architecture, Subsistence Economy, and Other
    Artifacts of a Preceramic Maritime Chiefdom, p. 89.
28. Quilter, “Late Preceramic Peru,” citing Urton, personal communication, 1991.
29. Quilter, “Late Preceramic Peru.”
30. Moseley, “The Exploration and Explanation of Early Monumental Architecture in the Andes.”
31. Burger, Chavin and the Origins of Andean Civilization, pp. 46–48.
32. Ibid., p. 48.
33. Burger and Salazar-Burger, “Ritual and Religion at Huaricoto,” and “The Early Ceremonial Center of
    Huaricoto.”
34. Quilter, “Late Preceramic Peru,” pp. 420 – 421.
35. Stanish, “The Origins of State Societies in South America,” p. 47.
36. Burger, Chavin and the Origins of Andean Civilization, p. 32.
37. Moseley, The Maritime Foundations of Andean Civilization.
38. Quilter and Stocker, “Subsistence Economies and the Origins of Andean Complex Societies.”
39. Moseley, The Maritime Foundations of Andean Civilization, p. 105.
40. Burger, Chavin and the Origins of Andean Civilization, pp. 28–33.
41. Ibid., pp. 42–43.
42. Stanish, “The Origins of State Societies in South America,” pp. 48–50.
43. Ibid., p. 49.
44. Burger, Chavin and the Origins of Andean Civilization, p. 80.
45. Ibid., p. 77.
46. Ibid., p. 78.
47. Ibid., p. 79.
48. Stanish, “The Origins of State Societies in South America,” p. 49; Burger, Chavin and the Origins of Andean
    Civilization, p. 82.
49. Burger, Chavin and the Origins of Andean Civilization, p. 83.
50. Haas, “The Exercise of Power in Early Andean State Development”; Pozorski and Pozorski, “Early Andean
    Cities.”
51. Burger, Chavin and the Origins of Andean Civilization, pp. 75, 87– 88.
52. Ibid., pp. 66–68; Burger and Salazar-Burger, “The Second Season of Investigations at the Initial Period Center
    of Cardal, Peru.”
53. Burger, Chavin and the Origins of Andean Civilization, p. 68.
54. Burger and Salazar-Burger, “The Second Season of Investigations at the Initial Period Center of Cardal, Peru,”
    p. 278.
55. Quilter, “Late Preceramic Peru,” p. 414.
56. Stanish, “The Origins of State Societies in South America,” p. 51.
57. Burger, Chavin and the Origins of the Andean Civilization.
58. Ibid., pp. 130–135.
59. Ibid., pp. 135–137.
60. Stanish, “The Origins of State Societies in South America,” p. 52.
61. Reviewed in Keatinge, Peruvian Prehistory; also see Haas, Pozorski, and Pozorski, The Origins and Development
    of The Andean State; Donnan, ed., Early Ceremonial Architecture in the Andes. But see Quilter, “Moche Politics,
    Religion, and Warfare,” for a viewpoint that questions whether or not the Moche can be considered a state-
    level society.
62. Lanning, Peru Before the Inkas, pp. 114 –115.
63. Silverman, “Cahuachi: Non-Urban Cultural Complexity on the South Coast of Peru.”
64. Although see Billman, “Irrigation and the Origins of the Southern Moche State on the North Coast of Peru,”
    who argues that canals and their construction early in the Moche would not have required organization above
    the level of the village or community. Billman instead contends that it was the production of subsistence
564   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


          surplus brought about by the use of irrigation that gave certain individuals the opportunity to accumulate
          wealth and power.
      65. Donnan, “Master Works Reveal a Pre-Inca World.” Additional unlooted tombs were located at Dos Cabezas,
          about 40 miles south of Sipán. A description of these can be found in Doonan, “Moche Burials Uncovered.”
      66. Donnan, Moche Art and Iconography.
      67. Lanning, Peru Before the Inkas, p. 127.
      68. Stanish, “The Origins of State Societies in South America,” pp. 53 –54.
      69. “Tiwanaku Settlement System: The Integration of Nested Hierarchies in the Lower Tiwanaku Valley.”
      70. Fiedel, Prehistory of the Americas, p. 333.
      71. Keatinge, “Chimú Rural Administration Centers in the Moche Valley, Peru,” p. 79.
      72. Moseley and Day, Chan Chan: Andean Desert City.
      73. Collier et al., The Inka and Aztec States, 1400–1800.
      74. D’Altroy, Provincial Power in the Inka Empire.
      75. Lanning, Peru Before the Inkas, pp. 159 –160.
      76. Covey, “ A Processual Study of Inka State Formation.”
      77. Ibid.
      78. Hastorf and Johannessen, “Maize and Politics in the Pre-Hispanic Andes.”
      79. Lanning, Peru Before the Inkas, pp. 166 –167.
      80. Ascher and Ascher, Code of the Quipu: A Study in Media, Mathematics, and Culture.
      81. Hyslop, The Inka Road System.
      82. Von Hagen, “America’s Oldest Roads.”
      83. Niles, Callachaca.
      84. Engl and Engl, Twilight of Ancient Peru, p. 119.
      85. Carneiro, “A Theory of the Origin of the State”; see also Wilson, “The Origins and Development of Complex
          Prehispanic Society in the Lower Santa Valley, Peru.”
15
Early Cultural Complexity in North
America

You must explain to the natives of [North
America] that there is only one God in heaven,
and the emperor on earth to rule and govern it,
whose subjects they must all become and they
must serve.
Instructions of the viceroy to Fray Marcos de Ninza
(a.d. 1538)




A          s Europeans invaded North America in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries,
           they encountered what looked to them like the relics of ancient civilizations:
hundreds of large earthen mounds, some nearly as large as the Egyptian pyramids,
dominated the Ohio and Mississippi river valleys; and in Arizona, Colorado, and New
Mexico large, neatly planned but abandoned towns that had obviously once been inhabited
by hundreds, if not thousands, were found along the major rivers and even in the arid
highlands (Figure 15.1).
      The Europeans of this age were, like the citizens of all world powers, highly ethnocentric.
It is not surprising, therefore, that they assumed that these impressive works had been
constructed by their own ancestors—the Celts, Romans, or perhaps the Vikings; they
simply could not believe that the ancestors of the poor and “degenerate” Native Americans
they saw about them might have had something to do with these great monuments. Some
Europeans even blamed the Native Americans for massacring what the Europeans believed
to be an ancient and extinct “superior” American race—the ultimate in adding insult to
injury, given the Native Americans’ eventual fate.
      The truth, of course, is that these mounds and abandoned settlements had indeed been
built by Native Americans many centuries before the Europeans arrived, and we now know
that these ancient Americans had a rich culture history going back more than 10,000 years
in the New World.
      Some of the people of “pre-Columbian” North America were inﬂuenced by contact
with the complex cultures of ancient Mesoamerica, and it is also true that, according to some
criteria, aboriginal American cultures never reached the level of complexity attained in
“independent” ancient centers of cultural evolution, such as Mesoamerica and Mesopotamia.

                                                      565
566   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                              NORTH AMERICA

                              1900
                              1800
                                                                           Great Plains
                              1700                                     Coalescent tradition
                                                                         • Introduction of
                              1600                                         horse-mounted
                                                                           nomadism
                              1500
                              1400
                              1300
                              1200                               Eastern
                                                                Woodlands       Great Plains
                                                                                                                           Mesa Verde
                              1100                              Mississippi    Plains Village
                                                                                                                          cliff dwellings
                                                                 Culture           period
                                                                                                                           constructed
                              1000
                               900
                               800                                                                     Southwest
                                     Eskimo
                                                                                                       Hohokam
                               700   culures
                                                                                       Desert West      tradition
                                     Stage V
                                                                                      and Southwest                                         Development
                               600




       MILLENNIA CENTURIES
                                                                                     Fremont culture                                        of Northwest
                                                                                                                                            Coast Indian
                               500                    Adena                    Plains                        Southwest                         cultures
                                                      culture                 Woodland                       Mogollon
                               400                                             period                         tradition              California
                                                                Hopewell                                                              cultures
                                                                                                                      Ancestral
                               300                               culture
                                                                                                                       Pueblo
                                                                                                                      tradition
                               200                   Eastern
                                                    Woodlands
                               100                           Eastern
                                                            Woodlands           Great
                                               Eskimo                                                                Southwest
                                 0                                              Plains                                              Emergence
                                             cultures
                                             Stage IV                                                                              of California
                              1000                                                                                                     tribes
                                     Eskimo
                                     cultures
                              2000   Stage III

                              3000             Eskimo
                                               cultures
                              4000             Stage II

                              5000                                                                                                     Northwest Coast
                                                                                                                                       Archaic cultures
                              6000                                                                                                      established by
                                                                                                                                           7700 B.C.
                              7000
                              8000   Eskimo                                                              Archaic
                                     cultures                                                          Paleoindian
                              9000    Stage I

                             10000



                         20000
FIGURE 15.1 Betatakin, an Ancestral Puebloan settlement in Arizona, was inhabited for only about
50 years before being abandoned.
568   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      But the native North Americans did develop some aspects of cultural complexity, and
      they did so largely independently. Moreover, the ecological and cultural reasons North
      American cultures did not exactly parallel those of Mexico or Peru provide some insights
      into all of these cultures.
           For more than a century archaeologists have been systematically digging North
      American sites, from Alaska to southern Texas, and we should know more about develop-
      ments here than virtually anywhere else in the world, given the high ratio of archaeologists
      per square kilometer. But, unfortunately, early American archaeologists also yielded to the
      temptations of excavating mainly rich tombs and large towns, resulting in a very biased
      view of the American past. And because of decades of turning ancient Native American
      cultural resources into parking lots and hamburger stands and because of the looting that
      continues today, so much of the archaeological record of North America has been destroyed
      that much of the American past will forever remain a mystery.
           The old, sometimes pejorative myths about “Indians” are now giving way in some
      circles to new ones stressing the social harmony, ecological purity, and superior metaphysics
      of ancient Native Americans. As with all cultures, there is much to admire about ancient
      North Americans. But the evidence suggests that for much of their antiquity, aboriginal
      Americans were like prehistoric peoples in every other part of the world—harried small-
      time foragers or farmers, worrying about this year’s drought and next year’s deluge, shifting
      their crops from year to year as they exhausted the resources in one place after another, and
      as enmeshed in slavery, exploitation, and warfare as any ancient Chinese, Egyptian, or
      European.
           The term “Native American” is gradually replacing the wildly imprecise “Indian” of
      bygone years, but it is well to remember that all Americans are immigrants, and rather recent
      ones at that. The people who colonized the New World and became “Native Americans”
      were, in fact, northern Asians who came in several episodes of colonization (chapter 5)—
      the ﬁrst of many waves of immigration to the New World.



      THE ECOLOGICAL SETTING

      We saw in chapter 5 that about 12,000 years ago the huge glacial ice sheets that once covered
      much of eastern North America retreated into Canada, and the distribution of plant and
      animal species in this region became similar to that of the recent past. Between about 8000
      and 6500 b.c., the annual temperature of much of the North American East was probably
      2.5°C cooler than at present, and after that time aboriginal Americans were likely directly
      affected by a number of climate ﬂuctuations. Subtle shifts of climate and effective rainfall
      may have had important effects on the distribution of nut-bearing trees, which were a very
      important food source, and also on the size and stability of rivers and lakes—rich environ-
      ments around which early Americans often built their hunting-foraging economies.
           Temperate eastern North America is a rich niche for hunter-foragers, but its abundant
      agricultural potential can only be realized with technologies such as draught animals and
      the plow. The American Southwest and West also include some very rich areas, but none
      of these areas has the same agricultural potential—given primitive technologies—as that,
      for example, of the Nile Valley or Mesopotamia. The modern u.s. agricultural economy is
                                              EARLY CULTURAL COMPLEXIY IN NORTH AMERICA          569


so productive that it is somewhat surprising just how poor a place it was for pre-industrial
subsistence farmers. First, most of it is far from the equator and therefore has less solar
radiation and fewer frost-free days, and thus lower absolute agricultural potential, than
more southern environments—such as the one in Mesoamerica. Second, those areas of
North America that are today the fertile ﬁelds of Iowa, Missouri, and other areas of the
Plains and Middle West were for the most part unavailable to the Native American farmer
because they lacked the plows and draft animals that can rip through thick grasses and other
vegetation to reveal these fertile soils and the other machines that are needed to suppress
the competition to crops from weeds. Third, much of the area between the Atlantic Coast
and the western reaches of the Mississippi River drainage were thickly forested and
relatively cool, “closed-canopy climax forests,” which could be exploited for nuts and a few
other resources but were in most areas an unprepossessing place for the maize-beans-
squash farming that became the basis for Native American cultivation in North America.
Fourth, the areas of California and other parts of the West that are today food suppliers to
the world were far too arid for anything but basic subsistence agriculture until modern
irrigation systems were installed.


THE NORTH AMERICAN EAST

The most complex ancient cultures in North America evolved in the great river valleys of
the North American East, especially the Mississippi and Ohio Rivers and the lands they
drain (Figure 15.2).


Agricultural Origins: The Late Archaic Period
(c. 4000– 800 B.C.)
Untangling the processes by which many Native Americans became farmers is difﬁcult. One
might consider maize and beans to be the most important domesticated plants in North
America because they were the basis of the largest and most complex cultures in this area.
But maize was a late introduction and only became an important source of food over most
of eastern North America after about a.d. 1000. Maize pollen found in sediments of Lake
Shelby in coastal Alabama seems securely dated to about 1500 b.c., but it is not clear that
this plant was an important food resource at this time. One of the earliest and securely dated
samples of maize in eastern North America is a collection of carbonized maize kernels
found at the Icehouse Bottom site in eastern Tennessee and directly dated by radiocarbon
methods to about a.d. 75; but until well into the ﬁrst millennium a.d. maize remained a
minor source of food.
     The productive patches of maize, beans, and squash that eventually allowed Native
Americans to live in great numbers all over North America were only the last, most pro-
ductive stages of a long, slow shift—away from simple plant collecting and hunting and
toward an ever-growing reliance on fewer and fewer kinds of plants. Long before maize
reached temperate North America, people there had specialized in exploiting several kinds
of plants in early forms of agriculture. So, the questions about North American agriculture
are the same as those we asked about other areas. Why did agricultural economies appear
FIGURE 15.2 Adena-Hopewell and related cultures. The Adena culture was centered in Ohio, but Adena
trade networks reached as far away as New York. Adena culture appears to have peaked at about 100 b.c.
and was waning by a.d. 400. By about 100 b.c. Adena cultures in Ohio were being replaced by Hopewell
cultures and for the next nine centuries the Hopewell cultures spread over much of the East.
                                               EARLY CULTURAL COMPLEXIY IN NORTH AMERICA           571


when and where they did, through what processes, and with what results? And what was
the long-term relationship between local domesticates and those introduced from
elsewhere?
     It was the oil- and starch-rich seeds of a variety of plants that formed the basis of
initial agriculture in eastern North America. Among the primary domesticated plants were
goosefoot (Chenopodium), sumpweed (Iva annua), sunﬂowers (Helianthus annus), wild
gourds (Cucurbita), maygrass (Phalaris), little barley (Hordeum pusillum), and knotweed
(Polygonum erectum). Until late in the ﬁrst millennium b.c., hunting and foraging continued
to be the way of life for most people, but through these many millennia after the Ice Age,
the overall trend was toward increasing numbers of sedentary communities that specialized
ﬁrst in hunting and intensive plant collecting and later in maize and bean agriculture.
     As in all other areas of early agriculture, climatic changes cannot be disregarded.
Complex climatic changes between about 5000 and 2000 b.c., for example, changed the
ﬂow characteristics of streams and rivers across the eastern woodlands so that backwater
swamps and lakes created by obstructions in river channels greatly expanded the abundance
and accessibility of shellﬁsh and other aquatic resources; and they also produced greater
and more varied “disturbed” habitats—areas of the ﬂoodplain where ﬂoodwaters dis-
turbed vegetation—which offered ecological niches for “pioneer” plants such as goosefoot,
sumpweed, sunﬂowers, marsh elder (Sambucus), wild gourds, and other plants,1 which
Native Americans exploited. They could have encouraged the growth of hickory trees, for
example, by “girdling” (cutting through the bark and growth layers) other species of trees
in stands of hickory, and they could have burned off other areas to encourage the growth
of chenopods, sunﬂowers, and other edible plants.2
     Among the earliest domesticates found in the North American woodlands are gourds
and squash, which appear shortly after 3,500 years ago.3 Species of gourds may have been
introduced from Mexico or washed ashore—for example, in Florida—and eventually
become locally domesticated. They were probably used as containers and for seeds, and
occasionally eaten directly, and we may suppose that their use goes back many millennia
before we have archaeological evidence of them. There is also a problem in distinguishing
between species of gourds based on their few traces in the archaeological record.4
     The ﬁrst clear evidences of changes in the direction of domestication of native food
plants in North America, however, appears in the period between about 2050 and 1050 b.c.
The primary evidence is in the form of changes in the morphology of the seeds of sunﬂowers,
goosefoot, and other disturbed-habitat plants. As we saw in chapter 6, one of the ways
in which people all over the world domesticated plants was to increase their usefulness by
increasing seed size and number (for example, from two-row to six-row barley) and by
altering the dormancy cycle of plants. When sunﬂowers, goosefoot, and other plants
germinated in the spring, they would have faced tremendous competition because these
plants release many seeds in a small area. In such conditions, plants that are the earliest to
sprout and are larger and more vigorous than others would be at an advantage. One key to
early sprouting is the thickness of the seed coat, the testa. As Bruce Smith notes,5 the average
testa thickness on goosefoot seeds shows marked decline over a large area of the eastern
woodlands after about 2,500 years ago, based on specimens retrieved from cave sites and
other occupations in Illinois, Arkansas, Kentucky, and adjacent areas. Other changes
indicative of domestication appeared at about this same time in a variety of plants, but, as
Smith notes, “it also appears likely that indigenous cultigens and domesticates did not
572   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      become substantial food sources, and food production did not play a major economic role
      until . . . a full 1,000 years after their initial domestication.”6
           Nonetheless, various scholars have tried to explain how the transition to initial
      agriculture might have occurred. Michael O’Brien has developed a “Coevolutionary”
      model to account for the transition to agriculture in one area, near the Illinois/Missouri
      border.7 Based on David Rindos’s work on plant domestication,8 O’Brien suggests that the
      consistent but low-intensity use of sunﬂower seeds, goosefoot, marsh elder, and other
      native annuals during the period up to about 300 b.c. created a relationship between these
      plants and people that resulted in a form of domestication and agriculture. He argues that
      initial exploitation of these plants would not have been of great signiﬁcance in the overall
      economy, but the costs of exploiting them were very low, since they did not conﬂict with
      other activities and one could carry these seeds as a minor food without too much effort.
      But then he says, “by 200 b.c. the interaction between human groups and their resource
      base had reached the point that sedentism became a viable option.”9 He notes that the risks
      of concentrating on these plants were considerable, in the way of droughts and ﬂoods. But
      they also had potential for supporting increased population densities.
           Many of the seeds of native North American domesticates could be eaten simply by
      drying and cracking them, but they also appear to have been staples in processed foods
      (Figure 15.3). David Braun has shown that during the Middle and Late Woodland periods




      FIGURE 15.3 In the prehistoric American Middle West the transition to the agricultural way of life
      was a process in which native crops and wild plant foods were replaced by maize, beans, and squash
      (the thickness of the shaded and black areas reﬂects relative importance of the different resources).
                                               EARLY CULTURAL COMPLEXIY IN NORTH AMERICA          573


people began to make more and more pottery in ways that seem particularly designed to
cook starchy seeds, such as those of goosefoot.10 Such pottery has to withstand high heat
and sudden temperature changes, and all over the world people making these kinds of pots
invented the same globular shapes and kinds of tempering and wall thicknesses that
facilitate the long, slow simmering of seeds and other foods in liquids. Stews and soups are
extraordinarily nutritious—and, more than that, they make excellent foods out of things
that normally people cannot proﬁt from much, such as dry goosefoot seeds and a picked-
over rabbit skeleton: The best way to increase the nutrition of these annuals is to boil them,
which “may increase palatability as well”.11
      The collection and domestication of these various plant species seem always and
everywhere to have been combined with relentless hunting, ﬁshing, and nut gathering.
There is little evidence that much energy was invested in modifying the environments of
sunﬂowers and these other plants through hoeing, watering, or weeding, although
cultivation must have been practiced at least in the sense that seeds were selected and
planted. Melvin Fowler noted that most of the native plants apparently domesticated in the
East are species that prefer open, disturbed areas, such as would have been provided by the
refuse piles that must have become increasingly available as hunters and gatherers cluttered
the landscape with snail and clam shells, ﬁsh bones, and other debris.12 When and to what
extent the kind of natural association between these plants and human disturbances was
converted into farming, in the sense of people planting and caring for these crops, will
probably always be difﬁcult to measure.


EARLY CULTURAL COMPLEXITY IN THE NORTH AMERICAN EAST
Like other hunter-foragers around the world, the people of the North American East began
to show signs of increasing social differentiation as they intensiﬁed their exploitation of
plants and as they became less mobile and spent more time in particular places.13 One
of the earliest signs of these changes is in burials. Beginning at about 2000 b.c., people all
over the East began burying their dead with exotic items, such as copper, marine shells,
and ground stone jewelry—often covering the corpse with red ocher, a mineral pigment.14
Yerkes suggests that these “individuals would go to their graves with the exotic materials
that they had accumulated, but it is unlikely that they were able to pass their achieved status
on to their descendants.”15 As we noted in chapter 4, even the Neandertals of 100,000 years
ago may have had at least some slight sense of death as a transition to another plane of
existence, so it is not surprising that some burials in the North American East after 2000
b.c. contain exotic commodities and that cremation was practiced in some areas. But, as in
many other areas of the world, this early sense of ceremonialism was transmuted over time
into elaborate mortuary cults in which social differentiations and other signs of increasing
complexity are evident.
     One of the earliest and most dramatic indications that American cultures were
becoming more complex than those of the previous millennia is the Poverty Point culture
of the lower Mississippi Delta. This culture is named after the Poverty Point site in
Louisiana (Figure 15.4), where large earthworks were constructed sometime between 1200
and 600 b.c. The six nested ranks of earthen mounds at Poverty Point average about
25 m wide and 3 m high and are set about 40 m apart. Near them stands an artiﬁcial mound
more than 20 m high and more than 200 m across.16 It is estimated that more than three
           574        PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                      million man-hours of labor
                                                                                      were required to build this com-
                                                                                      plex, with hundreds, perhaps
                                                                                      thousands, of people hauling
                                                                                      dirt in baskets in an organized,
                                                                                      planned effort. If each basket
                                                                                      contained a cubic foot of dirt,
                                                                                      about 1,236,007 loads would
                                                                                      have been required.17 Burials
                                                                                      suggest that this complex was a
                                                                                      mortuary cult, but its overall
                                                                                      signiﬁcance is difﬁcult to assess.
                                                                                      Some of the Poverty Point
                                                                                      people were skilled artisans who
                                                                                      made vessels out of steatite and
                                                                                      sandstone, pipes out of clay
                                                                                      and stone, and axes, adzes, saws,
FIGURE 15.4 One of the most impressive Archaic sites in North America is the          and weights from hard kinds of
complex of earthworks at Poverty Point, Louisiana. Between about 1500 and 700 b.c.    stone—importing these raw
hunter-gathering peoples in this area built six nested octagons of piled earth. The   materials, in some cases, from
outer octagon is about 1,300 m in diameter. Part of this complex was later eroded     sources more than 600 miles
away by a river. A small mound near these earthworks and other occupations pro-       away. In fact, trade in exotic
duced many beautiful artifacts, as well as thousands of ﬁred clay balls that were     commodities and the produc-
apparently heated and then dropped into containers to boil foods.
                                                                                      tion of craft goods from them
                                                                                      may be the reason for Poverty
                                                                                      Point’s prominence, since it is
                      located at the conﬂuence of six major rivers. Like any other large earthworks, those of
                      Poverty Point offer points for astronomical observation: A person standing on the large
                      mound at Poverty Point can see the vernal and autumnal equinoxes on a line across the
                      center of the mound, looking east.18 But, as with Stonehenge, any large monument offers
                      a great array of possible observation points, and it is not difﬁcult to ﬁnd some astronomical
                      regularity that may or may not have been the object of constructing that particular
                      observation point.
                           As we have seen elsewhere in the ancient world, at sites such as Jericho and el Paraíso,
                      agriculture is not a prerequisite for substantial architecture—all that is required is sufﬁcient
                      productivity. The Poverty Point people may have practiced some limited agriculture with
                      native plants, but it was probably a rich blend of hunting and foraging that supported these
                      mound-builders.
                           In any case, the people of Poverty Point did what people at a similar level of cultural
                      organization around the world did: They built monumental architecture, they expanded
                      and intensiﬁed regional trade in exotic commodities (and probably subsistence ones as
                      well) and apparently used these to mark differences in social status and other social and
                      ethnic identiﬁcation, and then, again like these other cultures, their culture began to decline
                      in importance as that of other cultures began to increase. The Poverty Point culture began
                      to contract at about 650 b.c. and went into decline as other areas to the northeast became
                      more powerful.
                                              EARLY CULTURAL COMPLEXIY IN NORTH AMERICA           575


Evolving Cultural Complexity: The Early, Middle, and
Late Woodland Periods (c. 800 B.C.–A.D. 750)
Between about 800 b.c. and a.d. 750, population densities in many parts of eastern North
America increased sharply, thousands of gigantic earthworks were constructed, inter-
regional trade expanded, and large villages were built. This era of change, usually referred
to as the Woodland period, is associated with two major cultural manifestations: the Adena
(centered in southern Ohio, and extending into Indiana, Kentucky, Pennsylvania, and West
Virginia), and the Hopewell (centered in southern Ohio but extending widely over much
of eastern North America). These cultures overlapped in time, with the Adena somewhat
earlier than the Hopewell in some areas. Both are deﬁned on the basis of styles of pottery,
engraved stone tablets, textiles, and worked bone and copper.


THE ADENA CULTURE
Adena mound-building and artifact styles seem concentrated in the interval between about
500 b.c. and a.d. 700, and the richness of some of these sites, in the burial goods found in
the mounds as well as the scale of the mounds themselves (Figure 15.5), originally led some
scholars to suppose that these people already lived in chiefdoms, built on the sweat and
labor of exploited farmers.
     But the Adena seem to have been still mainly hunter-forager peoples who moved
seasonally. Maize may have been cultivated on a small scale, but it was probably not very
important.19 And as impressive as the mounds are, they could easily have been built by small
groups adding a layer or two each year, without much supervision,20 perhaps as bodies were
interred in layers that covered
earlier burials.
     Many of the mounds were
mortuary centers in which one
or more corpses were placed in
log tombs or clay pits in com-
munal burials, sometimes with
beautiful stone tools and other
goods, and then covered with
earth. If the relative richness of
these burials accurately reﬂects
social differentiation in Adena
society, then there were elites
who could command in death
special treatment in the form of
log tombs, ocher and graphite
decorations of their bodies,
and expensive grave goods in
copper, stone, and shell. Lower-
status individuals appear to
have been cremated with little
ritual. These mounds may have        FIGURE 15.5 Great Serpent Mound, an Adena construction near Cincinnati, Ohio.
576   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      been ceremonial sites or centers for the exchange of goods, but they also could have served
      as territorial markers.21
           Stone tobacco pipes are found in some Adena sites, and smoking probably played an
      important role in rituals. The native strains of tobacco were much more powerful than
      modern strains and could have produced narcotic effects much stronger than modern
      cigarettes.22
           It is unfortunate that so many Adena sites were destroyed by modern constructions,
      and also that archaeologists excavated scores of mounds but almost no ordinary Adena
      settlements. Those few settlements that have been excavated suggest simple, somewhat
      temporary structures, probably made by setting series of posts in the ground and covering
      them with hides or wood—the wigwam.23


      THE HOPEWELL CULTURE
      The Hopewell culture—which was riverine in its adaptation—dominated parts of the
      Middle West from about 200 b.c. to a.d. 750. The Ohio Hopewell was centered in southern
      Ohio, and the Havana Hopewell dominated the central and lower Illinois River Valley,
      while various Hopewell groups extended up the Missouri River as far west as Kansas City.
      Hopewell religious traditions were practiced as far north as Wisconsin, south into
      Louisiana, and east into New York.
           While grave goods are not usually profuse in Adena mounds, Hopewell tombs often
      contain ﬁnely worked copper, pipestone, mica, obsidian, meteoric iron, shell, tortoise shell,
      shark and alligator teeth, bear teeth, ceramics, and other commodities; there is also
      evidence of the ultimate grave good—sacriﬁced humans. Hopewell settlements and
      mounds increased in size and number in the centuries before about a.d. 400, and major
      earthworks were often built near the burial mounds.
           These burials may reﬂect something about the dead person’s rank and status within
      the community—though burials are an uncertain guide to the actual prestige and power
      relationships of any community. Joseph Tainter carried out a statistical analysis of more
      than 500 Hopewell burials and concluded that there were six discrete levels of status within
      the Hopewell community, corresponding to six different forms of burial, ranging from
      simple holes in the ground to massive mounds in which the corpse was accompanied by
      the ﬁnest goods.24 In some Adena and Hopewell mounds, infants and juveniles were found
      buried with great ceremony and rich goods, suggesting the inheritance of rank and prestige
      and the control of the society’s resources by a limited number of its people.
           To understand these mound complexes we need to place them in the context of a local
      economy—and about this we know comparatively little. Because many later Hopewell build-
      ings and earthworks were precisely planned and relatively expensive to construct, we must
      suspect that at least some people had become specialized labor-organizers and engineers
      of sorts, perhaps even constituting a privileged social group. But one of the many puzzling
      things about these mound complexes is that in many areas they do not seem to have any
      associated domestic houses. Some archaeologists assumed that any society capable of build-
      ing such impressive works must certainly have been composed of sedentary agriculturalists,
      but Hopewell peoples for the most part probably hunted and gathered essentially the same
      plant and animal species as did their ancestors, with deer, ducks, small mammals, ﬁsh, snails,
      mussels, pigweed, lambsquarter, sunﬂowers, and nuts providing much of their nutrition.
                                                  EARLY CULTURAL COMPLEXIY IN NORTH AMERICA             577


     In any case, the Hopewell heartland was in no sense so poor that hunters and gatherers
were desperately trying to become full-time maize farmers. Estimates of resources around
the Hopewell settlement at Scoville, in the lower Illinois Valley, indicate that “within a half-
hour’s walk . . . there would annually be from 182,000 to 426,000 bushels of nuts and 48,000
to 484,000 bushels of acorns, 100 to 840 deer, 10,000 to 20,000 squirrels, and 200 turkeys.
Not computed were seeds, fruits, smaller animals, ﬁsh, mussels, and migratory birds
(6 million mallards were estimated to be in the Illinois River Valley in 1955).”25 Given these
abundant resources, it is not surprising that maize agriculture apparently appeared ﬁrst in
poorer, more marginal environments and displaced hunting and gathering in the lushest
environments only much later.
     Hopewell peoples traded extensively in exotic commodities, such as obsidian and
grizzly bear teeth from Montana, silver from Ontario, copper from northern Michigan, and
shark teeth and many marine shells and products from the Gulf Coast. By the ﬁrst few
centuries a.d., people all over eastern North America were participants in a great trading
network, and by “consuming” these goods by lavishing them on the dead and burying them
deeply in mound-tombs, the demand for these treasures was kept high and the trading
system in constant operation.
     Although the conspicuous consumption of the Hopewell era, with its great mounds,
rich burials, and wide variety of arts and crafts, indicates that Archaic egalitarian social
structures were changing, these societies seem to have been less complexly organized than,
for example, Mesoamerican cities like Teotihuacán.26 Most of the Hopewell and Adena
communities were small sedentary groups of hunter-collectors who built the burial
mounds and ceremonial complexes for reasons that may fundamentally have had to do
with distributing resources. Whereas Archaic hunters and gatherers met their needs by
following seasonal rounds and exploiting a diversity of resources, Hopewell communities
probably accomplished the same thing by exchanging products among themselves. Like the
Adena mounds, however, these constructions could have also been territorial markers.
     But we know comparatively little about daily life for the mass of the Hopewell or Adena
peoples. The few houses excavated seem to be rectangular or ovoid constructions supported
on posts and covered with bark or mats. Most people apparently lived in small hamlets
composed of a few such houses and a few storage pits and garbage dumps. Some people
were obviously specialists in ﬂint working and a few other arts and crafts, and some of these
communities may have been organized around a “big-man” and his favored lineage. But at
the Murphy site, in Licking County, Ohio—one of the few Hopewell sites that has been
excavated and analyzed for evidence of functional specialization—William Dancey and
Paul Hooge found little evidence of complex economic or social organization. This site was
occupied in the ﬁrst few centuries a.d., probably intermittently or annually during the
summer and fall.27 They found no evidence of craft-specialization or farming, although
these people did use pottery.


THE LATE WOODLAND PERIOD
After about a.d. 400 there is some evidence of a decline in mound-building and other changes
in settlement patterns that used to be considered evidence of a Hopewellian “collapse.” But
it is not at all certain that there was, in fact, a collapse, at least in the sense of disintegrating
economic relationships and declining productivity and population densities.
578   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


           Richard Yerkes has reviewed studies by David Braun and others that suggest that
      although the people who lived toward the end of the Hopewell era, indeed, seem to have
      invested comparatively little effort in rich burials, pottery decoration, and trade of exotic
      goods, these cultural changes may be reﬂections of evolving—not disintegrating—cultural
      complexity.28 At this time populations seem to have increased, people began producing
      more of their food through cultivation of native plants, and they seem to have moved into
      most of the major river valleys and established small settlements, perhaps in small nuclear
      family groups. As we have seen elsewhere, monumental architecture may be a response to
      stress and a device to control societal growth, rather than just an expression of societal
      wealth and extravagance.


      The Mississippian Culture (A.D. 800–1650)
      From about a.d. 600 to about 1650, the agricultural way of life spread over much of eastern
      North America, and in the North American East the Mississippian culture appeared—the
      high point of cultural evolution in aboriginal North America, particularly in terms of
      geographical extent of inﬂuence, ceremonialism, public works, technology, population
      density, and social stratiﬁcation.29
           Stoltman has listed some characteristics that deﬁne Mississippian culture, including
      (1) intensive maize-beans-squash agriculture; (2) apparent complex social organization—
      perhaps with chiefs and elites who could expropriate great amounts of societal wealth and
      power; (3) a theocratic social organization, with elites having both religious and political
      power; (4) towns in which 100, or in some cases 1,000 or more, people lived year-round,
      often behind fortiﬁcations; (5) monumental architecture, including mounds and tombs;
      (6) some occupational specialization in farming, trading, ritual, and administration; (7)
      mortuary cults involving certain patterns of burying the dead with “status goods” under
      earthen mounds; (8) distinctive pottery in shell-tempered wares, sometimes in the form of
      animals, and often beautifully incised, polished, or in other ways decorated; (9) use of the
      bow and arrow, with distinctive small, triangular stone arrowheads; and (10) certain kinds
      of houses, built by digging wall trenches and then using clay and thatch to form rooms.30
           The ﬂorescence of Mississippian culture may have been linked with the continuing
      domestication and improvement of maize. The sensitivity of maize to daylight duration
      and temperature is vividly demonstrated each summer along the northern fringe of its
      present range—such as in Seattle, where except in the warmest summers few maize varieties
      can be coaxed into production. But in more suitable environments, maize is a proliﬁc
      source of food. Maize probably ﬁrst became an agricultural staple in North America only
      in those southern zones where there are at least 200 frost-free days a year, but during the
      Mississippian era newer strains appeared that could be farmed productively with just 120
      frost-free days. And so adaptable is the plant that it was a staple as far north as Ontario,
      Canada, by the time the Europeans arrived in the sixteenth century. Primitive strains of
      maize had such small cobs when ﬁrst introduced from Mexico that considerable selective
      breeding was required before it was worthwhile to do all the work of clearing land, weed-
      ing, and harvesting necessary for successful maize agriculture here. Once domesticated
      beans were combined with maize in North American ﬁelds, thereby supplying the critical
      amino acids lacking in maize, people could live in dense concentrations all over the North
      American East. The spread of maize farming has been detected by analyzing carbon isotope
                                            EARLY CULTURAL COMPLEXIY IN NORTH AMERICA         579


concentrations in the skeletons of ancient Native Americans. Maize contains relatively high
amounts of 13C, so people who eat maize also have high concentrations of this isotope.
Several studies have shown that in Missouri, Arkansas, and other areas, skeletons of people
who lived before about a.d. 1000 tend to have little 13C, but beginning at about a.d. 900
to a.d. 1000, this isotope is found in radically higher concentrations.31
     But to identify maize agriculture as an economic foundation of the Mississippian
culture does not explain its emergence: Here, too, as in every other case of early complex
societies considered in this book, we must consider how elite groups manage to appropriate
a society’s resources and perpetuate their domination. And for the Mississippian culture,
as for other complex societies, there are many well-worn and largely unsatisfactory ideas
about how this happened, ranging from the presumed economic beneﬁts that would be
provided by a “redistributor-chief ” who could facilitate the circulation of goods to the
effects of increasing occupational specialization.32
     Artifacts and mounds of the Mississippian type ﬁrst appeared in the lower Mississippi
Valley, but they soon spread into the Tennessee River drainage and by a.d. 800–a.d. 900
occurred over much of the Ohio and Missouri river valleys. Between a.d. 900 and a.d. 1600,
large towns with impressive ceremonial centers were built from Florida to northern Illinois,
and from Ohio to eastern Oklahoma, but the heartland of this culture was in the central
Mississippi Valley (Figure 15.6).
     The largest prehistoric settlement north of Mexico was Cahokia, in East St. Louis,
Illinois. Beginning at about a.d. 600 the people of Cahokia began building mounds and
other features, and by about a.d. 1250 there were over 100 mounds within the 13 km2 of
the site. Monk’s Mound, an earthen pyramid in the center of Cahokia, is over 30 m high,
241-by-316 m at the base, and covers an area of more than 6.5 hectares (Figure 15.7). Thirty
to forty thousand people are estimated to have lived in the environs of Cahokia at about
a.d. 1200 in several large towns, a few smaller towns, and more than 40 villages; no doubt
people living within a large
surrounding area had some
contact with Cahokia.33
     The beginnings of a
class-based society in which
elites could control community
wealth is evident at Cahokia.
One adult male was buried
with 20,000 shell beads, 800
arrowheads, and sheets of mica
and copper.34 In addition, there
were many burials, includ-
ing 4 mutilated men and 118
women, many of whom appear
to have been ritually strangled;
we can only surmise that, like
their Chinese, Mesopotamian,
Mesoamerican, and other
counterparts, these ritual kill-     FIGURE 15.6 Mound B at Etowah, Georgia, is an example of a Mississippian
ings and entombments were            structure.
           580       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                     attempts to provide elites in
                                                                                     death with the same personal
                                                                                     services they enjoyed in this
                                                                                     life.
                                                                                           Some elite groups were per-
                                                                                     manent residents of Cahokia,
                                                                                     but most of the people who
                                                                                     built and sustained this center
                                                                                     were probably maize farmers
                                                                                     who lived in surrounding
                                                                                     hamlets and who supplemented
                                                                                     their farm incomes with hunt-
                                                                                     ing and gathering.
                                                                                           The mounds and burials
                                                                                     at Cahokia and other sites
                                                                                     are impressive monuments to
                                                                                     status and power, but like
FIGURE 15.7 This reconstruction of Cahokia shows the palisade that enclosed          other early complex societies,
the center of the site and some of the other major structures that existed at about  Mississippian society expressed
a.d. 1200. The base of Monk’s Mound, the largest pyramid, is larger than the Great   these social dynamics in many
Pyramid at Giza, Egypt.                                                              ways. Timothy Pauketat and
                                                                                     Thomas Emerson, for example,
                        have argued that a particular kind of Mississippian pottery, called Ramey Incised (which is
                        incised with ﬁgures of eyes, ﬁsh, arrows, abstract objects, and various designs), served to
                        legitimize and communicate the authority of rulers:

                          [These] pots were imbued with symbolism of order, hierarchy, and religiosity. . . . In the
                          context of the rites of intensiﬁcation, like the Green Corn ceremony, the Ramey Incised jar
                          would have been a vehicle not only for the “redistribution” of comestibles, but also for the
                          diffusion of elite ideas. Even the rudimentary actions of commoners, using Ramey Incised
                          pots (after they had been ceremonially distributed from the administrative center[s]) may
                          have provided a living metaphor of the role of elites—the source of the pots—as mediators
                          of cosmic forces.35

                     Archaeologists have long debated the kind of sociopolitical entity that Cahokia represents.
                     Some think Cahokia was a highly centralized, densely populated polity that can be thought
                     of as a “chiefdom” (see chapter 7), perhaps even an embryonic state. Others think it was much
                     less complex. George Milner, for example, suggests it was a “comparatively decentralized,
                     geographically and socially segmented, less populous, and more dynamic cultural
                     system.”36
                          Cahokia is an impressive site, but it was probably not functionally similar to
                     Teotihuacán or similar cities in prehistoric complex societies, at least in the degree of
                     occupational specialization or the volumes and diversity of products produced, the class-
                     stratiﬁcation of the society, or the overall productivity of the economy.
                          At another great Mississippian site—Moundville, Alabama—a central earthen mound
                     was the focus of a settlement in which elaborate burials, fortiﬁcations, and other structures
                     were found. Christopher Peebles’s statistical analysis of the grave goods unearthed with
                                              EARLY CULTURAL COMPLEXIY IN NORTH AMERICA          581


these burials suggests a society with considerable internal ranking.37 Moundville had a
complex history, and one gets the impression that here was a society with the potential to
become a true urban metropolis, the center of a state.38 Here too, however, the straight
ecological arguments are quite convincing as to why this never happened: In a temperate
forested environment, with an economy based on extensive cultivation of maize and a few
other plants and on considerable hunting and foraging, there was not the stimuli of
irrigation agriculture, interactions with nomads, and the other features of life present in
early agricultural Mesopotamia, Egypt, or China. The environment simply does not permit
or allow agricultural intensiﬁcation on the scale possible in the tropical Olmec river basins,
the Nile Valley, and other areas of advanced complexity.
     Many late Mississippian and later period mounds and burials contain ornaments,
pottery, and other artifacts decorated with motifs almost identical to some Mesoamerican
motifs, including plumed serpents, eagles, jaguars, and warriors carrying trophy heads, as
well as the 52-year calendar round. Collectively, they are taken as evidence of a southern
(Mesoamerican) religious cult. Opinions differ on their signiﬁcance in terms of contacts
with Mesoamerica; some consider them evidence of quite direct and sustained contacts,
while others see them as minor borrowings with little more than an accidental connection
to Mesoamerican cultures. The southern cult, as well as the Adena and Hopewell mortuary
ceremonialism, likely achieved importance in North America only after cultural complexity
in the north had reached a stage where these elements “made sense” for northern societies.
     Outside the great ceremonial centers, Mississippian villages were dispersed settlements
of a few score of wattle-and-daub structures, supported by internal wooden beams, with
ﬂoors of packed earth.39 The highest Mississippian population densities were along the rich
river bottoms where it was possible to combine maize and bean farming with waterfowl
exploitation.40 In some areas the river annually renewed the fertility of the soil through
alluviation, and permanent ﬁeld agriculture was possible. Without plows or an advanced
technology, the Native Americans in many areas relied on a form of swidden cultivation in
which they burned off the vegetation on rich, well-drained alluvial plains, then planted
maize and a few other crops, invested some effort in weeding and cultivation during the
growing season, and then harvested and stored as much maize as they could. After one or
two seasons a given plot of swidden land would lose its fertility, and the areas of
cultivation—and perhaps the whole village—would have to be shifted elsewhere.
     Where maize was most productive the people probably planted two crops a year in the
richest lands, with beans planted next to the maize and encouraged to grow up its stalks.
Squash, sunﬂowers, and other crops were interspersed among the maize ﬁelds. The
Mississippians were more gardeners than farmers compared to, for example, the wheat
farmers of Southwest Asia. There is little evidence that Mississippian peoples ever did much
in the way of ﬂood control or irrigation, but they certainly used hoes and intensive weeding
to boost crop yields.
     Warfare among competing Mississippian chiefdoms may have been frequent and
brutal, particularly as the best lands were overexploited and fertility began to fall.41
     Our view of Mississippian life comes from both archaeological and ethnological
sources, as Mississippian communities were still extant when the Europeans arrived in the
sixteenth century. Initial accounts of the aboriginal Americans by Europeans must be
viewed with suspicion because there is every reason to believe that European diseases sped
quickly through aboriginal populations—far faster in fact than the spread of the Europeans.
           582        PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                        Moreover, it was to the advant-
                                                                                        age of the Europeans to portray
                                                                                        Native Americans as savages
                                                                                        who could be legitimately dis-
                                                                                        placed and to suggest that they
                                                                                        had a moral duty to subdue
                                                                                        and instruct these savages in
                                                                                        the mores of civilized life.
                                                                                             Ethnographic accounts of
                                                                                        Mississippian communities as
                                                                                        they existed in the sixteenth
                                                                                        and seventeenth centuries—
                                                                                        long after the culmination of
                                                                                        Mississippian culture—describe
                                                                                        an intensely class-conscious
                                                                                        society in which nobles and
                                                                                        warriors alternately exploited
                                                                                        and abused the “stinkards,”
FIGURE 15.8 A sixteenth-century illustration by Jacques le Moyne of the burial          commoners and slaves who
of a Florida Indian chief. Arrows have been driven into the ground around the grave,    made up most of these societies.
and the chief’s houses (upper left) are being ceremonially burned.                      The upper classes were slavishly
                                                                                        obeyed and respected. They
                                                                                        frequently married the lower
                        classes, but the aristocrat could divorce or kill the lower-ranking spouse, given even minor
                        cause. In a.d. 1720 the French explorer Le Page du Pratz witnessed the funeral of “Great
                        Sun,” a ruler of the Natchez Mississippian people. On the occasion of his death, Great Sun’s
                        wives, servants, and relatives were drugged and then clubbed to death and buried with him42
                        (Figure 15.8).
                             In contrast to most other ancient cultures, there is little question about the immediate
                        cause of the decline of Mississippian culture. These people had no natural immunities to
                        measles, smallpox, and cholera, and the densely settled Mississippian areas provided an ideal
                        medium for the rapid spread of these highly contagious diseases.43 Le Page du Pratz, who lived
                        with the Natchez from 1718 to 1734, found that even “minor” diseases were devastating:

                          Two distempers, that are not very fatal in other parts of the world, make dreadful ravages
                          among them; I mean small-pox and a cold, which bafﬂe all the arts of their physicians, who
                          in other respects are very skillful. When a nation is attacked by the small-pox, it quickly
                          makes great havock; for as a whole family is crowded into a small hut, which has no
                          communications with the external air, but a door about two feet wide and four feet high,
                          the distemper, if it seizes one, is quickly communicated to all. The aged die in consequence
                          of their advanced years, and the bad quality of their food; and the young, if they are not
                          strictly watched, destroy themselves, from an abhorrence of the blotches on their skin. . . .
                          Colds, which are very common in winter, likewise destroy great numbers of the natives. In
                          that season they keep ﬁres in their huts day and night; and as there is no other opening but
                          the door, the air within the hut is kept excessively warm without any free circulation; so
                          that when they have occasion to go out, the cold seizes them, and the consequences of it
                          are almost always fatal.44
                                              EARLY CULTURAL COMPLEXIY IN NORTH AMERICA         583


Ann Ramenofsky has analyzed the archaeological evidence from several regions of the
North American East and found that in each area there are signiﬁcantly fewer settlements
that date to the decades just prior to European invasion of these areas, which suggests that
epidemic European diseases spread rapidly inland from the ﬁrst physical encounters
between most Native Americans and Europeans.45 Native Americans died by the hundreds
of thousands from diseases introduced by people they never saw.
     Within a few decades of European contact in the sixteenth century, the once highly
integrated and proud Mississippian people, and other cultures as well, were a much-
reduced and poverty-stricken group, living amid thousands of abandoned settlements
and eroding mounds attesting to their former greatness.
     In summary of cultural developments in the North American East, we see the familiar
script of cultural evolution. From a hunting-and-gathering base, specialized hunting and
minor plant exploitation gradually gave way to intricate hunting-foraging economies in
which ﬁshing, nut collecting, shellﬁshing, and other activities were added to the subsistence
repertoire according to what was probably a largely unrecognized but very precise “cost-
beneﬁt” analysis; then, after centuries of manipulation and selection, maize-based
agriculture displaced less-productive economies in many areas, with consequent increasing
population densities and the establishment of large sedentary communities. Once food-
production reached certain levels, the familiar harbingers of increasing cultural complexity,
such as the spread of religious and stylistic traditions, monumental architecture, mortuary
cults, and increasingly diverse and interdependent arts and crafts, also appeared. Social and
religious hierarchies emerged as “efﬁcient” ways to make the decisions necessary for the
perpetuation of these increasingly complex economies, and the institutionalization of
prestige and privilege may have arisen as an effective way of reducing competition between
these populations and of maximizing administrative efﬁciency.
     In these essentials, little differentiates the sequence of cultural evolution in North
America from that in Mesoamerica, except that, given the available domesticates and
technology, most of eastern North America had less agricultural potential than Mesoamerica,
causing these northern cultures to stabilize at a much lower level of complexity. Had the
Europeans not invaded and introduced their diseases, true state-level societies might well
have evolved from the remnants of the Mississippian climax, but only if food-production
could have been increased drastically through technological, agricultural, or administrative
innovations.


THE NORTH AMERICAN SOUTHWEST

The dramatic mountains, crystal skies, and primary colors of the Southwest make it an
attractive place to live—especially if one has access to a municipal water system and a
modern market and transport system. But from the perspective of a hunter and gatherer
or subsistence farmer, most of the Southwest is not a lush environment: There are few large
rivers or streams, and the combination of low rainfall and high elevation renders much of
the Southwest a land of searing summers and bitterly cold winters.
     In some prehistoric periods the Southwest was wetter than it is today, but for most of
the last 10,000 years the Southwest has usually been at least as hot and dry as it is today,
and there were short periods of extreme drought.
584   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


           As a consequence, although people have lived here for at least 10,000 years, and
      although they eventually adopted maize-based agriculture, aggregated into large towns, and
      evolved some occupational and administrative specialization, they never produced class-
      structured, hierarchically organized, economically differentiated societies. Periodic food
      shortages stimulated the development of small-scale cooperation among groups, but
      neither the economic inducements nor basic productivity were there to make such
      elaborate cultural forms necessary or possible.46
           Yet the archaeological record of the American Southwest is an extraordinary cultural
      resource. Its proximity to major universities and excellent aridity-related preservation has
      meant that the archaeology of this region is among the best known in the world. Many
      important methodological advances in archaeology have developed in part out of research
      in the Southwest, including tree-ring dating, regional statistically based sampling designs,
      analyses of site formation processes, and paleobotanical and paleoenvironmental research.
      Contemporary Native Americans living in the Southwest are in some cases direct
      descendants, both physically and culturally, of ancient groups, and thus the archaeology of
      the Southwest can be related to a well-studied ethnographic record.47 Also, the fact that
      early Southwest cultures developed political and economic systems that, while less
      “complex” than those of, for example, Maya Mesoamerica, had sufﬁcient complexity to
      offer an opportunity to study the kinds of cultural changes that in more productive
      environments are obscured archaeologically by the great states and empires that followed.48
      Moreover, there are some clear indications of cultural contacts between Southwest cultures
      and those of Mesoamerica, providing a “test case” in a sense for varying ideas about the
      nature of cultural contacts between more- and less-powerful groups in the ancient world.49
      And as Steadman Upham has shown, the American West provides an example of one of
      the enduring themes of human history, the relationship of nomads and agriculturalists. For,
      as people in some areas became farmers, they developed complex economic and social
      relationships with the many groups around them that continued to pursue the ancient
      hunting-foraging way of life.50


      Agricultural Origins: The Late Archaic Period
      As we saw in chapter 6, people have been in the Southwest for at least 12,000 years, and up
      to about a.d. 1, people here worked out a marvelous array of arid-land adaptations based
      on hunting and foraging. Late Archaic foragers, heirs to a tradition thousands of years old
      of desert plant collecting, may have been exploiting maize for a long time. The apparent
      presence of maize pollen in samples dated to about 2000 b.c. suggests that this plant may
      have been used for some millennia before it became the staple food crop,51 but the earliest
      evidence for substantial use of maize—at Sheep Rock Shelter, Bat Cave, numerous sites in
      the Tucson and Tonto Basins, as well as several sites in the Mogollon highlands and on the
      Colorado Plateau—seems to cluster around 1000 b.c.52 Domesticated varieties of beans and
      squash also appear in the archaeological record at about this time, but the diet was still
      probably based on a broad range of other plants and animals. Even today Native Americans
      in the Southwest still hunt deer, rabbits, and other animals and augment their farm produce
      with high-calorie nuts, berries, and seeds.
           The earliest maize variety used in the Southwest was the Chapalote variant found much
      earlier at Tehuacán, and thus there was a long time lag before it was in signiﬁcant use in
                                              EARLY CULTURAL COMPLEXIY IN NORTH AMERICA         585


the Southwest. It used to be thought that early varieties of maize had to be adapted to local
Southwest environments, but as Paul Minnis notes, the recent recovery of Archaic maize
from the deserts around Tucson does not support this idea. He suggests that the modern
maize variety morphologically closest to Archaic maize, Chapalote, was well adapted to
high and low environments and could be grown under many conditions.53 In any case, just
as we have seen prehistoric people in the Middle East, Mesoamerica, and other parts of the
world combine cultivated and wild food resources, so did the people of the Southwest adapt
maize to their lifestyle and combined it with beans, squash, and a wide variety of other
resources in an economy with sufﬁcient productivity to permit the village-farming way of
life and the beginnings of cultural elaboration.


The Hohokam Culture: 1000 B.C.–A.D. 1450
The Hohokam peoples ﬂourished in southern Arizona—particularly in the Salt and Gila
river valleys, as well as secondary river systems54 (Figure 15.9). For many decades,
archaeologists wrestled with the question of the origins of the Hohokam. Were they local
peoples whose culture was transformed by contacts with the high civilizations of Mexico?
Or, on the basis of similarity in styles of architecture, construction, ceramics, turquoise
ornaments, and other artifacts, were they were so similar to Mesoamerican examples that
they could only be the result of an immigration of Mexican people who transplanted their
way of life directly to the Hohokam area?55 The considerable amount of research that has
been undertaken in the Hohokam area since the 1990s has put to rest some of the intensity
of this debate because it indicates that local origins for the Hohokam are the more plausible
explanation.56 Additionally, those traits that appear to have derived—at least in part—from
Mesoamerican inﬂuences are most notable in Hohokam society only after about a.d. 80057
Sedentary villages and reliance on maize agriculture were present in this region long before
Hohokam culture.
     One of the most interesting aspects of the Hohokam is their agricultural system. Their
homeland is set in some of the driest deserts of North America, where summer tempera-
tures have impressed even archaeological veterans of the Middle East. Canal irrigation is
known from sites as early as 1200–1100 b.c.,58 although the large, impressive networks of
canals that channeled water from the Salt and Gila rivers to irrigate gardens of maize and
other crops were mainly built after a.d. 700. Modern buildings have erased much of the
Hohokam irrigation system, but two canals near Phoenix were over 16 km long, several
meters wide, and about 60 cm deep when ﬁrst constructed. Tightly woven grass mats were
probably used as gates to open and close canal segments, and earthen dams on the rivers
in some places diverted water through canals for more than 50 km across the desert ﬂoor,
with many small branches serving individual ﬁelds.
     In the recent past, Southwestern Native American irrigation systems, as well as
comparable agricultural systems elsewhere in the world, have been operated by a few
thousand people in relatively simple tribal organizations in which no coercion, permanent
authorities, or police agencies were necessary, and this might well have been the case among
the Hohokam.
     In areas away from the major rivers, Hohokam groups used akchin—ﬂoodwater—
farming, taking advantage of natural events that irrigated areas alongside small seasonal
streams, or farmed alluvial fans where moisture essential for plant growth was retained for
586   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY




      FIGURE 15.9 Major cultural traditions of the North American Southwest. These cultures are
      shown at their maximum extent, which they did not reach simultaneously.



      longer periods of time. Ethnohistoric and ethnographic accounts document akchin farming
      among some groups of the Tohono O’odham,59 who may be descendants of the Hohokam.
          Although the largest irrigation systems were apparently built sometime after a.d. 800,
      by about a.d. 300 there were already indications of minor increases in the complexity of
      Hohokam cultures. Some low platform mounds, about 29 m long, 23 m wide, and 3 m
                                               EARLY CULTURAL COMPLEXIY IN NORTH AMERICA           587


high, were built at the Snaketown site, and here and elsewhere people built large sunken
ball courts like those found in Mesoamerica. The Hohokam ball courts were east-west
oriented oval depressions about 60 m long, with 4.5- to 6-m-high sloping earth embankments
on a side. Apparently the objective of the game, played by two opposing teams, was to try
to get a rubber ball (several of which have been found in the Southwest) through a goal,
probably not by throwing or batting it, but by using knees, elbows, or torso. The ball appar-
ently could not be held in the hands when it was in play. As played by the Mesoamericans,
this activity was not a sport: The ball may have represented the sun, and the court and play
were imbued with ritual and cosmological imagery. Losing players were sometimes
executed (see chapter 13).
     The Southwestern ball courts were probably not stops on the northern road trips of
the Mexican major leagues, but they do indicate very close southern afﬁnities, as do the
platform mounds. And between a.d. 900 and a.d. 1200, many other Mesoamerican elements
were imported, including cotton textiles, certain ceramic motifs, pyrite mirrors, efﬁgy vessels,
cast copper bells, ear plugs, etched shell ornaments, and even parrots and macaws—kept
and prized for their feathers.
     Generally, however, there is little evidence in subsistence practices, settlements, or
mortuary ceremonies of evolving rank and wealth differences. Most of the Hohokam lived
in small square pithouses roofed with clay and grass domes supported by a wooden pole
framework. Early dwellings appear large enough for several families, but single-family
residences became more popular in later periods. This is not to say, however, that elites did
not exist in Hohokam society, particularly during the Classic period from a.d. 1150–1450.
Platform mound burials clearly show that some individuals were differentially treated—
including, at times, a few women.60 The degree to which these elites managed labor and
resources or established political connections within the Hohokam area or with other
groups remains an open and vigorously debated question.
     Research in the last two decades of the twentienth century, particularly by cultural
resource management (CRM) ﬁrms investigating areas prior to the building of roads,
housing developments, pipelines, and other modern projects, has greatly expanded our
understanding of Hohokam settlement patterns. While there are few indications of a master
plan in village layouts or of economic specialization of villages, by a.d. 700 and later,
patterns in intracommunity and intercommunity organization emerge. Within village sites,
domestic houses are arranged around courtyards, and these groupings have communal
cemeteries, cooking ovens, and trash areas.61 On a larger scale, villages along the same
irrigation canal may have been grouped into “irrigation communities” and linked together
in terms of social organization, economies, labor efforts related to canal construction, and
maintenance and shared public ceremonies at ball court sites.62 After a.d. 1150, irrigation
communities appear to have been linked to a series of major platform mound sites—
ball courts are no longer the integrative ceremonial mechanism—and at some sites, such
as Casa Grande, “great houses” were constructed (Figure 15.10). Most villages, however,
probably repeated all the economic activities of other villages, except that some favored
locations allowed a greater reliance on maize, beans, squash, and other crops. Nonetheless,
many atlatl dart points and arrowheads have been found at each Hohokam site, and
botanical remains indicate that almost every community supplemented its diet with wild
mustard, amaranths, chenopods, cactus fruits, mesquite, screwbeans, and other wild
products.63
           588       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                         Artifacts in the Hohokam
                                                                                    style have been found over
                                                                                    a wide area—73,000 km 2 —
                                                                                    encompassing a core Hohokam
                                                                                    area (centered on the Salt and
                                                                                    Gila rivers) and its surround-
                                                                                    ing regions (such as the Tucson
                                                                                    and Tonto basins), as well as
                                                                                    more peripheral areas such
                                                                                    as the Papagueria (the south-
                                                                                    western corner of Arizona)
                                                                                    (Figure 15.11). This interac-
                                                                                    tion sphere included groups of
                                                                                    people who were Hohokam,
                                                                                    those who were new immigrants
                                                                                    into the region, as well as those
                                                                                    who participated only margin-
FIGURE 15.10 The “Great House” at Casa Grande, Arizona, is an example of            ally in Hohokam social life.
large-scale construction by the Hohokam. The large shelter over the Great House     Evidence for supra-political
was built in the 1930s.                                                             control over this region—for
                                                                                    example, along the lines of
                                                                                    Moche, Tiwanku, or Maya—is
                                                                                    lacking, making it likely that
                                                                                    the Hohokam were sociopolit-
                                                                                    ically organized along less
                                                                                    complex lines.
                                                                                         The archaeological signa-
                                                                                    ture of the Classic Hohokam
                                                                                    fades from the record after
                                                                                    about a.d. 1450. Archaeologists
                                                                                    have struggled with various
                                                                                    explanations for this “dis-
                                                                                    appearance,” and it will come
                                                                                    as no surprise that the most
                                                                                    favored causes are ecological—
                                                                                    particularly ﬂooding episodes
                                                                                    along the major rivers—and
                                                                                    European diseases spreading in
                                                                                    advance of the actual arrival of
FIGURE 15.11 Prehistoric peoples in the American Southwest left many                the Spanish.
examples of petroglyphs (pecked images). Some appear to represent animals, while
others are more enigmatic. These are from an outcrop on a ridge above the Classic
period Hohokam site of Verbena Village, Arizona.                                    The Mogollon:
                                                                                    A.D. 200–1450
                     The Mogollon peoples (pronounced something like “Mug-ee-yone”), who also were heirs
                     to the Archaic desert foraging cultures of the last several millennia b.c., lived mainly in the
                                              EARLY CULTURAL COMPLEXIY IN NORTH AMERICA           589


mountains of east central Arizona and west central New
Mexico. Sedentary villages and ceramics of the Mogollon type
may have already been established by the last few centuries
b.c., but the distinctive Mogollon red-and-brown pottery is
securely dated to about the third century a.d., at which time
villages of about 15 pithouses each were scattered along ridges,
bluffs, and terraces. Like their contemporaries in much of the
Americas, they relied on the maize-beans-squash complex,
supplemented by many wild plants and game. Mogollon
burials of this period were often simple inhumations in house
ﬂoors, accompanied by a few pottery vessels, turquoise
ornaments, and stone tools typical of unstratiﬁed societies.
     At the important Mogollon site of Swarts Ruins, in the
Mimbres Valley, New Mexico, river boulders set in adobe were
used to construct a large complex of conjoined rectangular
rooms, access to which was apparently possible only through
the roof, since there were no exterior doors. Inside walls were
plastered with mud, and doorways led from one room to
another. Storage bins, shelves, ﬁreplaces, and benches con-
                                                                      FIGURE 15.12 Some of the most beautiful
stituted the essential furnishings. Corpses were frequently           painted pottery in the American Southwest is
interred in the ﬂoors of abandoned rooms, in occupied rooms,          from the Mimbres Mogollon culture in New
or within the village compound; most burials were very                Mexico and Arizona.
simple.
     The Mogollon built no pyramids, ball courts, or major
irrigation systems, but they did produce an extraordinarily beautiful array of ceramics.
Their “Mimbres” ceramic forms, decorated with vivid ﬁgures of frogs, insects, ﬁsh, deer,
and other animal life painted against black backgrounds, are particularly notable (Figure
15.12). Stephen Jett and Peter Moyle have shown that many of the ﬁsh species illustrated
on Mimbres pottery are marine species that could be found no closer to the Mimbres area
than 1,500 km southwest, in the Gulf of California.64 The beauty of Mogollon pottery has
resulted in widespread looting, a sickening destruction of yet another Native American
culture.
     Mogollon settlement patterns show some evidence of minor emerging social ranking.
Mogollon villages seem to be of two types: a small cluster of fewer than 5 pithouses, without
any large ceremonial kivas-pithouses-and larger collections of 100 or more pithouses
associated with “great kivas.” The largest pithouses in these communities tend to have the
greatest amount of storage space, larger numbers of exotic trade items, and evidence of
greater consumption of agricultural products. Lightfoot and Feinman interpret this
evidence and other data to mean that a “suprahousehold” decision-making organization
had developed among the Mogollon, perhaps as a result of competition among rival
political leaders.65 But it is hard to link changing distributions of artifacts like these to the
fairly subtle social changes that would have been involved in the rise of suprahousehold
administrative positions. In any case, there is little about the Mogollon to suggest profound
social changes in the direction of complexity. Natural limitations on agricultural
intensiﬁcation seem to have restricted the complexity of social and political organization
here.66
           590       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                       One of the major
                                                                                  settlement pattern transi-
                                                                                  tions in Southwestern cultural
                                                                                  history occurred during the
                                                                                  ﬁrst millennium a.d., when
                                                                                  people gradually, generation
                                                                                  by generation, stopped living
                                                                                  in relatively small villages of
                                                                                  semi-subterranean pithouses
                                                                                  and began building their
                                                                                  communities in the “pueblo”
                                                                                  style of blocks of contiguous
                                                                                  above-ground rooms (Figure
                                                                                  15.13).
                                                                                       For the archaeologist,
                                                                                  of course, such a change is
                                                                                  immediately seen in adaptive
FIGURE 15.13 A small pueblo structure of the Mogollon period at the Powers        terms: What conditions would
Ranch Ruin, Arizona.                                                              induce this sort of long-term,
                                                                                  regional change? In a considera-
                                                                                  tion of this question from
                     the perspective of Mogollon settlements in western Texas, Michael Whalen notes that the
                     change is associated with an increase in regional population densities, the appearance of
                     larger community size, a growing reliance on plant cultivation as the main subsistence
                     source, and an increasingly elaborate ceremonialism, as expressed in the design and
                     contents of structures.67
                          Whalen suggests that as populations grew, climates ﬂuctuated, and settlements spread
                     into different microenvironments, people tried to maintain their traditional way of life by
                     extending agriculture into the margins of basins where water was more available. The
                     greater productivity of these basin margins fostered certain kinds of economic agricultural
                     specialization in which the community rather than the family was the basic social and
                     economic unit. McGuire and Schiffer show that the transition from pithouses was the
                     outcome of a long period of experimentation.68
                          Some Mogollon sites, such as Paquimé—a.d. 1250–1450—in northern Mexico, have
                     what appear to be Mogollon-style artifacts along with Mesoamerican items, such as ball
                     courts, platform mounds, and jewelry in turquoise and shell. As Stephen Lekson69 notes,
                     Paquimé is one of the best candidates in the Southwest for status as politically complex, and
                     few archaeologists have disputed this attribution. The degree of this complexity, however,
                     has been debated, ranging from a Mesoamerican central authority who controlled trade to
                     a Mesoamerican authority based on ritual and religion to a local elite using ritual as a power
                     base.70
                          Like the Hohokam, the “disappearance” of the Mogollon as an archaeological culture
                     has been variously explained, with emphasis on ecological factors, particularly droughts.
                     Other researchers have stressed a shift to a more dispersed settlement pattern characterized
                     by small hamlets71 or the relocation of some Mogollon people to puebloan communities
                     and a subsequent restructuring of society.
                                                EARLY CULTURAL COMPLEXIY IN NORTH AMERICA              591


The Ancestral Pueblo: A.D. 100–1300
Like the Mogollon and Hohokam, the Ancestral Pueblo 72 developed out of desert-
foraging cultures, and their earliest pre-pottery representatives are widely known as the
Basketmaker cultures. It is not entirely certain how mobile early Ancestral Pueblo groups
were, but by the ﬁrst few centuries a.d. they were apparently living in many sedentary
settlements located on old river terraces and mesa tops or in river valleys in the high
plateau country of the central Southwest.73 The earliest houses were circular structures
of wattle and daub set on log bases, or semi-subterranean houses. These early Ancestral
Pueblo did not use pottery and, although they ate maize, beans, and squash, they invested
little labor in cultivating these crops, relying instead on wild foods, such as roots, bulbs,
grass seeds, nuts, acorns, berries, cactus fruits, sunﬂowers, deer, rabbits, antelopes, and
wild sheep.
      After about a.d. 400, the Ancestral Pueblo began to use pottery and to build large
pithouses, most of which were circular or rectangular, from 3 to 7.5 m in diameter, and
covered by log and mud roofs supported on center posts. Interior walls were plastered with
mud or faced with stone, access was through a descending passageway, and ﬁreplaces and
benches were standard furnishings. At some sites, large ceremonial pithouses, or kivas, were
built. After about a.d. 700, above-ground masonry houses were erected in some Ancestral
Pueblo communities, but the pithouse and kiva combination continued to be the basic
village type until the end of the thirteenth century a.d. (Figure 15.14).
      Defensive considerations, greater exploitation of more productive strains of maize, and
climatic changes beginning about a.d. 700 may have spurred the Ancestral Pueblo into
constructing the “cliff cities” for which they are famous74 (Figure 15.15). Pollen and
geological studies suggest that
summer rainfall, in the form of
torrential storms, increased
after a.d. 700, while winter
rainfall decreased, and the
resulting changes in water
tables and stream ﬂows may
have forced the Ancestral
Pueblo to congregate around
larger, permanently ﬂowing
rivers.75 Hillsides were terraced
to control erosion, and diver-
sion canals and dams were con-
structed to control and store as
much of the vital summer rain-
water as possible. On Chapin
Mesa, for example, in the Mesa
Verde area, the older agricul-
tural ﬁelds were extended by          FIGURE 15.14 Small pueblo structures were also typical of the Ancestral
an elaborate checkdam system          Puebloan culture. This room from a site on Black Mesa, Arizona, was used to store
that added 8 or 12 hectares of        corn. When the room burned, the corn cobs were preserved when they carbonized.
cultivable land.                      Note the evidence of burning on the slab walls.
592   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY




      FIGURE 15.15 Cliff Palace, Mesa Verde, Colorado, is one of the most impressive settlements built
      under massive cliffs in the American Southwest.
                                              EARLY CULTURAL COMPLEXIY IN NORTH AMERICA            593


     In some areas erosion
forced frequent settlement
relocations, and some com-
munities met the changing
agricultural conditions by
scattering into small family
groups; but the prevailing
response was to aggregate into
large towns along the major
rivers. By about 1100 a.d., pro-
sperous enclaves were estab-
lished at Mesa Verde, Chaco
Canyon, Canyon de Chelly,
and elsewhere, and in some
ways these communities repres-
ent the high point of South-
                                     FIGURE 15.16 Reconstruction of Pueblo Bonito, as it may have appeared at about
western culture.
                                     a.d. 1050.
     The developments at
Chaco Canyon are often cited
as the best example of
sociopolitical complexity in the Ancestral Pueblo region, a not surprising outcome given
the many unusual features found here and throughout the greater Chacoan interaction
sphere. There were 12 large towns (“Great Houses”) in Chaco Canyon, of which Pueblo
Bonito was the largest, with almost 700 rooms (Figure 15.16)—built over a period of almost
300 years (a.d. 850–1125). The Great Houses were relatively elaborate, planned elements
in the landscape of Chaco Canyon, and it is of some interest that sites such as Pueblo
Bonito, with its hundreds of rooms, appear to have been the residence for only a small
number of families.76 In addition to these large, multi-story pueblos, there were smaller
pueblo units and many single-story and apparently unplanned villages—these are the likely
residences for most of Chaco’s population.
     Vivian77 has shown that the Chaco Canyon was part of a large organized system that
included a uniﬁed irrigation system (using rainfall runoff from the canyon cliffs, as well
as water from the Chaco wash) and about 600 km of roads that linked scores of Chacoan
outliers—smaller-sized Great Houses built in the Chaco style—and other small com-
munities. Some 150–200 outlying Great Houses are linked by this road system to Chaco
and sometimes to other Chacoan outliers, reaching as far as 140 km away from Chaco
Canyon, and perhaps as far as southern Utah, some 240 km away.78
     The roads were long and straight constructions, sometimes cut into bedrock as
stairways when obstacles to the most direct route were encountered—analogous perhaps
to how we construct tunnels through hills and mountains to maintain the shortest distances
for roads. These ancient roads facilitated movement of people between the various Chacoan
settlements, as well as the transport of resources into Chaco Canyon. The hundreds of
thousands of pine logs79 used as roof beams and ceilings in the pueblos there, for example,
came from mountain areas at least 60 km away and represent a relatively major transport
labor investment. Other resources that entered Chaco Canyon include most of the
pottery—made at various Chacoan outliers—associated with the Great Houses, as well as
594   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      exotic items from much farther away, including copper bells and macaws from Mexico, and
      turquoise, likely from mines near Santa Fe.80
           Whether sociopolitical complexity is associated with the Chacoan “phenomenon” is a
      subject, as Barbara Mills81 observes, that is of less interest to archaeologists today than in
      past decades. As she notes, Chacoan research has instead posed new and interesting
      questions about how complexity may have been organized rather than seeking to simply
      determine its presence. Chief among the recent explanations have been models stressing
      prestige-good economies (elite dominated consumption of exotic materials), ritual
      leadership (Chaco as a pilgrimage center), and communal feasting (rather than competitive
      feasting).
           Sometime around a.d. 1125 or shortly thereafter, the Chaco system seems to
      disintegrate (possibly due to a prolonged drought), although some people continue to live
      in Chaco Canyon and a number of the outlier sites become more important, for example,
      Aztec Ruin—its name does not, however, denote contact with the Aztec. There are, in fact,
      many indications of continuity with the earlier Chaco “phenomenon,” although the social
      structure of Ancestral Pueblo communities after a.d. 1125 undergoes reorganization.82
           As beautiful as many Ancestral Pueblo settlements were, they do not appear to have
      been the work of a highly complex society. There may have been minor occupational
      specialization in ceramic manufacture, weaving, and turquoise carving, but most if not all
      of the people were subsistence farmers. Nor is there much evidence of differential rank
      expressed in domestic architecture or in grave goods—one exception being the burial of
      two possible elite males at Pueblo Bonito.83 Even the irrigation system, while intricate and
      efﬁcient, was probably administered through simple kinship systems.
           Shortly before a.d. 1300, many once-prosperous Ancestral Pueblo communities began
      to be abandoned, and when the Spanish arrived in the sixteenth century, they found some
      of the descendants of the Ancestral Pueblo living along the Rio Grande in small villages,
      each a largely autonomous political and economic unit. The Hopi, Zuñi, and Rio Grande
      pueblos are the descendants of the Ancestral Pueblo peoples.


      SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

      Illegal aliens have always been a problem in the
      United States. Ask any Indian.
      Robert Orben

      The New World was truly a “second earth,” where long millennia of indigenous cultural
      development produced a rich spectrum of peoples and cultures unaffected by contact with
      European and Asian peoples. The spectacular Mississippian and Southwestern sites
      dominate the North American archaeological record, but all over North America there were
      divergent cultural traditions, many of them interacting economically, but also remaining
      distinctive in essential ways, from language to social organization. To the northeast, the
      Iroquois peoples adapted maize-beans-squash farming to the colder uplands of New York
      State, New England, and southeastern Canada. Their shifting pattern of swidden
      agriculture seems to have created land shortages and recurrent warfare, forcing people to
      live in well-fortiﬁed villages. To the west, marginal cultivators lived in the richer river
                                                         EARLY CULTURAL COMPLEXIY IN NORTH AMERICA                     595


valleys of Nebraska, South Dakota, and the other north-central states, with bison-hunting
groups on the grasslands, where maize agriculture could not be practiced until the
introduction by Europeans of deep-bottom plows. The horse-mounted nomadic hunters
who range through thousands of Hollywood epics have some basis in reality, but only after
the Europeans reintroduced the horse in America. Most of the desert regions of the west
were thinly settled by hunter-foragers until European colonization, but rich and sedentary
communities were established along the Paciﬁc Northwest Coast and areas of California,
where marine and terrestrial resources were so naturally productive that low-level complex
societies could be sustained by simple ﬁshing-foraging-hunting.
     In some ways it is less than satisfying to conclude that the temperate latitudes of North
America never produced states and empires because of the simple absence of draft animals,
developed metallurgy, extensive warm arid alluvial plains, and a few other techno-
environmental factors—but this conclusion seems inescapable. From the perspective of the
present, the violent collision between Old and New World cultures also seems an inevitable
outcome of the competition dynamic of evolutionary processes and the demographic,
techno-environmental, and other conditions of both areas. But to rank Old and New World
cultures in this sense of an evolutionary scale is only a useful research device; it should not
obscure the great richness of the ancient cultures of both areas.


BIBLIOGRAPHY
Anderson, D. G., and G. T. Hanson. 1988. “Early Archaic Settlement in the Southeastern United States: A Case
             Study from the Savannah River Valley.” American Antiquity 53(2):262–286.
Baby, R., and S. Langlois. 1977. “Prehistoric Agriculture: A Study of House Types in the Ohio Valley.” Ohio
             Historical Society Echoes 16(2):1–5.
Barker, A. W., and T. R. Pauketat, eds. 1992. Lords of the Southeast: Social Inequality and the Native Elites of
             Southeastern North America. Washington, D.C.: Archeological Papers of the American
             Anthropological Association Number 3.
Baugh, T. G., and J. E. Ericson. 1995. Prehistoric Exchange Systems in North America. New York: Plenum Press.
Bayman. J. M. 2001. “The Hohokam of Southwest North America.” Journal of World Prehistory 15(3):257–313.
Betancourt, J. L., J. S. Dean, and H. M. Hull. 1986. “Prehistoric Long-Distance Transport of Construction Beams,
             Chaco Canyon, New Mexico.” American Antiquity 51:370–375.
Blitz, J. H. 1999. “Mississippian Chiefdoms and the Fission-Fusion Process.” American Antiquity 64(4):577–592.
Braun, D. P. 1983. “Pots as Tools.” In Archaeological Hammers and Theories, ed. A. Keene and J. Moore. New
             York: Academic Press.
———. 1987. “Comment on M. J. O’Brien, ‘Sedentism, Population Growth, and Resource Selection in the
             Woodland Midwest: A Review of Coevolutionary Developments.’ ” Current Anthropology
             28(2):189–190.
———. 1988. “The Social and Technological Roots of ‘Late Woodland.’” In Interpretations of Culture Change in
             Eastern Woodlands During the Late Woodland Period, ed. R. W. Yerkes. Department of Anthropology,
             Ohio State University, Occasional Papers in Anthropology 3:17–38.
Brose, D. S., and N. Greber, eds. 1979. Hopewell Archaeology: The Chillicothe Conference. Kent, OH: The Kent State
             University Press.
Brown, J. A. 1985. “Long-Term Trends to Sedentism and the Emergence of Complexity in the American Midwest.”
             In Prehistoric Hunter-Gatherers: The Emergence of Cultural Complexity, ed. T. D. Price and J. A. Brown.
             Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
Bush, D. E. 1975. “A Ceramic Analysis of the Late Adena Buckmeyer Site, Perry County, Ohio.” Michigan
             Archaeologist 21:9–23.
Cleland, C. E. 1966. The Prehistoric Animal Ecology and Ethnozoology of the Upper Great Lakes Region. Ann Arbor:
             Museum of Anthropology, Anthropological Papers, University of Michigan, No. 29.
Cobb, C. R., and P. H. Garrow. 1996. “Woodstock Culture and the Question of Mississippian Emergence.”
             American Antiquity 61(1):21–37.
Coe, M., D. Snow, and E. Benson. 1986. Atlas of Ancient America. New York: Facts on File.
Cordell, L. S. 1984. Prehistory of the Southwest. New York: Academic Press.
596   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      Cordell, L. S., and G. J. Gumerman, eds. 1989. Dynamics of Southwest Prehistory. Washington, DC: Smithsonian
                   Institution Press.
      Crown, P. L. 1990. “The Hohokam of the American Southwest.” Journal of World Prehistory 4(2):223–255.
      ———. 1995. Ceramics and Ideology: Salado Polychrome Pottery. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico
                   Press.
      Crown, P., and S. Fish. 1996. “Gender and Status in the Hohokam Pre-Classic to Classic Transition.” American
                   Anthropologist 98:803–813.
      Crown, P. L., and J. W. Judge. 1991. Chaco and Hohokam: Regional Systems in the American Southwest. Santa Fe,
                   NM: School of American Research.
      Dancey, W. S. 2005. “The Enigmatic Hopewell of the Eastern Woodlands.” In North American Archaeology, ed.
                   T. R. Pauketat and D. D. Loren, pp. 108–137. Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing.
      Dickson, D. B. 1975. “Settlement Pattern Stability and Change in the Middle Northern Rio Grande Region, New
                   Mexico: A Test of Some Hypotheses.” American Antiquity 40:159–171.
      ———. 1981. “The Yanomamo of the Mississippi Valley? Some Reﬂections on Larson . . . Gibson . . . and
                   Mississippi Period Warfare in the Southeastern United States.” American Antiquity 46:909–916.
      Diehl, M. W. 1997. “Changes in Architecture and Land Use Strategies in the American Southeast: Upland
                   Mogollon Pithouse Dwellers, A.C. 200–1000.” Journal of Field Archaeology 24(2):179–194.
      Ericson, J. E., and T. G. Baugh, eds. 1995. The American Southwest and Mesoamerica. New York: Plenum Press.
      Fagan, B. M. 1995. Ancient North America, 2nd ed. New York: Thames and Hudson.
      Farnsworth, K. B., and T. E. Emerson, eds. 1986. Early Woodland Archaeology. Kampsville Seminars in Archae-
                   ology, No. 2. Kampsville, IL: Kampsville Archeological Center, Center for American Archeology.
      Fiedel, S. J. 1992. Prehistory of the Americas, 2nd ed. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
      Fish, S. K. and P. R. Fish. 1994. “Prehistoric Desert Farmers of the Southwest.” Annual Review of Anthropology
                   23:83–108.
      Ford, R. I. 1981. “Gardening and Farming Before a.d. 1000: Patterns of Prehistoric Cultivation North of Mexico.”
                   Journal of Ethnobiology 1(1):6 – 27.
      Fowler, M. L. 1969. Explorations into Cahokia Archaeology. Illinois Archaeological Survey Bulletin 7. Urbana:
                   University of Illinois.
      ———. 1971. “Agriculture and Village Settlement in the North American East: The Central Mississippi Valley
                   Area, a Case History.” In Prehistoric Agriculture, ed. S. Struever. Garden City, NY: Natural History Press.
      ———. 1975. “A Pre-Columbian Urban Center on the Mississippi.” Scientiﬁc American 233(2):93–101.
      Fritz, G. 1990. “Multiple Ways to Farming in Precontact Eastern North America.” Journal of World Prehistory
                   4(4):387–436.
      Glassow, M. A. 1980. Prehistoric Agricultural Development in the Northern Southwest: A Study in Changing Patterns
                   of Land Use. Socorro, NM: Ballena Press.
      Gumerman, G. J., ed. 1988. The Anasazi in a Changing Environment. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
      Haury, E. W. 1976. The Hohokam Desert Farmers and Craftsmen. Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
      Hegmon, M. 2005. “Beyond the Mold: Questions of Inequality in Southwest Villages.” In North American
                   Archaeology, ed. T. R. Pauketat and D. D. Loren, pp. 212–234. Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing.
      Hill, J. N. 1970. Broken K Pueblo: Prehistoric Social Organization in the American Southwest. Tucson: University of
                   Arizona Press.
      Hines, P. 1977. “On Social Organization in the Middle Mississippian—States or Chiefdoms?” Current
                   Anthropology 18:337–338.
      Houart, G. L. 1971. Koster—A Stratiﬁed Archaic Site in the Illinois Valley. Springﬁeld: Illinois State Museum
                   Reports of Investigations, No. 22.
      Iseminger, W. R. 1996. “Mighty Cahokia.” Archaeology 49(3):30–37.
      Jennings, J. D. 1974. Prehistory of North America, 2nd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill.
      Jett, S. C., and P. B. Moyle. 1986. “The Exotic Origins of Fishes Depicted on Prehistoric Mimbres Pottery from
                   New Mexico.” American Antiquity 51(4):688–720.
      Kantner, J. 1996. “Political Competition Among the Chaco Anasazi of the American Southwest.” Journal of
                   Anthropological Archaeology 15:41–105.
      Keegan, W. F., ed. 1987. Emergent Horticultural Economies of the Eastern Woodlands. Occasional Paper No. 7.
                   Carbondale, IL: Center for Archaeological Investigations, Southern Illinois University.
      Lekson, S. H. 2005. “Chaco and Paquimé: Complexity, History, Landscape.” In North American Archaeology, ed.
                   T. R. Pauketat and D. D. Loren, pp. 235–272. Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing.
      Lightfoot, R. G., and G. M. Feinman. 1982. “Social Differentiation and Leadership Development in Early Pithouse
                   Villages in the Mogollon Region of the American Southwest.” American Antiquity 47:64–81.
      Lynott, M. J., T. W. Boutton, J. E. Price, and D. E. Nelson. 1986. “Stable Carbon Isotopic Evidence for Maize
                   Agriculture in Southeast Missouri and Northeast Arkansas.” American Antiquity 51(1):51–65.
      Madsen, D., and D. Rhode, eds. 1995. Across the West: Human Population Movement and the Expansion of the
                   Numa. Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press.
                                                         EARLY CULTURAL COMPLEXIY IN NORTH AMERICA                     597


Marquardt, W. H. 1985. “Complexity and Scale in the Study of Fisher-Gatherer-Hunters: An Example from
              the Eastern United States.” In Prehistoric Hunter-Gatherers: The Emergence of Cultural Complexity, ed.
              T. D. Price and J. A. Brown. Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
Mathien, F. J., and R. H. McGuire, eds. 1986. Ripples in the Chichimec Sea: New Considerations of Southwestern-
              Mesoamerican Interactions. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press.
Mabry, J. B. 1999. “Las Capas and Early Irrigation Farming.” Archaeology Southwest 13:14.
McGuire, R. H. 1992. Death, Society, and Ideology in a Hohokam Community. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
McGuire, R. H., and M. B. Schiffer. 1982. Hohokam and Patayan: Prehistory of Southwestern Arizona. New York:
              Academic Press.
McGuire, R. H., and M. B. Schiffer. 1983. “A Theory of Architectural Design.” Journal of Anthropological
              Archaeology 2:277–303.
Mehrer, M. W. 1995. Cahokia’s Countryside: Household Archaeology, Settlement, Patterns, and Social Power.
              Dekalb: Northern Illinois University Press.
Milanich, J. T., and C. H. Fairbanks. 1987. Florida Archaeology. New York: Academic Press.
Mills, B. J. 2002. “Recent Research on Chaco: Changing Views on Economy, Ritual, and Society.” Journal of
              Archaeological Research 10(1):65–117.
Milner, G. 1990. “The Late Prehistoric Cahokia Cultural System of the Mississippi River Valley: Foundations,
              Florescence, and Fragmentation.” Journal of World Prehistory 4(1):1– 44.
Minnis, P. E. 1985. Social Adaptation to Food Stress. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
———. 1992. “Earliest Plant Cultivation in the Desert Borderlands of North America.” In The Origins of
              Agriculture, ed. C. W. Cowan and P. J. Watson. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
Morse, D. F., and P. A. Morse. 1983. Archaeology of the Central Mississippi Valley. New York: Academic Press.
Muller, J. 1986. Archaeology of the Lower Ohio River Valley. New York: Academic Press.
Nassaney, M. S. 1992. “Communal Societies and the Emergence of Elites in the Prehistoric American Southeast.”
              In Lords of the Southeast: Social Inequality and the Native Elites of Southeastern North America, ed.
              A. W. Barker and T. R. Pauketat, pp. 111–143. Washington, D.C.: Archeological Papers of the
              American Anthropological Association, No. 3.
Nelson, M. C., and M. Hegmon. 2001. “Abandonment Is Not as It Seems: An Approach to the Relationship
              Between Site and Regional Abandonment.” American Antiquity 66(2):213–235.
O’Brien, M. J. 1987. “Sedentism, Population Growth, and Resource Selection in the Woodland Midwest: A Review
              of Coevolutionary Developments.” Current Anthropology 28(2):177–197.
Pauketat, T. R. 2004. Ancient Cahokia and the Mississippians. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Pauketat, T., and T. Emerson. 1991. “The Ideology of Authority and the Power of the Pot.” American
              Anthropologist 93(4):919–941.
Peebles, C. S. 1977. “Moundville and Surroundings Sites: Some Structural Considerations of Mortuary Practices,
              II.” In Approaches to the Social Dimensions of Mortuary Practices, ed. J. A. Brown. Washington, D.C.:
              Society for American Archaeology Memoir, No. 25.
Phillips, J., and J. Brown, eds. 1983. Archaic Hunter-Gatherers in the Midwest. Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
Porter, J. W. 1969. The Mitchell Site and Prehistoric Exchange Systems at Cahokia: A.D. 1000–300. Illinois
              Archaeological Survey Bulletin, No. 7. Urbana: University of Illinois.
Powell, S. 1983. Mobility and Adaptation: The Anasazi of Black Mesa, Arizona. Carbondale: Southern Illinois
              University Press.
Price, T. D., and G. M. Feinman, eds. 1995. Foundations of Social Inequality. New York: Plenum Press.
Prufer, O. H. 1964. “The Hopewell Cult.” Scientiﬁc American 211:90–102.
Ramenofsky, A. F. 1987. Vectors of Death: The Archaeology of European Contact. Albuquerque: University of New
              Mexico Press.
Redman, C. L. 1993. People of the Tonto Rim: Archaeological Discovery in Prehistoric Arizona. Washington, DC:
              Smithsonian Institution Press.
Reid, J. J., and D. E. Doyel, eds. 1986. Emil W. Haury’s Prehistory of the American Southwest. Tucson: University
              of Arizona Press.
Rice, G. E. 1975. “A Systemic Explanation of a Change in Mogollon Settlement Patterns.” Unpublished doctoral
              dissertation, University of Washington.
Riley, T. J., R. Edging, and J. Rossen. 1990. “Cultigens in Prehistoric Eastern North America.” Current
              Anthropology 31(5):525–541.
Rindos, D. 1984. The Origins of Agriculture: An Evolutionary Perspective. New York: Academic Press.
Rothschild, N. A. 1979. “Mortuary Behavior and Social Organization at Indian Knoll and Dickson Mounds.”
              American Antiquity 44:658–675.
Simmons, A. H. 1986. “New Evidence for the Early Use of Cultigens in the American Southwest.” American
              Antiquity 51(1):73–89.
Smith, B. 1974. “Middle Mississippi Exploitation of Animal Populations—A Predictive Model.” American
              Antiquity 39:274 – 291.
598   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      ———. 1985. “The Role of Chenopodium as a Domesticate in the Pre-Maize Garden System of the Eastern United
                  States.” Southeastern Archaeology 4:51–72.
      ———. 1986. “The Archaeology of the Southeastern United States: From Dalton to de Soto, 10,500–500 b.p.”
                  Advances in World Archaeology 5:1–92.
      ———. 1992. “Prehistoric Plant Husbandry in Eastern North America.” In The Origins of Agriculture: An
                  International Perspective, ed. C. W. Cowan and P. J. Watson, pp. 101–119. Washington, DC:
                  Smithsonian Institution Press.
      Smith, B. D., ed. 1990. The Mississippian Emergence. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
      ———. 1992. The Rivers of Change: Essays on Early Agriculture in Eastern North America. Washington, DC:
                  Smithsonian Institution Press.
      Spielmann, K. A., M. J. Schoeninger, and K. Moore. 1990. “Plains-Pueblo Interdependence and Human Diet at
                  Pecos Pueblo, New Mexico.” American Antiquity 55(4):745–765.
      Steponaitis, V. P. 1983. Ceramics, Chronology, and Community Patterns: An Archaeological Study at Moundville.
                  New York: Academic Press.
      Stoltman, J. B. 1983. “Ancient Peoples of the Upper Mississippi River Valley.” In Historic Lifestyles of the Upper
                  Mississippi River Valley, ed. J. Wozniak. New York: University Press of America.
      ———. 1986. Prehistoric Mound Builders of the Mississippi Valley. Davenport, IA: Putnam Museum.
      Struever, S., and K. D. Vickery. 1973. “The Beginnings of Cultivation in the Midwest-Riverine Area of the United
                  States.” American Anthropologist 75:1197–1220.
      Tainter, J. 1975. “Social Inference and Mortuary Practices: An Experiment in Numerical Classiﬁcation.” World
                  Archaeology 7:1–15.
      Upham, S. 1994. “Nomads of the Desert West: A Shifting Continuum in Prehistory.” Journal of World Prehistory
                  8(2):113–168.
      Upham, S., K. G. Lightfoot, and G. M. Feinman. 1981. “Explaining Socially Determined Ceramic Distributions
                  in the Prehistoric Southwest.” American Antiquity 46:822–836.
      Utah Museum of Natural History. 1995. Treading in the Past: Sandals of the Anasazi. Salt Lake City: University of
                  Utah Press.
      Vivian, G. 1990. The Chacoan Prehistory of the San Juan Basin. San Dicgo: Academic Press.
      Vogel, J. C., and N. J. Van Der Merwe. 1977. “Isotopic Evidence for Early Maize Cultivation in New York State.”
                  American Antiquity 42:238–242.
      Washburn, D. R. 1975. “The American Southwest.” In North America, ed. S. Gorenstein et al. New York:
                  St. Martin’s Press.
      Watson, P. J. 1974. Archeology of the Mammoth Cave Area. New York: Academic Press.
      Webb, C. H. 1977. The Poverty Point Culture. Baton Rouge: The School of Geoscience, Louisiana State University.
      Whalen, M. 1981. “Cultural-Ecological Aspects of the Pithouse-to-Pueblo Transition in a Portion of the
                  Southwest.” American Antiquity 46:75–91.
      Willey, G. R. 1966. An Introduction to American Archaeology, Vol. 1: North and Middle America. Englewood Cliffs,
                  NJ: Prentice-Hall.
      Wills, W. H. 1996. “The Transition from the Preceramic to Ceramic Period in the Mogollon Highlands of Western
                  New Mexico.” Journal of Field Archaeology 23(3):335–359.
      Wills, W. H., and R. D. Leonard, eds. 1995. The Ancient Southwestern Community: Models and Methods for the
                  Study of Prehistoric Social Organization. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
      Woosley, A. I., and J. C. Ravesloot, eds. 1995. Culture and Contact: Charles C. DiPeso’s Gran Chichimeca.
                  Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
      Yerkes, R. W. 1988. “The Woodland and Mississippian Traditions in the Prehistory of Midwestern North
                  America.” Journal of World Prehistory 2(3):307–358.



      NOTES
       1. Smith, The Rivers of Change: Essays on Early Agriculture in Eastern North America, pp. 102–106.
       2. Ibid., p. 106.
       3. Smith, “Prehistoric Plant Husbandry in Eastern North America,” p. 106.
       4. Fritz, “Multiple Ways to Farming in Precontact Eastern North America,” p. 399.
       5. Smith, The Rivers of Change: Essays on Early Agriculture in Eastern North America, p. 107.
       6. Smith, “Prehistoric Plant Husbandry in Eastern North America,” pp. 107–108.
       7. O’Brien, “Sedentism, Population Growth, and Resource Selection in the Woodland Midwest: A Review of
          Coevolutionary Developments.”
       8. Rindos, The Origins of Agriculture.
                                                       EARLY CULTURAL COMPLEXIY IN NORTH AMERICA                    599


 9. O’Brien, “Sedentism, Population Growth, and Resource Selection in the Woodland Midwest: A Review of
    Coevolutionary Developments,” p. 186; also see Keegan, ed., Emergent Horticultural Economies of the Eastern
    Woodlands.
10. Braun, “Pots as Tools,” and “Comment on M. J. O’Brien, ‘Sedentism, Population Growth, and Resource
    Selection in the Woodland Midwest: A Review of Coevolutionary Developments.’ ”
11. Braun, “Comment on M. J. O’Brien, ‘Sedentism, Population Growth, and Resource Selection in the
    Woodland Midwest: A Review of Coevolutionary Developments,’ ” p. 189.
12. Fowler, “Agriculture and Village Settlement in the North American East: The Central Mississippi Valley Area,
    a Case History.”
13. Price, and Feinman, eds., Foundations of Social Inequality.
14. Stoltman, Prehistoric Mound Builders of the Mississippi Valley; Marquardt, “Complexity and Scale in the Study
    of Fisher-Gatherer-Hunters”; Rothschild, “Mortuary Behavior and Social Organization at Indian Knoll and
    Dickson Mounds.”
15. Yerkes, “The Woodland and Mississippian Traditions in the Prehistory of Midwestern North America,”
    p. 315.
16. Fiedel, Prehistory of the Americas, p. 111.
17. Fagan, Ancient North America, p. 331.
18. Ibid.
19. Murphy, An Archaeological History of the Hocking Valley, pp. 161–163; Yerkes, “The Woodland and
    Mississippian Traditions in the Prehistory of Midwestern North America,” p. 317.
20. Yerkes, “The Woodland and Mississippian Traditions in the Prehistory of Midwestern North America,”
    p. 317.
21. Brown, “Long-Term Trends to Sedentism and the Emergence of Complexity in the American Midwest,” p. 219.
22. Coe, Snow, and Benson, Atlas of Ancient America, p. 50.
23. Bush, “A Ceramic Analysis of the Late Adena Buckmeyer Site”; Baby and Langlois, “Prehistoric Agriculture,”
    p. 3.
24. Tainter, “Social Inference and Mortuary Practices: An Experiment in Numerical Classiﬁcation.”
25. Jennings, Prehistory of North America, p. 232.
26. Brose and Greber, Hopewell Archaeology: The Chillicothe Conference.
27. Yerkes, “The Woodland and Mississippian Traditions in the Prehistory of Midwestern North America,”
    p. 323.
28. Braun, “The Social and Technological Roots of ‘Late Woodland.’ ”
29. For varied considerations of Mississippian America, see Smith, ed., The Mississippian Emergence.
30. Stoltman, “Ancient Peoples of the Upper Mississippi River Valley,” pp. 232–233.
31. Lynott et al., “Stable Carbon Isotopic Evidence for Maize Agriculture in Southeast Missouri and Northeast
    Arkansas.”
32. Reviewed by Brown, Kerber, and Winters, in Smith ed., The Mississippian Emergence. See also Nassaney,
    “Communal Societies and the Emergence of Elites in the Prehistoric American Southeast.”
33. Porter, The Mitchell Site and Prehistoric Exchange Systems at Cahokia: A.D. 1000–300. See also Yerkes, “The
    Woodland and Mississippian Traditions in the Prehistory of Midwestern North America.”
34. Iseminger, “Mighty Cahokia,” pp. 34–35.
35. Pauketat and Emerson, “The Ideology of Authority and the Power of the Pot,” p. 935.
36. Milner, “The Late Prehistoric Cahokia Cultural System of the Mississippi River Valley: Foundations,
    Florescence, and Fragmentation,” p. 2; also see Smith, “The Archaeology of the Southeastern United States:
    From Dalton to de Soto, 10,500–500 b.p.”
37. Peebles, “Moundville and Surrounding Sites.”
38. Steponaitis, Ceramics, Chronology, and Community Patterns: An Archaeological Study at Moundville.
39. Ramenofsky, Vectors of Death.
40. Smith, “Middle Mississippi Exploitation of Animal Populations—A Predictive Model.”
41. Dickson, “The Yanomamo of the Mississippi Valley? Some Reﬂections on Larson . . . Gibson . . . and
    Mississippi Period Warfare in the Southeastern United States.”
42. Fagan, Ancient North America, p. 338.
43. Mehrer, Cahokia’s Countryside: Household Archaeology, Settlement Patterns, and Social Power; Pauketat,
    Ancient Cahokia and the Mississippians.
44. Le Page du Pratz.
45. Ramenofsky, Vectors of Death.
46. Minnis, Social Adaptation to Food Stress.
47. See, for example, Redman, People of the Tonto Rim: Archaeological Discovery in Prehistoric Arizona.
48. For example, Cordell and Gumerman, eds., Dynamics of Southwest Prehistory; Wills and Leonard, eds., The
    Ancient Southwestern Community: Models and Methods for the Study of Prehistoric Social Organization.
600   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      49. Woosley and Ravesloot, Culture and Contact.
      50. Upham, “Nomads of the Desert West.”
      51. Cordell, Prehistory of the Southwest; Simmons, “New Evidence for the Early Use of Cultigens in the American
          Southwest.”
      52. Fish and Fish, “Prehistoric Desert Farmers of the Southwest,” p. 85.
      53. Minnis, “Earliest Plant Cultivation in the Desert Borderlands of North America,” pp. 128–129.
      54. Bayman, “The Hohokam of Southwest North America.”
      55. Haury, The Hohokam Desert Farmers and Craftsmen.
      56. Bayman, “The Hohokam of Southwest North America,” p. 266.
      57. See Bayman, “The Hohokam of Southwest North America,” for a discussion of the competing deﬁnitions of
          what constitutues “Hohokam Culture.”
      58. Mabry, “Las Capas and Early Irrigation Farming.”
      59. These Native Americans were fomerly called the Papago in various publications.
      60. Crown and Fish, “Gender and Status in the Hohokam Pre-Classic to Classic Transition”; Hegmon, “Beyond
          the Mold: Questions of Inequality in Southwest Villages.”
      61. Bayman, “The Hohokam of Southwest North America,” p. 271.
      62. Ibid.
      63. Ibid., pp. 275–276, 283–284.
      64. Jett and Moyle, “The Exotic Origins of Fishes Depicted on Prehistoric Mimbres Pottery from New Mexico.”
      65. Lightfoot and Feinman, “Social Differentiation and Leadership Development in Early Pithouse Villages in the
          Mogollon Region of the American Southwest,” p. 81.
      66. Minnis, Social Adaptation to Food Stress.
      67. Whalen, “Cultural-Ecological Aspects of the Pithouse-to-Pueblo Transition in a Portion of the Southwest.”
      68. McGuire and Schiffer, “A Theory of Architectural Design.”
      69. “Chaco and Paquimé: Complexity, History, Landscape.”
      70. Ibid., p. 264.
      71. See, for example, Nelson and Hegmon, “Abandonment Is Not as It Seems: An Approach to the Relationship
          Between Site and Regional Abandonment.”
      72. The “Ancestral Pueblo” classiﬁcation has been used by some scholars in recent years to replace the
          term “Anasazi,” which is regarded by many modern Puebloan groups as an inaccurate descriptor for their
          ancestors.
      73. Powell, Mobility and Adaptation: The Anasazi of Black Mesa, Arizona.
      74. Dickson, “Settlement Pattern Stability and Change in the Middle Northern Rio Grande Region, New Mexico:
          A Test of Some Hypotheses.”
      75. Washburn, “The American Southwest,” p. 114; but see Rice, “A Systematic Explanation of a Change in
          Mogollon Settlement Patterns.”
      76. Lekson, “Chaco and Paquimé: Complexity, History, Landscape,” p. 243.
      77. Vivian, The Chacoan Prehistory of the San Juan Basin.
      78. Lekson, “Chaco and Paquimé: Complexity, History, Landscape,” pp. 247–248.
      79. Betancourt et al., “Prehistoric Long-Distance Transport of Construction Beams, Chaco Canyon, New
          Mexico.”
      80. Ibid., pp. 244–246.
      81. “Recent Research on Chaco: Changing Views on Economy, Ritual, and Society.”
      82. Ibid., p. 97.
      83. Lekson, “Chaco and Paquimé: Complexity, History, Landscape,” p. 247.
16
Prehistory in Perspective

[W]hat’s past is prologue.
Shakespeare1




H        aving followed in this book our past, from the three-million-year-old hominin
         footprints of Laetoli through the sixteenth-century a.d. European invasion of the
Americas, the reader is invited to return to the questions posed in the ﬁrst chapter: Does
the world’s archaeological record tell us why history has turned out as it has? Can we predict
our future from our past? Does the human past appear to have some “meaning” that
transcends the sum of the individual lives of the billions of people who have comprised
humanity? Who “owns” the past, in the sense of who gathers evidence about it and
interprets it, and decides how the past is preserved and presented?
     These are, of course, ancient questions, and by now the reader will not expect an
ultimate answer from this book. It is perhaps a bad pedagogical tactic to raise questions,
review the evidence, and then conclude weakly that “we don’t really know,” but most
contemporary archaeologists ﬁnd themselves in this predicament. The world’s archae-
ological record seems to provide a general sense of potentially important causes of various
ancient cultural changes, but there is no single, powerful, comprehensive explanation of
the past. Thus, rather than demonstrating the power and accuracy of any speciﬁc models
of culture and history, we have simply explored the limitations and potentials of some of
the more obvious ideas about the past. Moreover, as we have seen, the very possibility of a
uniﬁed, objective, “scientiﬁc” understanding or explanation of the past has been rejected
by some archaeologists and questioned by most.


OUR INTELLECTUAL HERITAGE

One of the earliest casualties of our review here was the Enlightenment and nineteenth-
century view of mechanical cultural evolutionism, with its belief in the gradual improve-
ment of people and their societies, generation after generation, as we “progressed” from rude
savagery to the better, brighter world of industry, liberalism, and democracy. The Victorian
proponents of cultural evolutionism—who number among their ranks some of the greatest
intellects of all time—can be forgiven, perhaps, for this belief in progress because they lived
in an age of marvelous change. Just Darwin’s insights alone revolutionized the way people

                                             601
602   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      viewed the world and themselves. It is not surprising that people of the nineteenth century
      believed in the possibility of a science of history, for throughout their lives they saw
      “progress” in almost every kind of human endeavor. Consider, for example, the changes in
      both technology and dominant ideologies witnessed by someone like Oliver Wendell
      Holmes (1841–1935), father of the great American jurist: Holmes wrote his senior thesis
      at Harvard in the provincial America of the decade before Abraham Lincoln’s election
      to the presidency; he then served in the Civil War; in later life he broadcast on the radio
      during Franklin Roosevelt’s presidency.2 Holmes and others of his generation saw a world
      transformed by science and technology in a way few other generations have experienced.
           But, as Simone Weil said: “The great mistake of the nineteenth century was to assume
      that by walking straight on one mounted into the air.” Two of the nineteenth century’s
      greatest proponents of progressive evolution, Herbert Spencer and Karl Marx, today lie
      across from each other in death, on opposites sides of a gravel path in London’s Highgate
      Cemetery. Herbert Spencer is now remembered by only a few, and even Karl Marx—whose
      ideas transformed the twentieth century—will probably soon join Spencer in being more
      cited than read, and increasingly unregarded.

      “Change” is scientiﬁc, “progress” is ethical;
      change is indubitable, whereas progress is a
      matter of controversy.
      Bertrand Russell3


           It is difﬁcult to discard entirely the notion of history as describing a “progressive”
      trajectory, leading to ourselves, and this idea is embedded in many cultures. Our review of
      the archaeological records reveals, however, that instead of a smooth rising curve of social,
      physical, technological, and moral evolution, our past has been a series of ﬁtful cycles,
      where social forms and technologies have reached their limits of growth and then failed, to
      be replaced by new social forms and technologies, more complex in some ways than their
      predecessors, but neither permanent nor “better” in any evident moral or philosophical
      sense. Clearly, there is nothing in the archaeological record to indicate that we are on a
      straight path to an earthly paradise. Today, many people are “involuntary vegetarians,”4
      whose diet, morbidity and mortality rates, and general standard of living probably compare
      poorly with those of most ancient hunting-and-gathering bands. Even in the most
      industrialized countries, the vast majority labors longer for sustenance than did many of
      the people of prehistory. Moreover, the misery, poverty, wars, and generic atrocities of our
      current world make it difﬁcult to argue that our past is one of “moral evolution.”5
           But this lack of “progress” in the Victorian sense should not be taken as a complete
      indictment of the general notion of history as reﬂecting long-term directional change.
      Despite repeated local reversals and long plateaus, the past three million years can be seen
      as directional change in many aspects of humanity, from average brain size to the com-
      plexity of cultures, as measured by changes in the size, differentiation, and interdependence
      of social, political, and economic systems—and by such basic dynamics as the ability to
      divert energy to human use, and the degree of economic interdependence of the world’s
      people.
           Perhaps nowhere in the human past is there more convincing evidence of powerful
      general determinants of cultural evolution operating than in the appearance of early
                                                                    PREHISTORY IN PERSPECTIVE     603


civilizations. As noted in chapter 7, the six earliest civilizations seem independently to have
evolved in extraordinarily similar ways and with nearly identical characteristics. All were
based economically on comparatively productive agricultural systems, the “surplus”
production of which was expropriated by elites. All evolved national religious cults,
monumental architecture, complex bureaucratic hierarchies, and many other character-
istics in common.
      Given this, the world’s archaeological record cannot be understood accurately as the
reﬂection simply of the vagaries of human intentions or of unrelated and random cultural
constructs. We have identiﬁed many patterns and parallels. Cross-cutting cultural
developments all over the world are the same essential expressions of religion, warfare,
population growth, emerging social stratiﬁcation, and evolving economic productivity.
      But when we try to dissect the causal processes that produced the past, our explanations
seem incomplete and simplistic. We have seen, for example, that human population growth
has been correlated with almost every cultural transformation, from initial tool use to the
appearance of industrial empires. This relationship may even be thought of as possibly
causal: The rate of technological change might be linked simply to the number of minds
available to solve problems and produce innovations. But this is clearly an incomplete
explanation of our past. Time and time again the archaeological record discloses that the
relationship between population growth and cultural change is neither consistent nor
direct, and it remains for archaeologists to demonstrate the direct causal connections—if
there are any—between the world’s increasing population size and the speciﬁc, crucial
transformations of prehistory and history.
      This inability even to understand the impact of basic demographic factors on cultural
change does not augur well for a deterministic science of culture and history, for basic
demography would seem to be potentially the most easily understood aspect of change over
time in the human past, compared to changes in technology, society, and ideology.
      To consider another example of the complexity of unraveling the causal patterns of the
past, the recurrent nature of human interspecies violence—from the cannibalism of some
of our early hominin ancestors to the war in Iraq—clearly suggests that conﬂict is an
evolutionary mechanism of considerable power; conﬂict must do something for societies,
or it would be difﬁcult to explain its depressing ubiquity in human affairs (Figure 16.1).
But here, too, the actual mechanisms in most past societies whereby conﬂict interacted with
other variables to produce cultural change are unknown.
      It is the nature of evolutionary patterns that they only appear to have a direction when
one looks backward. As many have observed, “real life seems to have no plots,” and in the
same sense, evolutionary accounts have no plots, except in retrospect. The ﬁrst hunter-
gatherers who made wild wheat part of their diet, for example, could have had no inkling
their activities would eventually lead to vast stretches of North America being devoted to
highly mechanized cultivation of distant genetic descendants of those wild Southwest Asian
cereals.
      We can look back and discern many similar evolutionary sequences in the past. To
identify a long span of connections that link developments, however, is not the same as
explaining history—no general theory has won universal acceptance. Most archaeologists
employ a vaguely evolutionary perspective: They assume that cultural innovations are
constantly arising in human societies and that some of these innovations confer an adaptive
advantage and are “ﬁxed” within cultural systems and perpetuated until they too are
           604       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                   outmoded and replaced. Many
                                                                                   archaeologists also adopt a
                                                                                   rather “vulgar” materialist
                                                                                   determinism in that they
                                                                                   assume that cultural forms and
                                                                                   dynamics are to some extent
                                                                                   constrained and shaped by
                                                                                   technological, environmental,
                                                                                   and economic variables. Great
                                                                                   cities like Babylon could not
                                                                                   have arisen in pre-industrial
                                                                                   Alaska, and there seems to
                                                                                   be no great mystery that the
                                                                                   ﬁrst productive agricultural
                                                                                   economies appeared in fertile,
                                                                                   easily farmed river valleys close
                                                                                   to the natural habitat of the
a)                                                                                 wild ancestors of domesticated
                                                                                   plants. Similarly, contrasting
                                                                                   cultural forms, such as the
                                                                                   social egalitarianism of hunters
                                                                                   and gatherers in the Pleistocene
                                                                                   and the rigid social stratiﬁca-
                                                                                   tion of emerging states, are
                                                                                   generally understood in part
                                                                                   as results of their respective
                                                                                   economic bases. Nonetheless,
                                                                                   many contemporary archae-
                                                                                   ologists see such links between
                                                                                   primary economics and envir-
                                                                                   onments and socioeconomic
                                                                                   and political systems as only
                                                                                   the starting points of analysis.
                                                                                   Most now recognize that even
                                                                                   if they are able to demonstrate
                                                                                   a strong correlation in time
                                                                                   and space between, say, popu-
                                                                                   lation growth, warfare, and
                                                                                   urbanism, they will still not
b)                                                                                 have explained in a powerful
FIGURE 16.1 Examples of violence throughout time a) a stone point embedded         way any of these factors or their
in human bone; b) a depiction of a human sacriﬁce; c) a suicide bomber.            relationships to each other.
                                                                                        In the face of these ana-
                     lytical ambiguities, many contemporary archaeologists have become profoundly
                     sociological and behavioral in their theoretical approach, in the sense that they have focused
                     on the ways people and societies have culturally constructed the speciﬁcs of their
                                                                   PREHISTORY IN PERSPECTIVE    605


socioeconomic and political
systems and ideologies. In pre-
vious chapters we have reviewed
many attempts to analyze and
interpret the social structures,
dynamics, and ideologies of
extinct societies. A great variety
of sociological and political
theories have been developed
to explain how different cul-
tures used the same organiza-
tional mechanisms to produce
the worldwide and historical
patterns we see in power rela-
tions, ethnicity, gender rela-
tionships, social reproduction,
and so on.
     In contrast to these ap-       c)
proaches, as we noted in pre-       FIGURE 16.1 (cont’d)
vious chapters, other scholars
have argued that it is not possible to formulate a true science of the behavior of extinct
peoples and that the long chains of inference that must be constructed to link the existing
archaeological remains with such concepts as “class conﬂict” and “political domination”
cannot be measured in the archaeological record and treated scientiﬁcally. Robert Dunnell
argues that archaeology can never be a science of behavior because behavior does not
exist—artifacts exist—and because any science must deal with phenomena, a scientiﬁc
archaeology must deal with artifacts, not with inferred behavior. Yet such a science of
artifacts cannot be like physics, Dunnell has argued, because the artifactual record is
primarily one created by evolutionary processes, in contrast to the uniform timeless laws
that govern the physical universe.
     Dunnell and numerous other scholars6 are investigating applications of Darwinian
evolutionary theory to history and humanity, and recent advances in such related ﬁelds
as “complexity theory” and “chaos theory,” and in studies of artiﬁcial intelligence, may
eventually have great impact on the theory of archaeology. One interesting current trend
in these forms of evolutionary analyses involves nonlinear systems analyses and the
“emergent properties” of complex systems.7 The most vivid example is that of biological
organisms, such as ourselves, in which somehow there is a complete set of information in
our genes such that as we are formed from the division of a single cell, subsequent cells are
formed into skin, hair, bones, blood, and all the other tissues and organs that comprise us.
We cannot, however, draw an accurate and direct analogy between the formation of a
human being and the evolution of an ancient state. In each of these systems there is a
growing complexity that seems in some sense inherent in the simpler earlier stages of these
processes of evolution—a “Lamarckian” sense of evolution, in other words, instead of simply
a Darwinian one.
     But, as we have noted (chapter 1), attempts to make archaeology into a Darwinian or
positivist science of any kind have been dismissed by other archaeologists, who reject the
606   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      entire notion that “science” has any application to the explanation of the past—arguing that
      archaeology can never be a neutral, value-free, empirical science of artifacts. As discussed
      in chapter 1, the post-processualists8 and others have contended that, just as one cannot
      assign a deﬁnitive single meaning to a text, one cannot make an empirically veriﬁable and
      deﬁnitive interpretation of the archaeological record. We create the past, they argue, and
      our interpretations of the past are limited by, and arise out of, our own cultural context.
      As discussed in chapter 1 and elsewhere, some contemporary archaeologists believe that
      there is no one “past;” rather, there is a continuing dialectical process in which each person
      confronts the past and comes to a unique understanding of it.
           The general perspective taken in this book—a “holistic” approach, to use Bruce
      Trigger’s phrase (chapter 1), or “cognitive processualism,” to use Colin Renfrew and John
      Bintliff ’s term9 (chapter 1)—may seem like a sensible moderate course. In this kind of
      archaeology one can use any analytical techniques that seem to increase understanding of
      the past, and one need not shrink from nonscientiﬁc interpretations of ancient ideologies,
      on the one hand, or abandon scientiﬁc rigor in evaluating evidence and competing
      hypotheses, on the other. But to many post-processualists, positivist science has no place
      in archaeology beyond technical applications (for example, radiocarbon dating), and to
      Darwinian evolutionists and other scientiﬁcally inclined archaeologists, the nonscientiﬁc
      interpretations of ancient ideologies and “meanings” may be a form of personal expression
      or art, but it is not scientiﬁc analysis.
           These theoretical debates will no doubt continue for many years to come. In the
      meantime most archaeologists will do what they have always done, whatever their
      theoretical perspective, and that is to study the remains of the past—struggling to
      understand what they meant to the people of the past as well as what they mean to the
      archaeologist.
           Bill Nye described Wagner’s music as “better than it sounds,” and in a way archaeology
      is like this: Its limitations are obvious, but its achievements are also obvious—we
      understand human antiquity today to an extent unimaginable just a century ago.


      LESSONS OF PREHISTORY

          To think of time—of all that retrospection,
          To think of to-day, and the ages continued henceforward.
          Have you guess’d you yourself would not continue?
          Have you dreaded these earth-beetles?
          Is to-day nothing? is the beginningless past nothing?
          If the future is nothing they are just as surely nothing.
                                                      Walt Whitman 10
      It would be gratifying if we could extract from our review of world prehistory some
      important predictions about the future of humankind, but, as we have noted, archaeology
      should not be considered a predictive science. It is not that we cannot look at the past and
      extrapolate trends we see into the future. It is that there is no necessity to these trends:
      Evolutionary histories are what happened, not what had to happen or what has to happen,
      and they are unique.
                                                                       PREHISTORY IN PERSPECTIVE       607


      This is especially true when we consider the long-range
future, particularly now that humanity has instruments with
which to terminate all life on this planet. But even should we
survive as a species for millions of future generations, the
virtuosity of culture as an adaptive device makes extrapolation
into the far future an act of either ignorance or hubris. None
of the human ancestors who strolled through Olduvai Gorge
some Sunday morning two million years ago could have
had even the dimmest vision of the gaudy technology and
kaleidoscopic social and political forms of twentieth-century
                                                                      FIGURE 16.2 An eyed bone needle from the
civilization, and this civilization was not a necessary outcome
                                                                      Upper Paleolithic site at Creswell Crags, England.
of our Olduvai forebears.
      No student of the past, however, can overlook the
persistent, powerful trends that tie the present—and perhaps the future—to the past. These
trends extend beyond the simple cumulative increases in world population density and the
technology of energy capture. The increasing functional differentiation and integration of
the world’s economies and societies can be seen in any food market, any airport. It may
seem like a tenuous link between the development of, say, tailored clothing in the Upper
Paleolithic (chapter 4) (Figure 16.2), which allowed human radiation into more demanding
environments, and today’s rapidly mutating and world-invading Internet, but they are both
part of an increasing “complexity” of human society and adaptation.
      Nor are these changes just technological. In chapter 1 the Darwinian revolution in
world-views and life-views was discussed, but there is no reason to suspect that any ideology
will be the ﬁnal, deﬁnitive perspective for all humanity. Consider, for example, religion. We
will let those with more conﬁdence in their omniscience than we have pronounce upon the
ultimate nature of human religiosity; it is always sobering to recollect that neither the study
of world prehistory nor any other art or science has much to offer in the way of a reason
why we are out here, on a small planet in an incomprehensibly inﬁnite universe, and to all
evidence very much alone.


Religion and Cultural Values
    I remember, I remember
    The ﬁr-trees dark and high;
    I used to think their slender tops
    Were close against the sky:
    It was a childish ignorance,
    But now ‘tis little joy
    To know I’m further off from heav’n
    Than when I was a boy.
                             Thomas Hood
Taken solely on the level of its effects on other aspects of culture, religion appears to operate
principally as a highly adaptable, thermodynamically efﬁcient mechanism of social control.
We have in the archaeological and historical record an irrefutable demonstration that there
is no act so repellent—be it sacriﬁcing thousands of one’s own countrymen to the gods or
608   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      incinerating hundreds of thousands of one’s “enemies”—that it cannot be made not only
      acceptable, but entirely virtuous within the context of religious systems. The exploitation
      of the many by the few to build massive pyramids, the complete catalogue of sexual
      “perversions,” the avoidance of this or that food—all have been incorporated into state
      religions with no more difﬁculty than Christian faith, hope, and charity.
           Recent wars illustrate that, despite the apparent decline of formal theistic religions in
      some parts of the industrialized world, the power of ideology to set societies into conﬂict
      has not changed. These conﬂicts may stem in part from long-term underlying economic
      forces, but no observer of modern politics can help but be profoundly impressed by the
      awesome power of ideas about history and ethnicity to stimulate both genocide against
      one’s perceived enemies and identiﬁcation with one’s kin.
           The late-twentieth-century societies of the West are almost obsessed with social and
      economic inequalities, and it would be signiﬁcant if the study of world prehistory had
      anything to tell us about the future of differences in class, gender, and ethnicity. But the
      lessons of the archaeological record concerning the origins and signiﬁcance of social and
      economic inequalities are not as clear as they might seem at ﬁrst glance. It is inescapable
      that there has never been an economically powerful, sociopolitically complex society—
      especially the supposedly “classless” societies of Marxist Russia and China—that was not
      also stratiﬁed into groups having differential access to wealth, power, and prestige. It
      remains to be demonstrated, however, that cultural functional complexity and integration
      are inextricably linked to social stratiﬁcation. It would appear that in the past the
      complexity of managing an economy based on agriculture, and later agriculture in
      combination with fossil fuels, could work effectively only through administrative and social
      hierarchies and class-structured societies. These social and cultural forms allowed great
      stability and predictability because people’s functional roles in society and their
      contributions and consumption of goods and services were largely determined by the class
      into which they were born. But if in future centuries population densities are stabilized and
      perhaps reduced, if control of energy and food sources is decentralized and the production
      of material wealth made highly automated, it would seem at least possible that human
      societies will someday approximate the “social justice” of the late Pleistocene.
           Perhaps the archaeological record’s bleakest implication concerning our short-term
      future has to do with that ambiguous concept, “the quality of life.” We have already noted
      that today most of the world’s people have a diet and standard of living in many ways
      inferior to that of Pleistocene hunters and gatherers, and although medical technology,
      solar power, and contraceptives may change this by bringing the Western industrial
      standard of living to all parts of the world, this is by no means a certainty. Even given
      sufﬁcient energy and rapid industrialization, fundamental questions remain about the
      short-term prospects for the quality of life on this planet. In the wealthiest countries today
      the abundance of luxury goods seems to convey a sense of ease and fulﬁllment, but modern
      economies work only because the vast majority of the population are coerced or induced
      to spend most of their lives at hard labor. And it is not only the poorer, laboring class whose
      quality of life is questionable. It has been observed that a citizen of Athens in the ﬁfth
      century b.c. would consider today’s professionals—physicians, politicians, professors, and
      football players alike—to be in the main incomplete, undeveloped people whose “success”
      has required them to devote so much of their lives to their specialty that they are grotesquely
                                                                     PREHISTORY IN PERSPECTIVE     609


incompetent at the oratorical, conversational, athletic, philosophical, agricultural, and
aesthetic skills that the ancient Greeks, for example, would insist on as necessary com-
ponents of a “whole” person.11


THE FUTURE OF ARCHAEOLOGY

When I was a boy of fourteen, my father was so
ignorant I could hardly stand to have the old
man around. But when I got to be twenty-one, I
was astonished at how much the old man had
learned in seven years.
Mark Twain

The energy produced by the breaking down of
the atom is a very poor kind of thing. Anyone
who expects a source of power from the
transformation of these atoms is talking
moonshine.
Ernest Rutherford (1871–1937), physicist, after he had
split the atom for the ﬁrst time12

History teaches us that it is often a fundamental mistake to extrapolate immediate
experience and situations far into the future. Contemporary archaeology and the historical
disciplines are in such a state of ﬂux and ideological rivalry that we may have no sense of
what these ﬁelds of inquiry will be like in a century or two.
     In any case, the archaeological record is disappearing at such a rapid rate that the future
of ﬁeld archaeology on the problems of prehistory is very much in doubt. The worldwide
wave of industrialism—the major destroyer of archaeological materials—seems destined to
expand at ever-increasing speed.
     Dismal as the loss of the archaeological record is, it may be that the major progress in
archaeology in the next several generations will come not so much from the discovery of
new bones and stones, but rather from a reconsideration of theoretical and methodological
approaches and a reanalysis of existing data. We have recounted in this book the prospects
of current analytical approaches, and these and other perspectives are likely to increase
considerably our knowledge about our past. Does this mean that the general problem of,
for example, the origins of cultural complexity will someday be as precisely solved as the
formulae for making plastics? Probably not. These are very different kinds of questions with
different criteria for solution. Yet, the history of science is replete with examples in which
a seemingly impossible problem was not only solved but made routine: The general
problems of prehistory we have discussed here may well fall into this category, to be solved
in succeeding centuries in terms and with techniques that we now only dimly perceive.
After all, people of only a few centuries ago no doubt would be astounded not only by our
science and lush technology, but also by our knowledge of prehistory and the dynamics of
culture.
610   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      Requiem aeternam dona eis, Domine, et lux
      perpetua luceat eis (Grant them eternal rest, O
      Lord, and may perpetual light shine on them)
      Mozart Requiem
      Requiem Mass in D. Minor (K. 624)



      BIBLIOGRAPHY
      Alexander, R. D. 1987. The Biology of Moral Systems. Hawthorne, NY: Aldine de Gruyter.
      Bintliff, J. 1986. “Archaeology at the Interface: An Historical Perspective.” In Archaeology at the Interface, ed.
                   J. L. Bintliff and C. F. Gaffney. Oxford: BAR International Series 300.
      ———. 1993. “Why Indiana Jones is Smarter Than the Post-Processualists.” Norwegian Archaeological Review
                   26(2):91–100.
      Diamond, J. 2004. Collapse: How Societies Choose to Fail or Succeed. New York: Viking.
      Dunnell, R. C. 1982. “Science, Social Science, and Common Sense: The Agonizing Dilemma of Modern
                   Archaeology.” Journal of Anthropological Research 38:1–25.
      ———. 1992. “Is a Scientiﬁc Archaeology Possible?” In Metaarchaeology, ed. L. Embre, pp. 73–97. The
                   Netherlands: Kluvwer.
      Durham, W. H. 1990. “Advances in Evolutionary Culture Theory.” Annual Review of Anthropology 19:187–242.
      Gamble, C. 1994. Timewalkers: The Prehistory of Global Colonization. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
      Harris, M. 1977. Cannibals and Kings: The Origins of Cultures. New York: Random House.
      Hern, W. M. 1993. “Is Human Culture Carcinogenic for Uncontrolled Population Growth and Ecological
                   Destruction?” Bioscience 43(11):768–773.
      Hodder, I., M. Shanks, A. Alexandri, V. Buchli, J. Carman, J. Last, and G. Lucas. 1995. Interpreting Archaeology:
                   Finding Meaning in the Past. New York: Routledge.
      Lansing, J. S., and J. N. Kremer. 1993. “Emergent Properties of Balinese Water Temple Networks.” American
                   Anthropologist 95(1):97–114.
      Neiman, F. D. 1995. “Stylistic Variation in Evolutionary Perspective: Inferences from Decorative Diversity and
                   Interassemblage Distance in Illinois Woodland Ceramic Assemblages.” American Antiquity 60(1):7–36.
      Palgrave, F. T. 1965. The Golden Treasury, p. 234. NY: Oxford University Press.
      Pile, S. 1979. The Book of Heroic Failure. London: Macdonald Futura Publishers.
      Russell, B. 1950. Unpopular Essays. New York: Simon & Schuster.
      Trigger, B. 1991. “Distinguished Lecture in Archaeology: Constraint and Freedom.” American Anthropologist
                   93(3):551–569.
      ———. 1993. Early Civilizations: Ancient Egypt in Context. Cairo: American University in Cairo Press.
      Waldrop, M. M. 1992. Complexity. New York: Touchstone.



      NOTES
       1. Clear for 10 Shakespeare, The Tempest, Act II, Scene I.
       2. Brief Lives.
       3. Unpopular Essays, “Philosophy and Politics.”
       4. Harris, Cannibals and Kings, p. x.
       5. Trigger, Early Civilizations: Ancient Egypt in Context, p. 110.
       6. See, for example, Dunnell, “Science, Social Science, and Common Sense: The Agonizing Dilemma of Modern
          Archaeology,” and “Is a Scientiﬁc Archaeology Possible?”; also see Neiman, “Stylistic Variation in
          Evolutionary Perspective: Inferences from Decorative Diversity and Interassemblage Distance in Illinois
          Woodland Ceramic Assemblages.”
       7. Lansing and Kremer (“Emergent Properties of Balinese Water Temple Networks”), for example, have
          published one of the ﬁrst applications of these ideas to an anthropological problem, the evolution of Balinese
          economic systems.
       8. See, for example, Hodder et al., Interpreting Archaeology: Finding Meaning in the Past.
       9. See, for example, Bintliff, “Archaeology at the Interface,” and “Why Indiana Jones Is Smarter Than the Post-
          Processualists.”
      10. From Whitman’s “To Think of Time.”
      11. Kitto.
      12. Quoted by Pile, The Book of Heroic Failure, p. 216.
                                        Art Credits


FRONTISPIECE
From Touching the Mekong by Andrea Baldeck, reprinted by permission of University of Pennsylvania Press.


CHAPTER 1
1.1 Image of a Paleolithic site near Les Eyzies, France, courtesy the Library, American Museum of Natural History;
1.2 Collections of The New York Public Library/Rare Books Division; 1.3 Copyright: Grifﬁth Institute, Oxford;
1.4 Copyright: Grifﬁth Institute, Oxford; 1.5 Reprinted with the permission of Barry D. Kass; 1.6 Hirmer
Fotoarchiv, Munich; 1.7 Courtesy Deborah I. Olszewski; 1.8 Neg./Trans. No. 326795, courtesy the Library,
American Museum of Natural History; 1.9 Reproduced by permission of the Syndics of Cambridge University
Library; 1.10 Reprinted with the permission of Hulton Archive/Getty Images, Inc.; 1.11 Courtesy Deborah I.
Olszewski.


CHAPTER 2
2.1 ﬁgure on right: Courtesy Deborah I. Olszewski; 2.2 John Reader/Photo Researchers; 2.3 Courtesy Deborah I.
Olszewski; 2.4 Courtesy Deborah I. Olszewski; 2.5 Courtesy Deborah I. Olszewski and the Abydos Survey for
Paleolithic Sites; 2.6 Courtesy Deborah I. Olszewski and the Abydos Survey for Paleolithic Sites; 2.7 Courtesy
Deborah I. Olszewski; 2.8 Reprinted with the permission of Clark Erikson; 2.9 Lennart Larsen, The National
Museum of Denmark; 2.10 Reprinted with the permission of Cambridge; University Press; 2.11 Courtesy Deborah
I. Olszewski; 2.12 Courtesy Deborah I. Olszewski and the Abydos Survey for Paleolithic Sites; 2.13 From F. Hole,
K. V. Flannery, and J. Neely, Prehistory and Human Ecology of the Deh Luran Plain, Mem. Of the Museum of
Anthropology, No. 1 (U. of Michigan, 1969) Fig. 15. Reproduced by permission of Museum of Anthropology
Publications; 2.14 University of Pennsylvania Museum (image #S8-8995); 2.15 Photo by Pat Shipman; 2.16
Courtesy Deborah I. Olszewski; 2.17 Hirmer Fotoarchiv, Munich; 2.18 Victor R. Boswell, Jr./National Geographic
Image Collection; 2.19 Courtesy Deborah I. Olszewski; 2.20 Courtesy Deborah I. Olszewski and the Abydos Survey
for Paleolithic Sites; 2.21 From J. D. Jennings, Prehistory of North America, McGraw Hill, Inc., all rights reserved.
Reproduced by permission of McGraw-Hill Book Co.; 2.22 From Invitation to Archaeology by James Deetz,
copyright © 1967 by James Deetz. Used by permission of Doubleday, a division of Random House, Inc.; 2.23
Débenath & Dibble, Handbook of Paleolithic Typology, 1994, Vol. 1, p. 73, Fig. 6.19 and p. 106: Fig. 8.10
University Museum Publications; Upper Paleolithic and Epipaleolithic ﬁgures Courtesy Deborah I. Olszewski.


CHAPTER 3
3.1 Photograph by Jean-Baptiste Leca; 3.2 Reinisches Landmuseum; 3.3 Neg./Trans. No. 335795, courtesy the
Library, American Museum of Natural History; 3.4 Reprinted with the permission of Cambridge University Press;
3.5 Reprinted with the permission of Cambridge University Press; 3.6 Reprinted with the permission of the
Zoological Society of San Diego; 3.7 Courtesy Deborah I. Olszewski; 3.8 National Geographic map/NG Image
Collection; 3.9 Reprinted with the permission of Cambridge University Press; 3.10 From J. B. Birdsell, Human
Evolution: An Introduction to the New Physical Anthropology, 2nd, ed. (Rand McNally, 1975), Fig. 6.7. Reproduced
by permission of the estate of J. B. Birdsell; 3.11 Courtesy Deborah I. Olszewski; 3.12 Reprinted with to permission
of Anthro-Photo File; 3.13 Reprinted from Journal of Human Evolution, Vol. 27 Issue 2, Blumenschine, Carvallo,
and S. D. Capaldo, “Competition for Carcasses and Early Hominid,” Pages 197–213, copyright 1994, with
permission from Elsevier; 3.14 From W. Howells, Evolution of Genus Homo (Benjamin/Cummings Pub. Co.,
copyright © 1973), p. 47. Reproduced by permission of W. W. Howells.


CHAPTER 4
4.1 Figure 17.7, p. 263 From Humankind Emerging, 4th Edition by Bernard G. Campbell. Copyright © 1985 by
Bernard G. Campbell. Reprinted by permission of HarperCollins Publishers, Inc.; 4.2 Reprinted with the
permission of Cambridge University Press; 4.3 Photo Alan Walker © National Museum of Kenya; 4.4 Courtesy
Deborah I. Olszewski and the Abydos Survey for Paleolithic Sites; 4.5 Courtesy Deborah I. Olszewski; 4.6 Glynn
Ll. Isaac; 4.7 Reprinted with permission from Vekua et al., Science 297:85– 89, Fig. 2 views a, b and c. Copyright
2002 AAAS; 4.8 Courtesy of Naama Goren-Inbar; 4.9 Courtesy Deborah I. Olszewski; 4.10 Reprinted with the
permission of Cambridge University Press; 4.11 Courtesy Deborah I. Olszewski; 4.12 Reprinted with the


                                                       611
612   ART CREDITS


      permission of Cambridge University Press; 4.13 One ﬁg from Singer & Wymer, The Middle Stone Age at Klasies
      River Mouth in South Africa. Reprinted with the permission of the University of Chicago Press; 4.14 National
      Geographic map/NG Image Collection; 4.15 Photo provided by John Yellen; 4.16 Henri de Lumley, Centre
      nationale de la recherche scientiﬁque, Marseile; 4.17 © Erik Trinkaus; 4.18 From F. Bordes, The Old Stone Age
      (Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1968). Reproduced by permission of Weidenfeld and Nicolson; 4.19 Dibble, The
      Interpretation of Middle Paleolithic Scraper Reduction Patterns, 1998, L’Homme de Néandertal vol. 4, p. 57: Fig.
      1; 4.20 Photo Courtesy of Paul Goldberg; 4.21 Reprinted with the permission of Cambridge University Press; 4.22
      Courtesy Deborah I. Olszewski; 4.23 Bridgeman-Giraudon/Art Resource, NY; 4.24 New York Times, January 22,
      1995; 4.25 Ph. Carole FRITZ/équipe Grotte Chauvet/Ministère de la Culture; 4.26 Fig. 4 from “The Signs of All
      Times: Entroptic Phenomena in Upper Paleolithic Art” Current Anthropology 29:2 (1988) pp. 201–245. Reprinted
      with the permission of the University of Chicago Press; 4.27 From Flood, The Archaeology of Dreamtime, copyright
      1991, reprinted with the permission of Yale University Press; 4.28 Courtesy Deborah I. Olszewski; 4.29 Photos by
      Jeff Lindon; 4.30 Reprinted with the permission of Scribner, a Division of Simon & Schuster Inc. from The
      Threshold of Civilization by Walter A. Fairservis, Jr., drawings by Jon Fairservis. Copyright © 1975 Walter A.
      Fairservis, Jr.; 4.31 Courtesy Austrian Cultural Institute of New York.


      CHAPTER 5
      5.1 Philadelphia Museum of Art: Purchased with funds from the American Museum of Photography; 5.2 From
      J. J. Hester, Introduction of Archaeology(Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, 1976), compiled from A. Krieger, “Early
      Man in the New World,” in J. D. Jennings and E. Norbeck, eds., Prehistoric Man in the New World (University
      of Chicago Press, 1964). Reproduced with the permission of the University of Chicago Press; 5.3 Photo courtesy
      of Anthony T. Boldurian, Clovis Archives; 5.4 Joe LeMonnier, courtesy of Natural History Magazine, (11), (87);
      © the American Museum of Natural History, 1987; 5.5 Modiﬁed from Joe LeMonnier, courtesy of Natural History
      Magazine, (1), (87); © the American Museum of Natural History, 1987; 5.6 Modiﬁed from The Great Journey by
      Brian Fagan, © 1987. Thames & Hudson, Inc. Reprinted by permission of the publisher; 5.7 Reprinted with
      permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc.; 5.8 National Geographic map/NG Image Collection; 5.9 National
      Geographic map/NG Image Collection; 5.10 ﬁgure on left: From Gramly, Guide to the Palaeo-Indian Artifacts of
      North America, 1990. Illustration by Valerie Waldorf; 5.11 National Geographic map/NG Image Collection; 5.12
      From Natural History, 1/1987, © Natural History, American Museum of Natural History, Courtesy of C.G. Turner
      and American Museum of Natural History; 5.13 Original drawings by Ted Goebel. Reprinted by permission of
      John Hoffecker; 5.14 Tom D. Dillehay; 5.15 Reprinted with permission from Roosevelt, Science 272:373–384, Fig.
      6. Copyright 1996 AAAS; 5.16 Photo Courtesy of Paul Goldberg; 5.17 Nottoway River Survey—Archaeological
      Research; 5.18 Courtesy Deborah I. Olszewski; 5.19 From Gramly, Guide to the Palaeo-Indian Artifacts of North
      America, 1990. Illustration by Valerie Waldorf; 5.20 University of Colorado Museum of Natural History, Joe Ben
      Wheat.


      CHAPTER 6
      6.1 Reprinted with the permission of Cambridge University Press; 6.2 Courtesy of the Oriental Institute of the
      University of Chicago; 6.3 Courtesy Deborah I. Olszewski; 6.4 Courtesy Deborah I. Olszewski; 6.5 Fig. 39 from
      Oakley, Man the Toolmaker. Reprinted with the permission of the University of Chicago Press; 6.6 Robert Wenke
      and Oxford University Press; 6.7 Robert Wenke and Oxford University Press; 6.8 Robert Wenke and Oxford
      University Press; 6.9 Photo by Nancy R. Coinman; 6.10 Photo by D. Nadel, Zinman Inst. Of Archaeology,
      University of Haifa; 6.11 Courtesy Deborah I. Olszewski; 6.12 Robert Wenke and Oxford University Press; 6.13
      State Antiquities Organization, Baghdad; 6.14 Photo F. Valla and Centre de Recherche Français de Jérusalem; 6.15
      From F. Hole et al., Prehistory and Human Ecology of the Deh Luran Plain, Mem. Of the Museum of Anthropology,
      No. 1 (University of Michigan, 1969) Fig. 11.5. Reproduced by permission of Museum of Anthropology
      Publications; 6.16 Courtesy Deborah I. Olszewski; 6.17 Courtesy Deborah I. Olszewski; 6.18 Courtesy Deborah I.
      Olszewski; 6.19 Reprinted with the permission of Council for British Research in the Levant; 6.20 Courtesy
      Deborah I. Olszewski; 6.21 The Evolution of Maize from the Tehuacan Valley, copyright © Robert S. Peabody
      Museum of Archaeology, Phillips Academy, Andover, Massachusetts. All rights reserved; 6.22 Fagan, Brian M.,
      People of the Earth: An Introduction to World Prehistory w/CD, 11th Edition, © 2004, p. 305. Adapted by permission
      of Pearson Education, Inc., Upper Saddle River, NJ.


      CHAPTER 7
      7.1 Reprinted with the permission of Anthro-Photo File; 7.2 National Geographic map/NG Image Collection; 7.3
      Courtesy Deborah I. Olszewski; 7.4 Courtesy Deborah I. Olszewski; 7.5 University of Pennsylvania Museum
      (image #141592); 7.6 Reprinted from The Early Mesoamerican Village by K. V. Flannery ﬁgure 6.5, copyright 1982,
      with permission from Elsevier; 7.7 Courtesy Deborah I. Olszewski; 7.8 Courtesy Deborah I. Olszewski; 7.9
      Reprinted with the permission of Henry Wright.
                                                                                                   ART CREDITS        613


CHAPTER 8
8.1 Robert Wenke and Oxford University Press; 8.2 Private collection, Dr. Elizabeth Ann Morris, research assoc.
American Museum of Natural History NYC, 48 Pine Place, Bayﬁeld, CO 81122 USA; 8.3 Reprinted with the
permission of Council for British Research in the Levant; 8.4 Reprinted with the permission of Harald
Hauptmann; 8.5 Courtesy Deborah I. Olszewski; 8.6 Courtesy Deborah I. Olszewski; 8.7 Robert Wenke and
Oxford University Press; 8.8 From J. Mellaart, Catal Huyuk (McGraw-Hill, 1967), pp. 118, 125 © Thames &
Hudson Ltd. Reproduced by permission of J. Mellaart; 8.9 From J. Mellaart, The Neolithic of the Near East (Charles
Scribner’s Sons, 1975) Figs. 97, 91, 93, 94. © Thames & Hudson Ltd., Lon. Reproduced by permission of Charles
Scribner’s Sons and Thames & Hudson.; 8.10 From J. Mellaart, The Neolithic of the Near East (Charles Scribner’s
Sons, 1975) Figs. 97, 91, 93, 94. © Thames & Hudson Ltd., Lon. Reproduced by permission of Charles Scribner’s
Sons and Thames & Hudson.; 8.11 Robert Wenke and Oxford University Press; 8.12 From Sabloff & Lamberg-
Karlovsky, Ancient Civilization and Trade 1975, University of New Mexico Press; 8.13 State Antiquities
Organization, Baghdad; 8.14 From S.N. Kramer, “The Sumerians,” Scientiﬁc American, Oct. 1957, p. 76. Copyright
© 1957 by Scientiﬁc American; 8.15 (top) Hirmer Fotoarchiv, Munich. (bottom) University of Pennsylvania
Museum, Philadelphia; 8.16 Courtesy of the Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago; 8.17 Robert Wenke
and Oxford University Press; 8.18 Georg Gerster/Photo Researchers; 8.19 Courtesy Deborah I. Olszewski; 8.20
From Robert McC Adams, Heartland of Cities, Fig. 17, 1981, University of Chicago Press.


CHAPTER 9
9.1 Robert Wenke and Oxford University Press; 9.2 Robert Wenke and Oxford University Press; 9.3 Courtesy
Deborah I. Olszewski and the Abydos Survey for Paleolithic Sites; 9.4 Munich East Delta Expedition, D. Wildung;
9.5 Seattle Art Museum, Eugene Fuller Memorial Collection; 9.6 Courtesy Deborah I. Olszewski; 9.7 TWA; 9.8
Image of the Mummy of Queen Tiye from Harris & Wente, An X-Ray Atlas of the Royal Families. Reprinted with
the permission of the University of Chicago Press; 9.9 Reprinted with the permission of Cambridge University
Press; 9.10 Collection of Peter B. Rathbone; 9.11 Permission granted from Arelene Wolinski; 9.12 Victor R.
Boswell, Jr/National Geographic Image Collection; 9.13 Victor R. Boswell, Jr./National Geographic Image
Collection.


CHAPTER 10
10.1 Fig. 1.1 from Possehl, The Indus Civilization, 2002, p. 1. Reprinted with the permission of Altamira Press;
10.2 Copyright Harappa Archaeological Research Project, Courtesy Dept. of Archaeology and Museums, Govt. of
Pakistan; 10.3 Courtesy Deborah I. Olszewski; 10.4 Fig. 12.1 from Possehl, The Indus Civilization, 2002, p. 215.
Reprinted with the permission of Altamira Press; 10.5 Josephine Powell-Rome; 10.6 Fig. 3.20 from Possehl, The
Indus Civilization, 2002, p. 81. Reprinted with the permission of Altamira Press; 10.7 Jan Fairservis; 10.8 James
P. Blair/National Geographic Image Collection; 10.9 Courtesy National Museum, New Delhi; 10.10 University of
Pennsylvania Museum, Philadelphia.


CHAPTER 11
11.1 Robert Wenke and Oxford University Press; 11.2 Reprinted by permission of American Scientist, Magazine
of Sigma Xi, The Scientiﬁc Research Society; 11.3 From Ancient China by William Watson (New York Graphic
Society, 1974) Fig. 12; 11.4 From Yang, Perspective’s on China’s Past: Chinese Archaeology in Twentieth Century
China vol. 2, copyright 2004, reprinted with the permission of Yale University Press; 11.5 From Yang, Perspective’s
on China’s Past: Chinese Archaeology in Twentieth Century China vol. 2, copyright 2004, reprinted with the
permission of Yale University Press; 11.6 From Yang, Perspective’s on China’s Past: Chinese Archaeology in
Twentieth Century China vol. 2, copyright 2004, reprinted with the permission of Yale University Press; 11.7 From
K.C. Chang, The Archaeology of Ancient China, 4th edition, copyright 1987. Reprinted with the permission of Yale
University Press; 11.8 From K.C. Chang, The Archaeology of Ancient China, 4th edition, copyright 1987. Reprinted
with the permission of Yale University Press; 11.9 Reprinted with the permission of Dr. Li Liu; 11.10 From Yang,
Perspective’s on China’s Past: Chinese Archaeology in Twentieth Century China vol. 2, copyright 2004, reprinted
with the permission of Yale University Press; 11.11 Robert Wenke and Oxford University Press; 11.12 Institute of
Archaeology, Academia Sinica, Peking; 11.13 Robert Wenke and Oxford University Press.


CHAPTER 12
12.1 Courtesy Deborah I. Olszewski; 12.2 Courtesy Deborah I. Olszewski; 12.3 Photo Courtesy of Phillip Charles
Lucas; 12.4 Photo Courtesy of Phillip Charles Lucas; 12.5 Aeroﬁlms Ltd., London; 12.6 Reprinted with the
permission of Cambridge University Press; 12.7 Reproduced with permission from Christopher J. Knüsel’s “More
Circe Than Cassandra: The Princess of Vix in Ritualized Social Context” in European Journal of Archaeology vol.
5 #3 pp. 275 –308. Copyright © SAGE Publications and European Association of Archaeologists, 2002, by
permission of Sage Publications Ltd.; 12.8 Courtsey of Deutsches Archaeologisches Institut; 12.9 From M. Shinnie,
Ancient African Kingdoms, 1965, St. Martin’s Press. Reprinted with permission of St. Martin’s Press, Incor-
porated; 12.10 Reprinted with the permission of Cambridge University Press; 12.11 Reprinted with permission of
Patrick V. Kirch; 12.12 Courtesy Deborah I. Olszewski.
614   ART CREDITS


      CHAPTER 13
      13.1 Reproduced by permission of Equinox (Oxford) Ltd., Oxford England and ﬁrst published in Atlas of Ancient
      America (Facts on File Inc./New York and Phaidon Press/Oxford); 13.2 Robert Wenke and Oxford University
      Press; 13.3 Image of village of Morelos, Mexico, courtesy the Library, American Museum of Natural History; 13.4
      Robert Wenke and Oxford University Press; 13.5 Reprinted with the permission of Michael Coe; 13.6 Werner
      Forman/Art Resource, NY; 13.7 Reprinted with the permission of Philip Baird/AnthroArcheArt.Org; 13.8 The
      Michael C. Rockefeller Memorial Collection, Bequest of Nelson A. Rockefeller, 1979 (1979.206.1134); 13.9
      Reprinted with the permission of Michael Coe; 13.10 Reprinted from The Cloud People, Flannery & Marcus, Page
      59, 1983, with permission from Elsevier; 13.11 Mexican National Tourist Council; 13.12 Courtesy Deborah I.
      Olszewski; 13.13 Reprinted with the permission of Barry D. Kass; 13.14 Courtesy Deborah I. Olszewski; 13.15
      National Geographic map/NG Image Collection; 13.16 University of Pennsylvania Museum (image #65-4-1094);
      13.17 Reprinted with the permission of Michael Coe; 13.18 Reprinted with the permission of Michael Coe; 13.19
      SEF/Art Resource, NY; 13.20 Robert Wenke and Oxford University Press; 13.21 Image of a Mexican tribute list,
      courtesy the Library, American Museum of Natural History; 13.22 Image of early drawings describing sequence
      of ritual human sacriﬁce, courtesy the Library, American Museum of Natural History; 13.23 Reprinted with the
      permission of The Bridgeman Art Library International.


      CHAPTER 14
      14.1 Reproduced by permission of Equinox (Oxford) Ltd., Oxford England and ﬁrst published in Atlas of Ancient
      America (Facts on File Inc./New York and Phaidon Press/Oxford); 14.2 Vladimir Korostyshevskiy; 14.3 National
      Geographic map/NG Image Collection; 14.4 Courtesy Deborah I. Olszewski; 14.5 Reprinted from Early Settlement
      and Subsistence in Casma Valley by the University of Iowa Press; 14.6 Reprinted from Cultures of Ancient Peru, by
      F. G. Lumbreras, Smithsonian Institution Press © 1974, Fig. 5.4; 14.7 Courtesy Deborah I. Olszewski; 14.8 National
      Geographic map/NG Image Collection; 14.9 Courtesy Deborah I. Olszewski; 14.10 University of Pennsylvania
      Museum (image #G5-18729); 14.11 National Museum of Natural History, Smithsonian Institution; 14.12
      Reprinted from Cultures of Ancient Peru, by F. G. Lumbreras, Smithsonian Institution Press © 1974, Fig. 218.


      CHAPTER 15
      15.1 Courtesy Deborah I. Olszewski; 15.2 Reproduced by permission of Equinox (Oxford) Ltd., Oxford England
      and ﬁrst published in Atlas of Ancient America (Facts on File Inc./New York and Phaidon Press/Oxford); 15.3
      Reprinted, with permission, from the Annual Review of Anthropology, Volume 3 © 1974 by Annual Reviews
      www.annualreviews.org; 15.4 Reproduced by permission of Equinox (Oxford) Ltd., Oxford England and ﬁrst
      published in Atlas of Ancient America (Facts on File Inc./New York and Phaidon Press/Oxford); 15.5 Reprinted
      with the permission of the Ohio Historical Society; 15.6 Courtesy Deborah I. Olszewski; 15.7 Collections of The
      New York Public Library/Rare Books Division; 15.8 Reproduced by permission of Equinox (Oxford) Ltd., Oxford
      England and ﬁrst published in Atlas of Ancient America (Facts on File Inc./New York and Phaidon Press/Oxford);
      15.9 Reproduced by permission of Equinox (Oxford) Ltd., Oxford England and ﬁrst published in Atlas of Ancient
      America (Facts on File Inc./New York and Phaidon Press/Oxford); 15.10 Courtesy Deborah I. Olszewski; 15.11
      Courtesy Deborah I. Olszewski; 15.12 Werner Forman/Art Resource, NY; 15.13 Courtesy Deborah I. Olszewski;
      15.14 Courtesy Deborah I. Olszewski; 15.15 National Park Service; 15.16 From J. D. Jennings, Prehistory of
      North American, 2nd ed. (McGraw Hill, 1974). All rights reserved. Reproduced by permission of McGraw-Hill
      Book Co.


      CHAPTER 16
      16.1a reprinted with the permission of James C. Chatters; 16.1b reprinted with the permission of Instructional
      Resources Corporation; 16.2 Copyright of the Trustees of the British Museum, reprinted with permission.
                                                                  Index


Note: Pictorial representations are in bold type.


Abric Romaní, 167                                   Altai region, 208, 208                                 Atlatl (spear thrower, throwing stick), 174, 175,
Abydos, 30, 382, 386                                Alto Salaverry, 540                                      176, 243
Abydos Survey for Paleolithic Sites (ASPS),         Alva, Walter, 551                                      Atlantis, 194
  44 – 45, 47, 48, 65, 66                           Ambrona, 143–144, 145, 158                             Atzcapotzalco, 517
Accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS), 68, 69,        Amerind, 210                                           Aurignacian tools, 166, 166–167
  278 n. 91                                         Amri, 412                                              Australopiths, 88–89, 100–105
Achaemenids, 357, 358                               Analogy, 6                                             Australopithecus afarensis, 101, 102, 117
Acheulian tools, 136 –137, 137, 138, 156, 160       Anasazi Culture. See Ancestral Puebloan                Australopithecus africanus, 88, 101
Acosta, José de, 194                                Ancestral Puebloan, 566, 586, 591–594, 591, 592,       Australopithecus anamensis, 101, 102, 104
Adams, Robert McC., 123, 312, 329, 342, 348,          593, 600 n. 72                                       Australopithecus bahrelghazali, 101
  354, 361                                          Andean, cultures. See Peruvian cultures                Australopithecus boisei. See Paranthropus boisei
Adaptationist models, 315                           Andrews, Anthony, 513, 514                             Australopithecus garhi, 101
Adaptive radiation, 197                             Angang (An-yang), 446–447                              Australopithecus ramidus, 101
Adena culture, 570, 575–576, 576, 577               Anthropology: deﬁned, 42; specializations in,          Australopithecus robustus. See Paranthropus
Aegean cultures, 468 – 470, 469                       42                                                     robustus
Aerial photographs, 52–53, 53                       Aq Kupruk II site, 409                                 Ayllu, 555–556
Afontova Gora II site, 212                          Arago skull, 157, 157                                  Aztec culture, 481–482, 516, 517–523, 518
Africa, cultural complexity in, 470–471, 471        Archaeological record: of cultural origins,            Aztec Ruin, 594
“African Eve Hypothesis.” See “Total                  106–109; deﬁned, 106–107; formation of,
  Replacement” model                                  45–49
“African Origins” (Eve) model. See “Total           Archaeology: of complex societies, 292–298;            Baboons, 111–112
  Replacement” model                                  description of archaeologists, 42, 43; history       Babylon, 324, 357, 604
Agency, 30                                            of, 12–32; holistic, 32–33, 313–315, 606;            Babylonian Empire, 357
Agriculture: Andean, 262, 267, 267–269,               objectives of, 2–9, 11–12; post-processual,          Bakhtiari, 348
  538 –539; deﬁned, 231; development of,              27–32, 40 n. 57; purpose (goals) of, 32–33;          Ball courts: Hohokam, 587; Maya, 508–509
  11–12, 243–246, 245, 473; origins of, 229,          quantitative methods in, 64–65; research             Bampo (Pan-p’o), 437, 438, 438, 439
  230 –235, 247–248, 248; in China, 261,              design, 51–56                                        Ban Chiang, 446
  435– 437, 436; in Egypt, 261, 73–375,             Archaeometry, deﬁned, 66                               Ban Mae Tha, 142
  402– 403 n. 6; in Indus Valley, 409–411;          Ardipithecus ramidus, 101, 103, 104                    Bandkeramik, 461, 461–462
  irrigated, 301–302, 360, 396, 450, 505, 549,      Arens, W., 143                                         Bands, cultural, 287–288
  585; Mesoamerican, 262–267, 485–486; in           Argissa-Maghula, 260, 460                              Barker, Grahame, 460
  temperate Europe, 260–261, 459, 459–462           “Argument from Design,” 15, 19, 21, 95                 Barley, domestication of, 244, 247–248, 253, 269,
Ahmose I, 385                                       Aristobulus, 408                                         459
AIDS epidemic, 96                                   Aristotle, 14                                          Bar-Yosef, Ofer, 140
Aiello, Leslie, 149                                 Art: Egyptian, 382–383, 389–391; in Indus              Bashidang, 261
’Ain al-Buhayra, 249                                  Valley, 421, 423; Peruvian, 547–549, 549;            Basketmaker culture, 591
’Ain Ghazal, 258 –259                                 Pleistocene, 169–172, 169, 170, 171, 178,            Bat Cave, 584
’Ain Mallaha (Eynan), 251–252, 252, 254               191 n. 35                                            Battle Ax People, 463, 475
Akchin, 585–586                                     Artifacts: analysis of, 59–63, 60, 62, 63, 82 n. 40;   Beadle, George, 265
Akhenaten, 386 –388                                   context of, 50; deﬁned, 43, 44; production and       Beaker culture, 463
Akkadians, 356 –357                                   preservation of, 49–51                               Beans, domestication of, 262, 266, 538, 569, 585
Albarracin-Jordan, Juan, 553                        Aryans, 423                                            Beer. See Pulque
Aleuts, 210                                         Ashmore, Wendy, 30, 52                                 Behavioral perspectives, 604
Alexander the Great, 389, 430 n. 10                 Asia site (Peru), 546                                  Beidha, 256–257, 257
Algaze, Guillermo, 341–342, 347                     Assyria, 357                                           Belfer-Cohen, Anna, 252
Allen, Woody, 12                                    Atapuerca, fossil from, 141                            Bellwood, P., 261
Ali Kosh, 257–258, 338                              Atawallpa, 558                                         Belzoni, Giovanni, 1–2
Altamira Cave, 169, 169–170                         Athens, J. Stephen, 299–300                            Bender, Barbara, 242




                                                            615
              616           INDEX


Berekhat Ram, 191 n. 35                              Byrd, Brian, 257                                   Chinampas, 518, 520
Bergson, Henri, 84                                   Byrne, R., 231                                     Choga Mami, 336
Bering Land Bridge. See Beringia                                                                        Choga Mish, 340
Beringia, 198 –200, 202, 222                                                                            Chopper tools, 142
Berlin, Henrich, 512                                 Cactus Hill, 203, 216, 216, 222                    Chronological (historical) types, 63
Bernal, Martin, 38 –39 n. 13, 395                    Cagny l’Epinette, 48, 48                           Chronometric dating, 66–71, 67
Bettinger, Robert, L., 241–242                       Cahokia, 579–581, 580                              Chuño, 555
Bible: age of world, 10; archaeological focus on,    Cajamarca, 553, 557                                Cishan culture, 436
   1; and cultural complexity issues, 286; Exodus    Calakmul, 504, 505, 516                            Civilization. See Cultural complexity
   story, 388; and New World, 194                    Calendrical systems, 171, 512–513, 513             Clacton (site), 156, 191 n. 32
Bicondylar angle, 117, 117, 130 n. 72                Calico Hills, 225 n. 11                            Clactonian assemblage, 156
“Big men,” 442, 577                                  Calpulli, 520                                      Class conﬂict, and cultural complexity, 307, 355
Bilzingsleben, 157                                   Cambyses, 389                                      Classiﬁcation: of artifacts, 61–63; of complex
Binford, Lewis: analysis of bones, 137; formation    “Candelabra” model. See “Multi-regional” model       cultures, 284–290; of primates, 101
   of cultural laws, 26; Mousterian tool kits, 161   Can-ek, 514                                        Cliff Palace, 592
Binford, Sally, 161                                  Cann, Rebecca L., 148–149                          Climate: and agricultural origins, 240–246;
Bintliff, John, 40 n. 57, 606                        Cannibalism, 143, 163, 487–488, 522                  and body shape, 168; of Late Pleistocene, 174,
Biological anthropology, 42, 81 n. 1                 Canyon de Chelly, 593                                479 n. 12
                                                     14
Biomechanics, of bipedalism, 117, 117, 130 n. 71       C dating. See Dating, radiocarbon                Clines, 93
Bipedalism, 103–105, 116 –118                        Carbonell, Eudald, 141                             Close, Angela, 374
Bir Kiseiba, 374                                     Cardal, 546, 547                                   Clovis, 195–196, 197, 206, 212, 216, 218, 221
Birdsell, J., 115                                    Carnac, 463                                        “Clovis-ﬁrst” model, 203, 205, 216
Black, Henry, 88                                     Carnarvon, Lord (George Edward Stanhope            Clovis points, 196, 197, 206, 218, 219
Black Mesa, 591                                         Molyneux), 24, 388                              Coast hopping. See Native Americans, Paciﬁc
Blanton, Richard, 500 –501                           Carneiro, Robert, 303–305, 309, 361, 473, 558        route
Blumenschine, R., 114                                Carroll, Lewis, 146                                Cobo, Fr. Bernabe, 533
Blumler, M. A., 231                                  Carter, Howard, 24, 388                            Codices, Maya, 511
Bodo, 152                                            Casa Grande, 587, 588                              Coe, Michael, 512
Boesch, C., 113                                      Casma Valley, 268, 544–545                         Cognitive processualism, 606
Boesch-Achermann, H., 113                            Çatalhöyök (Çatal Hüyük), 330–333, 332, 334,       Cohen, Mark, 238
Bogucki, Peter, 460                                     339, 366 n. 8                                   College, Susan, 256
Bonampak, 510                                        Caton-Thompson, Gertrude, 73, 375                  Colombus, Christopher, 194
Book of Mormon, 194                                  Cattle, domestication of, 247–248, 259, 374–375,   Colonization, human. See Migration, human
Border Cave, 152                                        402–403 n. 6                                    Columbus, Christopher, 194
Bordes, François, 160 –161                           Caverna de Pedra Pintada, 214, 214–215             Combe Grenal Valley, 160
Borges, Luis, 61                                     Census, 451                                        Commercial development models, 315
Boserup, Ester, 299                                  Central Place model, 296–297, 297                  Comparative analysis, 23–24, 281
Bow and arrow, 175–176, 243, 459                     Ceramics. See Pottery                              Competition, and evolution, 19–20, 22
Boxgrove, 141                                        Cerro Arena, 549                                   Complex societies. See Cultural complexity
Boyd, Brian, 276 –277 n. 43                          Cerro Sechin, 544, 545, 547                        Complexity theory, 605
Boyd, Robert, 241–242                                Cerros, 506–507                                    Condon, Richard, 501
BP/bp. See Dating techniques, radiocarbon            Chaco Canyon, 593–594                              Condorcet, Marquis de (Marie-Jean Caritat), 17
Bradley, Bruce, 205–206                              Chalcatzingo, 490, 491                             Confucius, 450
Brady, James, 52                                     Champollion, Jean-François, 393–394                Conkey, Margaret, 171, 172
Braidwood, Robert, 237                               Chan-Chan, 554                                     “Continuity” model. See “Multi-regional” model
Brain development: size changes, 99–100, 99;         Chang, K. C., 434, 435– 436, 439, 442, 449, 452    Copán, 511
   and speech (language) development, 122            Chanhu-daro, 415                                   Copland, Aaron, 56
Braun, David, 60, 572, 578                           Chaos theory, 605                                  Copleston, Frederick, 86
Breadfruit, 473                                      Chapin Mesa, 591                                   Cortés, Hernan, 481, 482, 514, 523
Broad-spectrum revolution, 250                       Caral, 546                                         Costin, Cathy, 291
Broken Hill. See Kabwe                               Chatelperronian industry, 167                      Cotton, domestication of, 538
Bronze-working, 445– 446, 446                        Chauvet Cave, 170, 170                             Covey, Alan, 555
Brooks, Alison, 153                                  Chavín de Huántar, 547–549                         Cowgill, George, 300, 496
Brumﬁel, Elizabeth, 291, 315, 496                    Chazal, Malcolm de, 105                            Cozumel, 516
Burbank, Luther, 231                                 Ch’eng-tzu-yai, 442                                Cranial capacity, 12–124, 123, 157
Bureaucracy, formation of, 305                       Chephren. See Khephren                             Crelin, E., 162
Burger, Richard, 543, 545, 546                       Chica, 555                                         Crete, early civilizations of, 468–469
Burials: Chinese, 434, 438 – 439, 439, 441, 447,     Chichén Itzá, 514, 515–516                         Cro-Magnon man, 168
   451; and cultural complexity, 294–295, 295,       Chichimeca, 516                                    Cronin, J. E., 123
   322 n. 35, 594; eastern North America, 573,       Chickens, domestication of, 473                    Crop rotation, 450
   575, 576, 579–581; Egyptian, 5–6, 6, 7,           Chiefdoms, 288–289                                 Crops, deﬁned, 231
   377, 379; at Jericho, 258; Maya, 505, 509;        Chilca, 540, 541                                   Crumley, Carol, 283
   Mesoamerican, 492, 493– 494; Mesopotamian,        Childe, V. Gordon, 25, 236, 299, 309, 405, 458     Cuello, 505
   294, 337, 355, 355–356; Mogollon, 589;            Chimpanzees (common and bonobo), 85,               Cueva Victoria, 141
   Natuﬁan, 242, 252, 254; Neandertal, 162;             112–113, 118, 129 n. 11, 130 n. 53              Cuicuilco, 492, 496
   Paleolithic, 145; Peruvian, 543, 546, 551, 551,   Chimú culture, 552, 554                            Cultivation, deﬁned, 231
   554; temperate Europe, 463– 467                   China: agricultural origins in, 435–437, 436;      Cultural complexity: causes of, 281–284,
Buto, 377                                               cultural complexity in, 433, 434, 440–451;        298–316, 306; and cultural collapse,
Butzer, Karl, 378                                       ecological setting of, 434–435                    291–292, 384, 422–424, 424, 513–516;
                                                                                                                       INDEX           617


  deﬁned, 279–280, 284 –290, 292–298;                  Diseases, 176, 354, 558, 582–583, 588. See also    Eridu, 338, 339, 341
  development of, in Aegean, 468–470, 469;               Paleopathology                                   Ervin, Sam, 100
  in Africa, 470 – 471, 471; in Andean South           Divine kingship, 383                               Eskimos, 195, 198, 210, 287, 458
  America, 535, 539–557; in China, 434,                Dixon, James, 213, 218                             Estrus, 111
  440 – 451; in Egypt, 377–395, 387; in Hawai’i,       Djer, 382                                          Ethnic identity, development of, 252
  474 – 475, 475; in Indus Valley, 405–407,            Djoser, 379                                        Ethnoarchaeology,
  412– 424; in Mesoamerica, 483, 486–513,              DK I (site), 107, 108                              Ethnocentrism, 4, 565
  516 –523; in North America, 567, 573–583,            Dmanisi, 139–140                                   Ethnology, 98, 113–115
  585–594; in Southwest Asia (Mesopotamia),            DNA, 90, 91, 148, 210                              Etowah, 579
  334 –358; in temperate Europe, 457, 463–468          Documentation, in cultural reconstruction, 6–9     Eugenics, 96
Cultural ecology, 26, 57–59                            Dog, domestication of, 253, 437                    Evolution: biological and cultural, 90–97,
Cultural evolution, 291, 311–313                       Dolni Vestonice, 177                                 148–149, 311–313; progress in
Cultural processes, explanation of, 11–12, 25–32       Dolukhanov, Paul, 459                              Evolutionism, 15–16, 17–22, 21
Cultural reconstruction, 5–9, 25                       Domestication: deﬁned, 231, 255; ecological        Excavation, 51–56
Cultural Resource Management (CRM), 52                   background of, 246–247; evidence of,             Existentialism, 25
Culture: in anthropology, 42; evolution of, 14,          253–256, 259, 262–269, 267, 402–403 n. 6,        Exodus, 388
  17–22, 90 –97, 236, 282, 311–313; nature of,           430 n. 18
  84 – 87, 120 –121, 129 n. 4, 129 n. 5; origins of,   Dominance hierarchy, 112
  83– 84, 87– 89, 97–120                               Donnan, Christopher, 551                           Factor analysis, 161
Culture history, 10 –11                                Dorn, Ronald, 216                                  Farafa, 374
Cuneiform, deﬁned, 349. See also Sumerian              Dos Pilas, 514                                     Faunal analysis, 57
  language and writing                                 Dowson, T. A., 171                                 Fayyum, 73, 74, 375, 403 n. 15
Cuvier, Georges, 17                                    Dravidian language, 420                            Fayyum Archaeological Project, 72–75
Cuzco, 554, 556 –557                                   Drennan, Dick, 289                                 Features, deﬁned, 44, 46, 81 n. 5
                                                       Dry Creek, site at, 219                            Feinman, G. M., 30, 292, 589
                                                       Duarte, C., 168                                    Feinstein, L., 501
Dadiwan culture, 436                                   Dubois, Eugene, 88, 140                            Feminist archaeology. See Gender
Dadiwan site, 438                                      Dunnell, Robert C., 284, 311, 465, 605             Fentress, M. A., 416
Dahlin, Bruce, 515–516                                 Dzibilchaltun, 502, 507                            Fertile Crescent, 246, 246–247, 260, 325
Dales, George, 421                                                                                        Fertility rates, 300–301
Dali, 154                                                                                                 Fiedel, Stuart J., 217
Dancey, William, 577                                   Earle, Timothy, 288, 291, 315                      Figgins, J. D., 195
Dart, Raymond, 88                                      Ebla, 358                                          Finegan, Jack, 353
Darwin, Charles R., 12, 13, 18–22, 19, 83, 87, 90,     Edwards, I. E. S., 380–381                         Finney, B., 473
  147, 180, 298, 601                                   Egalitarian bands, 287–288                         Fire, 190 n. 13
Dashur, 381                                            Egalitarianism, 287–288                            “First Family,” 103
Dating techniques, 66 –72; dendrochronology,           Egypt: agricultural origins in, 373–375,           Fisher, Elizabeth, 171
  67, 67; Electron Spin Resonance (ESR), 71;              402–403 n. 6; art and thought in, 389–391;      Fishing, 153, 154, 176
  paleomagnetic, 70; potassium-argon, 70;                 cultural complexity in, 369, 375–395, 387;      Flam, Louis, 408
  radiocarbon (14C), 67–70, 82 n. 48, 216–217,            ecological setting of, 370–373; intellectual    Flannery, Kent V., 244–245, 256, 262, 278 n. 91,
  217; relative, 71–72, 72; seriation method,             foundations of, 383; looting of ancient tombs      494
  71–72, 72; stratiﬁcation, 55–56, 55;                    in, 1. See also Hieroglyphs; Mummies and        Fleure, Herbert, 237
  thermoluminescence (TL), 70–71                          mummiﬁcation; Pyramids                          FLK I (site), 107
Daughtery, Richard, 59                                 El Mirador, 505, 506, 509                          Floral analysis, 57–58, 58
David (king of Judea), 389                             El Niño, 537                                       Flotation, 57–58, 58
Davies, M. S., 252–253                                 El-Omari, 377                                      Fluted points, 195, 218
De Perthes, Boucher, 87                                El Paraíso, 542, 542, 543, 544, 547, 574           Folsom (site), 195
De Soto, 557                                           El Tajín, 508                                      Folsom points, 195, 196, 197
De Vos, J., 140                                        Elamites, 357                                      Fontugne, M. 537
Decentralization, 291–292                              Eldridge, Niles, 22, 123                           Food storage, 244
Decision making, and cultural evolution, 289,          Electron Spin Resonance (ESR), 71                  Food taboos, 238–239
  345                                                  Electronic distance meter (EDM). See Total         Foucault, Michel, 28
Deffand, Maquise de, 115                                  station and EDM                                 Fowler, Melvin, 573
Deir el-Bahri, 382, 386                                Elephantine, 379                                   Fox, James, 512
Dendrochronology, 67, 67                               Elites, 282                                        Fox, John, 508
Dennell, Robin, 459                                    Emerson, Thomas, 580                               Frankfort, H., 345
Denticulated tools, 160                                Empedocles, 13                                     Franklin, Benjamin, 16
Derrida, Jacques, 27, 28                               Empiricism, 4, 26, 31                              Frayer, David W., 149, 150, 154, 162, 179
Descartes, René, 85                                    Encephalization, ratio of, 99–100                  Freeman, L. G., 144
Desert West region, 220                                Engels, Friedrich, 305, 307                        Freidel, David, 504, 506, 509, 510
Determinism, 15–17, 22                                 Enlightenment, The, 15–17, 601                     Fried, Morton, 286–287
DeVore, Irven, 85– 86, 109, 119–120                    “Entopic” phenomena, 171, 171–172                  Friedman, J., 310
Diakonoff, I., 307, 308                                Environment, reconstructing, 57–59, 58             Frisch, Rose, 111
Diamond, Jared, 270                                    Environmental circumscription, 302–305             Fritz, Gayle, 263, 264, 485
Diaz del Castillo, Bernal, 481                         Epi-Olmec writing, 490–491                         Fuhlrott, Johann Karl, 87
Dibble, Harold L., 48, 161                             Epipaleolithic, 254; tools, 73, 251                Functional differentiation and integration,
Diet and genetic “ﬁtness,” 94–95                       Equiﬁnality, 11                                       295–296
Dikov, N., 212                                         Erh-li-kang, 445. See also Shang culture           Functional redundancy, 287–288
Dillehay, Tom, 213                                     Erh-li-t’ou (Yen-shih), 443, 444, 445, 447, 449    Functional types, 61–63
              618           INDEX


Functionalism, 26, 310                               Hawai’i, colonization of, 471–475, 472              Huang Di, 440
Functionalist arguments, 315–316                     Hayden, Brian, 239–240, 242–243                     Hujiawuchang, 261
Funnel Beaker People, 460                            Haynes, C. V., Jr., 212                             Humanities, 42
                                                     Hemudu, 439, 440                                    Hunting, 156, 163, 175, 177, 191 n. 32, 200, 219,
                                                     Henneberg, M., 123–124                                250–251
Galapagos Archipelago, 19                            Henry, Donald, 250                                  Huxley, Thomas, 18, 20, 250
Galileo Galilei, 16, 20                              Heraclitus, 302                                     Hyksos, 385
Ganj Dareh, 254                                      Herculaneum, 7–8                                    Hypotheses: formation of, 51; testing of, 8–9, 26,
Ganwariwala, 415                                     Herodotus, 9, 13, 368, 370, 389–390                   49
García Márquez, G., 21                               Herto, 151, 152
Gellner, Ernst, 39 n. 45                             Heterarchy, 283
Gender, 31–32, 32, 40 n. 52                          Heuneburg, 465                                      “Ice-free corridor.” See Native Americans, ice
Genetic variability, 93–95                           Hexian, 142                                            free corridor
Genetics, 93–97                                      Heyerdahl, Thor, 298                                Icehouse Bottom site, 569
Genic exchange, 147                                  Hierakonpolis, 376, 377, 379                        Ideology, 282–283, 293, 293, 490, 503–505,
Geoarchaeology, 58 –59                               Hierarchy theory, 345–347                              520–522, 521, 522, 547–549, 549
Geometric Kebaran culture, 249                       Hieroglyphs, 391–395, 392, 393                      Ifrah, Georges, 350
Geographic Information System (GIS), 45, 65, 66      Hillman, Gordon, 240–241, 252–253, 256              Igbo-Ukwu, 470
Ghar-i-Mar, 409                                      Hissarlik, 469                                      Iltis, Hugh, 266
Giddens, A., 313                                     Historical materialism, 22–24                       Imhotep, 379
Gill, Richardson, 515                                Hittites, 386, 388                                  Inanna, 352
Giza, 379–382                                        Hoabinihian tool assemblage, 178                    Incisors, “shovel-shaped,” 142, 208–209, 209
Global Positioning System (GPS), 45, 53              Hochdorf, 465, 466                                  Indo-European languages, 424
Goats, domestication of, 247–248, 253–254, 255,      Hodder, Ian, 27–28, 33, 172, 243, 331, 366 n. 8,    Indo-Europeans, 423
  259                                                  462                                               Indus Valley: agricultural origins in, 409–411;
Göbekli Tepe, 330, 330                               Hodge, Mary, 517                                       cultural complexity in, 406–407, 407;
Golding, William, 163                                Hoelzer, Guy A., 149                                   ecological setting of, 407–409. See also
Gona, 113                                            Hoffman, Michael, 73                                   Harappan civilization
Gould, Stephen Jay, 20, 22, 123, 265–266, 311, 315   Hohokam culture, 301, 585–588, 586, 588             Infanticide, 115
Gourds, domestication of. See Squash,                Hole, Frank, 240–241, 337–338, 340                  Inference, 6, 10
  domestication of                                   Holism, deﬁned, 313                                 Inka (Tawantinsuyu) Empire, 350, 534, 539, 540,
Gradualism, 22                                       Holistic archaeology, 32–33, 40 n. 57, 313–315,        551, 554–557
Gran Dolina (Atapuerca), 141, 141                      606                                               Intelligence, 85–86
Grayson, Donald K., 221                              Homes, Oliver Wendell, Jr., 602                     Interdependence, 288, 295–296
Great Bath (Mohenjo-daro), 416–417                   Hominin (hominid), deﬁned, 101, 129 n. 129          Iron Age, of Europe, 465–468
Great Chain of Being (Scala Naturae), 14–15, 15      Holocene, 98                                        Iron-working, 449, 465, 470
Great Serpent Mound, 575                             Homer: 468, Iliad, 2, 470; Odyssey, 470             Irrigation, 301, 301–302, 585
Great Wall of China, 451                             Homo, origins of, 101, 105–106                      Isaac, Glyn, 137
Greek world-view, 13–14, 14, 15, 608–609             Homo antecessor, 190 n. 6, 191 n. 22                Isernia La Pineta, 141
Greenberg, Joseph, 210, 226 n. 37                    Homo erectus, 88–89, 101, 104, 129 n. 33, 134,      Isin, 357
“Greenhouse effect,” 98                                135, 134–145, 143, 156–157                        Itzá, 514
Grimal, Nicholas, 383                                Homo ergaster, 101, 104, 105, 129 n. 33,            Iztapan 2, 219
Guilá Naquitz Cave, 263, 266                           135–136, 136, 139, 139
Guinea pigs, domestication of, 268, 539              Homo ﬂoresiensis, 190 n. 3, 192 n. 68, 192 n. 69
Guitarrero Cave, 268                                 Homo habilis, 101, 104, 105, 129 n. 33              Jabrud Rock Shelter, 161
Gunpowder, 432                                       Homo heidelbergensis, 190 n. 6                      Jacobson, J., 424
Gürcütepe, 330                                       Homo louisleakeyi, 190 n. 6                         Jansen, M., 416
                                                     Homo rhodesiensis, 190 n. 6                         Jarmo, 237, 237, 333, 334
                                                     Homo rudolfensis, 101, 104, 129 n. 33               Java, fossil ﬁnds from, 140, 154
Haas, Jonathan, 542, 545                             Homo sapiens, origins of, 83–84                     Jefferson, Thomas, 16, 55, 194, 225 n. 2
Habuba Kabira South, 348                             Homo neanderthalensis: culture and society of,      Jemdat Nasr period, 341–349
Hadar region, 103, 104, 120                            87, 161–163; development of, 159, 159–160,        Jericho, 254, 258, 258, 328, 329, 334, 336, 574
Hadza culture, 114                                     165; disappearance of, 164, 169; distribution     Jerison, Harry, 99–100
Halaﬁan culture, 335, 336, 341                         of, 155, 159; origins of, 155                     Jett, Stephen, 589
Hallstatt culture, 465– 467, 466                     Homo sapiens sapiens: evolution of, 89, 110, 135,   Jews, Exodus of, 388
Hamilton, M. E., 95                                    157; origins of, 46, 132, 145–157, 163–169;       Jiangzhai, 437–438
Hammurabi, 357                                         sexual dimorphism of, 109–110                     Jinniushan, 154
Han culture, 450, 450                                Hood, Thomas, 607                                   Johannessen, Sissel, 555
Harappa, 412, 413, 415, 416                          Hooge, Paul, 577                                    Johanson, Donald, 103
Harappan civilization, 405– 407, 406, 412–424,       Hooten, Earnest, 99                                 Johnson, Gregory, 289, 312, 339–340, 342,
  432                                                Hopewell culture, 570, 575, 576–577                    345–347
Harlan, Jack, 237                                    Horace, 122                                         Johnson, Samuel, 512
Harner, Michael, 522                                 Houpeville, 161                                     Jomon pottery, 454 n. 8
Harris, Marvin, 238 –239, 308 –309, 452              Houseman, A. E., 132                                Judeirjo-daro, 415
Hartley, L. P., 5                                    Houston, Stephen, 507, 510, 512                     Juteson, John, 490, 512
Hasan Dag volcano, 331                               Howell, F. Clark, 143–144
Hassan, Fekri, 74, 375, 376, 378                     Hsiao-T’un, 447
Hastorf, Christine, 555                              Huaca del Sol, 552                                  Kabwe (Broken Hill), 152
Hatshepsut, 382                                      Huaca Florida, 543                                  Kalahari Bushmen, 113–114, 285, 285, 287
                                                                                                                     INDEX          619


Kalibangan, 413, 415                                Language: in New World, 195, 210; origins of,      Mangelsdorf, Paul, 263, 264
Kaminaljuyu, 505                                      122, 162. See also Maya writing                  Manioc, domestication of, 268
Kanjera, 152                                        Lan-t’ien, 142                                     Mao Zedong, 12, 432
Kant, Immanuel, 284                                 Lapita cultural complex, 473–474, 474              Maqiao culture, 435
Karnak, 385                                         Largo Velho, 168, 168                              Marcus, Joyce, 494, 504, 510
Katanda, 154                                        Larsa, 357                                         Maritime resources. See Fishing
Kaufman, Terrence, 490                              Las Victorias, 490                                 Marshall, Sir John, 24, 405
K’axob, 505                                         Lascaux Cave, 170, 170                             Marx, Karl, 4, 22–24, 23, 281, 282, 305, 307, 458,
Kebara Cave, 164 –165                               Last Common Ancestor (LCA), 117–118                 503, 602
Kebaran culture, 249–250                            Lattimore, Owen, 452                               Marxism, 22–24
Kelly, Robert L., 221, 228                          Lauden, Larry, 28                                  Marxist analyses of cultural evolution, 239, 291,
Kemp, Barry J., 293, 384                            Le Page du Pratz (explorer), 582                    305–311, 315, 316, 452, 458
Kennedy, K., 423                                    Leakey, Louis, 107, 147, 225 n. 11                 Materialism, 15–16, 22–24
Kenoyer, J. Mark, 291, 412, 421, 425                Leakey, Mary, 102                                  Materialist determinism, 22–24
Khasekhemwy, 382                                    Leakey, Meave, 103                                 Mathews, Peter, 512
Khephren (Chephren), 383                            Leakey, Richard, 106                               Maya calendar, 491, 512–513, 513
Khufu, 379                                          LeCarré, John, 286                                 Maya culture: decline of, 513–516; development
Kili Ghul Mohammad, 409                             Lee, Richard, 285, 285                              of, 501–513; ecological setting of, 484–485,
Kim, Seung-Og, 441– 442                             Legge, Anthony J., 250–251                          502–503
Kinzey, W. G., 116                                  Lehner, Mark, 380, 382                             Maya writing, 511–513
Kipp, R. S., 308                                    Lekson, Stephen, 590                               Mayapán, 516
Kipu (quipu), 350, 556, 556                         Le Moustier, 160                                   McClung de Tapia, Emily, 265
Kirch, Patrick, 473                                 Leonard, W. R., 117                                McCorriston, Joy, 240–241
Kirkby, A., 485                                     Leone, Mark, 29                                    McGuire, Randall H., 33–34, 290, 590
Kish, 353                                           Leroi-Gourhan, Andre, 171                          McIntosh, R. J., 470
Kivas, 589, 591                                     Leroi-Gourhan, Arlette, 162                        McIntosh, S. K., 470
Klasies River Mouth caves, 151, 151–152             Les Eyzies, 174–175, 175                           Mead site, 213
Klein, Richard, 140, 141, 145, 152, 155, 162, 179   Levantine cultures, 249–252                        Meadow, Richard, 410
Knapp, B., 30                                       Lewis-Williams, J. D., 171                         Meadowcroft Rock Shelter, 202, 215, 215
“Kneeing-in.” See Bicondylar angle                  Lewthwaite, J., 465                                Megaliths, 462–465, 462, 464
KNM-ER 1470, 106                                    Liangzhu culture, 435                              Megiddo, 386
KNM-ER 15000, 106, 136                              Libby, Willard, 67, 68                             Mehrgarh, 409, 409–410
Knorosov, Yuri, 512                                 Lichtenberg, George C., 228                        Meiosis, 90–91
Knossos, 469                                        Lieberman, Philip, 162                             Mellaart, James, 330, 333
Knüsel, Christopher, 467                            Lightfoot, K., 30, 589                             Melnick, Don J., 149
Kohl, Philip, 313                                   Linear A writing, 469                              Meltzer, David J., 218, 221
Kom Ombo, 374                                       Liu, Li, 442                                       Meluhha, 414
Konoj, 557                                          Llamas, domestication of, 262, 268, 539, 559       Memphis (Egypt), 377, 378, 379, 385, 457, 507
Koobi Fora, 108, 136                                Localization, 291–292                              Mendel, Gregor, 20, 90, 129 n. 17
Kostenki-Bershevo culture, 177                      Locke, John, 298                                   Mencken, H. L., 24
Kot Diji, 412                                       Loess, 435                                         Menes, 377
Kotosh, 543, 547                                    Longshan culture, 440–443, 441                     Mer-ne-Ptah, 388
Kotosh religious tradition, 543                     Looting of sites, 2, 50, 50                        Mesa Verde, 591, 592, 593
Kowalewski, S. A., 501                              Loss of ﬁtness, and domestication, 231–232         Mesoamerica: agricultural origins in, 262–267,
Krapina, 163, 168                                   Lothal, 413, 415, 417, 418                          267, 485–486; cultural complexity in,
!Kung Bushmen, 115, 163                             Lovejoy, Owen, 116, 119                             486–501; ecological setting of, 484–485;
                                                    Lowther, Gordon, 114                                Spanish conquest of, 523. See also Maya
                                                    Lucretius, 17                                       culture
La Chapelle-aux-Saints, 162                         “Lucy,” 103, 104, 105, 117, 120. See also          Mesolithic, 244, 459–460
La Ferrassie, 162                                     Australopithecus afarensis                       Mesopotamia. See Southwest Asia
La Galgada, 543                                     Luminescence dating, 70–71                         Messelier, J., 279
La Mojarra Stela 1, 490                             Lyell, Charles, 17, 87                             Microlithic stone tools, 249, 251, 479 n. 11
La Tenè, 465, 466, 467– 468                                                                            Middle Awash, 103, 151
La Venta, 488 – 489, 488, 489, 491, 493                                                                Middle Kingdom (Egypt), 384–385
Laetoli, 44, 45, 102, 152, 601                      Ma’adi, 377                                        Middle Paleolithic, 157–163
Laguna de los Cerros, 489                           Maat, 391                                          Migration, 93
Lake Bonneville, 248                                MacNeish, Richard, 263–264                         Migrations, human, 172–179, 193 n. 134,
Lake Mungo, 172                                     “Maﬁa model,” 465                                   209, 226 n. 37, 479 n. 19. See also Hawai’i,
Lake Shelby, 569                                    Magan, 414                                          colonization of; Native Americans, Atlantic
Lake T’ai-hu area, 439                              Maize, domestication of, 262, 263–266, 267, 485,    route, “ice-free corridor” route, Paciﬁc route
Lake Texcoco, 218, 226 n. 68                          538, 544, 555, 569, 578–579, 584–585             Mill, John Stuart, 18
Lake Turkana region, 136                            Majuangou, 140                                     Miller, Daniel, 412, 415, 416, 421
Lake Ushki, 212                                     Male parental investment, 119                      Miller, Mary Ellen, 510
Lamarck, Jean, 17                                   Malraux, Andre, 456                                Millet, domestication of, 261, 436–437
Lampo, Jia, 142                                     Mal’ta site, 212                                   Millon, Rene, 496
Landa, Bishop, 511                                  Malthus, Thomas, 18, 19                            Mills, Barbara, 594
Landscape archaeology, 30                           Mammoth site, 213                                  Milner, George, 580
Lane, Mary Ellen, 73                                Manching, 467                                      Minnis, Paul, 585
Langdon, S., 353                                    Mandryk, C. A. S., 204                             Minoan culture, 469
              620           INDEX


Minshat Abu Omar, 377                               Nevali Çori, 330                                   Peake, Harold, 237
“Missing link,” search for, 87                      New Archaeology, 25–27                             Pearsall, Deborah, 268, 538
Mississippian culture, 578 –583                     New Kingdom (Egypt), 385–389                       Pebble-tool complex, 211
Mitanni, 386                                        New World: See Mesoamerica; North America;         Peebles, Christopher, 580
Mitosis, 90 –91                                       Peruvian cultures                                P’ei-li-kang (Peiligang) culture, 436, 437
Mobility, 228, 235–234                              Nichols, Deborah, 499, 501                         Peloponnesian War, 13
Moche, 549–552, 550, 563 n. 61, 563–564 n. 64,      Niles, Susan, 556                                  Pengtoushan, 261
  588                                               Nissen, Hans, 342–344                              Peruvian cultures: agricultural origins in, 267,
Mochica (Moche) culture                             “Noah’s Ark” model. See “Total Replacement”           267–269, 538–539; cultural complexity of,
Moctezuma, 523                                        model                                               535, 539–557; ecological setting of, 304,
Mogollon culture, 586, 588 –590, 589, 590           Nomadism, 256, 451                                    536–537; European conquest of, 557–558;
Mohenjo-daro, 408, 413, 415, 416, 416–417,          Nomarchs, 384                                         warfare in, 545, 551, 557
  422, 423                                          North America: agricultural origins in, 569–573,   Peterson, Nicolas, 285
Molecular biology, 148 –149                           572, 584–585; cultural complexity in,            Petrie, Sir Flinders, 376
Montaingne, Miche Eyquem de, 315                      573–583, 585–594; ecological settings in,        Physical anthropology. See Biological
Monte Albán, 500 –501, 501                            568–569                                             anthropology
Monte Verde, 203, 213, 213–214, 222                 Northwest Coast (North America), 539               Phytoliths, 538
Moore, Andrew M. T., 240 –241                       Nucleotide, 90                                     Picasso, Pablo, 65
Morgan, Lewis Henry, 23                             Nye, William, 606                                  Piedra Parada, 542
Morozova, Galina, 342, 366 n. 31                                                                       Piggot, Stuart, 407
Mortuary evidence and practices. See Burials                                                           Pigs, domestication of, 238–239, 248, 259,
Moseley, Michael, 539, 544                          Oasis hypothesis, 236–237                             441–442, 473
Moundsville, 580 –581                               Oats, domestication of, 459                        Pithecanthropines, 88
Mount Ararat, 353                                   Oaxaca, 263, 493–494, 500–501                      Pizarro, Francisco, 557–558
Mount Vesuvius, 7, 8                                Oaxaca Barrio, 499                                 Pleistocene, 97
Mousterian (Middle Paleolithic) tools, 73,          Objectivity, 26, 28                                Pleistocene extinctions, 202, 220–221
  160 –161, 160, 161, 166 –167                      O’Brien, Michael, 572                              Plow, 450, 462
Moyle, Peter, 589                                   Occupational specialization, 280, 291, 448, 552    Poliochni, 468
mtDNA (mitochondrial DNA), 148–149, 169,            O’Connell, J., 114                                 Political models, 315
  206, 207, 212                                     O’Connor, David, 382                               Pollock, Susan, 347
Mughal, 408                                         OH 62, 106                                         Polymorphism, 173
Mugharet es-Shubbabiq Cave, 161                     Ohalo II, 249–250, 250                             Polynesian cultures, 539
“Multi-regional” model, 46, 146, 146–157, 158       Old Kingdom (Egypt), 377–383                       Polytypy, 173
Mummies and mummiﬁcation, 386, 390, 534             Oldowan tools, 61–63, 63, 108, 140                 Pompeii, 7–8, 8, 9
Murphy site, 577                                    Olduvai Gorge, 9, 61, 107–108, 113, 122, 137,      Pope, Alexander, 14
Murra, John, 536                                      607                                              Pope, G. G., 154, 179
Mutations, 90 –91                                   Olmec culture, 486–491, 487, 488, 489, 490, 491    Popper, Karl, 11
Mutualism, deﬁned, 231–232, 233                     Olorgesailie, 113, 137, 138                        Population growth: and agriculture, 269; and
Mycenae, 469, 469                                   Olson-Chubbuck, 219                                   cultural complexity, 299–301, 303–305, 360,
Mycenaean culture, 469– 470                         Omo, 152                                              397, 425, 496, 558
                                                    Oppida, 467–468                                    Positivism, 29, 313, 605
                                                    Optimal foraging models, 235                       Possehl, Gregory, 405, 412, 413, 422–423
Na-Dene speakers, 210, 226 n. 37                    Orben, Robert, 594                                 Post-modernism, 29, 39 n.45
Nabta, 374                                          Orwell, George, 33                                 Post-processual archaeology, 27–32, 40 n. 57
Nakbe, 505, 506                                     Oriental despotism. See Wittfogel, Karl            Postgate, Nicholas, 325, 354
Naqada, 376 –377                                                                                       Potassium-argon dating, 70
Narikotome “boy.” See Homo ergaster                                                                    Potatoes, domestication of, 268, 538
Narmer Palette, 374, 374, 501                       Pacal, 513                                         Pottery, 60–61
Natchez, 582                                        Paciﬁc route. See Native Americans, Paciﬁc route   Poverty Point, 573–574, 574
Native Americans: arrival of, 196; Atlantic         Palenque, 508, 513, 514                            Powell, J. F., 209
  route, 205, 205–207; deﬁned, 568; “ice-free       Paleoindian economy, 217–220. See also Native      Pozorski, Sheila, 545
  corridor” route, 198, 198 –202, 203, 222;           Americans                                        Pozorski, Thomas, 545
  Paciﬁc route, 202–204, 204; physical features     Paleomagnetic dating, 70                           Pre-projectile point stage, 211
  of, 196, 207–210                                  Paleontology, 98–106                               Preclassic Maya, 505–507
Natuﬁan culture, 242, 249, 251–252, 252,            Paleopathology, 58. See also Diseases              Predynastic period (Egypt), 375–377
  277 n. 61                                         Paloma, 540                                        Preservation, 49
Natural habitat hypothesis, 237                     Pampa de las Llamas-Moxeke, 544, 545, 545, 549     Price, Douglas, 460, 461–462
Natural selection, 27, 91–92, 95–96                 P’an-keng, 446                                     Primates, evolution of, 100–102
Nausharo, 412                                       Pan-p’o-ts’un (Bampo), 437, 438, 438–439           Primatologist. See Biological anthropology
Nazca Valley, 549                                   Papyri, looting of, 1                              Primatology, 98, 109–113
Neander Valley, 87                                  Paquimé, 590                                       Probability statistics, 64–65
Neandertals. See Homo neanderthalensis              Paranthropus aethiopicus, 101                      Problem-oriented archaeology, 51–52
Nebhepetre’ Mentuhotpe, 385                         Paranthropus boisei, 101                           Processual archaeology. See New Archaeology
Nenana Complex tools, 213, 213                      Paranthropus robustus, 101                         Prognathism, 159
Neo-Marxism, 310 –311                               Parpola, A., 420                                   Progress, 25
Neolithic, 30, of China, 435– 440, 436, 454 n. 8;   Parsons, Jeffrey, 496                              Proskouriakoff, Tatiana, 512
  of Egypt, 373–375; of Indus Valley, 409–411;      Particulate theory of inheritance, 90              “Proto-Elamite” trading state, 356
  of Southwest Asia, 252–260, 329–334; of           Pathiani Kot, 415                                  Protocultural behavior, 85
  temperate Europe, 459– 465                        Pauketat, Timothy, 580                             Provenience, deﬁned, 53, 54
                                                                                                                     INDEX           621


Ptolemy V, 393                                    Samarran culture, 335, 336, 341                       Skinner, Cornelia Otis, 119
“Public” archaeology, 52                          Sampling, 64–65                                       Skhul Cave, 164–165
Pueblo Bonito, 593, 593, 594                      San Andreas Tuxtla, 490, 491                          Smenkhare, 388
Pulque, 497, 523                                  San José Mogote, 493, 494, 495                        Smith, Adam, 19
Punctuated equilibrium, 22                        San Lorenzo, 487–488, 491                             Smith, Bruce, 571
Pyramids: Egyptian, 379–382, 380, 381; Mayan,     Sandalja II site, 176                                 Smith, Fred H., 168, 179
  505–506, 509; Mesoamerican, 496–497, 498,       Sanders, William T., 496, 501                         Smith, Michael, 517
  516                                             Sanxigdui, 447                                        Smith, William “Strata,” 17
                                                  Saqqara, 379                                          Snaketown site, 587
                                                  Sarcina, A., 416                                      Social complexity. See Cultural complexity
Qafzeh, 164, 164 –165, 166                        Sargon of Akkad, 356                                  Social sciences, 42
Q’em-Xia-wo, 142                                  Savanna environments, 98                              Social typology, 286–292
Qin Dynasty, 450 – 451                            Scapulimancy, 442                                     Sociocultural anthropology, 42
Qin Shi Huang, 450, 451                           Scavenging, 113–114, 120, 121                         Sociological perspectives, 604–605
Qori Kancha, 557                                  Schaller, George, 114                                 Soffer, Olga, 165–166, 177
Quantitative methods, 64–65                       Schele, Linda, 504, 506, 509, 510                     Solecki, Ralph, 162
Quaternary period, 97                             Schiffer, Michael B., 590                             Solomon, 389
Quetzalcóatl, 516                                 Schild, Romauld, 374, 375                             Solutrean, 205–206, 206
Quilter, Jeffrey, 542, 543, 544                   Schliemann, Heinrich, 1–2, 3                          Sonviian tool assemblage, 178
Quinoa, domestication of, 538                     Schmandt-Besserat, Denise, 346                        South America. See Peruvian cultures
Quirigua, 511                                     Schmidt, Alfred, 22                                   Southwest Asia: agricultural origins in, 246–248;
Quipu. See Kipu                                   Schöningen, 191 n. 32                                    cultural complexity in, 249–260, 258, 259,
                                                  Schortman, Edward M., 308, 510–511                       295, 325, 328–358, 340; ecological setting of,
                                                  Schurr, Theodore G., 193 n. 134, 207                     32–328 sedentism in, 256–257
Ra, 383, 385                                      Schwalbe, Gustav, 88                                  Soybeans, domestication of, 261
Races: and cultural achievements, 395;            Scientiﬁc method, 15–16                               Spear thrower. See Atlatl
  formation of, 93, 147; origins of, 173          Scoville, 577                                         Speech (language), origins of, 122, 162
Radiocarbon dating (14Carbon), 67–70              Seals, stamp and cylinder, 345–346, 419–421           Spencer, Herbert, 18, 602
Raikes, Robert, 422                               Sechin Alto, 544                                      Spuhler, J., 353
Ramenofsky, Ann, 583                              Sedentary communities, deﬁned, 234                    Spy (site), 88
Ramesses II, 388                                  Seed “banks,” 269                                     Squash, domestication of, 262, 266, 571, 584
Rank-size rule, 346 –347, 359                     Segregation, law of, 90                               Stanford, Dennis, 205–206
Rao, S. R., 417                                   Seqenenre’ Ta’o II, 385                               Stanish, Charles, 543
Rathje, William, 43                               Sequences, chronological, 10                          Stanley, D. J., 435
Rationalism. See Enlightenment, The               Serengeti Plain, 105, 107                             States: deﬁned, 289–290, 290; and urbanism, 297
Read, Dwight, 40 n. 52                            Seriation dating, 71–72, 72                           St. Acheul (site), 136
Reciprocity, 288                                  Service, Elman, 286–287                               Steele, D. G., 209
Redman, Charles, 333–334                          Seshonk I, 389                                        Steinheim, 156–157, 180
Reindeer, Pleistocene cultural uses of, 175       Settlement patterns, 296–298, 297, 343, 430 n. 26     Stellmoor site, 175
Relative dating, 67, 71–72, 72                    Sexual dimorphism, 109–111                            Sterkfontein Cave, 104
Remote sensing techniques, 53                     Sexual selection, 93, 111, 118–119                    Steward, Julian, 25, 287, 299
Renfrew, Colin, 40 n. 57, 260–261, 423–424, 606   Shaffer, Jim, 407, 425                                Stocker, T., 544
Research design, 51–56                            Shakespeare, 601                                      Stoltman, J. B., 578
Resource-stress model, 239–240                    Shako, 389                                            Stuart, David, 512
Reynolds, Robert, 263                             Shamanism, 452                                        Solutrean point, 44
Rice, domestication of, 244, 261, 435, 439        Shang culture, 443, 444, 445–449                      Stone tools: analysis of, 63, 108, 136–137,
Rick, John, 537                                   Shanidar Cave, 162                                       160–161; earliest, 105–106
Richards, Janet, 30                               Shanks, Michael, 4, 27, 28, 313                       Stonehenge, 463, 464, 465, 574
Richerson, Peter, 241–242, 267                    Sharing, 285                                          Stoneking, Mark, 148–149
Rick, John, 537–538                               Sharp, 236                                            Strabo, 407, 430 n. 10
Rig Veda, 423                                     Sharuhen, 385                                         Stratiﬁed societies, 288–290
Rindos, David, 231, 232, 233, 572                 Sheep, domestication of, 247–248, 253–254, 259        Stratigraphy, 55–56, 55
Ritchie-Roberts Site, 218, 218                    Sheep Rock Shelter, 584                               Straus, Lawrence, 162, 167, 206
Roads, Peruvian, 553, 556                         Shennan, Steven, 458                                  Streuve, V. V., 307
Robertson, M. L., 117                             Sherds, deﬁned, 44                                    Stringer, Chris, 156
Roosevelt, Anna, 214 –215                         Shipman, Pat, 137                                     Stuart, David, 512
Rosetta Stone, 393                                “Shovel-shaped” incisors. See Incisors, “shovel-      Styles: deﬁned, 60; seriation of, 71–72, 72
Rossetti, Christina, 97                              shaped”                                            Suhm, P. F., 17
Rowlands, M. J., 310                              Shroud of Turin, 68                                   Sumerian civilization, 349–356
Rowley-Conwy, Peter A., 250–251, 461              Siberia, 212                                          Sumerian language and writing, 349–354, 350,
Russell, Bertrand, 41, 602                        Sickle-cell anemia, 92–93                                351
Rutherford, Ernest, 609                           Sicuani, 553                                          Sundadonts, 210
                                                  Sinanthropus, 88                                      Sunﬂowers, domestication of, 571
                                                  Singer, R., 152                                       Surveys, systematic, 51
Saggs, H. W. F., 351, 394                         Sinodonts, 210                                        “Survival of the ﬁttest,” 22. See also Competition
Sahara Desert, 470                                Sipán, 551, 551                                          and evolution
Sahlins, Marshall D., 239, 284                    Sites: context within, 50; deﬁned, 44, 46; locating   Susa, 357
Saint-Césaire, 167                                   and excavating, 52–56; mapping of, 53              Susiana Plain, 339–340, 345–349, 360
Salazar-Burger, Lucy, 543, 546                    Skeletal developments, 158                            Svoboda, J., 157
             622           INDEX


Swanscombe, 156, 160, 180                        Trade, development of, 331, 341–342, 413–415,      Wendorf, Fred, 374, 375
Swan Point, 213                                    414                                              Were-jaguar motif, 490
Swarts Ruins, 589                                Trail Creek Cave, 219                              Western Paciﬁc islands, colonization of,
Sweet potatoes, domestication of, 268            Transhumance, 538                                   471–475
Swidden agriculture, 487                         Tribes, deﬁned, 288                                Whalen, Michael, 590
Symbols, 145, 152–153, 170 –172, 171, 178        Trigger, Bruce, 28, 32–33, 40 n. 57, 281–282,      Wheat, domestication of, 237, 246, 247–248,
Symons, Donald, 118 –119                           297, 312, 313–315, 384, 606                       253, 269, 459
Sympathetic magic, 171                           Trinkaus, Eric, 156, 159–160, 163, 164, 167, 168   Wheeler, Sir Mortimer, 56, 423
Systems, analysis of, 26                         Trojan War, 1–2                                    White, Leslie A., 26, 85, 292–293, 344–345
                                                 Troy, 2, 3, 468                                    White, Randall, 145
                                                 Tula, 500, 516, 517                                White, Tim, 151
Tabun Cave, 55–56, 164 –165                      Turner, C., 209                                    Whitehead, Alfred North, 172
Tai Wang, 452                                    Tutankhamun, 5–6, 6, 7, 24, 388, 404 n. 52         Whitley, David, 216
Tainter, Joseph, 576                             Twain, Mark, 9, 86, 609                            Whitman, Walt, 606
Tamaulipas, 263, 278 n. 90                       Typology, deﬁned, 61–63                            Whittle, Alasdair, 461
Tambo Viejo, 549                                 2001: A Space Odyssey, 83–84                       Wilbour Papyrus, 386
Tanner, N., 113                                                                                     Willendorf, 178
Tan Tan, 191 n. 35                                                                                  Williams, Ralph Vaughn, 56
Taphonmy, deﬁned, 45, 81 n. 9; examples of,      Uaxactún, 507, 508, 509–510                        Wilmsen, Edwin, 113
   46 – 49, 143–144, 162, 190 n. 11, 225 n. 11   Ubaid period, 338–341                              Wilson, Alan C., 148–149
Tarascan state, 516                              ‘Ubeidiya, 140, 140, 155                           Wilson, John A., 383
Taro, 473                                        Umma, 348                                          Wittfogel, Karl, 301–302, 309, 313, 396
Taube, Karl, 512                                 Umm al-Qaab, 45                                    Wolfram, Seven, 12
Taung site, 88                                   Universal transverse Mercator (UTM),               Wolpoff, Milford H., 154, 162, 179
Tawantinsuyu, 554                                  81–82 n. 20                                      Woodland period (North America), 575–578
Tehuacán, 263–264, 485, 584                      Upham, Steadman, 30, 584                           Woolley, Sir Leonard, 24, 56, 353, 355
Tell, deﬁned, 328                                Upper Paleolithic, 166–168, 607; tools, 73, 166,   Wordsworth, William, 41
Tell Abu Hureyra, 251, 254 –256, 256               607                                              Worsae, Jens Jacob, 17
Tell al-Quelli, 339                              Ur, 24, 56, 56, 348, 353, 355, 357, 448            Wright, Henry T., 289, 339, 345–347, 430 n. 26
Tell es-Sawwan, 336 –337                         Ur death pit, 294, 355, 355–356                    Writing: origins of: in Aegean, 469; in China,
Tell el-Amarna, 386                              Ur-Nammu, 357                                       438, 443, 447; in Egypt, 391–395, 393, 393; in
Tennyson, Alfred Lord, 83, 157, 180              Urban, Patricia, 510–511                            Indus Valley, 406, 419–421, 420; in Mayan
Tenochtitlán, 517, 518, 523                      Urbanism, 297, 348                                  culture, 506, 511–513, 511; in Mesopotamia,
Taosi, 441                                       Uruk (city), 339, 341, 342–345, 348, 349, 417,      349–354, 350, 351
Teosinte, 265–266                                  507                                              Wu Rukang, 142
Teotihuacán, 448, 496, 497–500, 498, 499, 502,   Uruk culture, 341–349, 377                         Wymer, J., 152
   507, 523, 577, 580                            Utopian movements, 286
Tepe Hissarlik, 1–2, 3                           Uxmal, 508
Teshik-Tash, 162                                                                                    Xenophon, 324
Testart, Alain, 244                                                                                 Xia Dynasty, 443
Thapar, B. K., 423                               Valladas, Helene, 164                              Xishuipo, 439
Thebes, 1, 385                                   Valley of Mexico, 492, 496–500                     Xochicalco, 500
Thermoluminescence (TL) dating, 70–71            Vallois, H., 176
Thompson, Nainoa, 473                            Variability, genetic, 92
Thomsen, Christian, 17                           Varna, 463                                         Yams, 473
Thorne, A. G., 154, 179                          Vegeculture, 261                                   Yangshao culture, 437–440, 438, 439
“Three Dynasties” of China, 449                  “Venus” ﬁgurines, 177, 178                         Yanomamö, 163
Thucydides, 13                                   Vértesszölös, 144, 157                             Yeats, W. B., 49
Thurber, James, 309                              Village life, 235, 435. See also Sedentary         Yerkes, Richard, 578
Thutmosis III, 386                                 communities; Urbanism                            Yinxu phase, 446–449
Tikal, 502, 508, 509, 509, 510, 516              Vindija, 168                                       Young, T. Cuyler, 28
Tilley, Christopher, 1, 27, 28, 30, 313          Virchow, Rudolf, 87                                Young, Thomas, 393
Tiwanaku culture, 552–553, 553, 554, 588         Vivian, G., 593                                    Yuan K’ang, 17
Tlapacoya, 490                                   Vix, 466–467, 467                                  Yuan-chun-miao, 439
Tlatilco, 490, 492                                                                                  Yuanmou, 142
Todd, L. C., 221                                                                                    Yuanxian, 142, 154
Tohono O’odham (formerly Papago), 586            Wadjak, 178
“Tollund man,” 51                                Wahkare’ Khety III, 378
Tolstoy, Paul, 496                               Warfare, and cultural evolution, 302–305           Zagarell, Alan, 308
Toltec culture, 516, 517                         Wari, 552, 553, 554                                Zawi Chemi Shanidar, 254
Tomaltepec, 493                                  Warka. See Uruk (city)                             Zebu, domestication of, 410
Tooby, John, 85– 86, 109, 119–120                Waste, of resources, 497                           Zhengzhou (Chengchou), 445, 446
Torralba, 143–144, 145, 158                      Water buffalo, domestication of, 448               Zhou (Chou) culture, 449, 450, 452
“Total Replacement” model, 46, 146, 146–157,     Wattle-and-daub construction, 485, 486, 493, 581   Zhoukoudian, 88, 89, 14–143, 145, 150, 154,
   158, 165, 192 n. 68                           Webster, David, 305                                  156, 158, 166, 177–178
Total station and EDM, 53–54, 54                 Weidenreich, Franz, 143, 147                       Ziggurats, 344
Toth, Nicholas, 108                              Weil, Simone, 602                                  Zinjanthropus, 107
Townsend, Patricia, 115                          Weisner, Polly, 60                                 Zoquean language, 490
Toynbee, Arnold, 327                             Welles, Orson, 302                                 Zvelebil, Marek, 459, 461
