12
Later Complex Societies of the
Old World

     The day may come when, contemplating a
     world given back to the primeval forest, a
     human survivor will have no means of even
     guessing how much intelligence Man once
     imposed upon the forms of the earth, when he
     set up the stones of Florence in the billowing
     expanse of the Tuscan olive-groves. No trace
     will be left then of the palaces that saw
     Michelangelo pass by, nursing his grievances
     against Raphael; and nothing of the little Paris
     cafes where Renoir once sat beside Cezanne,
     Van Gogh beside Gauguin. Solitude, vicegerent
     of Eternity, vanquishes men’s dreams no less
     than armies, and men have known this ever
     since they came into being and realized that
     they must die.
     Andre Malraux




     T        o imply that the rich ancient civilizations of Greece, Ghana, Germany, Japan,
              Thailand, and other areas beyond the “primary civilizations” we have considered
     in earlier chapters were “secondary” in some sense is to imply an inappropriate sense of a
     hierarchy of importance. In many ways these later states and empires were largely
     independent developments—creations of their own environments, peoples, and unique
     histories, even if they incorporated elements from earlier civilizations. Interactions among
     the world’s many different cultures, moreover, have gradually increased in the past two
     millennia, with the balance of power and wealth frequently shifting from place to place and
     time to time.
           But ancient cultures of temperate Europe, Sub-Saharan Africa, Southeast Asia, and
     many other areas were, in fact, inﬂuenced by the ﬁrst civilizations, and to some extent were
     derivatives of them. And while European cultures, for example, eventually came to
     dominate the civilizations of Egypt, China, and Mesopotamia, they did so partly on the
     basis of the forms of agriculture and technology invented by these earlier civilizations.

                                                    456

                                                   LATER COMPLEX SOCIETIES OF THE OLD WORLD               457


      It is beyond the scope of this book
to review these later states and empires in
great detail,1 and, with the exception of                       A.D. 600   Settlers from the Society and Marquesas islands
Europe, only a few of them are described                                   reach Hawai’i in the Paciﬁc

brieﬂy at the end of this chapter to                              15 B.C.  Roman Conquest of central and western Europe

illustrate the diversity of ancient cultures
                                                                200 B.C.   Settlers from Fiji and Samoa reach the Society and
and the extent to which after about 3000                                   Marquesas islands in the Paciﬁc
b.c. the Old World became a mosaic                           475–15 B.C.   La `
                                                                              Tene period in Europe
of evolving cultures, none of which
developed in isolation. From the last few                   800–475 B.C.   Halstatt period in Europe
millennia b.c. onward, Old World his-
tory is a dizzyingly complex tapestry in                       1000 B.C.   Iron Age begins in Europe

which to separate individual strands
                                                               1000 B.C.   Fortiﬁed hilltop settlements appear in Europe
and even discern patterns is sometimes
difﬁcult. The reader may also wish to                          1000 B.C.   Mycenaean civilization begins
consider anew the biblical prophecy that
“the last shall be ﬁrst,” a sentiment                          1000 B.C.   Lapita pottery reaches Fiji and Samoa in the Paciﬁc
repeatedly demonstrated in Old World
culture history, where “peripheral” polit-                     1500 B.C.   Lapita pottery appears in the Bismarck
                                                                           Archipelago in the Paciﬁc
ical systems often rose to imperial power.
                                                               2000 B.C.   Minoan civilization begins
      Old World prehistory after about
4000 b.c. is in a sense an account of the                      2700 B.C.   Troy established as a city in the Aegean
division of the world into fewer and
fewer great empires and the slow eco-                          3000 B.C.   Beginning of the Beaker culture in Europe
nomic intermeshing of Europe, Asia,
and Africa. At about 2700 b.c. a citizen                  3500–2300 B.C.   Battle-axe culture in Europe

of Memphis, the capital of the Egypt
                                                               4000 B.C.   Gold and copper tools appear in central Europe
state, and a hunter-forager working the
north coast of France probably had not                         4500 B.C.   Megalith construction in western Europe begins
the slightest impact on each other’s lives,
not even as the end points of trading                          5000 B.C.   Food-producing economies well-established in the
networks in the most exotic of com-                                        Aegean

modities. But by about a.d. 200, north-                   5600–5000 B.C.   Bandkeramik culture in central Europe

ern France and Egypt were provinces in
                                                               5600 B.C.   Food-producing economies reach central Europe
the Roman Empire, and French veterans
of Roman armies were sometimes paid                       6000–2000 B.C.   Neolithic food-producing economies spread in
their pensions in the form of farms in          (8,000–4,000 years ago)    Europe
Egypt. That process of growing intercon-
nection occurred all over Europe, Asia,
and Africa, but it was greatly modiﬁed by
environments, transport routes, and
speciﬁc historic events. Ships plying the
Mediterranean coast linked millions of people in Asia, Europe and Africa, but the Sahara
desert cut much of Africa off from this intense interaction; the mountains of central and
western Europe had a similar effect for a time, as did the deserts, tundra, and other barriers
to the east.

458   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


           Today, however, nearly the whole world is interconnected and everywhere there are
      indications of a worldwide homogenization of cultures: Eskimos drive snowmobiles,
      Chinese drink American soft drinks, and a ﬁnancial tremor in the money markets of, say,
      Singapore, reverberates powerfully through the world’s economies. The rapid growth of
      the Internet and worldwide communications systems now links peoples in what can
      be considered a new form of organism, whose nervous system transcends distances and
      cultural differences. As different as our world today seems from the world of, say, 5,000
      years ago, however, what we see today is the continuation of the same basic trends that were
      evident already by 3000 b.c., when ships were beginning to sail the Mediterranean and
      farming was being extended into Europe, Asia, and Africa.



      TEMPERATE EUROPE

      Until about the seventh millennium b.c., “Barbarian Europe”—the great forests, grasslands,
      and mountain ranges beyond the Aegean Sea and extending north to Britain, Scandinavia,
      and Russia—was inhabited only by hunters and foragers. In succeeding millennia,
      Europeans developed complex forms of subsistence and adaptation and a rich cultural
      repertoire of technology and social systems, but throughout prehistory and well into the
      early centuries of the ﬁrst millennium a.d., European cultures were not the equal of those
      of Egypt, Mesopotamia, China, and other areas in most of the characteristics of cultural
      “complexity” (see chapter 7).
           One of the great questions of comparative history is how it happened that for
      thousands of years much of the creativity of the world was centered in Mesopotamia, China,
      the Indus, and the Mediterranean, and then, after the middle of the second millennium
      a.d., the cultural center of the world seemed to shift so decisively to Western Europe.
      Europeans seem to have incorporated many cultural elements of older, foreign cultures and
      then developed them in unique ways in an environment very different from that of these
      older civilizations. Karl Marx and others have argued that one key element in the eventual
      dominance of Western Europe was that its societies were based on rainfall agriculture,
      instead of the large riverine-canal systems of the older civilizations of Egypt, Mesopotamia,
      and China. Central governments can control every aspect of life, if their citizens are
      inextricably tied to an irrigation system fed by a great river through canal systems controlled
      by the government. In Western Europe, however, a central government could try to
      conquer smaller polities but it could not control the rainfall that was the indispensable
      element in farming the rich lands of temperate Europe. Marx used this environmental fact
      to explain much of the transition to feudalism and capitalism that made Western
      Europeans masters of so much of the world.
           Yet the economic and political history of the Old World cannot be easily or simply
      explained. Steven Shennan notes that many early scholars, especially V. Gordon Childe and
      the Marxists, saw history as a case in which “the Olympic torch of development was passed
      from East to West.”2 During the past several decades, research has suggested that many
      innovations were, in fact, independently invented in Europe, and in general there has been
      a critical reevaluation of the notion that to understand European prehistory one should
      look ﬁrst and always at Mediterranean civilizations.3

                                               LATER COMPLEX SOCIETIES OF THE OLD WORLD           459


Temperate Europe: Early Agriculture
As was discussed in chapter 6, the rough distinction between “farmers” and “hunter-
foragers” obscures great variations within and between these abstract socioeconomic types.
But debates about the origins of European agriculture have often been thought of in these
terms. Between about 6000 and 2000 b.c. hunting-foraging economies in most of temperate
Europe were replaced by agricultural economies based on cereals that had ﬁrst been
domesticated in the Middle East and introduced into Europe, including einkorn wheat,
barley, and rye; these crops were complemented by sheep and cattle—which also were
introduced as domesticates from the Middle East.4 As Robin Dennell notes, the only major
cereal crop domesticated in Europe was probably oats, which did not become economically
important until late in prehistory.5
     As with most such long-term, widespread, and radical processes of culture change,
archaeologists have tended to focus on the mechanisms of these cultural changes. One
traditional model offered to explain these mechanisms is that farmers from southern
Europe and the Middle East colonized temperate Europe over several millennia and
displaced hunter-foragers (Figure 12.1). As Marek Zvelebil and Paul Dolukhanov have
noted,6 this view focuses almost entirely on the circumstances and the processes of
colonization, but largely ignores the response of the hunter-foragers who were presumably
displaced. Other more recent models for the agricultural transition in Europe posit a
greater role for the indigenous hunter-foragers.7 Robin Dennell8 suggests that the climate
changes in Europe after the end of the ice ages favored the growth of grasses such as einkorn
and barley, and Europeans may have begun exploiting them in ways that led to domestica-
tion and cereal agriculture—a largely indigenous development, in other words, that may
have involved some introduced plants, and animals from Southwest Asia, but was not
simply the transplanting of Asians or their agricultural systems into Europe. Emmer wheat,
bread wheat, sheep, and other
crops and animals, nonetheless,
seem certainly to have been
domesticated in Southwest Asia
and then introduced to Europe.
     Unfortunately, the archae-
ological evidence with which
to evaluate some of these con-
trasting ideas, especially the
archaeology of post-glacial
hunter-foragers of Mesolithic
Europe, has only recently begun
to be treated systematically.9
The European Mesolithic is
deﬁned in terms of a shift in
stone tool types to an emphasis
on smaller geometric forms—
which may reﬂect primarily the
introduction and improving
efﬁciency of bows and arrows.10      FIGURE 12.1 The spread of agriculture into Europe from the Middle East.

460   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      As Douglas Price has noted, this transition may have been mainly the result of different raw
      materials available as the glaciers retreated and of the evolution of tool-making skills, rather
      than profound social or cultural changes.11 He also points out that we have lost much of
      the Mesolithic archaeological record because sea levels in northern Europe did not reach
      current levels until about 6000 b.c.; thus many regions available for settlement by
      Mesolithic peoples are now submerged.12
           Among the earliest evidence for cereal farming comes from Argissa-Maghula in
      Greece, where people were cultivating emmer wheat and barley and raising cattle, sheep,
      and pigs by 6800 b.c.
           On the Mediterranean fringes of European farming communities, agricultural villages
      were established on a reliable, productive mixture primarily of cereals, olives, and grapes
      in combination with sheep and goats. The processes by which domesticates and farming
      spread from the Middle East and Mediterranean areas into the great temperate forests of
      northern Europe remains one of the most interesting and intensively researched subjects
      in contemporary archaeology. Bogucki’s analysis of agricultural origins in the northern
      European Plain, particularly in the region of Poland, for example, suggests that for
      centuries Mesolithic foragers and primitive agriculturalists were increasingly symbiotic in
      their economies and that the ﬁrst agriculturalists, the Funnel Beaker People, involved the
      “selective incorporation of cultigens and domestic animals into an essentially Mesolithic
      way of life.”13 He also suggests that the great stone monuments and tombs that eventually
      appeared all over Europe were in fact territorial markers, which became important
      considerations as agriculture spread.
           There are great environmental differences between the semi-arid Mediterranean zone
      and the wetter, cooler regions of Britain, the Low Countries, northern Germany, and
      southern Scandinavia. A prehistoric farmer in southern Italy needed only a few hand-tools
      to farm successfully, but a peasant in northern Germany required capital-intensive
      equipment, such as the horse-drawn mouldboard plow. As Graeme Barker has observed,

          The object of Mediterranean plowing has always been to conserve the moisture content of
          the soil by scufﬂing the surface, whereas in northern Europe heavy equipment is needed to
          break up the thick mass of roots in order to release the soil nutrients from the lower depths.
          . . . The analysis of the early history of agriculture in particular, and of the productive
          economy in general, in the two areas has been characterized by a deﬁnite sense of
          entrepreneurial risk takers in the Mediterranean contrasting with their honest but stolid
          contemporaries in the north, rather like the familiar contrast between the respective
          football teams of southern and northern European countries today.14

      The rate and pattern of agriculture’s spread across Europe raise some interesting questions.
      To a certain extent, this spread can be assumed to be determined by the blunt forces of
      environment, technology, and demography. The genetic composition of cereals sets a strict
      limit to the rate at which species adapt to different environments, and without artiﬁcial
      fertilizers the yields of crops—and therefore human population densities—are narrowly
      constrained. But when we look at the problem of how small-time European farmers
      eventually produced complex societies here, we can begin to see how complexly interrelated
      are four dimensions of these ancient societies: climate-environment, farming technology,
      human population ﬂuctuations, and sociopolitical institutions.15 By 5600 b.c., a Mediter-
      ranean complement of domestic grains, cows, and sheep—and the technology to exploit
      them—had moved up the Danube into central Europe (see Figure 12.1). People lived in

                                           LATER COMPLEX SOCIETIES OF THE OLD WORLD       461


small clusters of wooden huts,
often with their animals, and
farmed narrow plots near
rivers and streams. Some of the
spread of this form of agricul-
tural settlement in Europe is
marked by pottery decorated
with incised, linear patterns—
the Bandkeramik style. The
Bandkeramik peoples and their
agricultural way of life appear
ﬁrst along the Danube in
central Europe, and by shortly
after 5000 b.c. had settled as far
                                     FIGURE 12.2 Reconstruction (top) and plan view (bottom) of a Linear
north as southern Holland.
                                     Bandkeramik longhouse in Europe.
These sturdy farmers lived in
small homesteads composed of
timber-and-thatch houses (Figure 12.2) and subsisted on barley, einkorn, wheat, cattle,
sheep, goats, and a variety of other crops and animals.
     Unlike that of the semi-arid plains of the Middle East and the Mediterranean littoral,
however, the agricultural way of life in Europe proper required clearing thick forests and
grasslands, at ﬁrst by cutting down the trees, later by plowing.
     Alasdair Whittle has reviewed the evidence for the variations in the location and
composition of Neolithic European sites and has shown that the distribution of loess and
alluvium and the forces of trade and social stratiﬁcation produce considerable vari-
ations in the density and sizes of settlements across the European Plain.16 Marek Zvelebil
and Peter Rowley-Conwy17 have argued that the transition to agriculture in much of
Europe involved a continuum of social and economic changes in which, at ﬁrst, hunter-
foragers and farmers encountered each other and traded a few products but were
largely independent of each other; over time, however, hunter-foragers and farmers began
to compete directly, as farmers moved into areas that had been exploited by hunter-
foragers; eventually, the superior economic resources of farmers probably enabled them to
displace hunter-foragers in the most productive areas—although crop failures and other
disasters probably forced farmers to rely on hunting and foraging to survive on many
occasions.
     The Zvelebil and Rowley-Conwy hypothesis represents the “traditional view” of the
settlement of Europe by Neolithic farmers. Recently, a wide variety of archaeologists
working on the origins of agriculture and the Neolithic in Europe have come to a some-
what different conclusion.18 While acknowledging that certain plants and animals were
introduced from the Middle East into Europe and that there were also some Neolithic
colonists who entered and spread throughout portions of Europe,19 archaeologists today
believe that local Mesolithic populations had a much greater role in the transition to food-
production and the appearance of Neolithic lifeways. The notion that hunter-gatherers
were simply displaced by or absorbed into groups of Neolithic immigrants is clearly far too
simplistic an explanation. As Douglas Price points out, indigenous Mesolithic populations
were the likely the main agents in the adoption and spread of agriculture especially for most
areas of Europe outside of southeastern and southern Europe.20

           462        PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                    After about 5000 b.c., as populations grew and
                                                              farmers adapted their crops and technologies to the
                                                              diverse European environments, larger communities
                                                              formed, some with apparent fortiﬁcations of earth-
                                                              works and enclosure walls of timber. Some people were
                                                              buried in large communal graves, marked by earthen
                                                              mounds and megaliths—large stone monuments
                                                              (Figure 12.3).
                                                                    By 3000 b.c. agricultural villages were to be
                                                              found from Great Britain far into eastern Russia.
                                                              There were hundreds of local resource specializations,
                                                              but most of these settlements subsisted mainly on
                                                              domesticated cereals and cattle. Copper axes and
FIGURE 12.3 A dolmen type of megalith. These struc-           ornaments were widely distributed, especially in
tures number in the tens of thousands in the maritime areas
                                                              central Europe and the Balkans.
of Western Europe.
                                                                    Population densities were heaviest in the central
                      European areas where rivers supplied broad alluvial ﬁelds, but after 3000 b.c. villages
                      appeared in light to heavy densities over almost every area where the environment
                      permitted stock-raising and cereal agriculture. The areas where this kind of subsistence was
                      possible were greatly expanded by the introduction (perhaps from the Middle East) of the
                      animal-drawn plow. In the absence of an arid climate or alluvial soils, it is difﬁcult for the
                      agriculturalist to compete with wild vegetation and renew the fertility of the soil. But the
                      plow gave these early European farmers a way to expose the soil for seeding, and it
                      contributed to weed control and soil fertility by plowing under vegetation (although the
                      deep plowing of modern times was a later invention).
                            Much of the archaeological work on the Neolithic in Europe has been focused on the
                      economic transformations, the interactions of colonists with local Mesolithic popula-
                      tions, and the involvement of Mesolithic hunter-gatherers in the adoption and spread of
                      the Neolithic way of life. There are, however, other perspectives on the Neolithic transition
                      in Europe. These are post-processual in orientation and they focus on ideological aspects
                      involved in the transition of society. Prominent among these have been the work of Hodder,
                      Thorpe, Tilley, and Edmonds, as well as others.21 While the aspects emphasized vary some-
                      what from scholar to scholar, they all share in common a focus on ideas, symbols, and the
                      way in which people view the world around them.
                            As we saw in chapter 6, for example, Hodder has stressed the notion of a contrast
                      between wild and tame, nature and culture, ﬁeld (agrios) and household (domus). These
                      concepts interact to create a social domestication of people as well as a domestication of
                      wild plants and animals. On the other hand, Tilley emphasizes the interactions and interplay
                      between people and material culture. In his viewpoint, items of material culture are used
                      by people to build, manipulate, and change the world around them. This results, over time,
                      in a different worldview and, in the case of the Neolithic, the introduction of social inequality,
                      the transformation of how the dead are treated via rituals, and how one perceives the
                      landscape around them.
                            Whichever pathway is used to better understand or explain the Neolithic, one aspect
                      is quite important—once most Europeans became agriculturalists, the stage was set for the
                      evolution of complex forms of social organization. Some of the factors that transformed
                      Europe were local, others international.

                                                LATER COMPLEX SOCIETIES OF THE OLD WORLD         463


Temperate Europe: Later Neolithic Through Bronze
Age Developments
Some of the earliest signs of social change in temperate Europe are, predictably, in southern
Europe, on the fringes of the Mediterranean world. For example, the Varna cemetery near
the Black Sea coast of Bulgaria, dating to about 4000 b.c., contained massive hoards of
golden and copper tools, suggesting not only great differences in economic classes in this
society, but also the existence of a metallurgical industry of considerable sophistication.22
Varna may well have ﬂourished on the basis of a Black Sea trade.
     Because they are so common and preserve well, metal and ceramic objects have been
used as the deﬁning characteristics of European peoples before the Romans. The Battle Axe
People, for example, is the general term for people who lived between about 3500 and 2300
b.c., whose copper and stone axes are found all over temperate Europe, mainly in graves,
along with their distinctive cord-marked pottery. These people seem to have originated in
central and eastern Europe, and they may have begun using the domestic horse and wheeled
carts as early as 3000 b.c. As usual, it is difﬁcult to determine if people in eastern Europe
physically migrated westward en masse, or if their art styles and economic impact spread
across Europe much in advance of any actual population movements.
     Another spread of artifact styles involved the Beaker Culture, named after the
distinctive pottery they produced. The Beaker Culture was evident in much of western and
central Europe just after 3000 b.c., and eventually the Battle Axe and Beaker cultures seem
to have coalesced.
     In talking about these cultures we must remember, of course, that nearly all the people
of this era were simple agriculturalists, with a few families living together in tiny hamlets.
Most would have lived out their lives in small houses and farms. Houses were simple
structures of logs, clay, and thatch.
     Another indication of the social changes that accompanied the spread of farming in
Western Europe are megaliths. By about 4500 b.c.—1,500 years and more before the
Egyptians began to build large stone buildings—farmers in Spain were using large stones
weighing many tons to build tombs, and over the next several millennia people all over
western Europe built large megalithic tombs. These tombs were often composed of several
interior rooms with stone walls, with large blocking stones covering entrances to the
complex and to its various compartments. These tombs were usually communal, with
numerous corpses in them, and there is some evidence that the dead were exposed to the
elements for a time and then their bones were entombed. Many tombs were covered by
earth and thus formed long “barrow” mounds (Figure 12.4).
     Tombs were not the only megalithic structures in Europe. Huge stones were raised
in complex designs in areas of France—for example, the thousands of standing stones
in the alignments that stretch over some three-quarters of a mile at Carnac. Stonehenge
(Figure 12.5), in England—the ﬁnal arrangement we see today dates to the Bronze Age—
is the most famous example of the circular arrangements of European megaliths.
     Like the pyramids of Egypt, the megalithic structures of Europe have elicited many
speculations about the societies and ideologies of which they were a part. Their spatial
arrangements in some cases suggest that they were positioned to mark boundaries
of some kind. Stonehenge and similar arrangements were probably ritual centers, and
some, perhaps, were used for astronomical observations and calculations. The long
“barrow” mounds that enclose megalithic tombs may have been evocations of the long

           464       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                     houses in which these early
                                                                                     farmers lived23—and thus per-
                                                                                     haps were a reﬂection of the
                                                                                     ties of community and kinship
                                                                                     that united these people in life
                                                                                     and death. Like the Egyptians,
                                                                                     these monuments no doubt
                                                                                     reinforced social hierarchies of
                                                                                     power and ideology and main-
                                                                                     tained the connections between
                                                                                     generations past, present, and
                                                                                     future.24
                                                                                            A somewhat different
                                                                                     question is, aside from what
                                                                                     the people who built these
                                                                                     monuments thought about
                                                                                     them, why did these structures
                                                                                     appear when they did and
                                                                                     where they did? As noted in
                                                                                     chapter 9, with regard to the
FIGURE 12.4 A passage grave type of megalith.




FIGURE 12.5 Stonehenge began as a series of ritual excavations about 2700 b.c. and was greatly elaborated between 2000
and 1000 b.c. The arranged stones probably had astronomical signiﬁcance. Stonehenge is just one example of thousands of
stone monuments built in this period in western Europe.

                                                LATER COMPLEX SOCIETIES OF THE OLD WORLD         465


Egyptian pyramids, these colossal monuments around the world (similar forms are
considered in later chapters on Mexico, Peru, and North America) seem to appear at times
of particular stress and rapid change. In North America, for example, as Robert C. Dunnell
has noted,25 great communal tombs not unlike the megalithic tombs of Europe appeared
in the Ohio and Mississippi river valleys just at the time when maize-beans-squash-based
agriculture was being established in these areas, and these monuments seem to appear on
the edges of the area where that agricultural adaptation was effective.26 Perhaps these great
“wastes” of energy and resources stabilized these societies by reducing population growth
and economic expansion. Viewed from this perspective, what the ancient Europeans
actually thought about these monuments is not just unknowable, it is not particularly
important: What is important is that these monuments had profound socioeconomic
impact on these societies. The prehistoric natives of Mississippi and of England may have
had vastly different ideas about the signiﬁcance of their monuments—yet each built them
at similar points in their cultural evolutionary history.
     The organization and planning required to build monuments like Stonehenge probably
reﬂect a society with at least incipient rank, class, and occupational specialization, and all
through the last few millennia b.c. expanding trade between Europe and the Mediterranean
and Aegean regions would have provided some stimulus to cultural change.
     Lewthwaite used the term Maﬁa model to describe views of the emergence of complex
societies in Europe in which “the motor for social change is the ambition of certain
individuals to dominate and control their fellow human beings, an ambition that can be
realized in certain ecological . . . circumstances.”27
     From burials not only of bodies but also of hoards of precious metals and artifacts, we
can speculate that warrior tribes contended all across Europe in the late second millennium
b.c., with their fortunes rising and falling to some extent with their success in maintaining
trading links with the Mediterranean and Aegean societies. Baltic amber, salt, metal tools,
and hundreds of other products ﬂowed along these ancient trade routes. By the end of this
period, fortiﬁed hilltop settlements were a characteristic of many parts of Europe, including
central Europe.28

Temperate Europe: Iron Age Developments: Hallstatt
and La Tène
Until about 1000 b.c. the secret of iron-making was a monopoly of the Hittite state in
Anatolia, but after this time knowledge of the technique spread north and west into Europe.
Iron is a much more utilitarian metal than bronze or gold: Iron tools could make a major
difference in efﬁciencies of plows, hoes, awls, knives, swords, arrowheads, and a thousand
other products.
     One early European iron-working culture, the Hallstatt, is reﬂected in the distinctive
artifacts of this tradition from Austria, southern Germany, the Czech Republic, and
Slovakia, between about 800 and 475 b.c. Archaeological evidence recovered in the past
several decades indicates that a number of earlier settlements, such as Heuneburg and
Hochdorf, grew into important manufacturing and trade centers during the Hallstatt
period, as well as the subsequent La Tène period29 (Figure 12.6). Differences between people
also became more accentuated during the Iron Age, with a proliferation of different design
elements and patterns on items such as belt plates.30 There is also ample evidence of status

466   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                western limits of Persian
                empire

           trade routes
                Greek

                Phoenician

                Etruscan
                                                                Gundestrup

                                                               Dejbjerg
                                                                                                    Baltic Sea
                                                               Hjortspring
                                                                                R.
                                                                                      El
                      Camulodunum (Cotoheitry)                                            be
                                                                                                   Biskupin
                                                                               R. N
             Atlantic Ocean                                                                           O
                                                                                                   R.
                                                                                                          r
                                                                                               Cliite   de        u la
                                                                                                                 st
                                    Mont Lassois Vix                                                              i
                                                           Hochodorf Hradiste                       R. V
                                                                   Heuneberg        Zavist
                                Avaricum Bourgesl                       Manching                                         p
                                               GAUL                           Hallstatt
                                                                                                                              ns
                                                             La Tene NORICUM                                               hia
                                                                     Villach                                             at
                                                                                    Maodarensbaig
                                                                              Vace
                               Pyren
                                     ees     Eotremont CISALPHE GAUL                Sticna
                                         (AIX-en-Pioyence)
                                  R.            Massilia Olbia                                                                     Baltic Sea
                                                                                         Singidunum
                                   Eb                                                      (Belgrade)
                                       ro                                      ET
                                                                               Ad
                                                                                RUria
                          IBERIA                                           IA         t
                                                                                      R ic S
                                                                                             ea

                                                                                Naples

                                                     Mediter
                                                                ran
                                                                      ea
                                                                           n
                                                                               Se
                                                                                      a




                                                                                                          Apolionia

      FIGURE 12.6 Some important Hallstatt and La Tène sites.



      differences between people, with some of the most notable examples coming from burial
      contexts. At Hochdorf, in Germany, for instance, a late Hallstatt burial of a 30-year-old
      male included a large mound with a burial chamber built of oak, abundant gold, feasting
      paraphernalia—drinking horns of iron and of aurochs (wild cattle) horn, bronze dishes, a
      bronze cauldron, a gold bowl, and so forth—elaborate textiles, a four-wheeled wagon, and
      a bronze couch (on which the deceased was laid).31
           Another well-known and impressive late Hallstatt burial is the so-called princess at Vix,
      Mont Lassois, in France (Figure 12.7).32 The 35-year-old woman laid to rest here was
      covered with a leather blanket and placed on the bed of a cart in the center of a large square
      chamber dug into the earth. The burial chamber was lined with wooden planks and covered
      with an earthen mound. Inside the chamber were a wealth of grave goods, including an
      enormous bronze cauldron—made in Greece and decorated with Greek warriors and
      chariots—used for serving and storing wine, bowls made of silver, gold, and bronze—one
      of which was from the Etruscan area of Italy—a gold collar, bronze brooches, and other
      items of personal adornment. Not far from this tomb is another structure containing life-

                                                LATER COMPLEX SOCIETIES OF THE OLD WORLD           467


size stone statues of a richly dressed
woman and a male warrior. Some
have speculated that the female
stature is a representation of the
“princess.”33
      An interesting reinterpretation
of the Vix burial has recently been
offered by Christopher Knüsel.34 He
argues that the traditional inter-
pretation of Vix contextualizes the
richly adorned female in terms of
male society, thus, a “princess.”
Knüsel, however, sees the combina-
tion of exotic goods, ritual treat-
ment, and physical characteristics of
the woman—which include skeletal
evidence for a waddling gait and a
wry-neck deformity that resulted in
her head held tilted to the right—as
evidence that she was a ritual spe-
cialist, perhaps placed in a socially
powerful or leadership position with
respect to control of trade relation-
ships with the Mediterranean region.
Richly adorned female ritual speci-         FIGURE 12.7 Plan map of the tomb of the “princess” at Vix, France.
alists are known from later La Tène
contexts such as Gündlingen in Germany.35
      Although trade relationships continued to be important in the following La Tène
period—from about 475 b.c. to the Roman Conquest in the last few years b.c.—the nature
of the goods imported from the Mediterranean area appears to have changed rather rad-
ically.36 Hallstatt burial assemblages include unique and “expensive” Greek bronze vessels
that were the result of extraordinary craftsmanship. La Tène burial assemblages, on the
other hand, contain the everyday Mediterranean items typical of the households of wealthy
Greek and Etrucscan social classes. The emphasis on the unique in La Tène society is instead
on local products such as gold neck and arm jewelry, leading to the development of
distinctive Celtic art and ornamentation. Quite interestingly, there is less and less evidence
for individual identity through time in La Tène culture, and burials change from single
inhumations to modest cremations or no evidence for burial at all.37 What seems to replace
an emphasis on burial of humans is a greater focus on landscape features such as water,
where “hoards” of swords, iron tools, gold coins, and gold rings have been found in
numerous places.38
      At about the same time as the decreased emphasis on individuals and individual iden-
tities, and the ﬂorescence of indigenous Celtic art styles, is the appearance of sites known
as oppida—enormous settlements, such as Manching, fortiﬁed by massive walls built of
earth, stone, and timber, and located in natural defensive positions. These vary in popula-
tion size from place to place, as well as in overall size, with some covering only 10 hectares

468   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      and others, 500 hectares.39 The oppida represent massive investments of time and labor,
      and thus are similar in effort and organization of work forces to monumental construction
      projects in Egypt, China, Mesoamerica, South America, and other early complex societies,
      civilizations, and states.
            The Hallstatt and La Tène cultures of ﬁrst millennium b.c. Europe ﬂourished in a
      period of rapid population expansion, migrations of various ethnic groups, reformation of
      trade routes along lines dictated by Mediterranean cultures, and other major social changes.
      The prehistoric European Iron Age, however, came to a relatively abrupt end with the
      Roman Conquest, which is conventionally dated to 15 b.c.40


      A BRIEF OVERVIEW OF OTHER LATER OLD WORLD
      COMPLEX SOCIETIES

      Earlier in this chapter we mentioned that there are numerous later states and empires in
      the Old World, all of which provide quite interesting examples of the many and varied
      trajectories in the development of complex societies. Each is certainly deserving of extended
      discussion, although here we can offer only a brief description of a few.


      The Aegean
      The “wine dark sea” of which Homer rhapsodized is the lovely expanse of the Aegean
      between Greece and Anatolia that encloses Lemnos, Lesbos, and hundreds of other islands.
      These islands and much of the mainlands of Asia and Europe that border on the Aegean
      and the Mediterranean seas are relatively arid, but they became very productive farmlands
      and also were an abundant source of metals, woods, and other materials.
           Domesticated wheat, barley, sheep, goats, grapes, olives, and other crops were
      established all over the Mediterranean by 5000 b.c., and by 3000 b.c. great volumes of com-
      modities were ﬂowing throughout the eastern Mediterranean world. By about 2700 b.c.
      Troy, Poliochni on the island of Lemnos, and other communities were already cities, with
      impressive stone buildings, efﬁcient roads, and a diversiﬁed economy that included
      specialized and lucrative production of objects in gold, tin, and other metals.
           These metals were, in a sense, not economically indispensable to the economies of the
      Aegean world of this age. Some bronze tools and weapons were no doubt useful, but much
      of this trade seems to have been in luxury goods without direct economic utility—gold
      ﬁgurines, for example. But a lot of the other products were basic staples and commodities.
      Probably the greatest volumes of trade were in commodities long since consumed and
      therefore archaeologically invisible, such as the millions of gallons of wine no doubt
      shipped all over the Mediterranean. In any case, it is really not quite accurate to think of
      golden ﬁgurines as economically useless: Status and the pursuit and social reinforcement
      of status were primary economic stimuli all over the ancient world.
           By about 2500 b.c., the Aegean islands, including Crete, and the Anatolian and Greek
      mainlands were dotted with hundreds of towns and villages. And while gold was a central
      element in trade among these communities, painted pottery, obsidian bowls, marble statues
      and ﬁgurines, dyed textiles, and hundreds of other products were not only widely traded,

                                               LATER COMPLEX SOCIETIES OF THE OLD WORLD         469


but also important as mortuary goods in the rich tombs here that indicate societies already
stratiﬁed into the rich and the poor, the powerful and the weak. Hissarlik, the “Troy” of the
Classical world, was a city at 2300 b.c., with fortress walls and many larger stone buildings,
is probably a good example of a typical large and powerful community of this era.
      Crete eventually came to dominate much of the Aegean world. By about 1900 b.c. the
many small towns and villages on Crete seem to have become linked increasingly into a
state-level political, economic, and religious system. This general pattern of change is
similar to that of all the other early civilizations: monumental architecture, increasingly
interdependent economies, rising population densities, and everywhere the signs of rank,
wealth, and power. The settlement at Knossos included a large palace that probably
functioned as a production center for many commodities, such as pottery, gold-work, and
lovely vessels in serpentine and other hard stones. A writing system, known as Linear A,
was developed, probably as a way to manage this complex economy.
      The culture of Crete of the second millennium b.c. is generally known as the Minoan
civilization, and throughout this era the wealth and power of Crete seems to have increased.
Minoan goods are found all over the
Aegean and the Greek and Anatolian
mainlands, and as far away as the
Levant and Egypt. Knossos probably
had a population of 10,000 people just
in the central areas of the settlement.
Great palaces and rich tombs are the
most obvious signs of the character
of this society, but it was all based on
a thriving economy. The warehouses
at Knossos held hundreds of huge
pottery storage vessels with enough
capacity to hold tens of thousands of
gallons of wine and olive oil.41
      Toward the end of the second
millennium b.c., Minoan culture
and power were supplanted over most
of the Aegean world by Mycenaean
civilization. The origins of Mycenaean
culture seem to have been on the
Argos Plain on the Greek mainland.
The stone fortress at Mycenae
(Figure 12.8) appears to have been the
center of a warrior kingdom, based
on an extensive trade network. The
rich shaft-graves found at Mycenae
reﬂect a luxurious yet violent society,
caught up in competition for eco-
nomic and political dominance of
not only the mainland but the Aegean       FIGURE 12.8 Heinrich and Sophia Schliemann seated to the right of the
islands and western Anatolia as well.      legendary Lion Gate at Mycenae in 1876.

470   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


          Scholars will never be able to resolve how much of Homer’s Iliad and Odyssey is ﬁction
      and how much fact, but these epics probably reﬂect much of the character of late
      Mycenaean civilization.


      Africa
      Africa is so rich in gold, silver, iron, jewels, ivory, palm oil, and other resources that one might
      expect it to have been a center of initial origins of cultural complexity, as it was for the ﬁrst
      three million years of hominin development. But Africa has formidable barriers that afﬂict
      the agriculturalist more than the hunter-gatherer.42 The enormous Sahara Desert, expanding
      and contracting with Pleistocene and post-Pleistocene climatic changes, has almost always
      isolated most of Africa from the critical mass of Middle Eastern and Mediterranean
      cultures. And even in the more humid Sub-Saharan regions the dense vegetation, poor
      soils, and unpredictable rainfall make large-scale intensive agriculture unproductive for the
      primitive cultivator. Nor do the great rivers, like the Niger, have the regular regimes, large
      semi-arid alluvial plains, or latitude that make the Nile, Tigris and Euphrates, and Yellow
      river valleys so productive. To make matters worse, Africa has a veritable horror show of
      diseases, including a tsetse ﬂy–borne cattle illness that barred pastoralists from many areas
      and malaria, which recurrently wiped out human populations in the more tropical areas.
           Given these and other ecological problems, early African societies are an object lesson
      in human inventiveness and adaptability in the face of an extreme environment.
           Sub-Saharan Africa of the last few millennia b.c. was probably a rich blend of hunting,
      foraging, ﬁshing, and agricultural societies, with extensive trade networks in gold, salt,
      and foodstuffs. We know comparatively little about the earliest phases of these societies
      because of the problems of preservation and inadequate archaeological research—although
      the intensity of research is increasing.43 The character of all these cultures was changed
      radically, however, by the introduction (beginning about 500 b.c.) of an iron-working
      technology. Complex societies quickly followed the introduction of iron in west Africa, and
      ﬁrst-millennium b.c. tombs in Nigeria and Senegal reﬂect great differences in wealth. At
      Igbo-Ukwu in Nigeria, one burial chamber contained cast-bronze objects and thousands
      of glass and carnelian beads.44 Arab accounts of these societies in the eighth through the
      eleventh centuries a.d. describe complex empires, with armies, kings, and massive craft
      industries.45 Many scholars have concluded that it was Arab commerce that stimulated west
      African cultural complexity, but McIntosh and McIntosh conclude that the spread of Arab
      goods and culture “reﬂects the grafting of Arab commerce onto a preexisting infrastructure
      of Saharan and Sub-Saharan networks. Such an explanation implies that earlier phases of
      development at Igbo-Ukwa were characterized by indigenous processes of trade expansion
      and increasing social stratiﬁcation.”46
           The ﬁrst ﬁve centuries a.d. saw the rapid spread over much of Africa of agriculturalists
      using iron tools and weapons and subsisting in part on indigenous domesticates like
      sorghum and squash and on domestic cattle and other animals (Figure 12.9). Only in a few
      arid wastelands were these agriculturalists unsuccessful in displacing the stone-age hunters
      who were the heirs of the millions-of-years-old tradition of African hunting-foraging.
           In contrast to the earlier-held view that the ﬁrst African states were “contact-states,”
      created by the economic and political “touch” of the established North African and
      Egyptian states, it now seems more reasonable to see Sub-Saharan indigenous states as

                                                                          LATER COMPLEX SOCIETIES OF THE OLD WORLD                               471


                                                                                                                 Mediterranean Sea



                                                           Ceuta                                                      Tunis
                                                                               Dried fruit,                            Kairouan
                                                            Fez                 imported
                                                                              goods, cloth                                 Tripoli
             Atlantic Ocean
                                                    Marrakesh                                      Wargla
                                                                  Sijilmasa
                                                                                             Ghadames                                Horses

                                                                                                                                           iro
                                                       Taghaza                                                                           Ca
                                                                                                                                      To
                                                              Salt
                                                                                                                                Murzuk
                                                                                                     Ghat

                                                             Taodeni
                                Wadan
                                                           Salt
                                                                                              AFRICA

                                                                                                    Air                       Bilma
                                       Walata              Timbuktu                                                            Salt
                                                                                                          Agades
                 Sene                                                                    Takedda
                     ga                Audoghast
                        l   R                                            Gao
                            .                                                            Copper
                                         GHANA
                                                          Jenné           Ni
                                Gold      MALI                                                                                       L. Chad
                Gambia R.                                                     gerR                   Katsina
                                                   Gold                              .
                                                                                                           Kano
                                                                                                                              Slaves
                                       Slaves

                                                                                                                      R.
                                                                                                                 ue
                                                                                                          Be n
                                                                  Kola
                                                                                                    Kola
                                                                  nuts
                                                                                                    nuts




                                                Gulf of Guinea



FIGURE 12.9 In the ﬁrst millennium a.d. trade routes in various commodities connected west
African kingdoms with each other and with coastal traders from the Middle East, Europe, and the
Mediterranean.

products of their own cultural matrix. The rapid population growth associated with the
introduction of agriculture to these areas; the rising spiral of trade in gold, copper, salt, and
slaves; and the sporadic inﬂuences of distant Mediterranean and Asian empires probably
all combined to produce the rich second millennium a.d. African chiefdoms and states.
Most seem to have been marked by some public buildings and were composed of a ruler
and an upper class who organized and taxed a complex economic system comprised of
farmers, herders, miners, iron-workers, traders, and religious leaders. Cemeteries often
show great variations of wealth and, presumably, social status.


COLONIZATION OF THE WESTERN PACIFIC ISLANDS

In one of the last great migrations in human prehistory, people colonized the southern
Paciﬁc (Figure 12.10), and the subtle variations of local climates and different times of

                                                                       472




                                                                       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY




FIGURE 12.10 Cultural areas of Micronesia, Melanesia, and Polynesia.

                                                 LATER COMPLEX SOCIETIES OF THE OLD WORLD          473


colonization have produced a varied cultural landscape that is, in the cliché, a giant cultural
laboratory.47 These areas have great signiﬁcance for a truly evolutionary analysis of the
past. In Polynesia, for example, during the last three millennia peoples spread out from
island to island, and the development of their languages, adaptations, and physical types
reﬂects the workings of basic evolutionary mechanisms.48 Patrick Kirch has argued that, in
some ways, the evolution of complex societies in Hawaii, Tonga, and other areas of
Polynesia agrees well with the “circumscription hypothesis” of Robert Carneiro49 (see
chapter 7).
     Scholars have long wondered how ancient peoples sailed across the tropical Paciﬁc from
west to east, when the prevailing winds and ocean currents move from east to west. Various
simulation models have been considered,50 and different colonizing rates and processes
are possible. Finney reports a voyage during 1986–1988 of the Hokule’a, a 19-m double-
hull canoe under the command of Hawaiian navigator Nainoa Thompson.51 By exploiting
occasional spells in which the prevailing winds shifted, the canoe was sailed from American
Samoa east to Tahiti, along the track the ancient settlers of these islands might have traveled.
Subsequent voyages of the Hokule’a, as well as a second ocean-going canoe, the Hawai’iloa,
have made voyages from the Marquesas Islands to Hawaii and back, as well as to Easter
Island (Rapa Nui).
     As always in human colonization, the timing and nature of the colonization depended
on the evolution of technologies and cultural adaptations that could provide sufﬁcient
food. Even Paciﬁc Islands with rich resources of animals and plants tended to be small
enough that hunting and foraging of wild plants and animals would not support many
people. The key to colonization was in the form of several domesticated plants and animals
that together provided a stable source of food. Domesticated pigs and chickens were
primary meat sources, along with ﬁsh and birds, but the mainstays of the diet were
cultivated tubers. One of the most important of these is taro, a perennial tropical plant with
large, starchy, tuberous roots. Lowland taro roots generally are prepared by heating them
to destroy the chemicals that give them a bitter taste, then they are ground and fermented
into an edible paste called poi (very much an acquired taste for most non-islanders). Taro
species native to dry lands produce corms that are eaten like potatoes in Japan, China, the
West Indies, and elsewhere.
     Another Paciﬁc Island staple is breadfruit, the globular fruit of the breadfruit tree. The
breadfruit tree grows to heights of 18 m (60 feet) or more. The yellow-green fruit is up to
30 cm (12 inches) in diameter, and its starchy pulp can be cooked in various ways to supply
a good source of carbohydrates.
     Among the most important foods of the Paciﬁc are yams, the tuberous roots of several
species of vines. Yams are grown and eaten much like potatoes and have a similar role as a
dietary staple and source of vitamins and carbohydrates. Yams look something like sweet
potatoes, but the two are not even distantly related. Some species of Paciﬁc yams produce
tubers weighing up to an impressive 45 kg (100 lb). These tubers have brown or black skin
and white, purple, or red ﬂesh. Like potatoes, yams are usually propagated by planting the
crowns of the large tuberous root or small whole small tubers. The climbing vines of yam
plants are supported on stakes or trellises to maximize yields.52
     One of the most interesting patterns in the colonization of the Paciﬁc is the spread of
the Lapita Cultural Complex. The people associated with this culture made a particularly

           474       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                  elaborately decorated pottery
                                                                                  that has come to deﬁne them,
                                                                                  in a sense. Lapita pottery
                                                                                  appears at about 1500 b.c. in
                                                                                  the Bismarck Archipelago
                                                                                  (Figure 12.11), an island group
                                                                                  in the southwest Paciﬁc that
                                                                                  includes part of Papua New
                                                                                  Guinea, New Britain, New
                                                                                  Ireland, the Admiralty Islands,
                                                                                  and other islands to the east of
                                                                                  Australia. These hot, humid,
                                                                                  volcanic islands form the core
                                                                                  of Melanesia (from the Greek
                                                                                  for “black islands”) and are
                                                                                  home to an impressive variety
                                                                                  of peoples, languages, and
                                                                                  cultures.
                                                                                       Lapita pottery occurs over
                                                                                  an area more than 5,000 miles
                                                                                  (8,100 km) long, encompassing
FIGURE 12.11 An example of Lapita pottery.                                        hundreds of islands stretching
                                                                                  as far east as Samoa and Fiji, and
                                                                                  the rapid spread—occurring
                 in about 500 years—of this pottery style over such a large area poses the same kinds of
                 questions we have seen elsewhere: Does this spread of a particular artifact style represent
                 people who migrated and carried with them their pottery and the rest of their culture? Or
                 were indigenous peoples incorporated into a growing exchange network in which they
                 eventually came to use pottery in Lapita styles, as well as obsidian and other commodities
                 traded among these many islands? Islands, like all varied environments, have the potential
                 for economic expansion through the exchange of commodities. If the costs of extracting or
                 producing goods and transporting them and exchanging them with neighbors is less than
                 their value in these exchanges, everyone—producers and consumers alike—is richer than
                 if they consumed only the resources they themselves produce. And it is not only food and
                 other utilitarian objects that have value. In the Paciﬁc as in every other human society of
                 our recent past, people used objects as status markers and ceremonial items. In the Paciﬁc
                 shells, pearls, and other commodities were circulated and used in ways that seem to have
                 deﬁned, facilitated, and maintained exchange networks and social hierarchies.
                       After reaching islands such as Samoa and Fiji, Lapita pottery “disappears” in the sense
                 that the archaeological sites of the islands colonized to the east and north do not have pottery.
                 Use of pottery for containers is likely replaced by investment in making wooden bowls and
                 jars, as well as containers of other organic materials. Sometime after about 200 b.c., some
                 groups from the area of Samoa and Fiji reached the Society and Marquesas Islands to the
                 east. And from there, they expanded outward to Hawaii, Easter Island, and New Zealand.
                       One of the most interesting examples of the evolution of sociopolitical complexity is
                 Hawaii. Hawaii was probably settled sometime around a.d. 600 or so, by settlers from the

                                               LATER COMPLEX SOCIETIES OF THE OLD WORLD           475


Marquesas or Society islands.
Although one might think that
Hawaii was isolated after
this initial wave of colonization
—after all, the trip to Hawaii
is more than 3,300 km (2,100
miles) from the Marquesas
and Society islands and takes
a minimum of 30 days of
open ocean voyaging—the oral
traditions of Native Hawaiians
say otherwise. Until as late
as about the mid-1200s a.d.,
these oral traditions document
long-distance ocean voyages
between Tahiti and Hawaii,
with newcomers from Tahiti
sometimes becoming ruling            FIGURE 12.12 A small heiau (temple) at the site of Kaunolu, island of Lana’i,
chiefs in Hawaii. 53 Tahitian        Hawaii.
settlers also introduced new
religious elements such as the war god, Ku, and the building of the luakini heiau—a special
type of Hawaiian temple that is associated with Ku. For reasons not recorded in the oral
traditions, these long-distance voyages appear to have ceased after the mid-1200s a.d.—
perhaps koa trees large enough to build the ocean-voyaging boats were no longer available
in the Hawaiian islands after this time.
      When Captain Cook and his crew “discovered” the Hawaiian Islands in 1778, they
found a society on the verge of becoming a state. Eighteenth- and nineteenth-century
ethnographic accounts provide a detailed account of this highly stratiﬁed society with
inherited power, prestige and wealth, a diversiﬁed economy—including intensiﬁcation of
food-production through the use of aquaculture (trapping of ﬁsh in both freshwater and
seawater ﬁshponds)—complex trade relationships, monumental architecture (Figure 12.12),
and many other elements associated with complex societies. The many different ideas about
how the ancient Hawaiians developed these cultural complexities reﬂect theoretical trends
in archaeology in general.54 Some scholars see population growth and various cultural
ecological features as primary factors in Hawaii’s cultural evolution; others appeal to
sociopolitical causes.



SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

The cultures on the periphery of the Old World, from northern Scandinavia to Hawaii,
repeat the common fact that most aspects of cultural complexity are the partial products
of technology and agricultural productivity. Battle Axe culture in Europe and ruling chiefs
in Hawaii represent gradients of cultural complexity, and in all these Old World areas
we see great diversity in the archaeological manifestations of these societies. Many are

476   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      characterized by monumental architecture, highly stratiﬁed social classes, and great
      disparities in wealth and access to other resources. Some had towns and regional political
      centers, while others are not recognizably urban at all. And, while all are indigenous
      developments, each was also inﬂuenced by peoples or events from other regions where
      complex societies had been in existence for some time.


      BIBLIOGRAPHY
      No attempt is made here to provide a comprehensive bibliography for the many secondary states and empires of
                    the ancient world.
      Aikens, C. M., K. M. Ames, and D. Sanger. 1986. “Afﬂuent Collectors at the Edges of Eurasia and North America:
                    Some Comparisons and Observations on the Evolution of Society Among North-Temperate Coastal
                    Hunter-Gatherers.” In Prehistoric Hunter-Gatherers in Japan, ed. T. Akazawa and C. M. Aikens. Tokyo:
                    University of Tokyo Press.
      Akazawa, T. 1982. “Cultural Change in Prehistoric Japan.” Advances in World Archaeology 1:151–212.
      Akazawa, T., and C. M. Aikens, eds. 1986. Prehistoric Hunter-Gatherers in Japan. Tokyo: University Museum,
                    University of Tokyo, Bulletin No. 27.
      Anderson, A. 1987. “Recent Developments in Japanese Prehistory: A Review.” American Antiquity 61(232):270–281.
      Barber, R. L. N. 1988. The Cyclades in the Bronze Age. Iowa City: University of Iowa Press.
      Barker, G., and C. Gamble. 1985. “Beyond Domestication: A Strategy for Investigating the Process and
                    Consequence of Social Complexity.” In Beyond Domestication in Prehistoric Europe, ed. G. Barker and
                    C. Gamble. New York: Academic Press.
      ———, eds. 1985. Beyond Domestication in Prehistoric Europe. New York: Academic Press.
      Bellwood, P. 1986. The Prehistory of the Indo-Malaysian Archipelago. Sydney, Australia: Academic Press.
      Bellwood, P., and J. Koon. 1989. “Lapita Colonists Leave Boats Unburned.” Antiquity 63(240):613 – 622.
      Bintliff, J., ed. 1984. European Social Evolution. Bradford, England: Bradford University Press.
      Bogucki, P. 1987. “The Establishment of Agrarian Communities on the North European Plain.” Current
                    Anthropology 28(1):1–24.
      ———. 1988. Forest Farmers and Stockherders. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
      Bradley, D. G., D. E. MacHugh, P. Cunningham, and R. T. Loftus. 1996. “Mitochondrial Diversity and the Origins
                    of African and European Cattle.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 93:5131–5135.
      Bronson, B. 1980. “South-east Asia: Civilizations of the Tropical Forest.” In Cambridge Encyclopedia of
                    Archaeology, pp. 262–266. New York: Crown Publishers/Cambridge University Press.
      Castleden, R. 1993. Minoans: Life in Bronze Age Crete. New York: Routledge.
      ———. 1994. The Making of Stonehenge. New York: Routledge.
      Cavalli-Sforza, L. L., and E. Minch. 1997. “Paleolithic and Neolithic Lineages in the European Mitochondrial Gene
                    Pool.” American Journal of Human Genetics 61:247–251.
      Charoenwongsa, P., and D. Bayard. 1983. “Non Chai: New Dates on Metalworking and Trade from Northeastern
                    Thailand.” Current Anthropology 24(4):521–523.
      Childe, V. G. 1958. The Prehistory of European Society. Baltimore: Penguin.
      Clist, B. 1987. “Early Bantu Settlements in West Central Africa: A Review of Recent Research.” Current
                    Anthropology 28(3):380 –382.
      Collis, J. 1984. The European Iron Age. London: Batsford.
      Connah, G. 2001. African Civilizations: An Archaeological Perspective. New York: Cambridge University Press.
      D’Arcy, P. 2003. “Warfare and State Formation in Hawaii: The Limits of Violence as a Means of Political
                    Consolidation.” Journal of Paciﬁc History 38(1):29 –52.
      Davidson, J. 1985. “New Zealand Prehistory.” Advances in World Archaeology 4:239 –292.
      Dennell, R. C. 1983. European Economic Prehistory: A New Approach. New York: Academic Press.
      ———. 1992 . “The Origins of Crop Agriculture in Europe.” In The Origins of Agriculture, ed. C. W. Cowan and
                    P. J. Watson. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
      Dickinson, O. 1994. The Aegean Bronze Age. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
      Donohue, R. E. 1992.“Desperately Seeking Ceres: A Critical Examination of Current Models for the Transition to
                    Agriculture in Mediterranean Europe.” In Transitions to Agriculture in Prehistory, ed. A. B. Gebauer
                    and T. D. Price, pp. 73 – 80. Madison, WI: Prehistory Press.
      Edmonds, M. 1999. Ancestral Geographies of the Neolithic: Landscapes, Monuments and Memory. New York:
                    Routledge.
      Ekholm, K. 1981. “On the Structure and Dynamics of Global Systems.” In The Anthropology of Pre-Capitalist,
                    Societies, ed. J. Kahn and J. Lobera. London: Macmillan.

                                                           LATER COMPLEX SOCIETIES OF THE OLD WORLD                    477


Fagan, B. 2004. People of the Earth, 11th ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall.
Finney, B. 1988. “Voyaging Against the Direction of the Trades: A Report of an Experimental Canoe Voyage from
             Samoa to Tahiti.” American Anthropologist 90(2):401– 405.
Fischer, A., P. V. Hansen, and P. Rasmussen. 1984. “Macro and Micro Wear Traces on Lithic Projectile Points.”
             Journal of Danish Archaeology 3:19–46.
Fornander, A. 1999a. Fornander Collection of Hawaiian Antiquities and Folk-lore. Vol. IV (with T. G. Thrum).
             Honolulu: ‘Ai Pohaku Press [facsimile publication; original publication 1916–1917, Honolulu: Bishop
             Museum Press].
———. 1999b. Fornander Collection of Hawaiian Antiquities and Folk-lore. Vol. V (with T. G. Thrum). Honolulu:
             ‘Ai Pohaku Press [facsimile publication; original publication 1918, Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press].
———. 1999c. Fornander Collection of Hawaiian Antiquities and Folk-lore. Vol. VI (with T. G. Thrum). Honolulu:
             ‘Ai Pohaku Press [facsimile publication; original publication 1919, Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press].
Gilman, A. 1981. “The Development of Social Stratiﬁcation in Bronze Age Europe.” Current Anthropology 22:1– 8.
Graves, M. W., and D. J. Addison. 1995. “Polynesian Settlement of the Hawaiian Archipelago: Integrating Models
             and Methods in Archaeological Interpretation.” World Archaeology 26(3):380 –399.
Green, M. 1993. Symbol and Image in Celtic Religious Art. New York: Routledge.
Gregg, S. A. 1988. Foragers and Farmers. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Grigg, D. B. 1982. The Dynamics of Agricultural Change. London: Hutchinson.
Hagelberg, E. 1993. “Ancient DNA Studies.” Evolutionary Anthropology 2(6):199 –207.
Hagelberg, E., S. Quevedo, D. Turbon, and J. B. Clegg. 1994. “DNA from Ancient Easter Islanders.” Nature 369:25–26.
Hall, M. 1987. The Changing Past: Farmers, Kings, and Traders in Southern Africa, 200 –1860. Cape Town, South
             Africa: David Phillip.
Harding, A. F. 1984. The Myceneaeans and Europe. New York: Academic Press.
Harlan, J., J. DeWet, and A. Stemler, eds. 1976. Origins of African Plant Domestication . The Hague: Mouton.
Higham, C. 1988. The Archaeology of Mainland Southeast Asia. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
———. 2000. “The Origins of the Civilization of Angkor.” Antiquity 74:27–28.
Hodder, I. 1990. The Domestication of Europe. Oxford. Blackwell.
Hood, S. 1973. The Minoans. London: Thames and Hudson.
Irwin, G. 1992. The Prehistoric Exploration and Colonisation of the Paciﬁc. Cambridge, England: Cambridge
             University Press.
Isager, S., and J. E. Sydsgaard, eds. 1995. Ancient Greek Agriculture: An Introduction. New York: Routledge.
Ivanov, I. S. 1978. “Les fouilles archéologiques de la nécropole chalcolithique à Varna (1972–1975).” Studia
             Praehistorica 1–2:13 –26.
Joffroy, R. 1962. Le Trésor de Vix. Historie et porteé d’une grande decouverte. Paris: Fayard.
Keeley, L. H. 1992. “The Introduction of Agriculture to the Western North European Plain.” In Transitions to
             Agriculture in Prehistory, ed. A. B. Gebauer and T. D. Price, pp. 81–95. Madison, WI: Prehistory Press.
Kinnes, I. 1982. “Les Fouaillages and Megalithic Origins.” Antiquity 56:24 –30.
Kirch, P. V. 1984. The Evolution of Polynesian Kingdoms. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
———. 1988. “Circumscription Theory and Sociopolitical Evolution in Polynesia.” American Behavioral Scientist
             31(4):416– 427.
———. 1990. “The Evolution of Sociopolitical Complexity in Prehistoric Hawaii: An Assessment of the
             Archaeological Evidence.” Journal of World Prehistory 4(3):311–345.
———. 2003. “New Archaeological Insights into Food and Status: A Case Study from Pre-Contact Hawaii.” World
             Archaeology 34(3):487– 497.
Kirch, P. V., ed. 1986. Island Societies. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Kirch, P. V., and R. C. Green. 1987. “History, Phylogeny, and Evolution in Polynesia.” Current Anthropology
             28(4):431– 454.
Kirch, P. V., and T. L. Hunt. 1988. Archaeology of the Lapita Cultural Complex: A Critical Review. Seattle: Burke
             Museum.
Knüsel, C. J. 2002. “More Circe Than Cassandra: The Princess of Vix in Ritualized Social Context.” European
             Journal of Archaeology 5(3):275 –308.
Kolb, M. J. 1994. “Monumentality and the Rise of Religious Authority in Precontact Hawaii.” Current
             Anthropology 35(5):521–548.
Kristiansen, K. 2002. “The Tale of the Sword—Swords and Swordﬁghters in Bronze Age Europe.” Oxford Journal
             of Archaeology 21(4):319 –332.
Lawson, A. 2001. “Recent Archaeological Research on Gambian Iron Age Habitation.” Nyame Akuma 55:32–35.
Lewis, D. 1972. We the Navigators. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.
Lewthwaite, J. 1981. “Comment on A. Gilman, ‘The Development of Social Stratiﬁcation in Bronze Age Europe.’ ”
             Current Anthropology 22:14.
McIntosh, S. K., and R. J. McIntosh. 1983. “Current Directions in West African Prehistory.” Annual Review of
             Anthropology 12:215 –258.

478   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      ———. 1988. “From Stone to Metal: New Perspectives on the Later Prehistory of West Africa.” Journal of World
                   Prehistory 2(1):89 –133.
      Nishida, M. 1983. “The Emergence of Food Production in Neolithic Japan.” Journal of Anthropological Archaeology
                   2(4):305 –322.
      Nygaard, S. E. 1989. “The Stone Age of Northern Scandinavia: A Review.” Journal of World Prehistory 3(1):71–116.
      Pawley, A., ed. 1991. Man and a Half. Auckland, New Zealand: Polynesian Society, Memoir 48.
      Pikirayi, I. 2001. The Zimbabwe Culture: Origins and Decline of Southern Zambezian States. Walnut Creek, CA:
                   Altamira Press.
      Pfeiffer, J. E. 1977. The Emergence of Society. New York: McGraw-Hill.
      Price, T. D. 1986. “The Earlier Stone Age of Northern Europe.” In The End of the Paleolithic in the Old World, ed.
                   L. G. Straus. Oxford: B.A.R. International Series 284.
      ———. 1987. “The Mesolithic of Western Europe.” Journal of World Prehistory 1(3):225 –305.
      ———. 2000. “Lessons in the Transition to Agriculture.” In Europe’s First Farmers, ed. T. D. Price, pp. 301–318.
                   New York: Cambridge University Press.
      Price, T. D., ed. 2000. Europe’s First Farmers. New York: Cambridge University Press.
      Price, T. D., and A. B. Gebauer. 1992. “The Final Frontier: First Farmers in Northern Europe. In Transitions to
                   Agriculture in Prehistory, ed. A. B. Gebauer and T. D. Price, pp. 97–116. Madison, WI: Prehistory Press.
      Renfrew, C. 1973. Before Civilization: The Radiocarbon Revolution and Prehistoric Europe. New York: Knopf.
      ———. 1978. “Varna and the Social Context of Early Metallurgy.” Antiquity 52:199 –203.
      Richards, M., V. Macaulay, A. Torroni, and H.-J. Bandelt. 2002. “In Search of Geographical Patterns in European
                   Mitochondrial DNA.” American Journal of Human Genetics 71:1168 –1174.
      Rowlands, M., M. Larsen, and K. Kristiansen, eds. 1987. Center and Periphery in the Ancient World. Cambridge,
                   England: Cambridge University Press.
      Rowley-Conway, P., M. Zvelebil, and H. P. Blankholm. 1987. Mesolithic Northwest Europe: Recent Trends.
                   Shefﬁeld, England: John R. Collis.
      Semino, O., G. Passarino, P. F. Oefner, A. A. Lin, S. Arbuzova, L. E. Beckman, G. De Benedictis, P. Francalacci,
                   A. Kouvatisu, S. Limborska, M. Marcikiae, A. Mika, B. Mika, D. Primorac, S. Santachiara-Benerecetti,
                   L. L. Cavallis-Sforza, and P. A. Underhill. 2000. “The Genetic Legacy of Paleolithic Homo sapiens
                   sapiens in Extant Europeans: A Y Chromosome Perspective.” Science 290:1155–1159.
      Shennan, S. J. 1987. “Trends in the Study of Later European Prehistory.” Annual Review of Anthropology 16:365–382.
      Sievers, S. 2002. “Manching Revisited.” Antiquity 76:943–944.
      Stahl, A. 1994. “Innovation, Diffusion, and Culture Contact: The Holocene Archaeology of Ghana.” Journal of
                   World Prehistory 8(1):51–112.
      Terrell, J. 1986. Prehistory in the Paciﬁc Islands. New York: Cambridge University Press.
      Thomas, J. 1991. Rethinking the Neolithic. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
      Thorpe, I. J. 1996. The Origins of Agriculture in Europe. New York: Routledge.
      Tilley, C. 1996. An Ethnography of the Neolithic. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
      Trump, D. 1980. The Prehistory of the Mediterranean. New Haven: Yale University Press.
      Weissleder, W. 1978. The Nomadic Alternative: Models and Models of Interaction in the African-Asian Deserts and
                   Steppes. The Hague: Mouton.
      Weisler, M. 1990. “Sources and Sourcing of Volcanic Glass in Hawai’i: Implications for Exchange Studies.”
                   Archaeology in Oceania 25:16 –23.
      Wells, P. 1994. “Changing Models of Settlement, Economy, and Ritual Activity: Recent Research in Late
                   Prehistoric Central Europe.” Journal of Archaeological Research 2(2):135–163.
      ———. 1998. “Identity and Material Culture in the Later Prehistory of Central Europe.” Journal of Archaeological
                   Research 6(3):239 –298.
      ———. 2001. Beyond Celts, Germans and Scythians. London: Duckworth.
      Whittle, A. 1987. “Neolithic Settlement Patterns in Temperate Europe.” Journal of World Prehistory 1(1):5 –52.
      ———. 1996. Europe in the Neolithic. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
      Zvelebil, M., ed. 1986. Hunters in Transition. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
      Zvelebil, M., and P. Rowley-Conwy. 1984. “Transition to Farming in Northern Europe: A Hunter-Gatherer
                   Perspective.” Norwegian Archaeological Review 17:104 –128.
      Zvelebil, M., and P. Dolukhanov. 1991. “Transition to Farming in Eastern and Northern Europe.” Journal of World
                   Prehistory 5(3):233 –278.



      NOTES
       1. See Fagan, People of the Earth, for a more detailed coverage of these later states and empires.
       2. Shennan, “Trends in the Study of Later European Prehistory”; see also Childe, The Prehistory of European Society.
       3. See, e.g., Harding, The Myceneaeans and Europe.

                                                          LATER COMPLEX SOCIETIES OF THE OLD WORLD                   479


 4. Bradley et al., “Mitochondrial Diversity and the Origins of African and European Cattle.”
 5. Dennell, “The Origins of Crop Agriculture in Europe,” p. 91.
 6. Zvelebil and Dolukhanov, “Transition to Farming in Eastern and Northern Europe.”
 7. See, for example, articles in Price, Europe’s First Farmers; and Thorpe, The Origins of Agriculture in Europe.
 8. European Economic Prehistory: A New Approach.
 9. See, e.g., Rowley-Conwy et al., Mesolithic Northwest Europe: Recent Trends; Price, “The Mesolithic of Western
    Europe”; Nygaard, “The Stone Age of Northern Scandinavia: A Review.”
10. Fischer et al., “Macro and Micro Wear Traces on Lithic Projectile Points.”
11. Price, “The Earlier Stone Age of Northern Europe,” p. 3. Although it should be noted that the shift to small
    backed microlithic stone tools is a widespread phenomenon throughout the Middle East and much of Europe
    in the late Pleistocene and early Holocene. This shift occurs earlier in the Middle East—about 20,000 years
    ago—but appears to be an independent innovation in Europe some 10,000 years later.
12. A good example of this phenomenon is the English Channel. Prior to about 8,000 or 9,000 years ago,
    Mesolithic hunter-gatherers in England could walk to what is now France over dry land. Rising sea levels even-
    tually cut England off from the continent and undoubtedly submerged many Mesolithic sites in the process.
13. Bogucki, “The Establishment of Agrarian Communities on the North European Plain,” p. 11.
14. Barker and Gamble, Beyond Domestication in Prehistoric Europe, p. 9.
15. Grigg, The Dynamics of Agricultural Change; Barker and Gamble, Beyond Domestication in Prehistoric Europe,
    p. 22.
16. Whittle, “Neolithic Settlement Patterns in Temperate Europe.”
17. “Transition to Farming in Northern Europe: A Hunter-Gatherer Perspective”; see also Zvelebil, Hunters in
    Transition.
18. See, for example, articles in Price, Europe’s First Farmers; and Thorpe, The Origins of Agriculture in Europe.
19. Genetic research has shown that there is some contribution of Middle Eastern genes to the European gene
    pool, suggesting that a population expansion from the Middle East did occur. See, for example, Cavalli-Sforza
    and Minch, “Paleolithic and Neolithic Lineages in the European Mitochondrail Gene Pool”; Semino et al.,
    “The Genetic Legacy of Paleolithic Homo sapiens sapiens in Extant Europeans: A Y Chromosome Perspective”;
    but see Richards et al., “In Search of Geographical Patterns in European Mitochondrial DNA,” for a some-
    what contrasting viewpoint.
20. Price, “Lessons in the Transition to Agriculture,” p. 302.
21. Hodder, The Domestication of Europe; Thorpe, The Origins of Agriculture in Europe; Tilley, An Ethnography of
    the Neolithic; Edmonds, Ancestral Geographies of the Neolithic; Whittle, Europe in the Neolithic; Thomas,
    Rethinking the Neolithic.
22. Ivanov, “Les fouilles archéologiques de la nécropole chalcolithique à Varna (1972–1975)”; Renfrew, “Varna
    and the Social Context of Early Metallurgy.”
23. Hodder, The Domestication of Europe.
24. Renfew, Before Civilization.
25. Personal communication to Wenke.
26. Also see Kinnes, “Les Fouaillages and Megalithic Origins.”
27. Lewthwaite, “Comment on A. Gilman, ‘The Development of Social Stratiﬁcation in Bronze Age Europe.’ ”
28. Wells, “Changing Models of Settlement, Economy, and Ritual Activity: Recent Research in Late Prehistoric
    Central Europe,” p. 138.
29. Ibid., p. 139.
30. Wells, “Identity and Material Culture in the Later Prehistory of Central Europe,” pp. 250 –251.
31. Wells, Beyond Celts, Germans and Scythians, pp. 46 – 47.
32. Joffroy, Le Trésor de Vix. Historie et porteé d’une grande decouverte.
33. Wells, Beyond Celts, Germans and Scythians, p. 48.
34. “More Circe Than Cassandra: The Princess of Vix in Ritualized Social Context.”
35. Wells, Beyond Celts, Germans and Scythians, pp. 58 – 60.
36. Ibid., pp. 60–61.
37. Wells, “Identity and Material Culture in the Later Prehistory of Central Europe,” pp. 251–254.
38. Ibid.
39. Wells, Beyond Celts, Germans and Scythians, pp. 84–90.
40. Wells, “Changing Models of Settlement, Economy, and Ritual Activity: Recent Research in Late Prehistoric
    Central Europe,” p. 151.
41. Pfeiffer, The Emergence of Society, p. 282.
42. Harlan et al., Origins of African Plant Domestication.
43. Stahl, “Innovation, Diffusion, and Culture Contact: The Holocene Archaeology of Ghana.”
44. Mcintosh and McIntosh, “From Stone to Metal: New Perspectives on the Later Prehistory of West Africa,”
    p. 110.
45. Ibid.

480   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      46. Ibid., p. 120.
      47. See Pawley, Man and a Half.
      48. Kirch and Green, “History, Phylogeny, and Evolution in Polynesia”; Kirch and Hunt, Archaeology of the Lapita
          Cultural Complex: A Critical Review.
      49. Kirch, “Circumscription Theory and Sociopolitical Evolution in Polynesia.”
      50. Reviewed in Terrell, Prehistory in the Paciﬁc Islands.
      51. Finney, “Voyaging Against the Direction of the Trades: A Report of an Experimental Canoe Voyage from
          Samoa to Tahiti.”
      52. These descriptions of Paciﬁc Islands and crops are based on entries in the Grolier Electronic Publishing, www.
          gme. grolier.com.
      53. See, for example, the three volumes by Fornander, Fornander Collection of Hawaiian Antiquities and Folk-lore.
      54. Reviewed in Kirch, “The Evolution of Sociopolitical Complexity in Prehistoric Hawaii: An Assessment of the
          Archaeological Evidence.”

13
The Evolution of Complex Societies
in Mesoamerica

During the morning we arrived at a broad
causeway and continued our march towards
Iztapalapa, and when we saw so many cities
and villages in the water and other great towns
on dry land and that straight and level
causeway going towards Mexico, we were
amazed and said it was like the enchantments
they tell of in the legend of Amadis, on account
of the great towers . . . and buildings rising from
the water, all built of masonry. And, some of
our soldiers asked whether the things we saw
were not a dream.
Bernal Diaz del Castillo1




I       n Easter week of 1519, the Spanish conquistador Hernan Cortés landed on the coast
        of Veracruz, Mexico, and began a military campaign that would end in the crushing
defeat of the indigenous Aztec civilization. (Figure 13.1) For tens of thousands of years
before Cortés’s arrival, the peoples of the Old and New Worlds had had so little contact
that they were physically different, spoke entirely different languages, and had no idea that
the others even existed. But here is the intriguing thing: When Cortés traveled the road
from Veracruz to the Aztec capital near Mexico City, he passed through cities, towns, villages,
markets, and irrigated ﬁelds, and he saw slavery, poverty, potentates, farmers, soldiers,
temples, massive pyramids, roads, boats, pottery, gold jewelry, and textiles; in short, he
encountered a world whose almost every aspect he could understand in terms of his own
experience as an urban Spaniard of the sixteenth century.
     There were, of course, many dissimilarities between the Spanish and Aztec peoples. And
the ideological differences between the Aztecs and their European conquerors were also pro-
found. The Spanish, despite their imperialism and murderous ferocity in warfare, viewed
the Aztecs’ preoccupations with death and human sacriﬁce with abhorrence, and the Aztecs
found many aspects of Roman Catholic Christianity both evil and incomprehensible.
     Yet despite profound differences in their respective morals and ideas, the Spanish and
the Aztecs were fundamentally alike in cultural respects: They lived in hierarchically

                                                 481

           482      PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                      organized, class-structured, expansionist empires in which state
                                      religions provided much of the context of life, supported by an economy
                                      of intensive agriculture and highly specialized and integrated systems of
                                      craft production.
                                           Spanish military technology, coupled with diplomacy with non-
                                      Aztec groups and the diseases the Spanish introduced, effectively ended
                                      the indigenous developments of Mesoamerican civilizations, and it is
                                      interesting to speculate about what the Europeans would have found in
                                      the Americas if they had come a few centuries later—would there have
                                      been a great Pan-American empire to rival that of Spain? Or is it possible
                                      that in, say about a.d. 1850, people living on the coast of England (or
                                      France or Spain) might have awakened to the sight of Aztec warships
                                      in their harbors? The latter scenario is unlikely because New World
                                      peoples did not develop two technologies fundamental to the powerful
                                      imperialism of Old World societies—iron in the form of tools and
                                      weapons and large domesticated animals capable of providing traction
                                      and transport (although New World peoples used metals in ornaments
                                      and had domesticated some beasts of burden, mainly the llama, in South
                                      America).
                                           In any case, scholars have assumed for centuries that the rise of
                                      agricultural and complex societies in the New World offered them a
FIGURE 13.1 Cortés haranguing his
                                      “Second Earth,” a comparative case, and that by examining these
troops.                               cultural developments in two somewhat different environments and
                                      times, the causes of these forms of cultural evolution might be more clearly
                 revealed. Despite contemporary reassessment of that premise,2 the early Mesoamerican
                 states, in combination and comparison with the Inka of the Andes, Sumerian Mesopotamia,
                 Old Kingdom Egypt, and other early polities, all illustrate that, whatever the factors are that
                 produced these societies, they operated similarly around the world and at different times.
                 Beyond these fundamental similarities of early civilizations, their unique arts and ideologies
                 provide ample material for particularistic studies that need not appeal to cross-cultural and
                 comparative analyses for intellectual justiﬁcation. In this regard, the early states of
                 Mesoamerica are some of the most fascinating in the world.
                       In previous chapters we have considered the issue of ethics and history: A central issue
                 here is the political consequences of interpretations of different cultures and their histories.
                 The European conquerors of the New World, for example, pointed to the prevalence of
                 warfare, human sacriﬁce, and ritual murder as evidence that the New World peoples were
                 barbarians who could only beneﬁt from the imposition of Western “civilization.” In this
                 chapter and in chapters 14 and 15 the evidence for these New World practices is reviewed,
                 and to some this may seem to perpetuate the stigmatization of New World peoples. But the
                 fact is that warfare, human sacriﬁce, and ritual murder, as well as every other kind of gross
                 exploitation of people, were common elements of cultures all over the world, from China
                 to England. The point of discussing the evidence here is not to titillate the morbidly inclined
                 reader; it is to confront the problem of the origins of ideologies and the nature of their
                 transformations—and to emphasize how cultures can make any behavior, no matter how
                 reprehensible in our own view, into a virtue that facilitates the workings of their political
                 systems.

                                                          THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN MESOAMERICA      483


                                                        MESOAMERICA

                       1900
                       1800
                       1700
                                                   Arrival of the Spanish
                       1600
                       1500
                                                                        AZTEC
                       1400
                                   LATE                                          OAXACA
                       1300     POST-CLASSIC                                     MIXTEC
                       1200                                                               Collapse of Maya in
                                                                                          Northern Lowlands
                       1100        EARLY
                                POST-CLASSIC                            TOLTEC
                                                                                     C. 900 COLLAPSE OF MAYA
                       1000
                                                                                     IN SOUTHERN LOWLANDS
                        900
                        800        EARLY
                                  CLASSIC                   EL
                        700                                TAJIN
                                                                                 MONTE
                        600
                                                                                 ALBAN
                        500        EARLY
                                  CLASSIC
                        400                                                                    MAYA
                                                                   TEOTIHUCAN               CIVILIZATION
                        300




MILLENNIA CENTURIES
                        200
                                               LATE
                        100                 FORMATIVE

                          0                                                                    IZAPAN
                              MIDDLE FORMATIVE
                       1000                               OLMEC                      OCOS CULTURE C. 1500 B.C.
                                   EARLY
                       2000
                                 FORMATIVE                                          BARRA CULTURE C. 1800 B.C.
                       3000
                       4000                             MAIZE IN USE
                                  ARCHAIC                BY 3500 B.C.
                       5000
                       6000
                       7000
                       8000
                       9000      Paleoindian
                      10000



                  20000

           484       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                   THE ECOLOGICAL
                                                                                   SETTING

                                                                                    As in other areas of early
                                                                                    civilization, the ﬁrst complex
                                                                                    societies did not appear in just
                                                                                    one area of Mexico and then
                                                                                    gradually expand to occupy
                                                                                    Mesoamerica; instead, there
                                                                                    were several developmental
                                                                                    centers, including the South
                                                                                    Gulf Coast, the Valley of Mexico,
                                                                                    the Valley of Oaxaca, and the
                                                                                    Maya lowlands and highlands
                                                                                    (Figure 13.2). Eventually some
                                                                                    of these regions coalesced
                                                                                    into larger polities, but only
                                                                                    after centuries of competition,
FIGURE 13.2 The geography of Mesoamerica. The darker shading identiﬁes              cooperation, expansion, and
developmental centers of early cultural complexity.                                 collapse.
                                                                                          In    each     of    these
                                                                                    Mesoamerican areas, cultural
                     evolution was much inﬂuenced by three general ecological conditions: (1) the millions of
                     years of mountain-building volcanic activity that left Mesoamerica a still-trembling land
                     of towering mountains and circumscribed valleys, and which in many areas compressed
                     extremely different ﬂora, fauna, and climates into proximity, thereby rewarding inter-
                     regional exchange, even though it made transport and communication difﬁcult; (2) the
                     absence of any domesticable animal suitable for providing milk, transport, or draft power;
                     and (3) the relative scarcity of large rivers with extensive alluvial plains in warm latitudes:
                     Unlike Egypt, Mesopotamia, the Indus Valley, North China, and Andean South America,
                     for example, Mesoamerica has few large, navigable rivers in the semi-arid environments
                     where primitive agriculture is highly productive.
                           All civilizations can be understood to a limited extent purely in thermodynamic terms.
                     From the food that keeps our bodies at proper metabolic temperature to the draft animals,
                     engines, or nuclear reactors that propel our vehicles, the connection between energy and
                     culture is close and causal. And, as in all early civilizations, in ancient Mesoamerica a few
                     plant and animal species were, in effect, the power base of cultural evolution. Not just any
                     domesticated plants and animals would do: There had to be a reliable, voluminous
                     carbohydrate source and nutritionally complementary plants and animals. In Mesoamerica
                     these foods were, principally, maize, beans, and squash, augmented by protein from rabbits,
                     deer, dogs, and, in some places, ﬁsh and shellﬁsh.3 The combination of maize and beans
                     was particularly important because it allowed populations to overcome signiﬁcant short falls
                     in protein that resulted from the small numbers of available hoofed animals. These rather
                     plain foodstuffs were enlivened in antiquity by the use of cacao (from which chocolate is
                     derived), incendiary peppers, numerous herbs and spices, and several natural hallucinogens.

                                      THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN MESOAMERICA         485


And like all ancient farmers, they used the magic of fermentation to improve the food
products of various high-sugar plants—cactus being the principal source of alcohol in
Mesoamerica.



EARLY MESOAMERICAN FARMING (C. 3500–1300 B.C.)

Between 9,000 and 4,000 years ago most of Mesoamerica was inhabited mainly by hunter-
foragers who lived in small bands that moved with the seasons to exploit cactus fruits, deer
herds, nuts, and the hundreds of other plant and animal species in their range, depending
on the season. Since these bands were small in size and never stayed in one place for a
sufﬁcient period of time to have much long-term effect on the plant and animal popula-
tions on which they subsisted, the hunter-foragers’ overall impact on their environment
was low. Some groups along the margins of the lake in the Valley of Mexico may have been
sedentary villagers, as were some groups along the coasts. They are likely to have had an
important role in the domestication of plants and animals and the eventual spread of
agriculture. Kirkby suggests that by about 4,000 years ago, maize cob size was large enough
that people over large areas of the Mexican highlands could subsist mainly on maize.4
Grinding corn and making tortillas out of it may not seem to be a great technological leap
forward from hunting-foraging, but maize, along with beans, squash, and a variety of other
plants, provided the reliable and productive source of food required for people to be able
to live in one place permanently.
     The recent redating of some of the supposedly earliest domesticated maize in
Mesoamerica to about 3500 b.c. raises the possibility, as Gayle Fritz notes,5 that initial
agriculture evolved out of intensiﬁed foraging by groups of people who were relatively
sedentary, perhaps living all or most of the year in one or a few places, and that they were
perhaps even in the process of developing social differences that increased the intensity
of their foraging. However maize was domesticated, and by whom, maize appears to have
reached sufﬁcient productivity to permit the village-farming way of life soon after about
2000 b.c., and agricultural communities appeared at about this time in many different
areas.6
     From the hot, wet Guatemalan lowlands to the arid Tehuacán Valley, the earliest
villages were quite similar in size and contents.7 Almost all houses (Figure 13.3) were built
using the wattle-and-daub method—sticks, branches, and cane were woven in-and-out
between vertical wall poles, then covered with a mud plaster, which was dried by the hot
sun. Houses, which were seldom larger than 4-by-6 m, featured thatched roofs and tamped
clay ﬂoors on which ﬁne sand was scattered.
     Most of the earliest farming communities were tiny hamlets, villages of 10 –12
houses that were home to about 50–60 people, but some communities were larger. Most
houses that have been excavated have yielded the same remains, mainly grinding stones,
storage pits, pieces of large ceramic storage jars, bones of cottontail rabbits, carbonized
maize fragments, and broken pieces of ceramic charcoal braziers.8 In addition, ovens,
middens, and graves are very common. While the proportion of plant and animal foods
varied somewhat, all villages probably grew maize, beans, squash, peppers, and some
other crops and hunted deer and rabbits. Each village, or each extended family, may have

           486        PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                     had a specialist who did pres-
                                                                                     sure ﬂaking of stone, leather-
                                                                                     working, or a similar craft, and
                                                                                     individual villages may have
                                                                                     concentrated on specialties
                                                                                     like salt production, feather-
                                                                                     weaving, shell-working, grind-
                                                                                     ing stone manufacture, and
                                                                                     the like.


                                                                                     THE
                                                                                     ARCHAEOLOGICAL
                                                                                     RECORD OF
                                                                                     EARLY COMPLEX
                                                                                     MESOAMERICAN
                                                                                     SOCIETIES
                                                                                     (C. 1300–500 B.C.)
FIGURE 13.3 Mexico’s ﬁrst agriculturalists lived in wattle-and-daub houses much
like these contemporary homes in Morelos, Mexico. The people in this village speak
Nahuatl, which is derived from the language of the Aztecs.                         As in Mesopotamia, China,
                                                                                   and elsewhere, the background
                                                                                   to the origins of complex
                      society in Mesoamerica was a great scatter of relatively simple agricultural villages in which
                      the mechanics of producing a reliable, expandable food supply had been mastered. Many
                      areas of Mesoamerica contributed to the overall rise of the ﬁrst Mesoamerican states, but
                      four areas appear to have been particularly important: the South Gulf Coast, the Valley
                      of Mexico, the Valley of Oaxaca, and the Maya highlands and lowlands. The Maya are
                      considered separately later in this chapter.


                      Early Complex Societies on the South Gulf Coast
                      An early and radical break with the simple village farming tradition of Mesoamerica
                      occurred in the sweltering lowlands of the South Gulf Coast. Here, beginning at about
                      1300 b.c., people built massive clay pyramids and platforms, lived in small-town groups of
                      hundreds or even thousands, intensively farmed a variety of ecological zones, and produced
                      what is one of the world’s most valued examples of stone sculpture.
                          These people are known to us as the Olmec, a name derived from an ancient American
                      word for rubber—doubtless a reference to the rubber trees that grow in this area—but a
                      name they themselves probably did not use.
                          Some scholars have considered the possibility that the Olmec culture was the cultura
                      madre (mother culture) of all later complex societies in Mesoamerica, and that they
                      were directly responsible for transforming their neighbors by military, political, religious,
                      or economic means into complex societies. 9 Other scholars, however, have argued
                      convincingly that the Olmec represent only one of several largely independent cases of the

                                     THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN MESOAMERICA           487


evolution of social complexity
in Mesoamerica.10 As we have
seen in other areas of the world,
civilizations seem not to have
developed, in general, because
of the behavior of a particular
group or the actions of a few
particularly gifted individuals:
Civilizations all appear to be
the products of broad regional
and long-term historical pro-
cesses that manifest them-
selves differently at different
places and times.
      The Olmec heartland is a
coastal strip approximately
350 km in length, extending
inland about 100 km (Figure
13.4). It was created by the          FIGURE 13.4 Centers of initial cultural complexity in ﬁrst millennium b.c.
alluviation of several rivers         Mesoamerica.
that run to the sea from the
highlands. Except for a few areas, the region is thickly forested. Torrential rains fall during
the summer, but the area is dry in the winter, which permits swidden, or slash-and-burn,
agriculture, as it is sometimes called. Swidden agriculture involves cutting down all the
vegetation in a particular area and then waiting for the dry season so that the cut vegetation
can be burned. Nutrients are thus returned to the soil—an important contribution since
manure and artiﬁcial fertilizers were not available (unlike the peasants of Mesopotamia, the
Olmec had no manure-producing cattle to graze on and replenish ﬁelds). After burning,
the land is sown, and the crops germinate and come to maturity in the rainy season. After
1 or 2 years of exploitation, however, the land must be left fallow, sometimes for 20 years
or more. If the cycle is accelerated, productivity falls rapidly. Until recent times, in the ﬂat
lowlands of the Olmec heartland as much as 70–90 percent of the land was fallow at any
one time.11
      Maize, beans, and squash were agricultural staples in early formative times,
supplemented by hunting and ﬁshing and collecting wild plant foods. In coastal areas,
mussels and other rich marine resources could also be collected. And while much of Olmec
agriculture may have been swidden-based, very productive farming was possible on the
river levees. Some river levees near the coast are annually inundated with water-borne silt
of such fertility that it was possible to raise two crops a year using swidden techniques.
Indeed, the precocity of the Olmec in developing one of the ﬁrst complex Mesoamerican
cultures was probably tied directly to the great agricultural potential and rich ﬂoral and
faunal resources of these riverine environments. The economic basis of Olmec culture is
still relatively poorly known. Although plant remains do not preserve well in the South Gulf
Coast, we know that most of the people were maize farmers. They ate some peccary and
deer, but ﬁsh and domestic dogs provided most of their protein. Human bones found at
San Lorenzo with obvious burning and butchering marks suggest cannibalism, undertaken

          488       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                    for either ritual or more secular motives. Obsidian, imported in large volumes from the
                    Mexican highlands to the west, was used for arrowheads, knives, and many other tools.
                         After many years of research, we ﬁnally have substantial data about the early formative
                    cultures of the South Gulf Coast, although we will probably never know with great precision
                    the population densities in the countryside in many periods because the tiny hamlets they
                    apparently lived in are covered by vegetation and easily missed in archaeological surveys.12
                         As a result, we know the Olmec primarily from their larger ceremonial centers, and on
                    this basis they are an impressive culture. People had been living since about 1500 b.c. On
                    the San Lorenzo plateau in southern Veracruz, for example, exploiting its good soil and
                    natural springs. Then, sometime after about 1250 b.c., the inhabitants of this area began
                    moving tons of earth and clay in baskets to level the plateau’s upper surface over an area
                    some 600-by-100 m. At ﬁrst, perhaps, they were simply trying to raise the elevation of their
                    residential areas above the ﬂood levels of the seasonally inundated plains on which they
                    lived. Within a century or two, however, they began to build pyramids and ceremonial
                    platforms adorned with monumental stone sculptures and other impressive monuments.13
                                                                  San Lorenzo actually is a group of sites within
                                                             about a 5-km area, a complex that reached its peak
                                                             between about 1150 and 900 b.c., when several
                                                             thousand people probably lived there; but after
                                                             about 900 b.c. construction of monuments ceased
                                                             and population densities appear to have declined.
                                                                  San Lorenzo’s ﬂorescence was followed by
                                                             that of another Olmec site, La Venta, located on a
                                                             small island in a coastal swamp near the Tonal
                                                             River (Figure 13.5). At this location the Olmec
                                                             constructed a series of mounds, platforms, courts,
                                                             and pyramids covering more than 5 km2. Much
                                                             of this has been destroyed by looters and an
                                                             oil well/processing installation, but excavations
                                                             have revealed a large portion of this site’s plan.
                                                             Dominating the area is a pyramid of clay, 128-by-
                                                             73 m at the base and 33.5 m high. Two long, low
                                                             mounds extend out to the north from the pyramid,
                                                             with a circular mound between them. All these
                                                             mounds are oriented eight degrees west of true
                                                             north.
                                                                  A particularly striking remnant of Olmec
                                                             culture at both San Lorenzo and La Venta are the
                                                             Olmec “heads” and other monumental sculptures
                                                             (Figure 13.6). The most impressive art works at La
                                                             Venta are four “Olmec heads,” some of which are
                                                             over 8 feet tall. They often depict a human with a
                                                             stern, not to say sneering, facial expression, and
                                                             usually are shown wearing a “helmet.” Presumably
FIGURE 13.5 The Olmec complex at La Venta included a         these sculptures are of Olmec rulers, but we will
30-m-high pyramid and several other lower mounds.            probably never know for certain. Since the Olmec

                                      THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN MESOAMERICA          489


had no metal tools, we assume they worked with grinding and
pecking stone implements, and it is difﬁcult to believe that
these sculptures were made by anyone other than skilled
specialists. Major Olmec sites often also included other
monumental stone carvings, such as those of free-standing
ﬁgures of kneeling men and carved stelae and “altars,” all
carefully executed from massive basalt blocks. On some of
them are engraved fantastic mythical creatures representing
hybrids of snakes, jaguars, and humans. The basalt for these
carvings was imported from 80 km or more away, probably
by being ﬂoated down rivers on rafts. Some of the heads weigh
more than 20 tons, so scores of people must have been
involved in quarrying, transporting, carving, and then erecting
the stone blocks in monumental compositions.
     The Olmec also decorated their ceremonial complexes
with many other kinds of expensive and exotic goods, such as
the “pavements” at La Venta. To form these mosaic-like pave-
ments, hundreds of serpentine (a green hard stone) blocks
about the size of small construction bricks were laid out in a
traditional Olmec design—a jaguar mask—and then carefully
                                                                      FIGURE 13.6 An Olmec stone head sculpture.
buried (Figure 13.7).
     Unfortunately, the acidic,
damp soils of the Olmec region
do not preserve bones well, and
we have only meager know-
ledge of Olmec burial prac-
tices. At La Venta a tomb in a
large mound near the central
pyramid was elaborately con-
structed of basalt columns,
and on its limestone ﬂoor two
juveniles were laid out in fabric
bundles heavily coated with red
paint. Buried with the bodies
were jade ﬁgurines, beads, a        FIGURE 13.7 Mosaic jaguar mask pavement at La Venta, Mexico.
shell ornament, a stingray spine,
and a few other items, and
these burials may reﬂect inherited wealth and prestige. Other types of evidence relating to
social complexity, such as residential architecture and settlement patterns, are not well
represented at La Venta. And while there is little residential debris there (except for pottery
and a few clay ﬁgurines), scholars now believe that the people who built La Venta did live
there permanently.14
     Other Olmec ceremonial centers were built at Laguna de los Cerros and elsewhere,
and between about 900 b.c. and 400 b.c. It is possible to have large buildings and other
trappings of social complexity on the basis of a very simple economic system, but the Olmec
also had an intensive and productive agricultural system. In addition, they traded jade, iron

           490       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                     ore, obsidian, bitumen, magnetite mirrors, shark teeth, stingray
                                                     spines, perhaps cacao and pottery, and many other goods in
                                                     complex patterns between the Olmec heartland and highland
                                                     Mexico and as far south as Guatemala.
                                                          As we have seen in other civilizations, a key element in
                                                     the development of most of them was some formative idea,
                                                     some set of religious or philosophical ideology that people
                                                     over a large area adopted and expressed in ways that linked
                                                     them in complex interrelationships. The core ideology of
                                                     the Olmec is hard to discern and decipher, however. Judging
                                                     from their art style, the Olmec seem to have believed that at
                                                     some distant time in the past a woman mated with a jaguar
                                                     and gave issue to a line of half-human/half-feline monsters,
                                                     or “were-jaguars.” These were portrayed in pottery, stone,
                                                     and other media in a highly stylized way, usually as fat infants
                                                     of no discernible sexuality (Figure 13.8). Their snarling
                                                     mouths, long canine teeth, and cleft heads give them a
                                                     strikingly bizarre quality that some scholars have explained as
                                                     an imitation of a birth defect of the neural tubes, or as the
                                                     deformities one would expect of a mating between a human
                                                     and a jaguar.15
                                                          “Olmec” ceramic and sculptural designs have also been
FIGURE 13.8 These Olmec ceramic “baby”               found  far outside the borders of the South Gulf Coast. Some
ﬁgurines were distributed over a large region of     bas-relief rock carvings at Las Victorias in highland El
central Mesoamerica.                                 Salvador strongly resemble those at La Venta, and similar
                                                     sculptures have been discovered in the highlands of Guerrero
                                                     and Morelos in western Mexico. At Chalcatzingo, in Morelos,
                      cliff sculptures include a standard Olmec motif of a human (probably male) seated in what
                      may have been meant as the mouth of a cave or a steaming monster (Figure 13.9). Olmec
                      styles of pottery, worked stone, jade, and other artifacts have also been found at several sites
                      in the Valley of Oaxaca, at Tlatilco and Tlapacoya near Mexico City, in Guatemala, and
                      elsewhere in Mesoamerica.
                            The later Olmec and their immediate successors may have formulated some of the
                      ideology that formed the basis of the Maya (see later), but the evidence is controversial. In
                      1902 a small jadeite ﬁgure of a person with what appears to be the bill of a duck was found
                      at San Andres Tuxtla. On it were engraved some glyphs that appeared to be a date, but
                      without the signs that would allow it to be converted to our calendar, and other glyphs,
                      some of which resembled those of later Maya writing but many others that did not. Scholars
                      disputed the signiﬁcance of this ﬁgure for many years, and in 1986 another ﬁnd helped
                      clarify its signiﬁcance. This was the La Mojarra Stela 1, found in southern Veracruz, where
                      writing was found that appeared to be the same script as that of the Tuxtla duck-billed
                      ﬁgurine. John Justeson and Terrence Kaufman16—whose work is controversial—have
                      argued that these inscriptions are in the Zoquean language, which is only distantly (if at all)
                      related to the language of the later Maya, and consists of separate glyphs for each
                      combination of the 11 consonants and 6 vowels of Zoquean (thus, 66 possible consonant-
                      vowel combinations). What is particularly important, however, is that this Epi-Olmec

                                         THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN MESOAMERICA                491


script contains logograms that
are semantically equivalent to
very similar-looking Maya
glyphs17 and that the Olmec were
using essentially the same calendar.
These Epi-Olmec inscriptions
refer to the accession of various
rulers, to what seems to be a war
between brothers-in-law, and to
other dynastic and calendrical
matters.
     Perhaps the most important
recent discovery of early writ-
ing, however, comes from San
Andrés, not far from La Venta.
Pohl and her colleagues18 report
ﬁnding a cylinder seal and a
greenstone plaque that contain
glyphs. These artifacts are from
contexts that date to about 650
b.c. and show that some of the
features of later Mesoamerican
writing systems, as well as the use
of the sacred 260-day calendar
and the association of glyphs
with rulers, were deﬁnitely pres-
ent in Olmec society.
     Whether or not the Olmec
can be credited with the origins of    FIGURE 13.9 Relief 1, Chalcatzingo, Morelos. One interpretation of this Olmec
Maya ideology, the Olmec were          motif is that it is a ruler within a cave or a stylized monster’s mouth, which gives
far different from their hunter-       off steam or smoke, while raindrops fall from above.
forager ancestors, and if we
match them against the checklist
of monumental architecture, burials of juveniles with wealth, voluminous craft production
and trade, writing, and so on, the Olmec were clearly a complex society. Their relatively
low population densities and small population numbers in centers is probably a direct
result of the constraints of their agricultural methods, although we may have an inaccur-
ate sense of their agriculture, which may have been more intensive than many scholars
think.
     La Venta appears to have been intentionally destroyed soon after about 400 b.c., or at
least we might infer this from the fact that some of its greatest stone monuments were
intentionally defaced. The history of the Olmec appears to have been one in which small
centers of power and prestige, such as San Lorenzo and La Venta, alternately became
dominant. And while the people of these centers probably shared core cultural elements,
ranging from language to theology, it is not certain that they ever formed a united,
integrated political unit over the entire Olmec region.

492   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      Early Complex Societies in the Valley of Mexico
      The Valley of Mexico is a large basin with no external drainage that is rimmed on three
      sides by high mountain walls cut by only a few passes; even in the north where there are no
      mountains, the valley is delimited by a series of low hills (see Figure 13.2). The valley has
      often been considered a “natural” analytical unit, bounded as it is by such impressive
      natural barriers, but archaeological research has revealed that almost from their arrival here
      the people of this area interacted with cultures far beyond the valley itself.19
           Although much of the Valley of Mexico lies beyond the temperature limits of maize
      agriculture, people were able to successfully pursue maize cultivation for several thousand
      years. They also beneﬁted from a large lake, which until the last 400 years, covered the low
      central portion of the valley, providing rich resources in the form of ﬁsh, fowl, turtles, algae,
      and reeds.
           There is not a single navigable stream or river in the whole Valley of Mexico today,
      and agriculture in most places in the valley would have depended on rainfall and small
      streams.20 Rainfall is sharply seasonal and varies considerably from north to south. Today,
      as in the past, the upper slopes of the Valley of Mexico provide many wood products, and
      in earlier times the slopes supported large deer herds that were an important part of the
      prehistoric and early historic diet.
           Modern urbanization in the Valley of Mexico has probably destroyed many of the
      earliest villages and towns there. What we do know suggests that by about 1000 b.c. there
      were small villages and hamlets in several areas of the valley. Only a few larger sites have been
      found, such as Tlatilco and Cuicuilco.21 The valley’s apparent two-tiered site size hierarchy,
      with a few large towns like Tlatilco and Cuicuilco and many small villages, suggests a simple,
      perhaps tribal, organization, and the distribution of settlements does not point to any
      political or social spacing. Settlements seem to be located principally around the edge of
      the great lake, although a few small villages have also been found in highland areas where
      the soil is particularly rich and deep. Differences in settlement size seem to be a result of
      local variations in agricultural potential.
           Nor is there much evidence of complex architecture at these settlements. A few small
      mounds and platforms may date to before 800 b.c., but none is on the scale of the pyramids,
      platforms, and other structures found later on the South Gulf Coast and in the Maya areas.
      No evidence of elaborate residential structures or monumental sculptures has been found.
           The cemetery at Tlatilco provides little evidence that the occupants of the Valley of
      Mexico were living in complex cultures. Burial goods include pottery, shell ornaments,
      obsidian tools, ﬁgurines, bone tools, and jade and serpentine objects. Some women seem
      to have been buried with more numerous and more expensive objects than other people in
      the cemetery, perhaps even with sacriﬁced men and children. But there is no evidence of
      lavish mortuary cults.
           From about 800 b.c. to about 500 b.c., the population density of the Valley of Mexico
      increased considerably. At least 10 sites were larger than 50 hectares (each inhabited by
      about 1,000 people), and one, Cuicuilco, probably had a population of about 2,500. All the
      larger sites are located along the lake margin, while scattered small hamlets have been found
      in the highlands. The larger settlements along the lake are fairly evenly spaced at 8- to
      10-km intervals, and they all used similar styles of pottery, suggesting some degree of social
      or political integration, but probably at a low level.

                                       THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN MESOAMERICA           493


Early Complex Societies in Oaxaca22
In the Olmec area the basis of cultural evolution was the productivity of the coastal zone
and river alluvium, while in the Valley of Mexico it was the lake shore and adjacent areas,
but in the Valley of Oaxaca, cultural evolution seems to have been based on the diversity
of ecological zones and the presence of some small river valleys (see Figure 13.2). On the
valley ﬂoor are large, fertile, ﬂat alluvial areas with a water table sufﬁciently high for
irrigation to be easily accomplished. Grading up into the mountains, the piedmont areas
are less fertile than the alluvium, but they can be productively farmed by diverting water
from the perennial streams that run toward the valley ﬂoor. The higher mountains are
cooler and wetter than the other zones and are still covered with pine and oak trees. Frost
here is not nearly the limiting factor on agriculture that it is in the Valley of Mexico,
although it can be a signiﬁcant determinant of productivity. Since formative times,
irrigation by means of canals and wells has been an important aspect of agriculture in
Oaxaca.
     Some of the most important resources of Oaxaca were the native iron ores, including
magnetite, ilmenite, and hematite. Small pieces of these materials were polished and used
as mirrors and ornaments, which were then traded widely over Mesoamerica and used as
marks of status.
     Shortly after 1400 b.c., the most productive areas of the piedmont and the alluvium
in the Valley of Oaxaca were occupied by small villages composed of perhaps 50 people
living in tiny wattle-and-daub structures. The ﬁrst signiﬁcant deviation from this pattern
of egalitarian farmers occurred sometime between 1350 b.c. and 1150 b.c., when the
inhabitants of at least one site (San José Mogote) at different times built several “public
buildings” of earth and adobe construction.23 Although these structures average only
5.4-by-4.4 m each, they are interpreted as public buildings because the ﬂoors were carefully
covered with a distinctive white lime plaster and swept clean, in contrast to the average
house of this period, the ﬂoors of which were usually stamped clay and sand and covered
with household debris.
     Other evidence suggests that these buildings at San José Mogote may have been
intended for special functions: They were repaired and reused over longer periods of time
than the obviously residential structures; at least one of them had an “altar” or step against
one wall; and they are oriented eight degrees west of true north, about the same as the major
monumental constructions at La Venta, in the Olmec heartland, which suggests that the
strong Mesoamerican tradition of imputing magic to place and arrangement (see later) was
already in force.
     Most of the other formative villages in Oaxaca lack such public structures, although
one, Tomaltepec, was found to have a large prepared mudbrick platform.24 In the ﬂoor of
this structure was a storage pit, considerably larger than any of the others at the site,
containing relatively large quantities of obsidian, ornamental seashell, and deer and rabbit
bones.25 Between 1400 and 1000 b.c., overlapping in time with the construction of this
platform, a large cemetery was created at Tomaltepec. Eighty burials containing a total of
about 100 individuals were found at the cemetery, and most of these burials had almost the
same goods, mainly ceramics and a few other small items. In four of the burials, small
quantities of obsidian, magnetite, and jade were found, but these differences in grave goods
seem fairly small in view of the overall similarity. And, interestingly, no juveniles or infants

494   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      were buried here; all the bodies were of adults, suggesting that this society had not yet
      achieved signiﬁcant social stratiﬁcation.
           Analysis of trade items in the valley between 1400 b.c. to 1000 b.c. also reinforces this
      impression of low-level community organization. A few items, such as obsidian, were
      traded, but in small amounts, and the trade was probably organized through individual
      households.26
           But archaeological evidence suggests that major changes were in process in the
      cultural organization of Oaxacan society between about 1400 b.c. and 1100 b.c. More
      crafts were apparently performed at San José Mogote than at other settlements in the
      valley at this time. Debris from working obsidian, jade, magnetite, shell, and other
      substances has been found here in concentrations proportionately greater than at other
      sites. There was a major increase in the volume of “exotic” traded materials in Oaxaca at
      this time also, perhaps in response to increasing social stratiﬁcation: These materials seem
      to have been used most frequently to make ornaments that reﬂect differences in social
      rank.
           As is discussed later in the context of the Maya, a widespread religious practice in
      Mesoamerica was ritual self-mutilation to produce blood—often in the form of cutting
      one’s tongue or (for men) penis with obsidian blades or stingray spines. This practice is
      thought to have been a way of materializing the gods and invoking their powers, and the
      presence of these materials at San José Magote may reﬂect this practice. The spread of
      common elements of ideology over Mesoamerica also seems reﬂected in other ways.
      There are clear resemblances between Olmec ﬁgurines and ones of comparable age from
      Oaxaca, for example, and some pottery with Olmec motifs reminiscent of the South Gulf
      Coast has been found in Oaxaca. Certainly, magnetite and obsidian were moved in
      substantial volumes between Oaxaca and the South Gulf Coast between 1100 b.c. and
      850 b.c.
           Kent Flannery and Joyce Marcus have challenged27 the notion that “Olmec” motifs on
      early Oaxaca pottery support the contention that somehow the South Gulf Coast cultures
      stimulated cultural developments in Oaxaca. They note that Oaxaca seems to have been more
      inﬂuenced by cultures in the Valley of Mexico than the South Gulf Coast and that Oaxaca
      society was, in any case, among the earliest in Mesoamerica to develop public architecture
      and other evidence of increasing cultural complexity.
           After about 850 b.c., variation in settlement size in Oaxaca increased; by 550 b.c.,
      San José Mogote, for example, grew to 15 times the size of the next largest community
      (Figure 13.10). Many settlements excavated have public architecture, and their distribution
      seems to mirror the growing importance of social and political factors in determining site
      location.
           It seems unlikely that cultural evolution in either Oaxaca or the Valley of Mexico was
      directly instigated by the Olmec through military imposition, economic exploitation, or
      slavish imitation.28 The wide distribution of Olmec styles of ceramics, ﬁgurines, and
      sculpture and the construction in Oaxaca and elsewhere of public buildings with astronom-
      ical orientations similar to those of the Olmec buildings seem to reﬂect interregional
      trade networks and perhaps the circulation of important people, but the archaeological
      evidence does not support the idea of uniﬁed political and military control of these three
      regions.29

                                                   THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN MESOAMERICA        495




                                                                                 Patch of
                                                                                 puddled
                                                                                 adobe ﬂoor
               Poorly preserved
               patch of puddled
               adobe ﬂoor
                                                                                 STRUCTURE 30




                                 ROOM 3

                  BURIAL 60
                 (below floor)           Jodes




                BURIAL 55
               (under wall)
                                                                                               Ash
                                 ROOM 2
                                                                         Red ochre with II
                                                                         obsidian projectile
                                                                         points
                                 ROOM 1
                                        Vessel 1                                                 Ash
                                        Vessel 2
                              Vessel 4
                                 Chert
          TOMB II                nodule Vessel
                                              5
                                     Vessel 3



                                                                                TOMB 10
                              STRUCTURE 26

            Mass of stones
            (possibly roof
                                                             PATIO
            removed from
            Tomb II)


                                                                     STRUCTURE 25,
                                                                        SOUTH

                                                                       Poorly preserved
                                                                       patch of puddled              Step
                         Well-preserved patch                          adobe ﬂoor                           STRUCTURE 25
                         of puddled adobe ﬂoor                                                                  EAST


                                                         N


                     0              1              2

                                 Meters




FIGURE 13.10 A plan view of structures at San José Mogote, Oaxaca, Mexico.

496   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      THE ARCHAEOLOGICAL RECORD OF MESOAMERICAN
      STATES IN THE VALLEYS OF MEXICO AND OAXACA

      As discussed in chapter 7, applying a static concept such as state to complex multi-dimensional
      cultural changes involves many difﬁculties, but as an informal descriptive term the notion
      of state implies a society based in part on socioeconomic classes; a centralized, hierarchically
      arranged bureaucratic structure; and the economic and functional integration of many
      settlements over a comparatively large area. Cuicuilco, with its early stone monuments,
      intensiﬁed agricultural system, and other developments, may be Mesoamerica’s ﬁrst state
      in this sense, but it is clear that other areas of Mesoamerica, especially the Valley of Oaxaca,
      were undergoing roughly contemporaneous and similar processes of state-formation.


      Early States in the Valley of Mexico (C. 500 B.C.–A.D. 800)
      Thanks to the hard work of William Sanders, Jeffrey Parsons, George Cowgill, Rene Millon,
      and many others in the Valley of Mexico, we can now reconstruct over 4,000 years of
      settlement history and other evidence related to the process of state-formation here.30
      Elizabeth Brumﬁel, for example, attempted to test the hypothesis that “population
      pressure” was an important factor in cultural evolution in the Valley of Mexico between
      500 b.c. and a.d. 1—the important interval just before the ﬂorescence of Teotihuacán.31
      She did this by estimating the agricultural productivity and the potential for intensiﬁcation
      of each settlement known for this period. Her argument is complex and mathematical, but
      one of her conclusions is quite simple: An important factor in the growth of smaller towns
      and villages was the imposition of tribute by elites in the largest communities. She found
      little convincing evidence of “population pressure” at the critical period—although, the
      data are not conclusive.32
            Several other analyses of these Valley of Mexico settlement patterns have been set in
      mathematical-locational geographical terms,33 and the results have stimulated a great deal
      of discussion about Mesoamerican cultural history and the applicability of these kinds of
      analytical techniques. The settlement pattern data we have here come from archaeological
      surveys where the procedure was to collect a sample of pottery from each site and then
      estimate the site size, periods of occupation, and distinctive architectural features. The
      limitations of such data have been intensively reviewed by Tolstoy and others, but this
      information can be quite useful.34
            For the period between about 500 b.c. and 200 b.c., there is persuasive evidence of
      changing cultural complexity in the Valley of Mexico. The population of the valley grew
      substantially in this period, and in most of Mesoamerica as well,35 and people were now
      living in larger settlements. Cuicuilco may have had as many as 7,500 people at this time
      —an unmanageable size without considerable social organization and control. Many
      other settlements of 80–100 hectares existed, intermediate and small settlements also
      increased in number, and there are some early signs of irrigation agriculture. Small
      “temple” platforms of stone and clay, some 3–4 m high, appeared in several areas, and
      Cuicuilco and other sites had large stone structures. Cuicuilco had the largest early pyramid
      structure in central Mexico, an anticipation of the great stone pyramids at Teotihuacán
      (see later).

                                        THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN MESOAMERICA            497


      As we saw in the case of Mesopotamia (chapter 8) and Egypt (chapter 9), early polities
that were developing centralized political authority, class-based social organizations, and
other elements of social complexity often seemed to begin building massive ceremonial
structures very early in this evolutionary process. That so many people around the world
chose the pyramid form has nothing to do with instinctive human aesthetics or the mystical
power of pyramids and everything to do with the simple engineering reality that people
with primitive tools who try to build a monumental structure capable of bearing its own
weight can only construct a few basic shapes. Of these, the pyramid is the easiest to build
in terms of raising materials to the top of the structure and the amount of materials and
labor needed. As discussed in previous chapters, monumental structures are functionally
efﬁcient in early complex societies, despite their apparent “waste” of resources and labor,
because they legitimize and focus the religious and social hierarchies of which they are an
expression, and they may also act to dampen unstable rates of population growth and
economic expansion.
      Before 200 b.c. the Teotihuacán area of the Valley of Mexico had been relatively
unimportant culturally, but it has large areas suitable for irrigated agriculture and possesses
large springs capable of supplying irrigation systems. Obsidian is also available nearby, and
the area is thought to have supported large stands of maguey cactus, used for its ﬁber and
to make pulque (a kind of beer), as well as edible nopal cactus, a plant species that is home
to an insect that can be rendered into a red dye highly prized in pre-Hispanic Mexico.
Moreover, Teotihuacán stands along a natural trade route to eastern Mesoamerica—an
important advantage given the difﬁcult terrain of this region.
      Between 150 b.c. and 1 b.c. the population growth rate exceeded that of any other
period, and Teotihuacán grew to some 6 – 8 km2, reaching about one-third its eventual
maximum size.36 Between about a.d. 1 and a.d. 150 Teotihuacán’s growth rate was still high
but had slowed; the average population during this period was probably between 60,000
and 80,000, and rose to 100,000 or more by a.d. 300.37
      During this time work was completed on the massive Pyramids of the Sun and the
Moon (Figure 13.11) and on at least 20 other important temple complexes.38 The Pyramid
of the Sun is 198 m long on each side of its base—as large an area as the Great Pyramid of
Khufu in Egypt—and rises 64 m (half the height of the Khufu pyramid). The pyramid seems
to have been built over an earlier, smaller structure made of sun-dried bricks and is ﬁlled
with an additional one million cubic meters of earth, stone, and rubble. In volume, this
probably equaled two million cubic meters of uncompressed ﬁll, which would have
required the excavation, transport, and shaping of the soil in an area 1.4 km2 to a depth of
1 m—a considerable effort by any standards. The Pyramid of the Moon is somewhat
smaller (150 m at the base, 45 m high), but of greater architectural sophistication, with a
series of inset trapezoidal platforms. Pottery fragments in the ﬁll of these pyramids indicate
that the pyramids were constructed by using material from earlier occupations near the
city. Considering the size of these structures, it is little wonder that the later Aztecs believed
that the pyramids had been constructed by giants and that some of the gods were buried
beneath them.
      By about a.d. 100 Teotihuacán had hundreds of workshops, with perhaps as much as
25 percent of its population employed as craft specialists, making products in obsidian,
ceramics, precious stones, slate, basalt, seashells, feathers, basketry, leather, and other
materials. Craft production was also extensive within households, and may have been taxed

           498       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY




FIGURE 13.11 The Pyramid of the Sun (upper left) and the Pyramid of the Moon (from which this photograph was taken)
were the ceremonial center of Teotihuacán. At times the city probably had a population of more than 100,000, and there
were hundreds of workshops and houses.



                     by the state.39 Massive public constructions were underway, considerable variability existed
                     in mortuary complexes and residential architecture, and the settlement patterns in the
                     surrounding areas were heavily inﬂuenced by the city.
                          The rest of the city is perhaps even more signiﬁcant in terms of its evidence of cultural
                     complexity (Figure 13.12). It was laid out in quadrants, formed by the Street of the Dead
                     intersected by streets running east to west. Some of the quadrants were more densely
                     occupied than others, and very different architectural styles and artifacts were found in
                     various zones of the city. Along the main north-south street were elaborate residences,
                     presumably for societal elites, as well as large and small temple complexes. Many of the
                     more impressive buildings were built on platforms and often faced inward on patios and
                     courtyards. Most buildings were one story high. In some temple complexes the walls were
                     decorated with beautiful murals depicting religious themes, warfare, imaginary animals,
                     and scenes from daily life.
                          The basic residential unit of Teotihuacán appears to have been large, walled, often
                     windowless compounds made of adobe bricks and chunks of volcanic rock. Many such

                                       THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN MESOAMERICA            499


compounds measured 60 m or more on a side
and internally were divided into many rooms,
porticoes, patios, and passageways. In some,
open patios let in sun and air and drained the
compounds through underground stone troughs.
Many walls were decorated with frescoes of
jaguars, coyotes, trees, gods, and people in
naturalistic settings.
     Some residential complexes at Teotihuacán
were found to have concentrations of artifacts
characteristic of distant areas of Mesoamerica,
with at least two enclaves with “foreign” asso-
ciations. 40 The Oaxaca Barrio, for example,
included ceramics, funeral urns, burials, and
other elements indistinguishable from the
artifacts used in Oaxaca—over 400 km to
the south—and very much in contrast to the
distinctive artifacts of the Teotihuacán natives.
These foreign “barrios” appear to have remained
culturally distinct and intact for at least several
centuries and may have been trade entrepôts or           FIGURE 13.12 A plan map of the central area of Teotihuacán,
ethnic “ghettos,” but no persuasive explanation          Mexico.
for these features has been made.
     The city’s people apparently ate large quantities of nopal and other kinds of cactus, as
well as maize, beans, squash, and a variety of other domesticated and nondomesticated
plants and animals. Deborah Nichols has shown how extensive was the irrigation system
that supported the intensive agriculture that fed Teotihuacán’s tens of thousands of
people. 41 Even at Teotihuacán’s peak, however, there was considerable hunting, as
evidenced by the fact that about 80 percent of the animal remains found were deer bones.
     By the time Teotihuacán reached its maximum size, it had apparently depopulated
much of the rest of the Valley of Mexico: Only one other major settlement appears in the
valley at about a.d. 500, and it is but a small fraction of the size of Teotihuacán. In fact, the
abandonment of rural sites correlates so closely with Teotihuacán’s growth that it appears
likely that populations were either drawn or coerced directly into the city.42 By a.d. 500
Teotihuacán-style ceramic vases were placed in the richly furnished burials of apparently
high-status individuals on the Gulf Coast, in Oaxaca, and elsewhere.
     Teotihuacán so dominated the Valley of Mexico that some have wondered if its power
extended far beyond the valley itself. It seems unlikely that the few hundred thousand
people at Teotihuacán were able to extend military control over the millions of people living
in the rest of Mesoamerica: Fighting a military campaign in the rough terrain of these
distant areas would have been suicidal. More likely, the Teotihuacános were tied to the
many other areas through trade networks. The city has no major defensive fortiﬁcations,
but it does have what appear to be large market areas, and the ecological diversity of
Mesoamerica would have put a high premium on large-volume trade in basic agricultural
and technological commodities. By circulating these many products, people would have
had a much higher standard of living and much greater protection against food shortages.

500   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      As we will see later, Teotihuacán was quite different from other Mesoamerican cities of the
      Classic period. In many respects, Teotihuacán was more comparable to Mesopotamian or
      Chinese cities.
           Sometime before a.d. 600, Teotihuacán’s size and inﬂuence began to decline. As the
      city shrank in population, new centers and settlements appeared throughout the Valley of
      Mexico, particularly on its edges. Signiﬁcantly, after a.d. 600 Teotihuacán styles in pottery,
      architecture, and other artifacts disappeared from the rest of Mesoamerica. It is as if a
      complicated exchange network had been beheaded, and local cultures began developing
      their own distinct traditions.
           Various factors appear to have diminished Teotihuacán’s population growth and
      inﬂuence after a.d. 600.43 Teotihuacán may have been eclipsed by other political systems
      based on more productive agricultural and economic resources: There is some evidence
      that at least part of its sphere of inﬂuence was encroached on by emerging states in the Maya
      areas. Even closer to home, political systems centered at Tula, Xochicalco, and elsewhere
      in the Valley of Mexico may have begun to block Teotihuacán’s access to needed raw
      materials and foodstuffs.
           There is some evidence that Teotihuacán was selectively burned down at about a.d. 650,
      with the targeted destruction of temples and elite residences, along with the smashing of
      idols.44 Whether this was an internal revolt or resulted from the actions of populations from
      other regional centers is not entirely clear. Some 40,000 people or so, however, did reinhabit
      the city after its destruction, although it never regained its former prominence or inﬂuence.
      Whatever malignant conjunction of wars, ﬁres, droughts, and other factors that destroyed
      it, Teotihuacán was one of the ﬁrst great states of the New World.


      Early States in the Valley of Oaxaca (C. 500 B.C.–200 B.C.)
      The rise of early states in Oaxaca paralleled that in the Valley of Mexico in many ways. Many
      years of intensive survey, for example, have shown that the settlement patterns changed
      from one in which small villages predominated to one in which villages proliferated in
      number but were also complemented by larger towns and villages.45
           Richard Blanton notes that shortly after about 500 b.c., Oaxaca experienced at least
      the following transformations: (1) Population density increased at a more rapid rate than
      in any previous period; (2) agricultural intensiﬁcation in the form of canal irrigation
      became important; (3) pottery manufacture became specialized and perhaps was part of
      the Valley’s ﬁrst market system; and (4) the settlement at Monte Albán, on a high plateau
      in the center of the Valley, grew to become a major regional center (Figure 13.13).46 Blanton
      has argued that the capital at Monte Albán was founded in an unpopulated area between
      various important settlements as an expression of a new confederation between people who
      previously may have been linked by rather low-level social and economic ties.47
           Blanton and his colleagues estimate that Monte Albán grew from an unoccupied,
      waterless mountaintop to a great religious and political complex of 5,000 people in fewer
      than 200 years.48 To accomplish this rate of increase, they suggest, people would have had
      to move up from settlements in the valley to their new home on the plateau, and agriculture
      in the valley and piedmont would have had to be intensiﬁed to support the town.
           By 200 b.c. the population of Monte Albán reached about 17,000—a great city, by
      ancient standards. Agriculture was intensiﬁed around Monte Albán as well, and rural
      population densities soared. Craft specialization in pottery and other commodities was

                                         THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN MESOAMERICA     501


sharpened, and the location
and products of kilns indicate
some degree of regional admin-
istrative control, although
Blanton concludes that Monte
Albán itself remained mainly a
ceremonial center with few
economic functions.49
     One of the main plaza
buildings at Monte Albán con-
tains a gallery of carved stone
reliefs whose main theme seems
to be the commemoration
of military conquests. Scores
of bodies are depicted with
open mouths, closed eyes, and
blood streaming from them
in ﬂowery patterns. 50 These
depictions have many parallels       FIGURE 13.13 Overview of Monte Alban, Valley of Oaxaca, Mexico.
in themes around the ancient
world, such as in the Egyptian Narmer Palette (chapter 9).
     In succeeding centuries, population densities and settlement patterns varied
considerably, but the investments in monumental architecture, the hierarchical
arrangements of towns in terms of the distribution of goods and services, and other markers
of cultural complexity persisted and became more elaborate. Thus, by 200 b.c. or shortly
thereafter, a state, by almost any deﬁnition, appears to have been operating in Oaxaca.
     It may be overstating the case to say that by 200 b.c. we have also moved from
prehistory to history in Mesoamerica, but the engraved signs and symbols at Oaxaca and
elsewhere in Mexico seem to be well on the way to the development of a true writing system.
     Although the rough outlines of Oaxacan cultural history have been established,
scholars argue about what forces determined this history. Sanders and Nichols stressed the
importance of irrigation agriculture and population growth as factors in the valley’s
ﬂorescence.51 Kowalewski and Feinstein, in a lengthy assessment of the development of
economic systems in Oaxaca, conclude that much of this “economic variation was largely
determined by the changing functions and degrees of chieﬂy or state power.”52 They
reconstruct a situation in which the power and predilections of elites changed, and with
them the permeability of the borders of Oaxacan political systems.53


THE MAYA

In Mexico the gods ruled, the priests interpreted
and interposed, and the people obeyed. In
Spain, the priests ruled, the king interpreted
and interposed, and the gods obeyed. A nuance
in an ideological difference is a wide chasm.
Richard Condon

502   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      At about the same time the civilization of Teotihuacán was developing in the Valley of
      Mexico, Maya civilization was emerging in southern Mexico, Guatemala, Belize, and
      Honduras (see Figure 13.2).
           Early Maya civilization may have been inﬂuenced to some minor degree by Teotihuacán,
      but it was largely its own creation. The Maya devised a complex writing system, built
      temples and palaces that are spectacularly beautiful monumental constructions, and are
      thought to have organized vast areas and many peoples in a series of independent states.
      The Maya were a civilization with cities although these cities were quite different in layout
      than our stereotypic notion of a city because Maya cities incorporated much farmland into
      their boundaries. Maya centers such as Tikal and Dzibilchaltun had thousands, perhaps
      tens of thousands, of people in permanent residence54—although these settlements never
      attained the population or physical size of Teotihuacán, and they had less diversity in
      residential architecture and perhaps less occupational specialization than existed in
      Teotihuacán or Oaxaca at a comparable time.
           It is difﬁcult to fault archaeologists who spend most of their time excavating the
      spectacular Maya ceremonial centers instead of surveying the snake-infested jungles for the
      rural settlements that supported these centers, but in recent years an increasing amount of
      research has focused on surveys of nonurban areas, and the general picture is much clearer
      than previously.55
           Much of the Maya homeland is hot, semitropical forest, but large areas are highlands
      created by a string of snow-capped volcanoes that extend from southeastern Chiapas
      toward lower Central America. In the highlands volcanic ash and millennia of wind and
      water erosion have created a rich thick layer of soil spread over a convoluted landscape of
      ravines, ridges, and valleys. Hard seasonal rains make this a fairly productive agricultural
      zone.
           The tropical lowlands at the steamy heart of Maya civilization cover the Petén and the
      Yucatan Peninsula, a massive limestone shelf lifted out of the seas over millions of years by
      tectonic movements. The land is rugged toward the southern part of the Petén, but most
      of the peninsula is ﬂat. There are few rivers or lakes because the porous limestone quickly
      drains away surface water.
           The lowland climate is hot and humid for most of the year, but drought can be a severe
      problem because the rainfall is seasonal and localized. In early spring a period of drought
      sets in, and the agricultural cycle slows. Trees are burned to open ﬁelds for crops, and the
      land dries. In May and June the rains begin, and the lowland landscape is transformed into
      a riot of life as plants green and animals multiply.
           Recent research has revealed large irrigation systems in some Maya areas and, during
      at least some periods, permanent ﬁeld agriculture with annual cropping, which was
      probably very important economically in the lowlands. Irrigation, however, was an
      exception. Labor intensive soil and water management for agriculture by the Maya mainly
      involved techniques such as slope terracing, water diversion, and wetland reclamation. In
      much of the Maya area, the ﬁelds used for maize, beans, squash, tomato, and pepper
      cultivation must be fallow for four to eight years after about three years of production. The
      Maya also converted land that today might be considered “unusable” through innovative
      techniques such as raised ﬁelds and seasonal use of bajos—swamp lands. Raised ﬁelds are
      created in bajos by digging channels and piling the excavated dirt between the channels. This
      produces a series of artiﬁcial areas on which agricultural crops can be grown year-round,

                                        THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN MESOAMERICA           503


although the raised ﬁeld technique is only viable where water levels remain relatively
stable.56 Seasonal use of the bajos occurs when they are dry—in other words, not during
the rainy season—and it is possible to grow one crop a year under these conditions.57
     When all the evidence of canals, raised ﬁelds, botanical remains from sites, and other
data are considered, it is clear that a variety of agricultural techniques, adapted to each local
ecology and regime, must be seen as the basis for Maya civilization.58 Most peasant
cultivators use animals, whether wild or domestic, to convert brush and hedgerow
vegetation into usable form, and the small Yucatec deer—which was intensively hunted—
apparently ﬁlled this role in the Maya lowlands, along with domestic dogs, rabbits, and
wildfowl. The Maya were sophisticated farmers who blended ﬁeld cultivation with a form
of tropical-forest management in which they were able to use foods from both in a
complementary, productive, and highly stable way.59


Maya Ideology
In Karl Marx’s somewhat self-contradictory and ambivalent view, state religions were seen
almost as by-products of state economies. He saw religions as ideologies that evolved as a
way of legitimizing state authority and of controlling the masses after the real causes of
state-formation—changes in the economic and technological base of the society—had
produced the socioeconomic classes and governmental structures of states.
     The case of the Maya, however, is one of many in history where one might argue for
the primacy of the idea of the state. The great agricultural productivity of the Maya area
was, of course, the base of Maya civilization and not only provided its energy but also
shaped its culture. But little about Maya civilization seems understandable apart from their
ideas of the divinity of kings and the nature of the cosmos.
     It is a truism, a cliché, that we can really never fully enter into the ideology of another
culture, whether that cultural ideology be the “dream time” of the Australian Aborigines,
the Marxist-Confucian ethos of modern China, or the spirit world of the ancient Maya.
And, unfortunately, much of a culture makes little “sense” unless one can share the cultural
perspective from which it derived. This is particularly true of the Maya, whose beautiful
monuments and intricate written language derive from a world-view and life-view that is
in so many ways fundamentally different from our own. So, we can only try to see the world
and time through the perspective of other cultures—try to get some sense of the
fundamental ideas that bound people together in time and place and community.
     For the Maya, the world manifested itself in two complementary dimensions—one in
which they lived out their lives, the other (the Otherworld) in which gods, ancestors, and
other supernatural beings existed—that were inextricably locked together.60 The Maya
apparently saw their dimension as three layered domains, “the starry arch of heaven, the
stony Middleworld of earth made to ﬂower and bear fruit by the blood of kings, and the
dark waters of the Underground below.”61 This world-view was highly structured, with 13
levels in the heavens and 9 levels in the underworld, each overseen by a particular god.62
     The Maya believed that these three regions—heavens, earth, and underworlds—were
interrelated, that shamans and rulers, for example, could penetrate the Underground world
via ecstatic trances. Above all, in the sky, was a great crocodilian monster who “made the
rains when it shed its blood in supernatural counterpoint to the royal sacriﬁces on the earth
below.”63 The human world was envisioned as ﬂoating in a primordial sea and was

504   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      sometimes represented as the back of a caiman (a crocodile-like animal) or a turtle. These
      various interrelated worlds and planes of existence, including the earth, were imbued by
      the gods with a sacredness that was especially concentrated at special points, such as caves
      and mountains. As Schele and Freidel note:

          The principal pattern of power points had been established by the gods when the cosmos
          was created. Within this matrix of sacred landscapes, human beings built communities that
          merged with the god-generated patterns and created a second human-made matrix of
          power points. These two systems were perceived to be complementary, not separate. . . .
          [The] world of human beings was connected to the Otherworld along the wacah chan [“six
          sky,” or “raised up sky”—a tree-like axis whose base was in the watery underworld and
          whose top was in the highest heavens of the Otherworld] which ran through the center of
          existence. This axis was not located in any one earthly place, but could be materialized
          through ritual at any point in the natural and human-made landscape. Most important, it
          was materialized in the person of the king, who brought it into existence as he stood
          enthralled in ecstatic visions atop his pyramid-mountain.”64

      Through proper ritual, the Maya believed that the power points on the earthly plane,
      whether they be places, people, or objects, could be intensiﬁed and become charged with
      accumulated energy. Kings, for example, rebuilt temples on the same spot time after time,
      thereby compounding the sacred power within them. These kings or holy rulers—K’uhul
      Ajaw—may have originally risen from the role of shaman in Maya society.65
           Blood-letting was a “focus ritual of Maya life.”66 The Maya believed that beings of the
      Otherworld could be materialized through the ritual shedding of blood. Men are shown in
      inscriptions using obsidian blades and other implements to pierce their tongues or penises,
      and women are shown piercing their tongues. Through blood-letting one could, in a sense,
      give “birth” to a god or ancestor, enabling it to materialize in physical form on the earthly
      plane of existence. Ritual blood-letting apparently was practiced not just by elites and
      priests but even by lowly peasant farmers in remote villages.
           Like many other cultures, the Maya rationalized and justiﬁed the great inequities of
      wealth, power, and prestige in their society by setting these inequities in a divine context.
      The king and his relatives deserved their wealth and power because the king was the pinnacle
      of the population and it was through him that contact could be made with the sacred, the
      Otherworld. Every Maya, from highest to lowest, beneﬁted from the king’s intercession
      with the divine world, and they all shared in the material wealth that the king provided the
      community through successful performance of his powers.67
           Like most early states, the Maya appear to have been strongly patriarchal—if the sex
      of people commemorated in royal inscriptions accurately reﬂects this society. But Maya
      royalty included women of high status. As Joyce Marcus notes,68 an inscribed stela records
      an occasion in which a royal woman from Calakmul improved the prestige of a particular
      lineage at El Perú by marrying the local ruler, who was socially beneath her.
           To the modern mind, the entire Maya world-view and life-view may seem bizarre and
      to represent a patent misunderstanding of how the cosmos operates. But by means of their
      ideology, the Maya in a sense invented a civilization. Schele and Freidel observed, “They
      invented ideas that harnessed social energy. . . . They invented political symbols that
      transformed and coordinated such age-old institutions as the extended family, the village,
      the shaman, and the patriarch into the stuff of civilized life.”69

                                      THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN MESOAMERICA          505


     Thus Maya civilization was as much an idea as a physical manifestation in towns and
villages, farms and monuments. The beginning of Maya ideology and its physical mani-
festations go back deep into the Mesoamerican past.70
     For the earliest Maya, as with the many other cultures we have considered in this book,
we come back to some basic and difﬁcult questions. Why and how did kings, priests,
writing, pyramid-building, and all the other facets of ancient civilization arise out of these
unprepossessing communities of farmers? For most Westerners it is difﬁcult to rid one’s
mind of the assumption that “civilization” is the “natural” outcome of agricultural life and
that complex societies will somehow develop out of societal competition, individual
strivings, the accumulation of technological advances, and other factors in all environments
(except for those in areas such as the Arctic, where there simply are not enough people and
not enough food and wealth to be expropriated). But archaeology shows us many examples
of cultures that did not automatically progress to “civilizations,” even in environments where
it would seem technically possible for them to have done so (e.g., aboriginal Australia).
     The early agricultural economy of the Maya shows that it had the potential for at least
one of the major common denominators of all ancient civilizations: agricultural production
of sufﬁcient quantity and diversity that it could be intensiﬁed, administered, and
expropriated.


The Preclassic Maya (1000 B.C.–A.D. 300)
Earlier views on the development of Maya civilization stressed explanations such as the
migration of people from the periphery of the Maya areas into the core areas of the lowlands
and highlands, the necessity for a political elite to manage trade, warfare, or population
pressures.71 Research since the 1980s, however, has considerably revised the chronology of
the Maya and has shown that these earlier explanations are simply no longer supported by
accumulating data. Monumental public architecture and ﬂourishing regional centers are
present by at least 600 b.c., with the best known example at Nakbe in the northern Petén.72
By 400 b.c., there are numerous examples of such centers in both the lowlands and
highlands, for example, at el Mirador, Kaminaljuyu, Calakmul, and Cuello.73
     Because these discoveries have been only recently made, and in many cases are ongoing,
scholars are reexamining earlier explanations, and undoubtedly there will be many exciting
hypotheses put forward in the next several years. How important, for example, was
irrigation agriculture? Some Maya canals are an impressive 1.6 km in length, 30 m in width,
and 3 m deep.
     Does the signiﬁcance lie instead in the development of Maya ideology? One element
may have been the growing Maya belief that dead ancestors could be conduits for power
from the Otherworld and that their relationship to the dead extended beyond just their
immediate families. All early states appear to have made a transition wherein people began
thinking of themselves as belonging to entities that extended far beyond the immediate
family. The ﬁrst suggestions we have that these changes were underway are found in burial
practices: Like ancient Chinese, Mesopotamians, and many others, the early Maya farmers
buried their closest relatives under their house ﬂoors, perhaps to retain in some remote way
the intimacy of family connections to house and home and to lay claim forever to the land
of their ancestors. At about 600 b.c., however, some Maya, such as those at K’axob,74 began
burying their dead in the core of large stone and earth platforms—which themselves are an

          506       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                               architectural reﬂection of important changes occurring in
                                               these formerly simple small villages.
                                                    As we saw earlier, some of the ﬁrst great stone Maya
                                               buildings, such as pyramids and platforms, appeared in the
                                               Maya area by at least 600 b.c. (at Nakbe). For the Maya as for
                                               many other ancient civilizations, monumental architecture
                                               appears as one of the ﬁrst signs of the transformation of the
                                               society. Between 600 b.c. and 400 b.c. people at Nakbe75 and
                                               other sites built lovely stone and masonry buildings on huge
                                               platforms and depicted gods and ancestors on building
FIGURE 13.14 A jungle river in Central         façades, stelae, masks, and other objects. If the people of
America.                                       Nakbe and other Preclassic Maya communities were already
                                               enmeshed in the formal Maya theology that we know from
               the later Maya, they probably regarded these buildings as important points from which to
               tap into the power of the cosmos and ampliﬁed their sacredness by building and rebuilding
               these impressive complexes.
                     The largest Preclassic Maya community was El Mirador, in the jungles (Figure 13.14)
               of the Guatemalan part of the Petén—an area so remote that even though the site had been
               sighted from an airplane in the 1930s, its inaccessibility prevented exact location and
               excavation until the 1970s. El Mirador is remarkable for its early dates, its massive size, and
               its anticipation of many core elements of later Classic Maya culture—including pyramid
               complexes, stucco mask representations of Maya gods, and Maya writing. Some of the
               earliest examples of Maya writing have been found here in the form of an inscribed pot
               sherd and inscribed symbols on stone sculpture.
                     Several pyramidal mounds 18 –20 m high at El Mirador appear to date to between
               600 b.c. and 300 b.c. Between about 150 b.c. and a.d. 50 the people of El Mirador built
               hundreds of large stone constructions, including buildings, pyramids, plazas, and
               causeways. The Tigre complex, for example, includes a pyramid that rises more than 50 m
               above the jungle ﬂoor, set amidst a temple and other buildings.76 Most of these buildings
               were coated with a white plaster and then painted deep red.77 To modern aesthetics the great
               stone buildings of the Maya, the Greeks, the Egyptians, and others have an elegant and simple
               beauty in their natural light stone colors, but ancient peoples undoubtedly had different
               aesthetic preferences, and they probably also painted their buildings in primary colors for
               cultic and ideological reasons, and not primarily, if at all, because of aesthetic preferences.
                     Shortly before about 50 b.c. at Cerros, where the New River, which runs through the
               eastern part of the Yucatán Peninsula, empties into Chetumal Bay, the Maya established a
               small community of farmers, ﬁshermen, and traders. At this time Cerros was unremark-
               able, just one of the hundreds of others like it in the Petén. But within the space of two
               generations, perhaps 40 or 50 years, the people of Cerros experienced a revolution: “The
               Coming of Kings.” As Linda Schele and David Freidel note, this transition appears to have
               been so rapid that many individuals probably personally experienced the transition from
               life in a simple village to one in which they became citizens of a large ceremonial city, living
               amid great stone temples, plazas, and other monuments and initiated into the full ideology
               of the Maya world-view and life-view.78
                     We will never know exactly what happened to effect this transformation at Cerros,
               but the archaeological evidence suggests that this was a conscious reformulation of a

                                      THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN MESOAMERICA         507


community: They apparently broke their pottery, jade ornaments, and other objects into
small bits and scattered them over their simple houses, buried ﬂowers and other talismanic
objects in the rubble, and then proceeded to build a new, vastly larger community around
and over the remains of their abandoned village. They began by building a temple at the
water’s edge (edges in the natural world were places of power in the Maya view79) and then
proceeded to build a large complex of temples, plazas, pyramids, stairways, causeways, and
other monuments—all laid out on the axis that connected this world to the other planes of
reality (see earlier). Decorating many of these structures were stucco representations of the
gods. Artisans made these by applying wet plaster to a wall and modeling the plaster, as well
as some appliqué pieces, into extremely complex designs. Few if any of these designs were
actual texts, but they can be read and they portray complex Maya religious ideas. On one
temple, for example, representations of the Jaguar Sun God on a south-facing wall would,
when lighted by the sun, present the sun “rising” on the east side of the wall and “setting”
on the west side as the sun made its daily trek across the sky.
     Despite all its beauty and magic, Cerros declined and all but disappeared as a com-
munity after only a few generations of glory—another example of a fundamental rhythm
of Maya political history, in which small communities all over their world were rapidly
transformed into great gleaming ceremonial settlements, home to tens of thousands of
people, only to fade and die in a relatively short time. Where many of the greatest Old
World cities, such as Memphis in Egypt and Warka in Mesopotamia, counted their histories
of dominance in millennia, most Mesoamerica centers ruled their particular worlds for
only 400–600 years at most.


The Classic Maya (A.D. 300–A.D. 900)
As we have seen in the case of the Harappan (Indus Valley) and ‘Ubaid (Mesopotamian)
ceramics, the spread of a distinctive, uniform artifact style over large areas often precedes
rapid and fundamental cultural change. By about a.d. 1, a distinctively styled pottery was
in use over the entire 250,000 km2 of the Maya lowlands, and pyramids, platforms, and
other large public buildings were being constructed at Dzibilchaltun, Uaxactun, and
elsewhere. Between a.d. 300 and a.d. 900, Maya civilization reached its climax as hundreds
of beautiful pyramids, temples, and other buildings were completed, and painting and
sculpture ﬂourished (Figure 13.15).
     The ﬁrst part of this period corresponds to the ﬂorescence of Teotihuacán, and the
extent to which interactions between the Maya area and Teotihuacán occurred is not
entirely clear. It is likely that this relationship included trade and alliances through
marriages, while other contacts might have been military or shared/adopted aspects of
religion or other ideological features.80 After a.d. 600, when Teotihuacán rapidly began to
lose inﬂuence and population, the Maya began a 300-year period of intense development.
Hundreds of temple complexes were constructed and beautiful stone sculptures executed—
many dated and inscribed.
     Stephen Houston has used archaeological evidence and interpretations of Maya
writing to estimate that most Maya polities were organized within areas of 70 km diameter
or less—with most of the settlements within a day’s walk of the major center.81 These dis-
persed agricultural hamlets were grouped around small ceremonial centers that included a
small temple pyramid and a few other stone constructions. Several districts of small

          508         PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY




                                                       UNITED STATES




                                                                                        Gulf of Mexico




                                                                                                                 Dzibilchaltun
                                                                                                                Chichen Itzá
                                                                                                             Uxmal

          Pacific
                                                                                                         Calakmul
          Ocean
                                                                                                                 Uaxactun
                                                                                               Palengue
   0         200 mi                                                                                            Tikal
                                                                                        Piedras Negras                 BELIZE
                                                                                                 Yaxchilan     Dos Pilas
   0     200 km
                                                                                                     GUATEMALA          Quirigua
 M EXI C O                                                                                            Kaminaljuyu      Copan



FIGURE 13.15 Some Classic period Maya sites.


                      ceremonial centers were congregated around the major ceremonial centers of Tikal,
                      Uaxactun, Palenque, Uxmal, and other sites. By this time much of southern Mesoamerica
                      featured beautiful, gleaming, white limestone pyramids and temples that were surrounded
                      by marvelously executed stone sculptures and decorated with wall paintings.
                           Most centers also had ball courts made of stucco-faced rock. We know little about how
                      the ball game was played.82 Apparently the objective of the game, played by two opposing
                      teams, was to try to get a rubber ball through a goal, probably not by throwing or batting
                      it, but by using knees, elbows, or torso. The ball apparently could not be held in the hands
                      when it was in play. As played by the Mesoamericans, this game was not a sport: The ball
                      may have represented the sun, and the court and play were imbued with ritual and
                      cosmological imagery. Losing players were sometimes executed. A relief panel from a ball
                      court at El Tajín, in Veracruz, Mexico, shows the captain of the losing team being stretched
                      out over a sacriﬁcial stone while the victor drives a knife into his chest.83 Maya representa-
                      tions of this ball game show a ball that, if the proportions are correct, would be larger than
                      a basketball, but the Maya may have simply been exaggerating these representations to
                      focus attention on the ball.
                           John Fox has argued that these ball courts were imbued with great and complex
                      ideological and social signiﬁcance and that they were the focus of feasts, competitions, and
                      other rituals that provided “strategic settings for the negotiations of power relations. These

                                     THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN MESOAMERICA         509


rituals centered on the redistribution of food and wealth and the symbolic renewal of
agricultural fertility.” He concludes that the ball courts, as places with “supernatural
associations, served as [stages] for rituals in which political conﬂict was mapped onto and
resolved through cosmological drama.”84


TIKAL AND UAXACTÚN85
Tikal and Uaxactún, two great Classic Maya communities, provide in their individual
elements and the history of their relationship to each other both an illustration of all the
essential elements of Maya civilization and also an object lesson regarding the political
history of early states in many parts of the world.
      Tikal and Uaxactún are located about 40 miles south of El Mirador in the hot lowland
jungles of the Petén, and much of their destiny was determined by the fact that they were
built only about 12 miles apart: Much of the social interactions of the ancient world were
determined by the distance a person could walk in a day or so—distances that linked
cultures in conﬂict and cooperation—and Tikal and Uaxactún were less than a day’s walk
for both traders and soldiers. In the end, it was the soldiers whose efforts shaped most of
the history of these communities.
      Tikal originated at about 600 b.c. in the form of a small farming village set on a small
hill in the middle of a swamp. Simple peasants these people may have been, but in one of
the burials of this period a severed human head was placed next to the corpse of a man—
perhaps an anticipation of the ritual decapitation of later Maya court rituals. Over
succeeding centuries the people of Tikal built one of the greatest ceremonial centers of the
New World. Temple I at Tikal (Figure 13.16), built about a.d. 700, captures much of the
architectural brilliance of the Maya. In previous centuries the people of Tikal had covered
the original village with a massive complex of temples, plazas, causeways—all the standard
elements of Maya ceremonial centers, but realized in particularly beautiful form. Well-
preserved tombs at Tikal included the bodies of kings and elites and rich offerings of
pottery, food, stingray spines, and other goods. One of the
richest tombs, Burial 85, contained a headless and thighless
body wrapped in a cinnebar-impregnated bundle along with a
marine shell and a stingray spine—common tools in ritual
blood-letting. Schele and Friedel suggest that the Maya may
have kept some of the bones of dead kings as relics and
talismans; they also note that the bodies of kings and elites
show that they were larger and more robust than the com-
moners of this community.86
      Computer simulations have been used to suggest that as
many as 77,000 people may have lived in Tikal’s immediate
environs at its peak,87 and probably 300,000 or more people
lived in the entire 965 square miles that this center dominated.
      Uaxactún’s ﬂorescence generally paralleled that of Tikal,
and by about a.d. 320 they were both the centers of large,
powerful kingdoms. Then an extraordinary Tikal king named
Great-Jaguar-Paw—Maya king names are based on the visual
imagery of their name signs, a device used prior to the             FIGURE 13.16 Temple 1 at Tikal, Guatemala.

510   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      phonetic decipherment of Maya signs in recent years—ascended the throne, and on
      January 16, a.d. 378, he conquered Uaxactún and installed a warrior from Tikal named
      Smoking-Frog as ruler. As Schele and Freidel note, before the ascension of Great-Jaguar-
      Paw, Maya warfare had a personal, almost formal quality: The Maya fought not to kill their
      enemies but to capture them, usually in hand-to-hand combat, so that the captured ruler
      and nobles could be carried back to the victorious city to be tortured and sacriﬁced in public
      rituals. But Great-Jaguar-Paw fought a war not of stylized, formalized combat aimed at
      taking captives for sacriﬁce for personal glory. Instead, he fought a war of conquest when
      he attacked Uaxactún: “This was war on an entirely different scale, played by rules never
      before heard of and for stakes far higher than reputations or lives of individuals. In this new
      warfare of death and conquest, the winner would gain the kingdom of the loser”.88 Great-
      Jaguar-Paw and his warriors not only physically killed the Uaxactún elites, but they also
      killed this community spiritually, cutting off the people from the guidance and protection
      of their ancestors and gods.
           Tikal and Uaxactún were two of the most prominent Classic Maya communities, but
      there were many others of interest. Some of the greatest of all known Maya frescoes are at
      Bonampak, dating to the end of the eighth century a.d. Here, in several rooms of murals,
      the paintings tell a story of warfare, torturing of prisoners of war, and celebration. The
      carefully drawn murals, which depict mutilated bodies, marching bands, richly dressed
      ﬁgures, and men with weapons, convey an extraordinarily vivid sense of militarism, royalty,
      and religion. Mary Ellen Miller has argued that these scenes are in part a depiction of raids
      to take prisoners. Unfortunately, these murals have been obscured by seepage through the
      composite limestone, so that they are only clearly visible when they are splashed with water
      or kerosene.89
           Themes of military triumph, the torture of captives, and the power of the ruling classes
      were also commonly depicted in bas-relief sculpture throughout the Classic period—even
      in the Valley of Oaxaca and the peripheral areas of the Maya sphere of inﬂuence. Individuals
      of presumably higher status were juxtaposed in stone carvings with persons of lower status,
      and differences of dress, bearing, and position sharpened the contrast. In some cases,
      representations of prisoners were carved into the facings of stone steps, so that they were
      trod on by the nobility—a not too subtle visual pun.90


      MAYA POLITICAL ORGANIZATION
      Scholars have advanced several different competing ideas about the political organization
      of the Maya. Joyce Marcus,91 for example, has suggested that the various Maya centers
      constituted a political hierarchy, with some royal families at particular centers being more
      powerful and prestigious than others, but with these various dynasties linked through
      marriage alliances and other ties. Stephen Houston, however, challenges this view,
      suggesting that the “Maya Lowlands may have consisted not only of centralized polities,
      with control some 30 km in any direction, but of ‘buffer zones’ in which smaller polities
      switched allegiance at will while remaining essentially independent. . . . Yet other areas may
      have been politically ‘neutral’ centers of pilgrimage.”92
           However, emerging data suggest that Maya polities were far more varied than center-
      dominated regions surrounded by buffer zones. Edward Schortman and Patricia Urban,93
      for example, examined the relationship of Maya communities on the periphery of the

                                       THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN MESOAMERICA           511


central Maya lowlands to centers such as Copán and Quirigua and concluded that these
relationships varied depending on whether one considers politics, economy, or ideology.
They suggest that despite the signs of great military domination by the most powerful
communities in the central Maya area, no community could dominate to the extent that
there was severe interregional exploitation in all dimensions of these relationships.
     These and other views of how the Maya were organized politically raise fundamental
questions about the nature of human societies in general. From the perspective of our own
world and time we can look back and see the cultures of the world inexorably being linked
closer and closer and ever more intensively. The United Nations, the European Union, and
other political and commercial organizations now affect the ﬂow of goods and ideas in even
the most distant corners of the world. But this long-term evolutionary pattern has been a
ﬁtful one, with frequent reversals and great variations through time and space. And it is not
clear that increasing complexity in these forms of organization are necessary or even
“good.” The various foreign conquests of the ancient Greek city-states, for example, are
traditionally attributed to the Greeks’ apparent inability to forge durable commercial,
military, and political ties and unite against their aggressors, but this lack of unity did not
seem to cripple these cultures intellectually—quite the opposite, in fact, when we consider
their cultural contributions.
     Basic geography certainly seems to explain part of the differences in level of political
organization that we see in the ancient world. The Maya, like the Greeks, did not have the
easy transport and communication channel that the Nile provided the ancient Egyptians,
for example. And the Maya did not have the domestic horses and donkeys that allowed
Middle Eastern societies to move goods, people, and information across a complex and vast
social landscape. As discussed in chapter 7, ancient civilizations are in essence ideas: Maya
ideology appears to have linked the many different centers that constituted this civilization,
but there is little evidence that this ideological unity ever culminated in political or
economic integration that extended beyond small regions.


MAYA WRITING
Maya writing is in many ways a more impressive achievement
than their pyramids and temples. Fortunately, we have many
Classic Maya texts in the form of inscriptions on stone and
pottery, written in the same writing system as the “books” that
followed 1,000 years later. These books consist of long strips
of bark paper covered with a layer of plaster and folded like
screens. Only a few of these “books” survive, but three are
quite long and informative: the Dresden, Madrid, and Paris
codices.
     The sixteenth-century Spanish cleric Bishop Landa
                                                                     FIGURE 13.17 Some Mayan glyphs and the
thought Maya writing (Figure 13.17) at ﬁrst to be entirely
                                                                     phonetic values assigned to them by Y. V.
alphabetic. Scholars quickly realized, however, that Maya            Knorosov. Research in the last two decades has
writing was to be read in double columns, from left to right         shown that ancient Maya writing is a ﬁnely
and from top to bottom, and by the turn of the last century          nuanced, beautiful orthography that probably
Maya glyphs had been identiﬁed for the “zero” and “twenty”           records the entire spoken language of these
signs, the cardinal points of the compass, the basic colors,         people.

512   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      Venus, the months of the year, and the “Long Count,” the system of reckoning by which
      the Maya ﬁgured how many years had elapsed since the beginning of their time.
           Unlike the case with Egyptian hieroglyphs and Mesopotamian cuneiform, Maya
      writing had to be deciphered without the aid of “parallel scripts”—that is, the expression
      of the same text in two different languages, one of which is known.94 As noted in chapter
      8, phoneticization is a key step in the evolution of a written language, for once the elemental
      sounds of the spoken language are represented by abstract characters, the complete
      language can be written. The Russian linguist Yuri Knorosov was the ﬁrst to demonstrate
      that Maya writing was indeed a phonetic system, and since his initial translations, many
      inscriptions have been almost entirely translated.95 Building on the work of Tatiana
      Proskouriakoff, Henrich Berlin, and Yuri Knorosov, a new generation of Mayanists has
      made great progress: David Stuart, Peter Mathews, Steve Houston, Karl Taube, James Fox,
      John Juteson, and Michael Coe are just some of the scholars of the past several decades
      whose combined efforts have shown that ancient Maya writing is a ﬁnely nuanced, beautiful
      orthography that probably records the entire spoken language of these people.96
           Maya script is somewhat similar to Egyptian hieroglyphs (chapter 9) in that it includes
      a mixture of signs, some representing whole words or ideas, others expressing syllables,
      sounds, and determinatives that clarify meanings.
           In the Middle East the ﬁrst writings are almost unrelievedly economic, but in
      Mesoamerica the surviving documents are primarily calendrical and historical, recording,
      for example, when a temple was begun, when a king defeated a rival, and what lands were
      under the control of the state. About the dull details of maize and men, they seemed much
      less concerned.97 Recently, however, the inscriptions on hundreds of ceramics have been
      translated, and they do provide a great deal of economic information. Michael Coe, Steve
      Houston, and others98 have shown that these texts recorded such information as the class
      of vessels a particular pot belonged to, its methods of adornment, the contents (e.g.,
      chocolate or ﬂavored maize gruel99), and occasionally the person who made or owned the
      vessel and its contents. As Houston also notes, the inscribed dates for the birth, accession,
      death, and other primary events in the lives of elites offer at least a speculative basis for
      estimating basic anthropological data about life spans. Justifying the fulsomeness of
      inscriptions on headstones and mortuary monuments, Samuel Johnson said, “In lapidary
      inscriptions a man is not upon oath,” and it may be that there is a ﬁctional element in the
      life-histories recorded for elite Maya. But the inscriptions ﬁt rather well with some
      anthropological data that indicate that the Maya rarely lived past 55-65 years.100
           The Maya were sophisticated mathematicians. They used a base-20 system in which
      they expressed the quantity 39, for example, as 19 numbers after 20, and the value 60 as
      three 20s.101 They discovered the concept of zero and used a place-value notation system
      that allowed them to express numbers beyond 100,000,000. They had no way to express
      fractions in mathematical notation, but they computed the length of the solar year to
      365.242000 days, compared to our own Gregorian calendar ﬁgure of 365.242500 days (the
      true value is approximately 365.242198 days). The Maya used two calendars. One was the
      familiar solar calendar in which a year equaled 365 days, but whereas we intercalate an extra
      day every four years to compensate for the year being actually 365.24 days long, the Maya
      blithely ignored this and let the seasons creep around the calendar. And in contrast to our
      system of 12 months of from 28 to 31 days, the Maya had 18 named months of 20 days
      each, with 5 days, which were considered highly unlucky, added to the end.

                                      THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN MESOAMERICA           513


     The second calendar
(which appears to have been in
use by the Olmec, a millennium
or so prior to the Maya)
involved a 260-day year, com-
posed by intermeshing the
sequence of numbers from 1
to 13 with 20 named days
(Figure 13.18). These two
calendars ran parallel, and thus
every particular day in the
260-day calendar also had a
position in the solar calendar.
The calendars’ permutations
are such that each named day
would not reappear in the
same position for 18,980 days,       FIGURE 13.18 One of the Maya calendars was calculated from the correlation of
or 52 of our solar years. Every      the numbers from 1 to 13 and 20 named days.
day on the Maya calendar had
its omens, and activities were rigorously scheduled in accordance with their astrological
signiﬁcance.
     In some of the later adaptations of the Maya calendar, it appears that people were
named after the day on which they were born and could not marry if they shared a
numerical coefﬁcient (e.g., Mr. “8 deer” could not marry Ms. “8 ﬂower”).102 The Maya were
thoroughly attuned to these calendrical cycles and used them to schedule many aspects of
daily life and ritual. The Maya’s “zero day,” from which they counted time (and which they
perhaps believed was the date on which the world was created) was August 13, 3114 b.c.
Contrary to some speculations, the Maya apparently did not believe the world will end on
December 24, a.d. 2011, but this date does mark the point at which the Long Count will
return to the symmetry of its beginning. Pacal, king of Palenque, predicted in one of his
inscriptions that the eightieth Calendar Round of his accession will be celebrated on
October 15, a.d. 4772—a man who took the long view, indeed.103


The End of the Classic Maya (C. A.D. 760–A.D. 1100)
For decades scholars have debated the “collapse” of Maya civilization. It is in part a Western
view of the world to see periods of rise and collapse in nations’ histories and to search for
causes. But the collapse of states, ancient and modern, never seems easily explained, and
this is especially true of the Maya.
      “Collapse” in the sense of what happened to the Maya has many meanings, since
hundreds of thousands of people who spoke Mayan and were the direct genetic descendants
of the classic ﬁrst millennium a.d. Maya were there to greet the ﬁrst Europeans on their
arrival in the sixteenth century. And as Andrews and others have noted, the “collapse” of
the Maya may be more apparent than real. A decline in temple construction and in the
production of lavish goods does not necessarily mean societal collapse. As we noted in the
discussion of changes in Egypt and elsewhere in the ancient world, declines in certain kinds

514   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      of “waste” seem to be more indicative of a changing economic basis and administrative
      structure than the destruction of a culture. Had the Spanish not arrived when they did, the
      people of the Maya areas might have been reformulated by time and circumstance into a
      larger, more powerful, nation-state.
           But Classic Maya culture did change—it lost many of its most important elements, and
      many formerly great communities were abandoned. One of the last kings of the Maya,
      Can-Ek, ruler of Itzá, met Cortés as he and his expedition crossed the Petén in a.d. 1525.
      But Maya culture was in decline long before that. As Anthony Andrews notes:

          In the eighth and ninth centuries the Maya area was a densely populated mosaic of large
          and small city-states ruled by regal and ritual dynasties who oversaw the great achievements
          of what we now call Classic Maya Civilization. These polities were also crossing the
          threshold of their demographic and ecological limits, which when coupled with managerial
          shortcomings, warfare, and the breakdown of political structure, led to a spectacular
          process of societal collapse. Cities throughout the southern lowlands were abandoned—
          some quickly. . . . Small populations survived in pockets . . . but for the most part they had
          severed their ties with the Classic past.104

      Until about a.d. 910, the Maya usually accompanied any new monumental building with
      a stone stela engraved with the date of its construction, and thus we know that while many
      buildings were completed during the eighth and ninth centuries a.d., by a.d. 889 only three
      sites were under construction, and by about a.d. 900, construction seems to have ended for
      good. On the basis of ceramics and other information, we know that depopulation of the
      countryside and centers apparently followed quickly.
           We know from inscriptions at Palenque, Dos Pilas, and other sites that the ninth
      century a.d. was a time of intense warfare and conquest, but there were also sporadic
      attempts to reestablish control and build communities in the ancient traditions. But the
      last king to erect a tree-stone, a traditional royal inscription to celebrate the end of a
      calendrical cycle, did so on January 20, a.d. 909, and after that the Maya traditions in the
      southern lowlands contracted and all but disappeared in the next few centuries.
           But in the northern lowlands the ninth and tenth centuries a.d. were a time of great
      expansion. Cities such as Chichén Itzá established empires that transcended in size and
      power those of the earlier Classic period. Despite these periods of regional ﬂorescence and
      empire, however, Maya writing fell out of use and, with it, perhaps, the central ideology of
      the Maya world—the complex ideas about the universe and human affairs that melded
      these people into a culture and inspired them to build their civilization.
           Many factors have been suggested as causes of the collapse, and also the development,
      of Maya civilization, and new interpretations sporadically appear. Not surprisingly, many
      involve the ecology of the Maya homeland, which seems at ﬁrst glance to be a major barrier
      to cultural evolution.
           A traditional archaeological approach to explaining the development of something is
      to imagine a set of problems to which the development is a solution. We might ask, given
      the Maya environment, under what conditions would it have been advantageous to
      organize into larger political and social units? Perhaps the answer lies in the necessity of
      local exchange to meet the threat of drought, disease, or disturbance. Rainfall is quite vari-
      able within the Maya area, and many other factors can adversely affect each community’s
      agricultural system. Because the communities were all so similar in the crops they grew and

                                         THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN MESOAMERICA            515


their techniques for growing them, a major drought, such as happens in this area every
8–10 years, could result in the starvation of many people in hundreds of hamlets. But this
could be avoided if many villages established exchange networks that spread the risks.
Each year earthquakes, droughts, disease, ﬂoods, warfare, or some other combination of
calamities might wipe out some sectors of the subsistence system, but if a village belonged
to an organization that included many hamlets, it could get help or give help, depending
on its fortunes. Population-control regulators were very important, hence the monumental
construction projects in this most unlikely of places.
     Whatever was at the root of the Maya cultural evolution, the collapse of this culture
poses equally interesting questions. We have argued that the evolution of Maya society
could probably be tied to the necessity of spreading the “risk” of life in this area by integrating
many different settlements under a centralized authority. But by the same token, such an
integrated system might eventually have encountered a series of catastrophes and internal
problems that were spaced so closely together and in such a sequence that their effects could
not be successfully fought off. “Murphy’s Law” stipulates that if anything can go wrong, it
will. This is especially true for cultural systems spanning millennia. Earthquakes, disease,
warfare, drought, crop disease—all have certain periodicities, and unfavorable conjunctions
must necessarily arise if the system is sufﬁciently long-lived.
     For the Maya lowlands, accumulating data suggest that drought played a signiﬁcant
role in the demise of much of the Classic Maya world.105 As we discussed earlier, the lowlands
are characterized by seasonal rainfall, with about 90 percent of the rain falling in the interval
between June and September.106 Exacerbating this ecological factor is the rarity of surface water
—water dissolves the limestone substrate in the Yucatan, forming caves and underground
rivers. Maya settlements, whether large or small, had to build reservoirs to trap rainfall or,
occasionally, where possible, dig into the bedrock to reach underground sources of water.
Throughout this period, dry conditions were always more prevalent in the northern
lowlands compared to the south. If less rainfall fell during the wet seasons for an extended
period of time, then reservoirs would not be sufﬁciently full to support both the water needs
of people and the water needed for irrigation and crop growing.
     Richardson Gill107 recently suggested that three major periods of drought occurred
during the latter part of the Classic Maya period: 760 to 810 a.d., around 860 a.d., and about
910 a.d. These would have differentially affected Maya settlements, with sites in the southern
lowlands being the earliest to suffer the consequences of reduced rainfall. This periodicity
of major droughts has recently received independent conﬁrmation from climatic data from
sediments off the shore of Venezuela.108
     While major droughts likely were an important factor, the demise of the Classic Maya
should be seen as a period when people began to restructure their society and culture to
meet various challenges, such as failure of rulership, increasing populations, and warfare,
as well as major droughts.109 Restructuring often results in archaeological signatures that
are different from what came before, and thus appear to be striking changes in the archae-
ological record. We see these most dramatically in the southern Maya lowlands, where the
Classic Maya “disappears.” It is now clear, however, that societal adaptations among the
Maya were quite variable. Chichén Itzá (see earlier) in the northern lowlands is a good case
in point. The great droughts occurred here, but Chichén Itzá grew in power, prestige, and
inﬂuence. Bruce Dahlin110 has provided one explanation for this pattern, suggesting that
the northern lowlands had access to a much wider diversity of resource zones. Chichén Itzá

516   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      capitalized on this access by intensifying trade networks and also through conquests.
      Chichén Itzá also may have beneﬁted from the endemic warfare between Tikal and
      Calakmul in the southern and central lowlands. Emphasis on obtaining a diversity of
      resources, especially those related to subsistence, and providing labor in the form of the
      military and services related to trade, led to some restructuring of society, particularly in
      political and economic organization. Chichén Itzá is now viewed by scholars as the last of
      the Classic Maya capitals—rather than as a phenomenon of the Postclassic period—not
      reaching its demise until sometime between a.d. 1000–1100, long after the abandonment
      of Classic Maya centers in the southern lowlands.111
           Global explanations for societal changes are rarely satisfactory. In the case of the
      Maya, regional variability in ecology, settlement, population, aptitude of individual rulers,
      droughts, warfare, and a host of other factors all appear to have contributed in varying
      degrees to the end of the Classic period. As we have seen, however, this demise did not occur
      over all the Maya region simultaneously, but took place over some 250 years.



      POSTCLASSIC MESOAMERICA (A.D. 900–A.D. 1521)

      As Maya political power in the lowlands was beginning to wane, much of highland Puebla,
      Mexico, and Hildago was apportioned among several competing power centers. One group,
      the Toltecs, began to dominate the Valley of Mexico after about a.d. 900. According to
      Aztec legends (the Aztecs claimed descent from the Toltecs), the Toltecs came to central
      Mexico from northwestern Mexico. The desert plateaus of northwestern Mexico were for
      many millennia the home of the Chichimeca, groups of nomadic hunter-foragers, and it is
      possible that some of these people migrated south and did, in fact, join with (or displace)
      local cultures to produce the Toltec culture. One of the major centers of the Toltec polity
      was at Tula, just north of the Valley of Mexico. Shortly after about a.d. 900, the Toltec built
      two stone pyramids and a ball court at Tula. On one of the pyramids they placed a temple
      dedicated to the Serpent god, Quetzalcóatl. On top of the pyramid (which is just over
      10 m high) they placed stone statues of warriors (Figure 13.19), which are about 4.6 m
      high, as supports for a temple, and these ﬁgures continue to dominate the site. The base of
      the pyramid is decorated with reliefs of prowling jaguars and coyotes and eagles eating
      hearts.112
           The Toltecs established trade and military outposts in many areas of northern and
      western Mexico and exported metal, gemstones, and other commodities as far north as
      Arizona and New Mexico. To the south, the Toltecs interacted with Chichén Itzá.
           Eventually, Toltec power weakened. Under the onslaught of the invading Chichimec
      from the north, the Toltecs broke up into many smaller, competitive groups. Tula itself was
      almost entirely destroyed by invaders at about a.d. 1156. Succeeding centuries saw the rise
      of various other cultural traditions in central Mexico, such as the Tarascan state.113 Chichén
      Itzá also went into a period of decline, to be replaced by a loose confederation of provinces,
      called the League of Mayapán, and the island of Cozumel, on Yucatan’s east coast, which
      was a major trading center between a.d. 1250 and the arrival of the Spanish in a.d. 1519.114
      But by the time of the arrival of the Spanish, the community at Mayapán had been abandoned
      and the Maya areas were a welter of small chiefdoms at war with one another.115

                                      THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN MESOAMERICA        517


The Aztec
(c. A.D. 1150–1521)
One of the last tribes to
invade central Mexico from the
north and west was the Aztecs.
Aztec histories and legends, as
recorded by the Spanish, tell
of their arrival in the Valley of
Mexico as rag-tag foragers
and primitive agriculturalists
who at ﬁrst were forced by
the established residents of the
valley to live in the swamps
around the lake, subsisting
on ﬂies, snakes, and vermin.
According to legend, rival
political groups in the valley
enlisted the Aztecs in their
campaigns but avoided other
contacts with them because
of the Aztecs’ predilections
for human sacriﬁce and other
barbarisms. At war with vari-
ous groups, the Aztecs were
forced to take refuge on islands
                                     FIGURE 13.19 Toltec warrior statues from Tula, Mexico.
in the lake where, according to
legend, they built their ﬁrst
city, Tenochtitlán (Figure 13.20). In time Tenochtitlán grew to become a massive complex
of pyramids, courts, and other buildings (now largely buried beneath the streets of
Mexico City).
      As allies of the Tepanec kingdom of Atzcapotzalco, the Aztecs conquered many of the
surrounding cities, and at about a.d. 1427 they turned on their erstwhile allies and through
savage warfare brought most of central Mexico under their control. Military expeditions
conquered peoples all the way to the Guatemalan border, and garrison towns were
established from the Paciﬁc Coast to the Gulf of Mexico. Considerable investment in
monumental construction characterized the capital at Tenochtitlán, but outside the capital,
as Mary Hodge points outs, “the Aztec Empire has been described as nearly ‘invisible’
because it did not invest in roads, administrative buildings, or walls.”116
      Although the Aztecs are usually associated with militarism, they also created an
impressive civil and commercial administration. Between about a.d. 1300 and a.d. 1520
they drained large areas of the Valley of Mexico, transforming them into productive
agricultural plots. Michael Smith has argued that the Valley of Mexico settlement pattern
during Aztec times was a hierarchically arranged marketing system of products with intense
local specialization in goods and services.117 Many commodities, including salt, reeds, ﬁsh,
stone, cloth, various crops, ceramics, gold, and wood, were exchanged among hundreds of

518   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY




      FIGURE 13.20 The most important Aztec cities were built around the lake that used to cover part
      of the Valley of Mexico. The lake margins were intensively farmed, and boats conveyed great quan-
      tities of food and craft products among these cities.


      communities (Figure 13.21). In fact, the improbable location of Tenochtitlán—on an
      island in the middle of the lake—is probably best understood in terms of its central role in
      these redistributive networks.118 In a.d. 1519 Tenochtitlán is estimated to have had about
      200,000–300,000 inhabitants, ﬁve times the population of London at that period, and there
      were many other large cities within the Aztec domain.119 Many cities had broad avenues,
      causeways, temples, pyramids, and other large buildings, often interspersed with gardens,
      courtyards, and large markets.
           It is estimated that between one and two million people lived in the Valley of Mexico
      in late Aztec times.120 The lake provided great and reliable quantities of food in the form of
      ﬁsh, waterfowl, and salamanders. In the southern areas of the valley’s lake system, maize,
      beans, squash, tomatoes, and other crops were grown on chinampas, long rectangular plots
      of ground created out of the lake bed by piling up layers of aquatic weeds, mud, human
      feces, garbage, and other materials. According to ancient documents, the Aztecs initially
      made the chinampas by braiding grass and reeds into thick mats that could ﬂoat, and thus
      they were able to ﬂoat entire ﬁelds from one place to another—an agricultural system
      unparalleled in the ancient world.121 The Aztecs and their successors planted trees,
      including the ahejote (a kind of willow), that eventually anchored most plots. Farmers who

                                     THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN MESOAMERICA        519




FIGURE 13.21 A Mexican tribute list (from the Codex Mendoza) describing the tribute paid to
the government by towns in Guerrero Province. Among the commodities described are uniforms,
shields, jade, gourds, sage, and amaranth.

520   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      still cultivate chinampas water the plots until they are the consistency of pudding and then
      use a rake to grid them into squares about an inch on a side. Seeds are placed in each square
      and covered with organic material to provide a greenhouse effect, and once the seedlings
      are at the proper size they are transplanted to other ﬁelds. As many as four crops per year
      can be grown on these exceptionally fertile plots of land.
            The Aztecs were organized into a highly stratiﬁed class system headed by a divine king.
      Beneath the king were the nobles, the pillitin, all of whom belonged to the royal house, while
      the great mass of the populace were commoners who were organized in large clans, called
      calpulli (“big house”). The calpulli were the basic units of Aztec society. Each was composed
      of several lineages, totaling several hundred people, one of whom was designated the
      calpule, or leader. Members of a calpulli usually lived in the same village or ward, fought
      together as a unit if drafted for war, held and worked land in common, paid taxes as a unit,
      and worshiped at the shrine maintained by the calpulli. The leaders of the calpulli were the
      direct link between the imperial government and the people. There was also a class of
      professional merchants called pochteca.
            The calpulli differed from one another in social rank. There was some social mobility
      for individuals—usually by virtue of extraordinary service to the state in warfare, trade, or
      religion. At the bottom of the social scale were the landless peasants and slaves, who worked
      the ﬁelds, performed other menial tasks, and were sacriﬁced in enormous numbers to
      various gods.
            The Aztecs believed that the present world was just one in a succession of creations by
      the gods and that constant effort was required to forestall the extinction of the sun and the
      utter disappearance of humanity. Human blood was an essential part of the ritual (Figure
      13.22) whereby the end of the world was postponed, and each time a human heart was
      ripped from a sacriﬁced person, another small step was taken toward prolonging the daily
      rebirth of the sun.122 At times long lines of sacriﬁcial victims snaked down the steps of the
      major pyramid mounds, on the top of which priests spent hour after hour engaged in the
      bloody process of heart removal. After the heart and blood had been offered to the gods,
      the body was thrown down the steps of the pyramid and subsequently ﬂayed and then,
      perhaps, eaten. Other victims slated for sacriﬁce were pitted in gladiatorial contests, or
      beheaded, or drowned, or cast into ﬁres. The Spanish conquistadors may have exaggerated
      the numbers of people sacriﬁced, but it seems inescapable that the Aztecs annually killed
      many tens of thousands and perhaps hundreds of thousands of people. This slaughter was
      accepted by the common people; in fact, it seems to have been widely supported. All war
      captives knew their fate, and it was an act of honor to accept a sacriﬁcial death. In addition,
      young men were selected each year to lead a life of luxury in which they were surrounded
      by complaisant young women and feasted on the best of food, realizing full well that at the
      end of the year they would be sacriﬁced. In addition, parents throughout the land turned over
      infants and children to government ofﬁcials for use in annual sacriﬁcial rites. One sixteenth-
      century (apparently) eyewitness account of the ritual execution of a woman who played the
      role of the goddess Uixtociuatl gives us a sense of what these rites may have been like:

          And after they had slain the captives, only [then] Uixtociuatl [’s impersonator] followed;
          she came only at the last. They came to the end and ﬁnished only with her.
                And when this was done, thereupon they laid her down upon the offering stone. They
          stretched her out upon her back. . . . They laid hold of her; they pulled and stretched out

                                          THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN MESOAMERICA                  521




FIGURE 13.22 These early drawings (from the Codex Florentino) describe the sequence of ritual human sacriﬁce. (A)
The priest is dressed in the skin of a sacriﬁced person; another person (B) was given a shield, mirror, and other ritual items
and played the part of the god Tezcatlipoca; the individual was then sacriﬁced (C) and eaten (D).



     her arms and legs, bending [up] her breast greatly, bending down her head taut, toward the
     earth. And they bore down upon her neck with the tightly pressed snout of a sword ﬁsh,
     barbed, spiny, spined on either side.
          And the slayer stood there; he stood up. Thereupon he cut open her breast.

           522       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                               And when he opened her breast, the blood gushed up high; it welled up far as it poured
                         forth, as it boiled up.
                               And when this was done, then he raised her heart as an offering [to the god] and placed
                         it in the green jar, which was called the green stone jar.
                               And as this was done, loudly were the trumpets blown. And when it was over, then
                         they lowered the body and the heart of [the likeness of] Uixtociuatl, covered by a precious
                         mantle.123

                      Many of the sacriﬁcial victims, as well as soldiers who died in battle, people struck by
                      lightning, and mothers who died in childbirth, were thought to spend eternity in various
                      paradises, cosseted with the pleasures of this world and the next.
                            With its emphasis on death, blood, and cosmic cataclysm, it is little wonder that Aztec
                      theology struck the Spanish as somewhat heterodox (Figure 13.23). Even anthropologists,
                      renowned for their cultural relativism, are impressed with the violence of Aztec religion.
                      But human sacriﬁce is an old and recurrent theme in the evolution of complex cultures: In
                      Mesopotamia, China, North America, and most other places, examples of warfare and
                      slaughter can be found that equaled that of the Aztecs in form, if not in intensity. Also, as
                      noted at the beginning of this chapter, the Europeans probably exaggerated the violence of
                      Mesoamerican life, for the Europeans had a political agenda well-served by depicting the
                      Native Americans as savages.
                            But human sacriﬁce and blood-letting were important elements in Mesoamerican
                      cultures, and it is an interesting anthropological problem to explain why these acts, so
                                                   repugnant to the modern mind, became so celebrated by the
                                                   ancients of Mesoamerica, China, Mesopotamia, and else-
                                                   where. It is not difﬁcult to posit “functional” explanations
                                                   that are plausible, if largely untestable. Michael Harner, for
                                                   example, has argued that the key to Aztec sacriﬁce is the
                                                   contribution the cannibalism of sacriﬁcial victims made to the
                                                   Aztec diet. 124 Mesoamerica lacks any large domesticated
                                                   animals that could have been effectively integrated with Aztec
                                                   agricultural strategies, and this animal protein and fat deﬁci-
                                                   ency may have been compensated for by cannibalism. But the
                                                   Mesoamerican diet is generally a rich one, with a nutritionally
                                                   adequate basis of maize, beans, squash, ﬁsh, frogs, birds, deer,
                                                   dogs, and other animals. This diet was sufﬁcient to have
                                                   supported long-term population growth and the needs of
                                                   hundreds of thousands of people who lived around what is
                                                   now Mexico City. There is little doubt that the Aztecs engaged
                                                   in cannibalism, since several sixteenth-century Europeans
                                                   described it as it happened, but we have insufﬁcient evidence
                                                   with which to evaluate Harner’s thesis.
                                                        Despite their death cults, the Aztecs in everyday life were
                                                   a colorful and in some ways engaging people. The Spanish
                                                   remarked on their love of ﬂowers and natural beauty, and their
FIGURE 13.23 The supreme Aztec divinity was        poetry contains many references to the joys of the natural
Tezcatlipoca, whose skull is modeled here in jade  world. The Spanish were amazed to ﬁnd that Aztecs bathed
and crystal.                                       their entire bodies most days—a level of personal cleanliness

                                        THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN MESOAMERICA         523


that would have struck even most eighteenth- and nineteenth-century Europeans as bizarre
and unhealthy.
     Dress for men and women often consisted of a loincloth and a woven cloak, and
brightly colored cotton fabrics were used for ornamentation. In the countryside women
often went about naked to the waist, but middle- and upper-class urban women wore
decorated blouses.125
     The diet of the Aztecs centered on maize, beans, squash, and tomatoes, although the
wealthier people could eat various fruits, nuts, meats, and other exotic foods. The relatively
unvaried diet was enlivened with peyote and other natural hallucinogens and by tobacco
and pulque, a cactus-derived alcoholic drink with impressive powers to revive the weary.


THE SPANISH CONQUEST

    The captain Alonso Lopez de Avila . . . captured during the war . . . a young Indian woman
    of lovely and gracious appearance. She had promised her husband, fearful lest they should
    kill him in the war, not to have relations with any other man but him, and so no persuasion
    was sufﬁcient to prevent her from taking her own life to avoid being deﬁled by another
    man; and because of this they had her thrown to the dogs.126

The melancholy history of the conquest of Mesoamerica by Spanish adventurers in the early
sixteenth century was recorded in detail by the Spanish themselves. Accounts on both sides
of this meeting of worlds provide a fascinating look at the clash of cultures.127
     In a.d. 1519 Corte’s left Cuba with a sizable force of ships, men, armaments, and horses
and sailed to the coast of Veracruz. With the advantage of diplomacy with non-Aztec
groups, horses, cannons, war dogs, and an extraordinary esprit de corps, Cortés and his
men were able to march directly into the Aztec capital at Tenochtitlán, where they were at
ﬁrst welcomed by the Aztec king, Moctezuma, who was under the delusion that the Spanish
were gods returning to their ancestral homeland. He could hardly have been more wrong.
Within a short time, the Spanish had kidnapped and jailed him and were forming alliances
with local non-Aztec peoples, who were only too happy to help the Spanish displace the
Aztecs. Moctezuma and many of his people were eventually killed in a ﬁerce battle at
Tenochtitlán, after which Aztec resistance stiffened; but within a few years the Spanish had
captured most of the Aztec heartland. In 1524 they hanged the last Aztec king, and
thereafter Spanish domination of Mexico was rapid. When the Spanish ﬁrst arrived, the
population of the heartland of the Aztec empire was probably more than a million; 150
years later it probably held fewer than 70,000 people—the survivors of war, European
diseases such as smallpox, slavery, and the other plagues of this epic clash of cultures.


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

As in all the other cases of early cultural complexity we have considered, it is clear that
aspects of economy, ecology, and demography explain much of what happened in the New
World. The Olmec, Teotihuacán, Oaxacan, Maya, Aztec, and other Mesoamerican societies
appeared where they did and not in Newfoundland or Nebraska because of the exceptional

524   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      productivity of the South Gulf Coast, Oaxaca, and other areas of Mesoamerica, given a
      simple farming technology and the maize-beans-squash complex.
           We see in Mesoamerica, too, the stimulus to development provided by irrigation
      agriculture, environmental circumscription, interregional exchange, and other factors.
           Once we get beyond an ecological level of analysis, we encounter a welter of variability
      in sociopolitical forms, economic histories, settlement patterns, and the other elaborations
      in these complex societies. In the absence of sufﬁcient written documents, it is difﬁcultto
      apply Marxian or other sociopolitical models to Mesoamerica. So we are left with a case
      of cultural evolution that is so striking a parallel to what happened in, for example,
      Mesopotamia, that we must consider both areas examples of a single developmental pattern.
           From a nonscientiﬁc point of view, in some ways the most interesting thing about early
      Mesoamerican societies is the psychological contrast they make with ourselves. We may be
      sure that the average Olmec town of 500 b.c. had a full range of human personality types
      and an agricultural existence that we can all imagine. But in their cosmologies, world-views,
      and life-views, ancient Mesoamericans were profoundly different from the Spanish who
      ﬁrst met them. Indeed, their views were probably profoundly different from those of any
      of the other western European traditions.


      BIBLIOGRAPHY
      Adams, R. E. W., ed. 1977. The Origins of Maya Civilization. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
      Adams, R. E., W. E. Brown, Jr., and T. P. Culbert. 1981. “Radar Mapping, Archaeology, and Ancient Mayan Land
                   Use.” Science 213:1457–1463.
      Alden, J. R. 1979. “A Reconstruction of the Toltec Period Political Units in the Valley of Mexico.” In
                   Transformations: Mathematical Approaches to Culture Change, ed. C. Renfrew and K. L. Cooke. New
                   York: Academic Press.
      Anderson, A. O., and C. Dibble, eds. 1978. The Florentine Codex. Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press.
      Andrews, A. P. 1990. “The Fall of Chichen Itza: A Preliminary Hypothesis.” Latin American Antiquity
                   1(3):258 –267.
      ———. 1993. “Late Postclassic Lowland Maya Archaeology.” Journal of World Prehistory 7(1):35 –70.
      Andrews, A. P., E. W. Andrews, and F. R. Castellanos. 2003. “The Northern Maya Collapse and its Aftermath.”
                   Ancient Mesoamerica 14:151–156.
      Andrews V, E. W. 1990. “Early Ceramic History of the Lowland Maya.” In Vision and Revision in Maya Studies,
                   ed. F. S. Clancy and P. D. Harrison, pp. 1–19. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
      Andrews V, E. W., and N. D. C. Hammond. 1990. “Redeﬁnition of the Swasey Phase at Cuello, Belize.” American
                   Antiquity 54:570–584.
      Armillas, P. 1971. “Gardens on Swamps.” Science 174:653 – 661.
      Arnold, J. E., and A. Ford. 1980. “A Statistical Examination of Settlement Patterns at Tikal, Guatemala.” American
                   Antiquity 45:713 –726.
      Ashmore, W., ed. 1981. Lowland Maya Settlement Patterns. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
      Bell, E. B., M. A. Canuto, and R. J. Sharer. eds. 2004. Understanding Early Classic Copan. Philadelphia: University
                   of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology.
      Berlo, J. C., ed. 1992. Art, Ideology and the City of Teotihuacan: A Symposium at Dumbarton Oaks 8th and 9th
                   October 1988. Washington, DC: Dumbarton Oaks.
      Berrin, K., and Pasztory, R., eds. 1994. Teotihacan. London: Thames and Hudson.
      Blanton, R. E. 1972. “Prehistoric Adaptation in the Ixtapalapa Region, Mexico.” Science 175:1317–1326.
      ———. 1978. Monte Albán: Settlement Patterns at the Ancient Zapotec Capital. New York: Academic Press.
      ———. 1980. “Cultural Ecology Reconsidered.” American Antiquity 45:145 –151.
      ———. 1983. “Advances in the Study of Cultural Evolution in Prehispanic Highland Mesoamerica.” In Advances
                   in World Archaeology, Vol. 2, ed. F. Wendorf and A. E. Close. New York: Academic Press.
      Blanton, R. E., S. A. Kowalewski, G. Feinman, and J. Appel. 1981. Ancient Mesoamerica, a Comparison of Change
                   in Three Regions. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
      Blomster, J. P., H. Neff, and M. D. Glascock. 2005. “Olmec Pottery Production and Export in Ancient Mexico
                   Determined Through Elemental Analysis.” Science 307:1068–1072.

                                               THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN MESOAMERICA                     525


Braswell, G., ed. 2003. The Maya and Teotihuacan: Reinterpreting Early Classic Interaction. Austin: University of
             Texas Press.
Brumﬁel, E. 1976. “Regional Growth in the Eastern Valley of Mexico: A Test of the ‘Population Pressures’
             Hypothesis.” In The Early Mesoamerican Village, ed. K. V. Flannery. New York: Academic Press.
———. 1983. “Aztec State Making: Ecology, Structure, and the Origin of the State.” American Anthropologist
             85(2):261–284.
Chase, D. V. 1990. “The Invisible Maya: Population History and Archaeology at Santa Rita Corozal.” In Prehistoric
             Population History in the Maya Lowlands, ed. T. P. Culbert and D. S. Rice, pp. 199 –214. Albuquerque:
             University of New Mexico Press.
Chippendale, C., N. Hammond, and J. Sabloff. 1988. “The Archaeology of Maya Decipherment.” Antiquity
             62(234):119 –122.
Clancy, F. S., and P. D. Harrison, eds. 1995. Vision and Revision in Maya Studies. Albuquerque: University of New
             Mexico Press.
Clark, J. E. 1997. “The Arts of Government in Early Mesoamerica.” Annual Review of Anthropology 26:211–234.
Clendinnen, I. 1991. The Aztecs: An Interpretation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Coe, M. D. 1965. “The Olmec Style and Its Distribution.” Handbook of Middle American Indians 3:739 –775.
———. 1968. America’s First Civilization: Discovering the Olmec. New York: American Heritage.
———. 1970. “The Archaeological Sequence at San Lorenzo Tenochtitlán, Veracruz, Mexico.” Contributions of
             the University of California Archaeological Research Facility 8:21–34.
———. 1992. Breaking the Maya Code. London and New York: Thames and Hudson.
———. 1994. Mexico, 4th ed. New York: Thames and Hudson.
Coe, M., and R. Diehl. 1980. The Land of the Olmec: The People of the River, Vol. 2. Austin: University of Texas
             Press.
Coe, M., D. Snow, and E. Benson. 1986. Atlas of Ancient America. New York: Facts on File.
Coe, W., and W. A. Haviland. 1982. Introduction to the Archaeology of Tikal, Guatemala. Philadelphia: University
             Museum, University of Pennsylvania.
Coggins, C. 1985. The Sacred Cenote of Sacriﬁce. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Collier, G. A., R. I. Rosaldo, and J. D. Wirth, eds. 1982. The Inca and Aztec State. New York: Academic Press.
Conrad, G. W., and A. A. Demarest. 1984. Religion and Empire: The Dynamics of Aztec and Inca Expansionism.
             Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cook, S. 1946. “Human Sacriﬁce and Warfare as Factors in the Demography of Precolonial Mexico.” Human
             Biology 18:81–102.
Cordova, C., A. L. M. del Pozzo, and J. L. Camacho. 1994. “Palaeolandforms and Volcanic Impact on the
             Environment of Prehistoric Cuicuilco, Southern Mexico City.” Journal of Archaeological Science
             21:585–596.
Cowgill, G. 1974. “Quantitative Studies of Urbanization at Teotihuacán.” In Mesoamerican Archaeology: New
             Approaches, ed. N. Hammond, pp. 363–396. Austin: University of Texas Press.
———. 1997. “State and Society at Teotihuacan, Mexico.” Annual Review of Anthropology 26:129 –161.
Cowgill, U. 1971. “Some Comments on Manihot Subsistence and the Ancient Maya.” Southwest Journal of
             Anthropology 27:51– 63.
Culbert, T. P. 1973. The Classic Maya Collapse. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
———. 1988. “Political History and the Decipherment of Maya Glyphs.” Antiquity 62(234):135 –152.
Culbert, T. P., and D. S. Rice, eds. 1995. Precolumbian Population History in the Maya Lowlands. Albuquerque:
             University of New Mexico Press.
Dahlin, B. H. 2002. “Climate Change and the End of the Classic Period in Yucatan.” Ancient Mesoamerica
             13:327–340.
Demerest, A. 2004. Ancient Maya: The Rise and Fall of a Rainforest Civilization. New York: Cambridge University
             Press.
Demarest, A., and G. W. Conrad, eds. 1992. Ideology and Pre-Columbian Civilizations. Santa Fe, NM: School of
             American Research Press.
DePalma, A. 1993. “Mexico City Restoring Area Tilled by Aztecs,” New York Times, Sept. 14, 1993, p. B7.
Diaz del Castillo, B. 1928. The Discovery and Conquest of Mexico. London: Routledge.
Dickson, D. B. 1981. “Further Simulations of Ancient Agriculture and Population at Tikal, Guatemala.” American
             Antiquity 46:922–926.
Diehl, R. A., and M. D. Coe. 1996. “Olmec Archaeology.” In The Olmec World: Ritual and Rulership, pp. 10 –25.
             Princeton, NJ: The Art Museum of Princeton University.
Dunning, N. P. 1996. “An Examination of Regional Variability in the Prehispanic Maya Agricultural Landscape.”
             In The Managed Mosaic: Ancient Maya Agriculture and Resource Use, ed. S. L. Fedick, pp. 53 – 68. Salt
             Lake City: University of Utah Press.
Dunning, N. P., T. Beach, P. Farrell, and S. Luzzadder-Beach. 1998. “Prehispanic Agrosystems and Adaptive
             Regions in the Maya Lowlands.” Culture and Agriculture 20:87–101.

526   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      Dunning, N. P., T. Beach, and D. Rue. 1997. “The Paleoecology and Ancient Settlement of the Petexbatun Region,
                   Guatemala.” Ancient Mesoamerica 8:255 –266.
      Fash, W. L. 1991. Scribes, Warriors and Kings: The City of Copan and the Ancient Maya. New York: Thames and
                   Hudson.
      Fedick, S. L. 1994. “Ancient Maya Agricultural Terracing in the Upper Belize River Area.” Ancient Mesoamerica
                   5:107–127.
      ———, ed. 1996. The Managed Mosaic: Ancient Maya Agriculture and Resource Use. Salt Lake City: University of
                   Utah Press.
      Feinman, G. M., and L. M. Nicholas. 1990. “At the Margins of the Monte Alban State: Settlement Patterns in the
                   Ejutla Valley, Oaxaca, Mexico.” Latin American Antiquity 1(3):216 –246.
      Flannery, K. V. 1968. “The Olmec and the Valley of Oaxaca: A Model for Inter-Regional Interaction in Formative
                   Times.” In Dumbarton Oaks Conference on the Olmec, ed. E. P. Benson. Dumbarton Oaks, Washington,
                   DC: Dumbarton Oaks.
      ———. 1976a. “The Early Mesoamerican House.” In The Early Mesoamerican Village, ed. K. V. Flannery. New
                   York: Academic Press.
      ———. 1976b. “Evolution of Complex Settlement Systems.” In The Early Mesoamerican Village, ed. K. V.
                   Flannery. New York: Academic Press.
      ———. 1976c. “Contextual Analysis of Ritual Paraphernalia from Formative Oaxaca.” In The Early Mesoamerican
                   Village, ed. K. V. Flannery. New York: Academic Press.
      ———, ed. 1982. Maya Subsistence: Studies in Memory of Dennis E. Puleston. New York: Academic Press.
      Flannery, K. V., and J. Marcus. 1976. “Evolution of Public Building in Formative Oaxaca.” In Cultural Change
                   and Continuity, ed. C. E. Cleland. New York: Academic Press.
      ———. 1994. Early Formative Pottery of the Valley of Oaxaca, Mexico (with a technical ceramic analysis by W. O.
                   Payne). Memoirs of the Museum of Anthropology 27. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
      ———. 2000. “Formative Mexican Chiefdoms and the Myth of the ‘Mother-Culture.’ ” Journal of Anthropological
                   Archaeology 19:1–37.
      Flannery, K. V., J. Marcus, and S. A. Kowalewski. 1981. “The Preceramic and Formative of the Valley of Oaxaca.”
                   In Supplement to the Handbook of Middle American Indians, pp. 48 –93. Austin: University of Texas
                   Press.
      Flannery, K. V., and M. C. Winter. 1976. “Analyzing Household Activities.” In The Early Mesoamerican Village,
                   ed. K. V. Flannery. New York: Academic Press.
      Folan, W. J., E. R. Kintz, and L. A. Fletcher. 1983. Coba: A Classic Maya Metropolis. New York: Academic Press.
      Fox, J. G. 1996. “Playing with Power. Ballcourts and Political Ritual in Southern Mesoamerica.” Current
                   Anthropology 37(3):483 –509.
      Fox, J. W. 1987. Maya Postclassic State Formation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
      Freidel, D. A., and J. A. Sabloff. 1984. Cozumel: Late Maya Settlement Patterns. New York: Academic Press.
      Fritz, G. J. 1994. “Are the First American Farmers Getting Younger?” Current Anthropology 35(3):305 –309.
      Fry, R., and S. Cox. 1974. “The Structure of Ceramic Exchange at Tikal, Guatemala.” World Archaeology
                   6:209 –225.
      Gill, R. B. 2000. The Great Maya Droughts: Water, Life, and Death. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
      Grennes-Ravits, R., and G. Coleman. 1976. “The Quintessential Role of Olmec in the Central Highlands of
                   Mexico.” American Antiquity 41:196 –205.
      Grove, D. C. 1992. “Ideology and Evolution at the Pre-State Level.” In Ideology and Pre-Columbian Civilizations,
                   ed. A. Demarest and G. W. Conrad. Santa Fe, NM: School of American Research Press.
      Grove, D. C., ed. 1987. Ancient Chalcatzingo. Austin: University of Texas Press.
      Hammond, N. 1995. Ancient Mayan Civilization. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers.
      Hansen, R. D. 1990. Excavations in the Tigre Complex, El Mirador, Petén, Guatemala. Papers of the New World
                   Archaeological Foundation 62. Provo, UT: New World Archaeological Foundation.
      ———. 2001. “The First Cities: The Beginnings of Urbanization and State Formation in the Maya Lowlands.”
                   In Maya: Divine Kings of the Rainforest, ed. N. Grube. Cologne, Germany: Könemann.
      Harner, M. 1977. “The Ecological Basis for Aztec Sacriﬁce.” American Ethnologist 4:117–135.
      Harris, M. 1977. Cannibals and Kings: The Origins of Cultures. New York: Random House.
      Hodge, M. 1991. “Land and Lordship. The Politics of Aztec Provincial Administration in the Valley of Mexico.”
                   In Land and Politics in the Valley of Mexico: A Two-Thousand Year Perspective, ed. H. R. Harvey.
                   Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
      ———. 1995. “Polities Composing the Aztec Empire’s Core.” In Economies and Polities in the Aztec Realm, ed.
                   M. E. Smith and M. G. Hodge. Albany: State University of New York.
      ———. 1998. “Archaeological Views of Aztec Culture.” Journal of Archaeological Research 6(3):197–238.
      Houston, S. D. 1988. “The Phonetic Decipherment of Mayan Glyphs.” Antiquity 62(234):126 –135.
      ———. 1989a. “Archaeology and Maya Writing.” Journal of World Prehistory 3(1):1–32.
      ———. 1989b. Maya Glyphs. Berkeley: University of California Press.

                                               THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN MESOAMERICA                     527


Hunt, R. C., and E. Hunt. 1976. “Canal Irrigation and Local Social Organization.” Current Anthropology 17:389–411.
Ifrah, G. 1985. From One to Zero. Trans. L. Bair. New York: Viking Penguin.
Johnston, K. J. 2004. “The ‘Invisible’ Maya: Minimally Mounded Residential Settlemnt at Itzán, Petén,
            Guatemala.” Latin American Antiquity 15(2):145 –175.
Joyce, R. A. 1986. “Terminal Classic Interaction on the Southeastern Maya Periphery.” American Antiquity
            1986:313–329.
Joyce, R. A., and J. S. Henderson. 2001. “Beginnings of Village Life in Eastern Mesoamerica.” Latin American
            Antiquity 12(1):5 –24.
Justeson, J. S., and T. Kaufman. 1993. “A Decipherment of Epi-Olmec Hieroglyphic Writing.” Science 259:1665–
            1796.
Kelley, D. H. 1993. “The Decipherment of Epi-Olmec Script as Zoquean by Justeson and Kaufman.” The Review
            of Archaeology 14(1):29 –32.
Killion, T. W., and J. Uraid. 2001. “The Olmec Legacy: Cultural Continuity and Change in Mexico’s Southern
            Gulf Coast Lowlands.” Journal of Field Archaeology 28(1–2):3 –25.
Kirkby, A. 1973. The Use of Land and Water Resources in the Past and Present Valley of Oaxaca, Mexico. Ann Arbor:
            Memoirs of the Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan, No. 5.
Kowalewski, S. A. 1990. “The Evolution of Complexity in the Valley of Oaxaca.” Annual Review of Anthropology
            19:39–58.
Kowalewski, S. A., and L. Feinstein. 1983. “The Economic Systems of Ancient Oaxaca: A Regional Perspective.”
            Current Anthropology 24(4):413 – 441.
Knorozov, Y. 1982. Maya Hieroglyphic Codices. Trans. S. D. Cole. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Kunen, J. L., T. P. Culbert, V. Fialko, B. R. McKee, and L. Grazioso. 2000. “Bajo Communities: A Case Study from
            the Central Petén.” Culture and Agriculture 22(3):15 –31.
Kurtz, D. V. 1987. “The Economics of Urbanization and State Formation at Teotihuacán.” Current Anthropology
            28(3):329–353.
Landa, D. de. The Maya Account of Affairs of Yucatan. Chicago: J. O’Hara.
Lees, S. H. 1973. Sociopolitical Aspects of Canal Irrigation in the Valley of Oaxaca. Ann Arbor: Memoir of the
            Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan, No. 6.
Lounsbury, F. G. 1991. “Distinguished Lecture: Recent Work in the Decipherment of Palenque’s Hieroglyphic
            Inscriptions.” American Anthropologist 93(4):809 – 825,
Lowe, J. W. G. 1982. “On Mathematical Models of the Classic Maya Collapse: The Class Conﬂict Hypothesis
            Reexamined.” American Antiquity 47:643 – 652.
Manzanilla, L. 1996. “Corporate Groups and Domestic Activities at Teotihuacan.” Latin American Antiquity
            7(3):228–246.
———. 1999. “Emergence of Complex Urban Societies in Central Mexico: The Case of Teotihuacan.” In
            Archaeology in Latin America, ed. G. G. Politis and B. Alberti, pp. 93 –129. New York: Routledge.
Marcus, J. 1973. “Territorial Organization of the Lowland Classic Maya.” Science 180:911–916.
———. 1974. “The Iconography of Power Among the Classic Maya.” World Archaeology 6:83 –94.
———. 1976a. “The Origins of Mesoamerican Writing.” Annual Review of Anthropology 5:35 – 68.
———. 1976b. “The Iconography of Militarism at Monte Albán and Neighboring Sites in the Valley of Oaxaca.”
            In The Origins of Religious Art and Iconography in Preclassic Mesoamerica, ed. H. B. Nicholson. Los
            Angeles: Latin American Center, UCLA.
———. 1993. Mesoamerican Writing Systems: Propaganda, Myth, and History in Four Ancient Civilizations.
            Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Masson, M. A., and D. A. Freidel, eds. 2002. Ancient Maya Political Economies. Walnut Creek, CA: Altamira.
Matheny, R. T. 1986. “Early States in the Maya Lowlands During the Late Preclassic Period: Edzná and El
            Mirador.” In City-States of the Maya, ed. E. P. Benson, pp. 1– 44. Denver: Rocky Mountain Institute
            for Pre-Columbian Studies.
Matheny, R. T., and D. L. Gurr. 1983. “Variation in Prehistoric Agricultural Systems of the New World.” Annual
            Review of Anthropology 12:79 –103.
McAnany, P. 1994. Living with the Ancestors: Kinship and Kingship in Ancient Maya Society. Austin: University of
            Texas Press.
Miller, M. E. 1986. The Murals of Bonampak. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Miller, M., and K. Taube. 1993. The Gods and Symbols of Ancient Mexico and the Maya. London and New York:
            Thames and Hudson.
Millon, R. 1974. “The Study of Urbanism at Teotihuacán, Mexico.” In Mesoamerican Archaeology: New
            Approaches, ed. N. Hammond. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Millon, R., R. B. Drewitt, and G. L. Cowgill. 1973. Urbanization at Teotihuacán, Mexico, Vol. 1, Parts 1 and 2.
            Austin: University of Texas Press.
Moctezuma, E. M. 1988. The Great Temple of the Aztecs. New York: Thames and Hudson.
Murdy, C. N. 1981. “Congenital Deformities and the Olmec Were-Jaguar Motif.” American Antiquity 46:861– 869.

528   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      Nations, J. D. 1980. “The Evolutionary Potential of Lacondon Maya Sustained-Yield Tropical Forest Agriculture.”
                   Journal of Anthropological Research 36:1–30.
      Nichols, D. L. 1982. “A Middle Formative Irrigation System Near Santa Clara Coatitlan in the Basin of Mexico.”
                   American Antiquity 47:133 –144.
      ———. 1988. “Infrared Aerial Photography and Prehispanic Irrigation at Teotihuacán: The Tlajinga Canals.”
                   Journal of Field Archaeology 15:17–27.
      ———. 1995. “The Organization of Provincial Craft Production and the Aztec City-States of Otumba.” In
                   Economies and Polities in the Aztec Realm, ed. M. Hodge and M. Smith, Albany: Institute for
                   Mesoamerican Studies, State University of New York.
      Niederberger, C. 1979. “Early Sedentary Economy in the Basin of Mexico.” Science 203:131–146.
      O’Brien, M. J., J. A. Ferguson, T. D. Holland, and D. E. Lewarch. 1989. “On Interpretive Competition in the
                   Absence of Appropriate Data: Monte Albán Revisited.” Current Anthropology 30(2):191–199.
      O’Brien, M. J., R. D. Mason, D. E. Lewarch, and J. A. Neely. 1982. A Late Formative Irrigation Settlement Below
                   Monte Albán. Austin: University of Texas Press.
      Offner, J. A. 1981. “On the Inapplicability of ‘Oriental Despotism’ and the ‘Asiatic Mode of Production’ to the
                   Aztecs of Texcoco.” American Antiquity 46:43 – 61.
      Parsons, J. R. 1971. Prehistoric Settlement Patterns in the Texcoco Region, Mexico. Ann Arbor: Memoir of the
                   Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan, No. 3.
      ———. 1974. “The Development of a Prehistoric Complex Society: A Regional Perspective from the Valley of
                   Mexico.” Journal of Field Archaeology 1:81–108.
      Pelzer, R. J. 1945. Pioneer Settlement in the Asiatic Tropics. Special Publications, No. 29. New York: American
                   Geographical Society.
      Pendergast, D. M. 1993. “Late Postclassic Maya Archaeology.” Journal of World Prehistory 7(1):35 –70.
      Peterson, L. C., and G. H. Haug. 2005. “Climate and the Collapse of Maya Civilization.” American Scientist
                   93:322–329.
      Pires-Ferreira, J. W. 1975. Formative Mesoamerican Exchange Networks with Special Reference to the Valley of
                   Oaxaca. Ann Arbor: Memoirs of the Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan, No. 7.
      Pohl, M. E. D., K. O. Pope, and C. van Nagy. 2002. “Olmec Origins of Mesoamerican Writing.” Science
                   298:1984 –1987.
      Pollard, H. P. 1980. “Central Places and Cities: A Consideration of the Protohistoric Tarascan State.” American
                   Antiquity 45:677– 697.
      Porter, M. N. 1953. Tlatilco and the Pre-Classic Cultures of the New World. New York: Viking Fund Publications
                   in Anthropology, No. 19.
      Puleston, D. E., and O. S. Puleston. 1971. “An Ecological Approach to the Origins of Maya Civilization.”
                   Archaeology 24:330–336.
      Rathje, W. L. 1971. “The Origin and Development of Lowland Classic Maya Civilization.” American Antiquity
                   36:275–285.
      ———. 1973. “Classic Maya Development and Denouement: A Research Design.” In The Classic Maya Collapse,
                   ed. T. P. Culbert. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
      Reilly, K. 1991. “Olmec Iconographic Inﬂuences on the Symbols of Maya Rulership: An Examination of Possible
                   Sources.” In Sixth Palenque Round Table, 1986, ed. V. M. Fields, pp. 151–74. Norman: University of
                   Oklahoma Press.
      Robertson, R. A., and D. A. Freidel, eds. 1988. Archaeology at Cerros, Belize, Central America. Volume I: An Interim
                   Report. Dallas: Southern Methodist University Press.
      Rust, W., and R. Sharer. 1988. “New Settlement Data from La Venta.” Science 242:102–104.
      Sabloff, J. A. 1990. The New Archaeology and the Ancient Maya. New York: Scientiﬁc American Library.
      Sabloff, J. A., and D. A. Freidel. 1984. Cozumel: Late Maya Settlement Patterns. New York: Academic Press.
      Sahagun, F. B. de. 1976. A History of Ancient Mexico. Trans. F. R. Bandelier. Glorieta, NM: Rio Grande Press.
      Sanders, W. T., and D. L. Nichols. 1988. “Ecological Theory and Cultural Evolution in the Valley of Oaxaca.”
                   Current Anthropology 29(1):33 – 80.
      Sanders, W. T., J. R. Parsons, and R. S. Santley. 1979. The Basin of Mexico: Ecological Processes in the Evolution of
                   a Civilization. New York: Academic Press.
      Sanders, W. T., and D. Webster. 1978. “Unilinealism, Multilinealism, and the Evolution of Complex Societies.”
                   In Social Archaeology, ed. C. L. Redman et al., pp. 249–302. New York: Academic Press.
      Schele, L., and D. Freidel. 1990. A Forest of Kings. New York: Morrow.
      Schele, L., and E. Miller. 1986. The Blood of Kings. Austin: University of Texas Press.
      Schortman, E. M., and P. A. Urban. 1994. “Core and Periphery in Southeastern Mesoamerica.” Current
                   Anthropology 35(4):401– 430.
      Sempowski, M. L., and M. W. Spence. 1995. Mortuary Practices and Skeletal Remains at Teotihuacán, ed. R. Millon.
                   Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press.
      Sharer, R., and D. Grove, eds. 1989. Regional Perspectives on the Olmec. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

                                              THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN MESOAMERICA                     529


Sheets, P. D. 1979. “Environmental and Cultural Effects of the Ilopango Eruption in Central America.” In Volcanic
             Activity and Human Ecology, ed. P. D. Sheets and D. K. Grayson, pp. 525–564. New York: Academic
             Press.
———. 2000. “Provisioning the Ceren Household: The Vertical Economy, Village Economy, and Household
             Economy in the Southeastern Maya Periphery.” Ancient Mesoamerica 11:217–230.
Sheets, P. D., ed. 1983. Archeology and Volcanism in Central America. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Siemens, A. H., and D. E. Puleston. 1972. “Ridged Fields and Associated Features in Southern Campeche: New
             Perspectives on the Lowland Maya.” American Antiquity 37:228 –239.
Sisson, E. B. 1970. “Settlement Patterns and Land Use in the Northwestern Chontalpa, Tabasco, Mexico: A
             Progress Report.” Ceramica de Cultura Maya 6:41–54.
Smith, M. E. 1979. “The Aztec Marketing System and Settlement Pattern in the Valley of Mexico: A Central Place
             Analysis.” American Antiquity 44:10 –24.
———. 2003. “A Quarter-Century of Aztec Studies.” Mexicon 25(1):4 –10.
Smith, M. E., and L. Montiel. 2001. “The Archaeological Study of Empires and Imperialism in Pre-Hispanic
             Central Mexico.” Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 20:245 –284.
Soustelle, J. 1961. Daily Life of the Aztecs. Trans. P. O’Brian. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Stark, B., L. Heller, F. W. Nelson, R. Bishop, D. M. Pearsall, D. S. Whitley, and H. Wells. 1985. “El Balsamo
             Residential Investigations: A Pilot Project and Research Issues.” American Anthropologist
             87(1):100–111.
Steponaitis, V. P. 1981. “Settlement Hierarchies and Political Complexity in Non-market Societies: The Formative
             Period in the Valley of Mexico.” American Anthropologist 83:320 –363.
Stoltman, J. B., J. Marcus, K. V. Flannery, J. H. Burton, and R. G. Moyle. 2005. “Petrographic Evidence Shows
             That Pottery Exchange Between the Olmec and Their Neighbors was Two-Way.” Proceedings of the
             National Academy of Sciences 102(32):11213 –11218.
Storey, R. 1985. “An Estimate of Mortality in a Pre-Columbian Urban Population.” American Anthropologist
             87(3):519–535.
———. 1992. Life and Death in the Ancient City of Teotihuacán. Birmingham: University of Alabama Press.
Symonds, S. C. 1997. “Settlement System and Population Development at San Lorenzo.” In Olmec to Aztec, ed.
             B. L. Stark and P. J. Arnold III. Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
Thomas, P. M. 1981. Prehistoric Maya Settlement Patterns at Becan, Campeche, Mexico. New Orleans: Middle
             American Research Institute, Tulane University.
Todorov, T. 1984. The Conquest of America. Trans. R. Howard. New York: Harper & Row.
Tolstoy, P. 1981. “Advances in the Basin of Mexico, Pt. 1.” The Quarterly Review of Archaeology 2:33 –34, 36.
Tolstoy, P., and A. Guinette. 1965. “Le Placement de Tlatilco dans le Cadre du Pre-Classique du Basin de Mexico.”
             Journal de la Societe des Americanistes (Paris) 54:47–91.
Tolstoy, P., and L. Paradis. 1970. “Early and Middle Preclassic Culture in the Basin of Mexico.” Science
             167:344–351.
Townsend, R. F. 1992. The Aztecs. London and New York: Thames and Hudson.
Trigger, B. G. 1993. Early Civilizations: Ancient Egypt in Context. Cairo: American University in Cairo Press.
Turner, B. L., and P. D. Harrison, eds. 1978. Prehispanic Maya Agriculture.
———. 1984. Pulltrouser Swamp: Ancient Maya Habitat, Agriculture, and Settlement in Northern Belize. Austin:
             University of Texas Press.
Urban, P. A., and E. M. Schortman, eds. 1986. The Southeast Maya Periphery. Austin: University of Texas
             Press.
Webster, D. 1988. “Copan as a Classic Maya Center.” In The Southeast Classic Maya Zone, ed. E. Boone and
             G. Willey. Washington, DC: Dumbarton Oaks.
———. 1992. “Maya Elites: The Perspective from Copan.” In Mesoamerican Elites, ed. D. Chase and A. Chase.
             Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
Webster, D., and N. Gonlin. 1988. “Household Remains of the Humblest Maya.” Journal of Field Archaeology
             15(2):169–190.
Whalen, M. E. 1976. “Zoning Within an Early Formative Community in the Valley of Oaxaca.” In The Early
             Mesoamerican Valley, ed. K. V. Flannery. New York: Academic Press.
———. 1981. Excavations at Santo Domingo Tomaltepec: Evolution of a Formative Community in the Valley of
             Oaxaca, Mexico. Ann Arbor: Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan, No. 12.
Wilcox, V. L., and D. R. Scarborough, eds. 1993. The Mesoamerican Ballgame. Tucson: University of Arizona
             Press.
Wilk, R. R., and W. Ashmore, eds. 1987. House and Household in the Mesoamerican Antiquity 62(237):703 –707.
Winter, M. 1972. “Tierras Largas: A Formative Community in the Valley of Oaxaca, Mexico.” Doctoral thesis.
             Tucson: University of Arizona.
———. 1976. “The Archaeological Household Cluster in the Valley of Oaxaca.” In The Early Mesoamerican
             Village, ed. K. V. Flannery. New York: Academic Press.

530   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      NOTES
       1. Bernal Diaz del Castillo, The Discovery and Conquest of Mexico, pp. 190 –191.
       2. Reviewed in Trigger, Early Civilizations: Ancient Egypt in Context.
       3. Harner, “The Ecological Basis for Aztec Sacriﬁce.”
       4. Kirkby, The Use of Land and Water Resources in the Past and Present Valley of Oaxaca, Mexico.
       5. Fritz, “Are the First American Farmers Getting Younger?”
       6. See, for example, Joyce and Henderson, “Beginnings of Village Life in Eastern Mesoamerica.”
       7. Flannery, “The Early Mesoamerican House,” pp. 13 –15.
       8. Flannery and Winter, “Analyzing Household Activities,” p. 36.
       9. For example, Diehl and Coe, “Olmec Archaeology.” Recently, Blomster et al., “Olmec Pottery Production
          and Export in Ancient Mexico Determined Through Elemental Analysis,” have provided some support for
          the notion of Olmec priority. Not all Mesoamerican researchers agree, however. See Stoltman et al.,
          “Petrographic Evidence Shows That Pottery Exchange Between the Olmec and Their Neighbors was Two-
          Way,” for a different viewpoint.
      10. A good review of this can be found in Flannery and Marcus, “Formative Mexican Chiefdoms and the Myth
          of the ‘Mother Culture.’ ”
      11. Pelzer, Pioneer Settlement in the Asiatic Tropics.
      12. Sisson, “Settlement Patterns and Land Use in the Northwestern Chontalpa, Tobasco, Mexico: A Progress
          Report.”
      13. Coe and Diehl, The Land of the Olmec: The People of the River.
      14. Rust and Sharer, “New Settlement Data from La Venta.”
      15. Murdy, “Congenital Deformities and the Olmec Were-Jaguar Motif.”
      16. Justeson and Kaufman, “A Decipherment of Epi-Olmec Hieroglyphic Writing.”
      17. Kelley, “The Decipherment of Epi-Olmec Script as Zoquean by Justeson and Kaufman,” p. 31.
      18. “Olmec Origins of Mesoamerican Writing.”
      19. Sanders, Parsons, and Santley, The Basin of Mexico: Ecological Processes in the Evolution of a Civilization.
      20. Nichols, “A Middle Formative Irrigation System Near Santa Clara Coatitlan in the Basin of Mexico.”
      21. Parsons, “The Development of a Prehistoric Complex Society: A Regional Perspective from the Valley of
          Mexico,” p. 91.
      22. This section relies heavily on Kowalewski’s review article, “The Evolution of Complexity in the Valley of
          Oaxaca.”
      23. Flannery, “Contextual Analysis of Ritual Paraphernalia from Formative Oaxaca,” p. 335; Flannery and
          Marcus, “Evolution of Public Building in Formative Oaxaca,” in Cultural Change and Continuity.
      24. Whalen, “Zoning Within an Early Formative Community in the Valley of Oaxaca.”
      25. Whalen, Excavations at Santo Domingo Tomaltepec: Evolution of a Formative Community in the Valley of
          Oaxaca, Mexico.
      26. Winter, “The Archaeological Household Cluster in the Valley of Oaxaca.”
      27. Flannery and Marcus, Early Formative Pottery of the Valley of Oaxaca, Mexico.
      28. Despite some evidence to the contrary (Coe, “The Olmec Style and Its Distribution”).
      29. Blanton et al., Ancient Mesoamerica, A Comparison of Change in Three Regions, pp. 180–183; Flannery, “The
          Olmec and the Valley of Oaxaca: A Model for Inter-Regional Interaction in Formative Times”; Grennes-
          Ravits and Coleman, “The Quintessential Role of Olmec in the Central Highlands of Mexico”; Flannery,
          Marcus, and Kowalewski, “The Preceramic and Formative of the Valley of Oaxaca.”
      30. See, for example, the works of William Sanders (Sanders, Parsons, and Santley, The Basin of Mexico:
          Ecological Processes in the Evolution of a Civilization), Jeffrey Parsons (Parsons, Prehistoric Settlement Patterns
          in the Texcoco Region, Mexico; idem., “The Development of a Prehistoric Complex Society: A Regional
          Perspective from the Valley of Mexico”), and Richard Blanton (Blanton, “Prehistoric Adaptation in the
          Ixtapalapa Region, Mexico”); O’Brien et al., “On Interpretive Competition in the Absence of Appropriate
          Data.”
      31. Brumﬁel, “Regional Growth in the Eastern Valley of Mexico: A Test of the ‘Population Pressure’
          Hypothesis.”
      32. Ibid. See Tolstoy, “Advances in the Basin of Mexico, Pt. 1.”
      33. Alden, “A Reconstruction of the Toltec Period Political Units in the Valley of Mexico.”
      34. Tolstoy, “Advances in the Basin of Mexico, Pt. 1.”
      35. Grove, “Ideology and Evolution at the Pre-State Level.”
      36. Cowgill, “Quantitative Studies of Urbanization at Teotihuacan.”
      37. Cowgill, “State and Society at Teotihuacan, Mexico,” pp. 129 –130.
      38. Millon, “The Study of Urbanism at Teotihuacan, Mexico,” p. 42.
      39. Cowgill, “State and Society at Teotihuacan, Mexico,” p. 144; see also Manzanilla, “Coporate Groups and
          Domestic Activities at Teotihuacan.”

                                             THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN MESOAMERICA                     531


40. Cowgill, “State and Society at Teotihuacan, Mexico,” p. 139.
41. Nichols, “Infrared Aerial Photography and Prehispanic Irrigation at Teotihuacán.”
42. Parsons, “The Development of a Prehistoric Complex Society: A Regional Perspective from the Valley of
    Mexico.”
43. Kurtz, “The Economics of Urbanization and State Formation at Teotihuacan”; Blanton, “Advances in the
    Study of Cultural Evolution in Prehispanic Highland Mesoamerica.”
44. Cowgill, “State and Society at Teotihuacan, Mexico,” pp. 156 –157.
45. Kowalewski, “The Evolution of Complexity in the Valley of Oaxaca,” p. 44.
46. Blanton, “Advances in the Study of Cultural Evolution in Prehispanic Highland Mesoamerica,” pp. 261– 262;
    Blanton et al., Ancient Mesoamerica, A Comparison of Change in Three Regions, p. 67.
47. Blanton, “Cultural Ecology Reconsidered.”
48. Blanton et al., Ancient Mesoamerica, A Comparison of Change in Three Regions.
49. Ibid. See also Blanton, “Advances in the Study of Cultural Evolution in Prehispanic Highland Mesoamerica,”
    p. 2.
50. Marcus, “The Iconography of Militarism at Monte Albán and Neighboring Sites in the Valley of Oaxaca.”
51. Sanders and Nichols, “Ecological Theory and Cultural Evolution in the Valley of Oaxaca.”
52. Kowalewski and Feinstein, “The Economic Systems of Ancient Oaxaca: A Regional Perspective,” p. 425.
53. See Current Anthropology 29(1):52 – 80 for a discussion of this point.
54. Culbert and Rice, Precolumbian Population History in the Maya Lowlands.
55. Flannery, Maya Subsistence. Studies in Memory of Dennis E. Puleston; Ashmore, Lowland Maya Settlement
    Patterns; Dunning, “An Examination of Regional Variability in the Prehispanic Maya Agricultural
    Landscape.” In recent years we have seen greatly increased research on the smaller Maya sites. See Robertson
    and Freidel, Archaeology at Cerros, Belize, Central America: Volume I: An Interim Report; Sheets,
    “Provisioning the Ceren Household: The Vertical Economy, Village Economy, and Household Economy in
    the Southeastern Maya Periphery”; Chase, “The Invisible Maya: Population History and Archaeology at
    Santa Rita Corozal”; Johnston, “The ‘Invisible’ Maya: Minimally Mounded Residential Settlement at Itzán,
    Petén, Guatemala.” See also Clancey and Harrison, eds., Vision and Revision in Maya Studies.
56. Fedick, “Ancient Maya Agricultural Terracing in the Upper Belize River Area”; Dunning, “An Examination
    of Regional Variability in the Prehispanic Maya Agricultural Landscape”; Dunning et al., “The Paleoecology
    and Ancient Settlement of the Petexbatun Region. Guatemala.”
57. Kunen et al., “Bajo Communities: A Case Study from the Central Petén.”
58. Fedick, The Managed Mosaic: Ancient Maya Agriculture and Resource Use”; Turner and Harrison,
    Pulltrouser Swamp: Ancient Maya Habitat, Agriculture, and Settlement in Northern Belize; Dunning et al.,
    “Prehispanic Agrosystems and Adaptive Regions in the Maya Lowlands.”
59. Coe and Diehl, The Land of the Olmec.
60. Ibid., p. 65.
61. Ibid., p. 66.
62. Demarest, Ancient Maya: The Rise and Fall of a Rainforest Civilization, p. 179.
63. Schele and Friedel, Forest of Kings, p. 66.
64. Ibid., pp. 67–68.
65. Demarest, Ancient Maya: The Rise and Fall of a Rainforest Civilization, p. 206.
66. Schele and Friedel, Forest of Kings, p. 70.
67. Ibid., p. 98.
68. Marcus, Mesoamerican Writing Systems.
69. Schele and Friedel, Forest of Kings, p. 97.
70. See Andrews, “Early Ceramic History of the Lowland Maya,” and Schele and Freidel, A Forest of Kings.
71. For example, articles in Adams, The Origins of Maya Civilization; Rathje, “Classic Maya Development and
    Denouement: A Research Design”; Sheets, “Environmental and Cultural Effects of the Ilopango Eruption in
    Central America.”
72. Hansen, “The First Cities: The Beginnings of Urbanization and State Formation in the Maya Lowlands.”
73. Demarest, Ancient Maya: The Rise and Fall of a Rainforest Civilization, pp. 83 – 86.
74. McAnany, Living with the Ancestors: Kinship and Kingship in Ancient Maya Society.
75. Hansen, “The First Cities: The Beginnings of Urbanization and State Formation in the Maya Lowlands.”
76. Hansen, Excavations in the Tigre Complex, El Mirado, Petén, Guatamala.
77. Matheny, “Early States in the Maya Lowlands During the Late Preclassic Period: Edzná and El Mirador”;
    Coe, Breaking the Maya Code, p. 63.
78. Schele and Freidel, A Forest of Kings, p. 103.
79. Ibid., p. 102.
80. Braswell, The Maya and Teotihuacan: Reinterpreting Early Classic Interaction.
81. Houston, “Archaeology and Maya Writing,” p. 26.
82. Wilcox and Scarborough, eds., The Mesoamerican Ballgame.

532   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


       83. This scene is well illustrated in Coe, Snow, and Benson, Atlas of Ancient America, pp. 108 –109.
       84. Fox, “Playing with Power: Ballcourts and Political Ritual in Southern Mesoamerica.”
       85. The following discussion is based largely on Schele and Freidel, A Forest of Kings.
       86. Ibid., p. 135.
       87. Dickson, “Further Simulations of Ancient Agriculture and Population at Tikal, Guatemala.”
       88. Schele and Freidel, A Forest of Kings, p. 145.
       89. Miller, The Murals of Bonampak.
       90. Marcus, “The Iconography of Power Among the Classic Maya,” p. 92.
       91. Marcus, “The Origins of Mesoamerican Writing.”
       92. Houston, “Archaeology and Maya Writing,” p. 26.
       93. Schortman and Urban, “Core and Periphery in Southeastern Mesoamerica.”
       94. Chippindale, Hammond, and Sabloff, “The Archaeology of Maya Decipherement”; Demarest, Ancient Maya:
           The Rise and Fall of a Rainforest Civilization, pp. 47– 48.
       95. Knorosov, Maya Hieroglyphic Codices.
       96. Reviewed in Coe, Breaking the Maya Code.
       97. See Houston, Maya Glyphs.
       98. Reviewed in Houston, “Archaeology and Maya Writing.”
       99. Ibid., p. 13.
      100. Reviewed in Houston, “Archaeology and Maya Writing.”
      101. Ifrah, From One to Zero, p. 404.
      102. Marcus, “The Origins of Mesoamerican Writing.”
      103. Schele and Freidel, A Forest of Kings, p. 82.
      104. Andrews, “Late Postclassic Lowland Maya Archaeology,” p. 54.
      105. Gill, The Great Maya Droughts: Water, Life, and Death; Peterson and Haug, “Climate and the Collapse of
           Maya Civilization”; Dahlin, “ Climate Change and the End of the Classic Period in Yucatan.”
      106. Peterson and Haug, “Climate and the Collapse of Maya Civilization,” p. 322.
      107. Gill, The Great Maya Droughts: Water, Life, and Death.
      108. Peterson and Haug, “Climate and the Collapse of Maya Civilization,” pp. 326 –328.
      109. Andrews et al., “The Northern Maya Collapse and Its Aftermath.”
      110. Dahlin, “Climate Change and the End of the Classic Period in Yucatan.”
      111. Andrews et al., “The Northern Maya Collapse and Its Aftermath.”
      112. Tula is well illustrated in The Atlas of Ancient America, Coe, Snow, and Benson, eds., pp. 134 –135.
      113. Pollard, “Central Places and Cities: A Consideration of the Protohistoric Tarascan State.”
      114. Freidel and Sabloff, Cozumel: Late Maya Settlement Patterns.
      115. Andrews, “Late Postclassic Lowland Maya Archaeology,” p. 55.
      116. Hodge, “Archaeological Views of Aztec Culture,” pp. 199–200.
      117. Smith, “The Aztec Marketing System and Settlement Pattern in the Valley of Mexico: A Central Place
           Analysis.”
      118. Parsons, “The Development of a Prehistoric Complex Society: A Regional Perspective from the Valley of
           Mexico,” p. 107.
      119. Coe, Mexico, p. 151.
      120. Parsons, “The Development of a Prehistoric Complex Society: A Regional Perspective from the Valley of
           Mexico.”
      121. Some of this description is taken from DePalma, “Mexico City Restoring Area Tilled by Aztecs.”
      122. Soustelle, Daily Life of the Aztecs, p. 97.
      123. Quoted in Harris, Cannibals and Kings, p. 101.
      124. Harner, “The Ecological Basis for Aztec Sacriﬁce.”
      125. Soustelle, Daily Life of the Aztecs, p. 135.
      126. Diego de Landa, Relacion de las Cosas de Yucatan, p. 32 (quoted in Todorov, The Conquest of America).
      127. Todorov, The Conquest of America; Collier, Rosaldo, and Wirth, The Inca and Aztec State.

