4
The Origins of Homo sapiens sapiens

        And how am I to face the odds
        Of man’s bedevilment and God’s?
        I, a stranger and afraid
        In a world I never made.
                          A. E. Houseman1




    V       iewed from space, earth’s green and blue beauty is framed by the black inﬁnity of
            the universe. This perspective has compelled many astronauts to reﬂect on our
    common humanity. A similar contemplation of community should arise when we look
    back archaeologically through the millions of years of our common human ancestry and
    meditate on the evidence in the fragmented bones and crude stone tools of our primate
    ancestors.
         It is tempting to lapse into a sentimental vision of our ancestors pluckily ﬁghting
    their way up a long dangerous road, and ﬁnally to “succeed”—to become “us.” But human
    evolution was not like this. As in most evolutionary equations, the most intense
    competition was between individuals of the same species—we are all the progeny of people
    who “won,” in the sense that their genes made it through the unforgiving sieves of time and
    circumstance, to reside in us. But chance, randomness, seems to have affected the biological
    universe in profoundly incalculable ways since the beginnings of our planet; we seem to be
    here by virtue in part of a chain of improbable accidental events.2
         We can see traces of our origins in all the earth’s ancient life-forms, from the earliest
    marine creatures through early mammals that lived tens of millions of years ago to our later
    primate ancestors—but only in the crucial interval of two to one million years ago did our
    genus, Homo, become the dominant primate in the world; and not until just a few hundred
    thousand years ago did humans appear whom we accord the honor of calling them, too,
    Homo sapiens. We reserve the ultimate accolade of “people like us,” Homo sapiens sapiens,
    for only some of the humans who lived after about 150,000 years ago, and it was not until
    about 30,000 years ago that we alone came to constitute humanity.3
         To follow the Socratic dictum to know ourselves, we must ask, what were the forces
    and circumstances that produced us, modern humanity, from the pre-human forms of our
    ancestors, and what does this knowledge tell us about ourselves and our future?




                                                132

                                                         THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS            133


HUMAN EVOLUTION
AND RADIATION: 1.8?
                                                         10,000 years ago     First documented appearance of bows and arrows
MILLION TO CIRCA
300,000 YEARS AGO                                        14,000 years ago     Appearance of ﬁsh weirs

                                                      20–12,000 years ago  Appearance of Mesolithic and Epipaleolithic
When we left our African ancestors in                                      industries
chapter 3, at about 1.5 million years ago,               32,000 years ago  Neandertals become extinct
some of them had cranial capacities
approaching the low end of the normal                    36,000 years ago  Appearance of the Chatelperronian Upper
modern range, they could make and                                          Paleolithic industry
use a variety of efﬁcient stone tools,                   40,000 years ago  Appearance of the Aurignacian Upper
                                                                           Paleolithic industry
and some of them may have already
                                                     50–45,000 years ago   Appearance of Upper Paleolithic industries
been living far outside of Africa. Several
localities outside of Africa are beginning           60–50,000 years ago   Homo sapiens begins to colonize Australia
to show quite convincingly that early
hominins were able to leave the African                 100,000 years ago  Beginning of radiation of Homo sapiens
continent and disperse into at least                                       from Africa to Eurasia

some areas of Eurasia; by shortly after a               130,000 years ago  Neandertals well-established in Western
                                                                           Eurasia
million years ago, our ancestors had
                                                        160,000 years ago  Appearance of early forms of anatomically
colonized most of the southern edge of                                     modern humans (Homo sapiens) in Africa
the Old World, from Africa to Indonesia.                230,000 years ago  Appearance of early forms of Neandertals
These were the habitats—rich in ﬂora                                       (Homo neanderthalensis) in Europe
and fauna and with few seasonal differ-                 300,000 years ago  Appearance of Middle Paleolithic industries
ences in the availability of food—to
which we, as tropical animals, were best                800,000 years ago  Homo erectus grade present in Spain

adapted. But while our hominin ancestors
                                                 1.7–1.2 million years ago Homo erectus grade present in Israel,
were extending their range in the hot                                      Central Europe, and China
savannas of Africa and the warm margins              1.7 million years ago Beginning of radiation of Homo erectus
of Europe and Asia, great fertile tracts of                                grade from Africa to Eurasia
the world lay unknown and untouched                  1.8 million years ago Appearance of handaxes (bifaces) of the
by humans.                                                                 Lower Paleolithic

     At some time between about one                  1.8 million years ago Appearance of Homo erectus grade of
                                                                           hominins
million and half a million years ago,
however, humans were beginning to
colonize more temperate northern
environments. If there is any answer as
to why they would begin to move out of
the tropical environments they had
evolved in, it probably lies in the nature of the hunting-gathering band. Ethnographic
studies suggest that human hunting-gathering bands with primitive technologies need large
areas to support themselves, and also that one response to growing populations is for bands
to split and for “daughter” groups to establish themselves in open territories on the original
group’s boundary.
     Hundreds of thousands of years of this process of band division, coupled with slow
evolution in the efﬁciencies of tools, would have populated the warmer ranges of the

134   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY




           Atapuerca
                                               Dmanisi



                                  ’Ubeidiya




      FIGURE 4.1 Distribution of Homo erectus sites. Homo erectus was the ﬁrst hominin to invade
      temperate climates. Land bridges, now submerged, facilitated Homo erectus movements.




      Old World and positioned human groups for colonization of more temperate latitudes
      (Figure 4.1).
           Let us begin with the problem of which hominin actually did make the ﬁrst forays into
      the Middle East and Asia, and then into the north. The most likely candidate would seem
      to be the hominin that, until recently, was commonly known as Homo erectus. Individuals
      generally classed as Homo erectus averaged just over ﬁve feet feet tall (about 1.5 meters),
      walked fully erect (though its body and legs differed in various proportions and shapes from
      ours), and had a cranial capacity that ranged between about 850 and 1,300 cm3.4 Compared
      to us, these hominins had low foreheads, large brow ridges, thick cranial bones, and almost
      no chins (Figure 4.2).
           Alas, physical anthropologists have had a great crisis of faith with regard to the species
      designation of “Homo erectus”:
          Does Homo erectus exist as a true taxon or should it be sunk into Homo sapiens? Is it a
          palaeospecies that exists . . . as a segment of the line that emerged from Homo habilis and
          gave rise to Homo sapiens? Is Homo erectus an extinct form that had no part to play in the

                                                             THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS      135




FIGURE 4.2 The Homo erectus skull (A) was long and low, with heavy brow ridges, no chin, and
protruding jaws, compared to modern humans (B). In the transition from Homo erectus (C) to mod-
ern humans (D), the brain enlarged and the muscles controlling the head and neck were changed.



    evolution of Homo sapiens? Is Homo erectus a good example of a “stasis event” . . . with little
    or no change in its form during its existence? Is there a clear cut example of Homo erectus
    in the European fossil record of man? Finally, are the Asian forms so far removed from the
    evolution of Homo sapiens in Africa to call into question the existence of Homo erectus sensu
    stricto in Africa at all?5

In view of these and other problems, some anthropologists have hypothesized that Homo
erectus consisted of only the east Asian hominins who branched off from the main Homo
line in Africa at about 1.5 million years ago, and that the African humans of this period
should be called Homo ergaster.6 Others classify almost all Asian, African, and European
hominins of between about 1.5 and 0.5 million years ago as Homo erectus.
     In what follows here, all of the humans who lived between about 1.5 and 0.5 million
years ago are called Homo erectus, but this designation is likely to change as these
taxonomies are reﬁned.

           136       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                 Early Radiation and Migrations of Homo
                                   By 1.5 million years ago, “culture” by any deﬁnition was present. Hominins with
                                   brainsizes on the low end of our own range had a stone tool repertoire indicat-
                                   ing they could produce different forms for different purposes—often out of
                                   materials that had to be brought many kilometers to the place where the tools
                                   were made or used.
                                        The 11-year-old boy who died on the western shore of Lake Turkana in
                                   northern Kenya about 1.6 million years ago, and whose skull and nearly intact
                                   skeleton (known as KNM-WT 15000) represent one of the best preserved and
                                   earliest Homo erectus individuals, seems to tell us much about our ancestors of
                                   this age (Figure 4.3). He was 1.6 meters (5 feet, 3 inches) tall—taller than many
                                   modern 11-year-olds. His cranial capacity, however, was 880 c3, somewhat more
                                   than half our size, and his brow ridges were very thick. His skeleton appears very
                                   similar to ours, though, and this suggests that our ancestors developed a body
                                   much like ours long before their mentalities equaled ours.
                                        No stone tools were found with this individual, but Acheulian-style (named
                                   after the French site at St. Acheul) stone tools associated with Homo erectus in
                                   Europe at a much later date (c. 600,000 years ago at the earliest) were apparently
                                   already present in many other East African sites more than a million years ago.7
                                   For example, at Koobi Fora, on Lake Turkana in Kenya, Homo remains and
                                   animal bones with what seem to be butchering marks have been found in
                                   substantial numbers, and there are small clusters of stone tools, some in
                                   concentrations about 5 to 10 m in diameter with from about 10 to 100 artifacts.8
                                        The hand-axes and other stone tools associated with the early African
                                   Homo erectus are a major improvement on the tools associated with the
                                   australopiths of the previous million years, and this developing technology may
                                   have enabled hominins to radiate from warmer latitudes into colder, more
FIGURE 4.3 The Nariko-             demanding climates. The “Acheulian hand-axe” may not seem like a marvelous
tome boy (KNM-WT 15000)            bit of technological advance, but it has several features that seem to reﬂect
from West Turkana, Kenya,
                                   human intellectual evolution (Figure 4.4). First, it requires more processing—
a Homo ergaster hominin
(Homo erectus grade).
                                   more actual steps of manufacture—than did the Oldowan chopper-style tools.
                                   Again, this might not seem like some major technological breakthrough, but in
                                   a rather abstract sense the Acheulian hand-axe requires that the maker “see” the
                      possibilities of striking off numerous ﬂakes—a sort of intuitive feel for the physics and
                      geometry involved. Also, Acheulian hand-axes came in a variety of sizes and shapes. As we
                      shall see, in some cases the best use of basalt, quartzite, ﬂint, and other hard stones is to
                      knock off a series of ﬂakes, use them until the edges dull, and then strike off more ﬂakes.
                      In such a substantial tool it may have been functionally efﬁcient and effective to get the
                      proportions as close to the ideal size as possible. If one is simply going to smash open a cow
                      femur for marrow, any rock not too heavy to lift or too small to transmit much force would
                      be adequate, but one interpretation of Acheulian hand-axes suggests that they were
                      beginning to converge on functionally optimal proportions and overall size.
                           What these functions were, however, remains unclear. Possibly these tools were used
                      for a great variety of tasks, or they may have simply been cores to produce sharp-edged
                      ﬂakes; other archaeologists think they are specialized tools. Many are too heavy to have

                                                       THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS         137


been hafted (attached to a spear or other piece of wood) easily,
yet they are often found in association with animal bones. It is
barely possible that this association with animal bones is
accidental, but it seems more likely that one function of this
tool was as a primary butchering tool.
     Since Acheulian hand-axes are usually found with other
types of stone tools (and were presumably used with a wide
variety of wood and bone tools that did not preserve), and
although they may not have been the “Swiss Army” knives of
their generation, they were certainly an important tool. Their
distribution is particularly impressive. They have been found
(Figure 4.5) over most of western Europe, Africa, and India,
and are also occasionally reported from China.
     The economy of all humans of this time period remains
more a matter of speculation than hard evidence and continues
to be the source of sharply different interpretations. Some think
Homo erectus was primarily a hunter and that the demands
of the hunting way of life partially “drove” human evolution
toward ourselves; others doubt Homo erectus did much more
than scavenging and opportunistic hunting.                             FIGURE 4.4 Examples of Acheulian hand-axes
     An interesting site in this dispute is Olorgesailie, near         from the Abydos Survey for Paleolithic Sites
Nairobi, Kenya (Figure 4.6). Here many small concentrations            project, Egypt.
of stone tools and bones are spread out along a peninsula in
an extinct lake. Most of the tools are cleavers and hand-axes, and some show considerable
chipping and blunting wear. Mixed in with them are bones from several species of large
mammals, including a hippopotamus and, curiously, 63 individuals of an extinct species of
baboon (but no hominins). Potassium-argon dating of the Olorgesailie formation yields an
age of about 480,000 years.9
     Glyn Isaac suggested that ancient hominins encircled a troop of baboons here, perhaps
at night, spooked them by making a lot of noise, and then systematically clubbed them to
death as they tried to escape. Pat Shipman, too, has interpreted this site as the result of a
hunting episode.10 If Olorgesailie is a case of hominins hunting baboons, as some suggest,
we may have been underestimating the linguistic and physical prowess of Homo erectus. It
is instructive to try to imagine oneself about two-thirds our size, going out at night with
stones and clubs to kill 63 baboons.
     But Lewis Binford has questioned whether Olorgesailie—and most other early
hominin sites—were places where hominins killed and butchered animals.11 He suggests
that the evidence from Olduvai and Olorgesailie may well be remains left by hominins who
scavenged the kills of other animals, mainly for bone marrow, which they obtained by
smashing bones with stone tools. He sees no evidence that early hominins shared food in
complex patterns like humans or that they foraged from home bases.12
     Again, the non-anthropologist might wonder why anthropologists take so seriously
these debates about how people made a living in Africa half a million years ago, but from
a certain perspective, we really are what we eat, and not only that, as modern humans we are
very much a product of the natural selective forces that applied over the millions of years
of our past and especially to such basic matters as to how we and our ancestors got our food.

           138      PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                  The Invasion of
                                                                                  Temperate Ecozones
                                                                                 One of the most interesting
                                                                                 discoveries about these early
                                                                                 Homo, however, is that some
                                                                                 groups of them left Africa,
                                                                                 apparently very soon after they
                                                                                 ﬁrst appeared there.
                                                                                       Finds from Israel, the
                                                                                 Republic of Georgia, Pakistan,
                                                                                 China, Java, and Spain indicate
                                                                                 that hominins were distributed
                                                                                 across the warmer regions of
                                                                                 the world as early as 1.7 million
                                                                                 years ago. The lowered seas of
                                                                                 the Pleistocene would have
                                                                                 facilitated this, opening rich
                                                                                 coastal niches far out into the
                                                                                 Southeast Asian archipelagos.
                                                                                       At various times in the
                                                                                 past million years the climate
                                                                                 of northern Europe and Asia
FIGURE 4.5 The distribution of Acheulian and non-Acheulian traditions in the     was much warmer than it is at
Old World.                                                                       present. So warm were areas of
                                                                                 Germany and France about
                                               800,000 or 900,000 years ago that monkeys swarmed through
                                               dense forests there. But at other times the icy ﬁngers of glaciers
                                               drew down out of the Alps and other mountain ranges, and
                                               great expanses of northern Europe were tundra.
                                                    One can imagine human groups probing northward dur-
                                               ing warmer periods—some of which lasted tens of thousands
                                               of years—and then their descendants being faced with equally
                                               long-term cooling trends. Probably no individual was conscious
                                               of the change, since it was so gradual, but kilometer by kilometer,
                                               year by year, they would have had to retreat or adapt. For our
                                               ancestors to invade the more northern climates, and to survive
                                               there during periods of expanding glaciers, would have
                                               required some form of clothing, seasonal hunting, and perhaps
                                               the use of ﬁre.13 If these early hominins had the use of ﬁre, it
                                               could be used for keeping warm, cooking food, and evicting
                                               bears and other carnivores from caves and rock shelters—the
                                               safest and warmest places to live in northern latitudes.
                                                    Climate has had a strong impact on people physically and
FIGURE 4.6 Aerial view of Olorgesailie, Kenya, culturally until very recently, when modern technology began
an area with Early and Middle Stone Age sites. to moderate its direct effects. In the Pleistocene, moving into

                                                   THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS      139


northern climates depended on people becoming whiter and stouter over many tens of
millennia, through natural selection: Up to 80 percent of the energy value of food goes
simply to maintain body temperatures, and it is an inescapable fact of physics that spheres
lose heat more slowly than any another shape of equal volume. Even with the pervasive
migrations of people during the last century, the relationship between body shape and
mean temperature—as epitomized by the East African Watusi and the Arctic Inuit
(“Eskimo”)—is strong.14
     The white skins of northern peoples have to do most directly with their dependency
on vitamin D, which is present in some foods but can also be synthesized in humans by the
action of sunlight on skin. But whiter shades of skin are also more susceptible to cancer,
acne, and psoriasis than are darker tones, so for northern Europeans the selection for whiter
skins—necessary to maintain vitamin D production in the long dark northern winters—
was a mixed blessing.
     The problems of living in northern climates go beyond simply keeping warm. In winter
most of the plants suitable for human consumption die, and an animal like ourselves has
only two ways to get food: store it—or hunt, ﬁsh, or scavenge other animals who can ﬁnd
suitable nutrition. On the African savannas and in other warm environments, women
supply most of the food in hunting and gathering cultures, and even pregnant women,
children, and the aged can gather much of their own food all year long. But such self-reliance
would not have been possible in northern latitudes, where snow covered the ground for
ﬁve to six months of the year. Clearly, strong social systems in which food-sharing and
cooperative efforts were com-
mon would be important in
adapting to these demanding
temperate environments.15
     The best evidence for
hominins outside of Africa
before one million years ago is
found in four widely separated
areas: the Republic of Georgia,
China, Java, and Israel.
     Ongoing work at the site
of Dmanisi in the Republic
of Georgia has yielded a
treasure trove of early hominin
remains.16 The fossils (Figure
4.7) are very similar to the
African Homo ergaster rather
than Asian hominins. Numer-
ous animal bones (which
help provide a relative date for
the site) and some stone
tools similar to the Oldowan
industry (chopper-chopping
tradition) were also found, but      FIGURE 4.7 One of the Homo ergaster hominins from Dmanisi, Republic of
Dmanisi is not a “living site”       Georgia, dating to about 1.7 million years ago.

           140        PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                        —it represents materials that were redeposited from elsewhere in the landscape. Perhaps
                        the most surprising discovery is the age of the site—the fossils are in deposits that are age
                        bracketed between 1.77 and 1.85 million years ago. Dates for the underlying basalt layer
                        (1.85 million years ago) were obtained using the potassium argon method and
                        paleomagnetism (see chapter 2), which measures the magnetic ﬁelds of strata of rocks. The
                        earth’s magnetic ﬁeld is known to have reversed polarity several times and the irregular
                        timing of these events is well established. The overlying sediments at Dmanisi yielded
                        paleomagnetic information that can be correlated to a change in the earth’s magnetic poles
                        from normal to reversed polarity at 1.77 million years ago.
                             The recent discovery of the northern Chinese site of Majuangou shows that hominins
                        were present in this colder and drier area by 1.66 million years ago—thus making this site
                        nearly as old as the evidence from Dmanisi. 17 No hominin fossils were found, but
                        Majuangou was a lakeside site with stone tools such as cores and ﬂakes (a chopper industry
                        similar to the Oldowan), as well as animal bones including horse, hyena, rhinoceros, deer,
                        gazelle, and ostrich. Some of the horse and deer bones were broken open with stone tools
                        to extract the nutritious marrow.
                             The Homo erectus remains found in Java by Dubois are also comparably old. After
                        redating the sediments where the ﬁnds were supposedly made, plus some sediments that
                        had adhered to the fossils themselves, de Vos and colleagues are now conﬁdent that these
                        remains date to about 1.7 million years ago.18 But there will always be questions about these
                        dates because the exact location these ﬁnds were made is not known with absolute certainty,
                                                       and even sediments adhering to fossils might have come
                                                       from older formations that had nothing to do with the fossils
                                                       themselves. One of the most frustrating things about the
                                                       record of Homo erectus in Java is that not a single fossil of
                                                       this hominin has been found there in good association with
                                                       stone tools.
                                                            ‘Ubeidiya (Figure 4.8), 3 km south of the Sea of Galilee
                                                       in what is now Israel, comprised about 14 distinct archae-
                                                       ological assemblages, all probably dating to no later than
                                                       640,000 years ago, and perhaps much earlier, before 1.2
                                                       million years ago (and some dates on animal remains are as
                                                       high as 2 million years).19 The tools found here seem very
                                                       similar to those from Middle and Upper Bed II at Olduvai
                                                       Gorge, being mainly choppers, spheroids (rounded stones),
                                                       hand-axes, and used ﬂakes. Richard Klein notes that at dif-
                                                       ferent times in the Pleistocene, the eastern Mediterranean can
                                                       be considered part of Africa—in the sense that the climate and
                                                       animals there very closely resembled nearby areas of Africa.20
                                                            It is clear that early hominins were able to inhabit a great
                                                       diversity of environments—they were a successful genus,
                                                       expanding into new niches. The most conservative view and
                                                       probably the most accurate one is that hominins evolved
FIGURE 4.8 Ofer Bar-Yosef at the Lower                 bipedalism, then tool-using and other cultural behavior in
Paleolithic site of ‘Ubeidiya, Israel. Note the        Africa, and then spread out along the warmer margins of
extremely tilted stratigraphic deposit.                the Old World in a long slow process of population growth

                                                        THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS         141


and very gradual movements,
as groups split and moved
short distances away from one
another, until hominins could
be found from southern Africa
to Java.
     After one million years ago,
there is widespread evidence of
hominins in many areas out-
side of Africa, including, for the
ﬁrst time, in western Europe.
     If Homo had reached
northern China well before a
million years ago, there seems
to be no obvious environmental
reason why they could not have
invaded southern temperate
Europe as well. Klein notes           FIGURE 4.9 Excavations at the Lower Paleolithic Gran Dolina site at Atapuerca,
that some scholars believe that       Spain.
humans colonized most of
temperate Europe only after
500,000 years ago, but recent human fossils found in Spain, at Cueva Victoria and Gran
Dolina, “suggest that humans in fact arrived in Europe nearer to 1 million years ago.”21 At
Gran Dolina (a cave site at a place called Atapuerca; Figure 4.9), for example, Eudald
Carbonell and other Spanish scholars found what could be the oldest known European
humans.22 About 36 human bones, including cranial fragments, teeth, jaw, hand, and foot
bones were recovered, representing at least four individuals, including an adolescent and a
child. These fossils’ ages were estimated using paleomagnetic dating. The Atapuerca fossils
were found just below a magnetic reversal that is known to have happened 780,000 years ago.
     If this date is accurate—and many scholars consider it to be—these fossils raise many
questions. The bones do not seem to be very similar to Homo erectus. The Spanish
researchers who found the fossils say they do not closely resemble any known form of
human but could represent ancestors of the Neandertals (see later in this chapter). The
Atapuerca fossils may represent one of many unsuccessful attempts to colonize Europe, as
time after time people migrated into the area but did not persist, in the face of the severe
winters and other challenges of Pleistocene Europe.
     Another well-dated early European site is Isernia La Pineta, in central Italy, where
volcanic deposits overlie deposits of stone tools associated with animal bones. Stone
choppers, ﬂakes, and scrapers were found here amidst bones from elephants, bison, and
other animals, and the animals and volcanic deposits indicate a date of about 500,000 years
ago and possibly much earlier.23 A human thigh bone from Boxgrove in southern England
has also been dated to about 500,000 years ago, and various other sites in Europe date to
this age. For people to have colonized this far north, into England by 500,000 years ago, we
might expect that they began to move out of the Mediterranean area by 600,000 years ago
or earlier, and it is certainly possible, given the vagaries of preservation, that people were
in northern Europe in substantial numbers by 700,000 years ago, or earlier. But based on

142   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      the available evidence it seems likely people did not regularly and signiﬁcantly inhabit
      northern temperate Europe until about 500,000 years ago.
           If people were in Java 1.7 million years ago, however, we might expect dense
      concentrations along the routes out of Africa and along the southern coasts of Asia that
      date to this same period, but there is little evidence of this. A few stone tools found at Ban
      Mae Tha, Thailand, appear to date to 700,000 years ago, and the Lan-t’ien and Q’en-Xia-
      wo sites in central China contained fragments of Homo erectus that date to about 600,000
      years ago, but there simply is little other credible evidence of human occupation of these
      more southern areas before about 900,000 years ago. It is possible that such factors as the
      sea level rise at the end of the Pleistocene drowned most of the pre-1-million-year-old sites
      along the southern approaches to Java, but it is also possible that the 1.7-million-year-old
      dates for the Indonesian Homo erectus hominins are wrong.
           An important site for analyzing human colonization of temperate environments is
      Zhoukoudian (literally “Dragon Bone Hill”), a cave located 43 km southwest of Beijing.
      Using explosives, excavators managed to blast out and examine thousands of cubic meters
      of collapsed cave debris at the site between 1927 and 1937, and these excavations and later
      research revealed the remains of more than 40 hominins, as well as over 100,000 stone tools,
      countless animal bones, and many hearths and ash layers, all well stratiﬁed in a deposit
      that is an astonishing 50 m deep. Not all this was cultural debris—cave bears and other
      animals alternated with hominins in occupying the cave, and these other animals probably
      brought in many of the animals. But Zhoukoudian has more superimposed occupational
      layers than any other known Homo erectus site. Analysis of the fauna and hominins and
      various forms of dating (including ﬁssion track, uranium-thorium, paleomagnetism, and
      thermoluminescene) have produced conﬂicting age estimates. In a recent summary24 of
      these dates, Wu Rukang and Jia Lampo conclude that the uppermost layers date to 230,000
      years ago and the earliest levels to about 700,000 years ago.
           The 14 skullcaps, 6 skull bones, 10 jaw fragments, 147 teeth, and assorted arm, leg, and
      hand bones found at Zhoukoudian all appear to have come from Homo erectus. Brain
      volumes average about 1,040 cm3 and range between about 775 and 1,300 cm3—somewhat
      larger than the Homo erectus from Java—and teeth sizes fall between ourselves and
      australopiths (actually, they are only slightly larger than contemporary native Australian
      populations). Based on the few leg-bone fragments recovered, it is estimated that the
      Zhoukoudian hominins averaged about 5 feet, 1 inch in height—which may seem short,
      but is only an inch or two less than the average height of most people of just a few hundred
      years ago.
           Wu and Lampo note that every Homo erectus upper incisor found in China, including
      those from Zhoukoutian, Yuanmou, Yunxian, and Hexian, is “shovel-shaped”—that is, in
      cross section the tooth is curved like a shovel. They note that this feature is found in nearly
      as high frequencies in living Mongoloid populations, whereas it is at much lower
      frequencies elsewhere, and thus they conclude that the Chinese Homo erectus are the genetic
      ancestors of contemporary Chinese. This point is discussed at greater length later.
           About 100,000 stone tools were retrieved from Zhoukoudian, most of them simple
      ﬂakes and choppers made from quartz, but with some more specialized tools, as well,
      including ﬂakes, drills, and augers. Over the course of the site’s occupation, the simple
      chopper tools of the 700,000-year-old initial occupation were replaced by a variety of tools
      that included retouch and prepared core ﬂaking.25

                                                       THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS        143


     Zhoukoudian may have been a base camp from which hominins hunted and to which
they brought back their kills to be cooked and eaten. The site includes hundreds of
thousands of animal bones, mainly from deer, but also from elephants, rhinoceroses,
beavers, bison, boars, and horses. The large quantities of charred hackberry seeds found at
Zhoukoudian suggest that they were a dietary staple, and pollen analysis indicates that nuts
from walnut, hazelnut, and pine would have been available. Such ﬁnds remind us that we
see only a distorted picture of early hominin diets: They probably ate vastly greater
quantities of plant foods than meat, but only when they used ﬁre to cook plants do we ﬁnd
the traces of vegetable foods, and although pollen can show that some plants were available,
many plant foods simply were not preserved in archaeologically recognizable forms.
     Not a single skull from this site had an attached face, and the base of each skull was
broken, perhaps to get at the brains. But numerous scholars have questioned the idea that
these bone alterations indicate cannibalism.26 Arens, for example, also rejects the notion
that cannibalism was a common practice for very long in any culture, ancient or recent.27
He may well be right, since ecologically, systematic cannibalism is a poor food-
procurement strategy.28 Compared to almost any other animals, people are hard to catch
in relation to the amount of food they represent, and one risks depleting the stock extremely
quickly if cannibalism is at all frequent.
     Some of these questions about the Zhoukoudian humans could be answered if we still
had their bones, but all the hominin remains disappeared while being transferred from
Beijing to an American ship during the Japanese invasion of China prior to World War II.
Although there are some mysterious indications that they have survived, to date no progress
has been made in locating any of the fossils.29 Fortunately, at the time of their discovery the
great German anatomist Franz Weidenreich made excellent plaster casts of them all and
described them in superlative detail.
     Perhaps our best evidence of European adaptations hundreds of thousands of
years ago comes from Torralba
and Ambrona, located about
1.5 km apart in a deep valley
150 km northeast of Madrid
(Figure 4.10). Given the many
difﬁculties of discriminating
between human scavenging
and hunting, no single site can
be taken as a convincing evid-
ence of the general nature of
early human life in Europe.
But many regard Torralba and
Ambrona as evidence that at
least some groups in Middle
Pleistocene Europe engaged in
big-game hunting. Excavations
at Torralba in the early 1960s by
F. Clark Howell exposed about
300 m2 of stratiﬁed archaeolog-
ical deposits, from which were        FIGURE 4.10 Some important Homo erectus sites in Europe.

144   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      collected hundreds of pollen samples, several thousand stone tools, and countless animal
      bones (but no human remains). The kinds of pollen found in these remains have convinced
      some scholars that Torralba dates to about 400,000 years ago, but some think it is only
      about 200,000 years old. Pollen analysis indicates the area was a cool, swampy valley when
      the site was inhabited.30
           The remains of at least 30 elephants were found at Torralba, as well as about 25 deer,
      25 horses, 10 wild oxen, and several rhinoceroses. The original interpretation of activities
      at this site suggested that most of the animals here were killed and butchered by hominins,
      based on the presence of disarticulated skeletons, the lack of elephant skulls and other meat-
      bearing bones which could have been carried elsewhere, and charcoal—possible evidence
      of setting ﬁres to drive game—found mixed with bones and stone tools.
           The process of driving animals into the swamps and killing and butchering them would
      have been quite a spectacle, with great clouds of smoke, shrieking, demented animals, and
      running, shouting hominins. But how could these ill-equipped people have killed these huge
      animals? Not a single obvious stone spear-point was found at the site, but Freeman suggests
      that the animals were either stoned to death with the many fragments of rock found amid
      the bone or dispatched with wooden spears.31 It is a bit difﬁcult to envisage any human, let
      alone Homo erectus, about to stone three or four large elephants to death, or to kill them with
      long-since-rotted wooden stabbing spears,32 but if they did, it would have been a fantastic
      Hitchcockian scene played out in this Spanish valley hundreds of thousands of years ago.
           As intriguing a picture as this ancient hunt may be, our better understanding of
      taphonomic processes in the formation of sites (see chapter 3) has led to a reinterpretation
      of Torralba. Some of the patterns in the disarticulated bones are almost certainly the result
      of the actions of slow-moving water, and at least some of the smashed and split animal
      bones are due to scavenging animals such as hyenas. The widely scattered charcoal is most
      likely due to a naturally occurring brush ﬁre, not a ﬁre set to drive game into the swamps.
           That said, the stratigraphy at Torralba is complex, and the site may represent not one,
      but many different hunting episodes for some of the animals found there.33 Those animal
      bones with no signs of butchering may be natural deaths or deaths due to nonhuman
      predation. The few animals with evidence of butchering may be what remains to us from
      those occasional hunting episodes, added to the “background noise” of natural deaths and
      other predators in the landscape.
           Another important central European site is Vértesszöllös, a rock quarry west of
      Budapest, Hungary. A recent series of uranium dates put the site at about 185,000 years
      b.p.,34 but it could be as old as 350,000. When the site was ﬁrst occupied, it was on the banks
      of some hot springs, and several layers of human occupational debris have been found near
      these springs. Excavations in the 1960s uncovered about 3,000 stone tools, many smashed
      and burned animal bones, and the occipital bone from one hominin and a few teeth from
      another. The estimated cranial capacity of between 1,115 and 1,437 cm3 is large for a Homo
      erectus, and some consider this fossil to be an archaic form of Homo sapiens. No hearths
      have been found at the site, but burned bones here indicate the use of ﬁre.
           Nearly all the evidence reviewed to this point seems clear in indicating that some form
      of early Homo left Africa and colonized Europe and Asia between 1.7 and 0.5 million years
      ago; and most scholars see patterns of regional evolution, with some commonalties but also
      some differences appearing in human groups as they made their living in highly varied
      ways, exploiting small areas in a complex mosaic of adaptations that reached from England
      to southern Africa to Indonesia.

                                                          THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS         145


    This consensus of scholarly opinion on our ancestors up to about 300,000 years ago
evaporates, however, when the question of “what happened next?” is considered.



HOMO SAPIENS: MODELS OF ORIGINS

In their tool use, social systems, and economies, Homo of several hundred thousand years
ago, as we know them from Zhoukoudian, Torralba-Ambrona, and the other sites
described in the previous section, seem to have been similar to modern hunters and
gatherers in many ways, yet there is something alien about these creatures. We look for
artifacts expressing ritual or complex symbolism, but not a single ﬁgurine,35 wall painting,
rock carving, or even an elaborately made stone tool can be securely attributed to Homo
erectus. Later, beginning at least 40,000 years ago, people made exquisitely crafted stone
tools, some so delicately worked that even moderate use would ruin them—tools that must
have been made in part simply for the pleasure of creating something beautiful. But the
tools of Homo erectus are undeviatingly simple, efﬁcient, utilitarian objects.
     Perhaps even more revealing, there are no known Homo erectus burials or ritual
dispositions of corpses. For at least the last 30,000 years, death has almost everywhere been
an occasion for the outpouring of human emotion, and even the simplest hunters and
gatherers during this span usually disposed of their dead by digging a hole and placing a
few stone tools or bits of shell in with the body; but not a single Homo erectus anywhere in
the world appears to have been even intentionally buried, let alone sent off to the next world
with a few provisions and expressions of goodwill.
     These various absences of stylistic behavior among Homo erectus can be interpreted
in several different ways. Homo erectus, with his brain about two-thirds the size of our
own, may simply have lacked the mental equipment to generalize and symbolize his
experiences as we do. Homo erectus’s language skills, in particular, may have been quite
limited.36 On the other hand, Homo erectus may have had the potential for stylistic,
religious, and social impulses but lived in circumstances that did not elicit such expressions.
As Randall White has observed, the ethnographic record of material forms of represen-
tation like that of Pleistocene “art” suggests that these aesthetic expressions are about
political authority and social distinctions,37 and it may be that the social conditions in
which such distinctions are important were just beginning to appear in the Middle and
Late Pleistocene.
     It is difﬁcult to overstate the importance of the evolution of the capacity for aesthetic,
ritual, and social feelings, for as we will see, it was precisely these mental characteristics that
made possible the rise of great civilizations. Thus, we are particularly concerned in this
chapter with the conditions under which these feelings ﬁrst appeared (as reﬂected in the
archaeological record) and with their concurrent important cultural developments.
Richard Klein,38 for example, suggests that the “explosion” of art about 30,000 years ago,
in the form of ﬁgurines and highly stylized stone tools, as well as other evident cultural
change, reﬂects the migrations of anatomically modern peoples throughout the world—
the ﬁrst people, he suggests, to have these mental powers.
     The obvious question is: How were our ancestors changed by time and circumstance
in these highly signiﬁcant ways? To consider this question, we must turn to the contrasting
hypotheses about modern human origins.

                146      PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                         “I can’t believe that!” said Alice. “Can’t you?”
                         the Queen said. . . . “Try again: draw a long
                         breath, and shut your eyes.” Alice laughed.
                         “There’s no use trying,” she said: “one can’t
                         believe impossible things.” “I daresay you
                         haven’t had much practice,” said the Queen.
                         “When I was your age, I always did it for half-
                         an-hour a day. Why, sometimes I’ve believed as
                         many as six impossible things before breakfast.”
                         Lewis Carroll39

                                                                            The major contemporary “models” (that is,
                                                                            sets of linked assumptions, hypotheses, and
      Present         Europe           Africa        Asia
                                                              “Modern
                                                                            interpretations of data) about how we
                                                              humans”       changed from early African hominins into
                                                                            us, Homo sapiens sapiens, all require one to
                                                                            believe scenarios that, if not exactly
                                                                            impossible to believe, do require some
                                                                            dramatic leaps of faith.
       Time                                                                      Most models of modern human origins
                                                                            are variants of two basic contrasting
                                                                            hypotheses. One of these, which has become
                                                                            the majority view, is described variously as
                                                              “Archaic      the African Origins, Total Replacement,
                                                              humans”
(a)    Past           Europe           Africa        Asia
                                                                            Noah’s Ark, or Eve model.40 It stipulates that
                                                                            modern humans evolved ﬁrst and only in
      Present         Europe           Africa        Asia                   Africa and only a few hundred thousand
                                                              “Modern
                                                              humans”
                                                                            years ago or less, and then migrated to the rest
                                                                            of the world, replacing all other hominin
                                                                            forms, and with little or no genetic inter-
                                                                            change with these other forms (Figure 4.11).
                                                                                   An alternative model, commonly
       Time                                                                 known as the Continuity, Multiregional
                                                                            Evolution, or Candelabra model,41 traces all
                      Extinct                       Extinct
                                                                            modern populations back to what was
                                                                            ultimately an African source (but to a time
                                                              “Archaic      when people lived only there), through a
                                                              humans”       web whose genetic contributions to the
(b)    Past           Europe           Africa        Asia
                                                                            present varied from region to region and
FIGURE 4.11 Two models for the origins of modern humans.                    from time to time (see Figure 4.11).42 Thus,
a) Multiregional model. This model proposes that the ancestry of
                                                                            this model proposes that archaic humans in
modern humans is from both African ancestors and archaic human
populations outside Africa beginning about 150,000 years ago.
                                                                            Africa and outside Africa contributed to the
b) Replacement or out-of-Africa model. This model proposes that the         ancestry of modern humans. The basic idea
ancestry of modern humans is only from African ancestors about              of this hypothesis is that sometime between
150,000 years ago. All archaic humans outside of Africa became              about one and two million years ago a
extinct and African modern humans replaced these archaic                    generic Homo ancestor of ours spread out
populations in areas outside of Africa.                                     across the warmer latitudes of Africa, the

                                                     THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS      147


Middle East, Asia, and possibly the southernmost fringe of Europe. With the passage of the
millennia these groups began to diverge somewhat as they adapted to local and different
environments, but across the whole range of Homo they were evolving toward Homo
sapiens as a result of “genic exchange” (i.e., gene ﬂow through mating and migrations)
that connected all human groups to some extent; and because they were under
similar evolutionary selective forces, as generalized hunter-foragers, they all emerged in
the last 30,000 years as one species, Homo sapiens sapiens—but with some of the
physical differences that distinguish many modern Europeans, Africans, and Asians from
each other.
     These different views of the origins of modern humans have long histories. Louis
Leakey, for example, argued43 an African origins hypothesis in the 1960s against the then-
predominate multiregional view, such as that advanced in the 1930s by Franz Weidenreich.44
Weidenreich suggested that modern humans exhibit physical features that reﬂect
continued gene ﬂow throughout the world, but from at least four centers where the genetic
continuity was sufﬁcient to produce the differences observable in today’s major “races.”45
     These competing models require some difﬁcult assumptions. Since relatively few
nonhuman species have evolved from one species into another over a wide range in a
“convergent” fashion, for example, why would we expect humans to be different? One
answer might be that if humans actually did evolve in the convergent worldwide pattern
imagined by Weidenreich it was because they all shared a similar ecological niche—that is,
“culture.” If we ask how many migrants per generation would be required to sustain the
gene ﬂow to keep regional evolution convergent, estimates range as low as just one migrant
per generation, but many scholars doubt that migrations and matings and convergent
evolution were enough to produce Homo sapiens sapiens at about the same time and in
about the same form in such widely separated areas as, for example, northern China and
southern Africa.
     This presumed pattern of convergent human evolution over a wide area and through
great spans of time remains a problem for the Multiregional Evolution model, but, as we
shall see, the African Origins model also requires some assumptions.
     Whatever the ultimate accuracy of these models, different scholars using the same
data have come to very different conclusions about which of these models best ﬁts the data.
Resolution of intellectual debates sometimes comes as much from a change in perspective
(e.g., Darwin) as from additional data. Fundamental research continues on the nature of
evolutionary processes, and this research, along with discoveries of new fossils and tools,
will probably resolve these debates.


Molecular Biological Evidence of Modern Human
Origins
The skulls and skeletons of our ancestors may seem the most direct evidence to assess
hypotheses about human origins, but these bones are usually just mineral casts of formerly
living individuals, and arguments about the meaning of subtle differences in size and shape
of their features are endless and largely irresolvable. An alternative approach is to work
backward—in effect, to look at today’s people and see how their degree of biological
relatedness ﬁts various ideas about our origins.

           148       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                        Figure 4.12 presents
                                                                                   one such form of analysis:
                                                                                   It expresses the degree of
                                                                                   biological similarity among
                                                                                   contemporary peoples of the
                                                                                   world. How did such different
                                                                                   degrees of relatedness appear,
                                                                                   and when, and what do these
                                                                                   differences “mean”?
                                                                                        It is an inescapable fact
                                                                                   of genetics that all the people
                                                                                   alive in the world are geneti-
                                                                                   cally related and that at some
                                                                                   point an individual existed
FIGURE 4.12 (A) Analyses of DNA have been used to suggest genetic distances        whom we can all claim as an
among contemporary groups of people. In this ﬁgure the genetic distances between   ancestor. The only points of
groups is based on a sample of 600 individuals from eight groups. Between any two  debate are how long ago that
groups, the fewer the symbols the shorter the genetic distance and the closer the  ancestor lived, and where.
presumed relationship. In (B) these data are arranged in a family tree. These data
                                                                                   Some scholars have argued on
suggest all modern humans are genetic descendants of one small inbred group of
                                                                                   the basis of genetic evidence
prehistoric Africans.
                                                                                   that all of us alive today have a
                                                                                   common female ancestor who
                       lived less than about 200,000 years ago. This African Eve model is based on the study of
                       DNA taken from the mitochondria, which are features in human cells where energy to keep
                       the cell functioning is produced. The term “mtDNA” stands for mitochondrial DNA;
                       mtDNA is different from nuclear DNA in that it is all in the mitochondria of the mother’s
                       egg and therefore is not affected by the sperm’s contribution to genetic inheritance as
                       implanted during fertilization. Thus, mtDNA is inherited only through the mother.
                       MtDNA is subject to random mutations at a higher rate than nuclear DNA, and these are
                       expressed as minor mistakes in copying the genetic code that are then passed on to the next
                       generation. Thus, we would not even expect two people from, for example, the same small
                       isolated group of hunter-foragers in, for example, highland New Guinea to have identical
                       mtDNA. And we would expect that differences in mitochondrial DNA would increase the
                       longer any two people are separated in terms of a common ancestor, since the minor genetic
                       mutations in mtDNA accumulate over time.
                            An analogy to accumulation of changes in mtDNA is the fate of last names in many
                       Western cultures, where a child’s last name usually comes only from the father. If a man
                       does not have children or has only female children, his individual perpetuation of that last
                       name is “lost” (although, of course, there are usually many others with that last name).
                       Similarly, mtDNA is “lost” if a woman has no children or has only sons.46
                            In an early study to test the relatedness of contemporary human groups, Cann,
                       Stoneking, and Wilson collected the placentas of 147 women in the United States, Asia,
                       Europe, the Middle East, New Guinea, and Australia, and then separated the mtDNA from
                       these samples and compared them. They concluded that everyone living today is descended
                       from an African woman, a “mitochondrial Eve,” who lived between 140,000 and 290,000
                       years ago—probably about 200,000 years ago. They identiﬁed Africa as the home of this
                       woman because mtDNA is most variable in today’s Africa, and thus these mtDNA

                                                      THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS      149


differences appear to have been accumulating longest in Africa. If the estimate of about
200,000 years ago for a common maternal ancestor is correct, it is highly unlikely that the
people who lived in Europe and Asia before about 200,000 years had anything to do with
us, in terms of our biological ancestry. Since this study, other researchers have increased
the sample of people studied and used various other methods of calculating genetic
similarity (reviewed by Aiello47), and some have concluded that, indeed, the evidence shows
that everyone in the world today is descended from a few Africans who lived a few hundred
thousand years ago.
     But many scholars have questioned these mtDNA and related studies. For these
estimates to be accurate, at least three things must be true: (1) The generation time (i.e.,
the average number of years between mother and daughter’s ages) must be accurately
estimated; (2) the molecular “clock,” in the sense of the rate at which genetic differences
accumulate, must run equally as fast for us, the Hominini, as for other mammals; and (3)
nucleotide substitutions must be constant over time. Each of these assumptions has been
attacked by recent scholars, and, in any case, Don Melnick and Guy Hoelzer strongly
caution about the use of the mtDNA clock, suggesting that various problems with it “render
mtDNA unreliable for dating past evolutionary events.”48 Frayer and others49 also strongly
criticize assumptions about the mutation rate of mtDNA, and they argue that if the starting
date of the “clock” is pushed back to 800,000 years ago for the origins of the mtDNA we
now all share, then there would be a better ﬁt between the molecular evidence and the fossil
and archaeological records.
     The details of these debates about the interpretation of graphs of genetic relatedness
based on mtDNA are beyond the scope of this book—and beyond the grasp of those with-
out speciﬁc kinds of mathematical expertise. Various mathematical techniques are required
to measure similarity and to arrange these patterns of similarity in patterns that show
descent and genetic relatedness, and disputes about the appropriateness of these techniques
continue. Frayer and his colleagues50 conclude, for example, that “There is no statistically
reliable mtDNA evidence for an African, or any other single, geographically centered origin
for Eve.”
     Although these debates have raged on in the literature for a couple of decades now,
new genetic studies appear to be putting this argument to rest. Perhaps the best recent
genetic support for the “Out of Africa” scenario has come from studies of mtDNA recovered
from Neandertal (discussed later) fossils.51 These appear to show that Neandertals differ
from modern humans in more than 20 mtDNA mutations. Coupled with the mitochrondrial
clock for mutation rates, this degree of difference suggests that Neandertals cannot be
related to modern humans. If true, then Neandertals, and likely most other archaic Homo
forms outside of Africa, did not contribute to the gene pool that constitutes us.
     To evaluate these opposing models of human origins and interpretations of the genetic
evidence, we can at least consider the ambiguous and fragmentary record of their bones
and stone tools.

Fossil and Archaeological Evidence of Modern Human
Origins: Testing the Total Replacement Model
Let us consider the Total Replacement model to be a “null hypothesis,” in the sense that
we can attempt to demonstrate that it is not true. Although some of the most vocal
proponents of the Total Replacement model have recently questioned aspects of their

150   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      model,52 it at least has the virtue of clearly testable implications. If, for example, the Total
      Replacement model is accurate, we would expect to see various kinds of speciﬁc evidence.53
            First, the earliest known Homo sapiens sapiens should be found in Africa, and there
      should be evidence that “modern” humans lived only in Africa prior to their appearance
      in the rest of the world.
            A second testable implication of the Total Replacement model is that there should be
      no anatomical evidence of genetic mixing between the early modern Africans and the people
      they replaced. That is, except in Africa, there should be an absence of “intermediate” forms
      of humans—those whose physical forms appear as a blend of early Homo and Homo sapiens
      sapiens—in the period between about 400,000 and 30,000 years ago.
            Third, everywhere outside of Africa the earliest modern humans should resemble these
      African ancestors and not the local people who had lived there ﬁrst. Also, there should be
      evidence of a “rapid” change from early Homo to Homo sapiens sapiens in both the fossil
      and archaeological records as the replacement took place, and in a geographical pattern that
      reﬂects the routes they took out of Africa.
            Fourth, in areas outside of Africa there should be no evidence of anatomical continuity
      spanning the time period before and after the replacement occurred: That is, we should not
      expect to see a pattern of continuous similarity in the physical types who lived, for example,
      in China at Zhoukoudian 300,000 years ago, 50,000 years ago, and today.
            Fifth, we should look for some evidence as to why Africans were able to displace well-
      adapted hominins all over the Old World. We would expect some evidence in technology,
      skull size and shape, animal exploitation patterns, site densities and placement, or some
      other attribute of the archaeological record that would explain why this replacement was
      both rapid and complete. As Frayer and his colleagues note,54 even the European conquest
      of the Americas, involving as it did far superior technology and the introduction of
      numerous lethal diseases, left many indigenous Native American hunter-foragers, from
      Alaska to Tierra del Fuego, and some have persisted even into the present day. So, what
      evidence is there that the early African Homo sapiens sapiens possessed some advantage that
      allowed them to drive into extinction all other humans?
            It is important to note that all of these ﬁve categories of evidence are to some degree
      equivocal: What, for example, would an “intermediate” skull be, and what would “rapid”
      change look like in the archaeological record?55 Different scholars have different ideas about
      what these kinds of terms mean. Also, given the vagaries of preservation and differences in
      the intensity of archaeological research (much more work has been done in western Europe,
      for example, than, say, Pakistan), we could be easily misled by sample biases. Moreover,
      whatever advantages the early African Homo sapiens sapiens had that allowed them to
      replace other hominin forms, if in fact that is what happened, these advantages may not be
      visible in the archaeological record, given our current knowledge of that record. If early
      Africans, for example, simply had a slightly greater fertility rate, perhaps because of some
      genetic mutation and minor cultural adaptation to this mutation, and no other advantages,
      it is possible that they could have supplanted all other hominins in a few hundred thousand
      years—although we would still have to explain why no interbreeding by adjacent groups
      took place, since such gene ﬂow is the common pattern during the recent past. Finally, the
      basic logic of science stipulates that hypotheses cannot be “proven.” One attempts to
      disprove them and in the end all that science can aspire to is pointing us toward the current
      “best” model—“best” being deﬁned in terms of “ﬁt” to the data and parsimony.

                                                       THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS    151


    To “test” these ﬁve implications of the Total Replacement model requires that we
examine a complex array of evidence, and the reader is forewarned that this review ends
inconclusively: Reasonable scientists differ on interpretations of this evidence.

THE EVIDENCE FROM AFRICA
One implication of the Total Replacement model is that the earliest modern humans should
appear in Africa. Does this appear to be true? Recent fossil discoveries by Tim White and
his colleagues in Ethiopia suggest that this may be the case.56 Several hominin crania
recovered from Herto in the Middle Awash area—dated to between 160,000 to 154,000 years
ago—have features that are intermediate between archaic Homo in Africa and anatomically
modern humans. The combination of the age of these fossil hominins and their mor-
phology may be strong evidence that they are the ancestors of modern humans.
     Another example of early Homo sapiens sapiens is the fragmentary human remains
from the Klasies River Mouth caves in South Africa (Figure 4.13), found in association with
many stone tools, animal bones, and other evidence of repeated occupation.57




FIGURE 4.13 Overview of the Middle Stone Age site of Klasies River Mouth, South Africa.

152   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


           Uranium series dates and correlations with dates from marine cores seem to place
      these remains between 125,000 and 95,000 years ago. Only some elements of the crucially
      important facial morphology are preserved on just four of the individuals represented by
      these bones. The scholars who have analyzed the Klasies human remains come to startlingly
      different conclusions. Some scholars see archaic features in many elements of these bones
      and little evidence for the “modern” features they would expect if these individuals were part
      of the population that, according to the Total Replacement model, preceded the appearance
      of modern Homo sapiens sapiens elsewhere in the world. The excavators of this site, R.
      Singer and J. Wymer, add that the many stone points found at the site indicate substantial
      hunting with hafted spears.58
           Early hominin fossils of Homo sapiens have also been found at Bodo and Omo
      (Ethiopia); Laetoli (Tanzania); Kanjera (Kenya);59 Kabwe, or Broken Hill (Zambia); Border
      Cave (South Africa); and several other sites, but in every case at least some scholars con-
      sider the dating unreliable or disagree on the degree of modernity evident in these highly
      fragmented ﬁnds.60 Other scholars,61 however, see a pronounced modern appearance in the
      African human fossils that span the period between about 200,000 and 100,000 years ago
      and conclude that the evolution of Homo sapiens sapiens was slow and continuous and had
      nearly run its course in Africa by 70,000 years ago.
           But the Total Replacement model does not require that Homo sapiens sapiens appeared
      in East Africa as early as 100,000 years ago. Richard Klein has suggested that the Homo
      sapiens sapiens who actually replaced all other humans only appeared in Africa after 50,000
      years ago, and perhaps only shortly before 30,000 years ago, when we see the spread across
      the Middle East and Europe of “art,” in the sense of wall paintings, ﬁgurines, shell and bone
      ornaments, and beautifully crafted tools (see later), and when we also see standardized tool
      shapes and highly organized activity areas in the remains of archaeological sites:

          The fourth and most recent event occurred about 50,000 years ago and it was arguably the
          most important of all, for it produced the fully modern ability to invent and manipulate
          culture . . . a genetic mutation that promoted the fully modern brain. . . . [I]t allowed the
          kind of rapidly spoken phonemic language that is inseparable from culture as we know it
          today. . . . Fossil, archaeological, genetic, and linguistic evidence all point to Africa as the
          place where the 50,000-year-old behavioral breakthrough occurred. . . . Had the crucial
          mutation occurred ﬁrst in Europe, the earliest evidence for modern behavior would be
          there, and students of human evolution today would be Neandertals marveling at the
          peculiar people who used to live in African and then abruptly disappeared. 62

           One interesting implication of Klein’s hypothesis is that these Homo sapiens sapiens
      could also have replaced the supposedly modern-looking but much more ancient Homo
      sapiens, like those who lived at Herto, Klasies, Omo, and elsewhere in Africa 100,000 or
      more years ago (Figure 4.14). Klein suggests that the mutation that accounted for the ability
      of these Homo sapiens sapiens to replace all other forms after 50,000 years ago may have
      been just an increased ability to conceptualize and communicate—as perhaps is evident in
      “art” and the standardized tools they used and the way they organized their daily activities.
      Such changes may have had no reﬂections in the shape or size of human skulls and only
      very subtle reﬂections in the ways tools were made, used, and discarded.
           Is there any artifactual evidence in African sites after 100,000 or between 50,000 and
      30,000 years ago, as Klein suggests, for “art” and other improved conceptual skills?
      Tantalizing bits of evidence have been produced, but the evidence, as always, is ambiguous.

                                                       THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS                 153


                                  Smuggler’s Cave
                                   Jabel Irhand                                                            ASIA




           Atlantic                                                                                           Arabian
            Ocean                                                                                               Sea
                                                                                           Herto, Bodo

                                                                                             Omo-Kibish

                                                                                            Kanjera
                                                                           Katanda
                                                                                             LuKenya
                                                                                     Laetoli
                                                                                                         Indian Ocean


   SOUTH                   AFRICA
  AMERICA
                                                                         Mumbwa




                   0          800 mi
                                                                                     Border Cave
                                                                      Florisbad
                   0     800 km
                                                                     Klasies River Mouth


FIGURE 4.14 Early Homo sapiens sites in Africa. The dates of some sites are controversial. Most are thought to date
beween 160,000 and 60,000 years ago.


Allison Brooks and her group report that they have found sophisticated bone tools,
including barbed points that may have been used to spear catﬁsh in rivers in Zaire as early
as 90,000 years ago (Figure 4.15).63 Fishing in this way seems to have been a very late
development in Europe, so one might consider this as some evidence in support of the idea
that Homo sapiens sapiens evolved in Africa, and only in Africa. Perforated ostrich eggshell
ornaments, bones, stone points, and examples of the use of ochre (a mineral that is often
red or yellow in color)—perhaps as a pigment—have been found, but it is difﬁcult to argue
deﬁnitively on the basis of this evidence that there is a clear reﬂection of greater cognitive
powers than other humans outside of Africa at this time possessed.
      Thus, to some, the African evidence, in summary, is ambiguous. There are suggestions
of a transition from archaic Homo to Homo sapiens at 160,000 years ago, but it is not certain
that Africa is the only place this morphological change occurred, nor is there material
evidence of some advantage that explains why Africans might have been able to drive into
extinction all other hominins.


THE EVIDENCE FROM EAST ASIA AND AUSTRALIA
If the Total Replacement model is correct, at some point we should see a radical change in
the human physical types who lived on this far periphery of early human adaptations. That

          154       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                is, the people who almost
                                                                                certainly were in Indonesia
                                                                                and adjacent regions by about
                                                                                900,000 years ago, for example,
                                                                                would have been abruptly
                                                                                replaced by Homo sapiens
                                                                                sapiens of the African type
                                                                                after about 100,000 years ago
                                                                                (and possibly much later).
                                                                                Moreover, there should be no
                                                                                evidence here of hybridization
                                                                                of Africans and Asians, nor any
                                                                                patterns of continuity in the
                                                                                physical evolution of indigen-
                                                                                ous Asian humans toward
                                                                                modern Homo sapiens sapiens.
                                                                                We might also expect some
                                                                                evidence of replacement in the
FIGURE 4.15 Bone harpoons from the site of Katanda, Zaire.                      tools and other aspects of the
                                                                                archaeological record.
                      Consider ﬁrst the farthest periphery of the Late Pleistocene Old World—Australia.
                 There is now persuasive evidence that people arrived there at least by 50,000 years ago, and
                 possibly by 60,000 years ago.64 If the “total replacement” occurred at about 200,000 years ago,
                 then these early Australians might be expected to show little physical similarity to Chinese
                 and other Asians of the hundreds of thousands of years before this time, such as those at
                 Zhoukoudian and Java, because the Australians would have migrated to Australia as much
                 as 140,000 years after the replacement of the world’s population began. If, as Klein suggests,
                 however, the replacement occurred after 50,000 years ago, then these Australians may be a
                 mix of early and later peoples, some of whom were closely related to Africans of this period.
                      Some anthropologists think that the east Asian fossil and archaeological record
                 constitutes persuasive evidence for the rejection of the Total Replacement model. Pope,
                 Wolpoff, Thorne,65 and others see strong similarity between the early Australians and the
                 Javanese, for example, and all of them as very distinct from Africans of the same age (i.e.,
                 c. 400,000–50,000 years ago). They focus on physical traits such as the “shovel” shape of
                 the cross- sections of human incisors, which occurs in high frequency in Asian populations
                 and much lower frequencies in Africans.66 Frayer and his colleagues conclude that there is
                 a very distinctive combination of facial and cranial features in Java, for example, and that
                 this “unique combination of regional features . . . was stable for at least 700,000 years, while
                 other characteristics continued evolving. The more recent Java remains have expanded
                 brains that reached the modern range.”67 These patterns of anatomical continuity would
                 be expected on the basis of the Multiregional Evolution/Continuity hypothesis.
                      Advocates of the Multiregional Evolution/Continuity hypothesis also see strong
                 evidence of continuity in the physical forms of humans in northeast Asia, as well as gradual
                 regional evolution here of modern human brain capacities. Crania from Zhoukoudian,
                 Dali, Jinniushan, and Yunxian and fragmentary ﬁnds from elsewhere form the basic
                 evidence here.

                                                       THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS       155


     Advocates of the Total Replacement model disagree with these interpretations.68 Some
have suggested that claims that early Asian humans show evolution toward “modern”
Homo sapiens sapiens forms are based on a biased selection of only a few physical traits and
inappropriate statistical manipulation of these data. They also stress the fragmentary and
possibly biased record of fossils in Asia.
     There is little evidence in the east Asian archaeological record of some obvious
advantage in technology or other aspect of adaptation. From about 400,000 years ago
onward, Asian stone tools show strong similarities, and some contrasts between Asian and
African and European tools seem to go back far into prehistory. It is possible, of course,
that invading Africans adopted the lithic technology of the groups they replaced, but this
would seem unlikely.
     In summary of the Asian evidence, scholars disagree entirely on the extent to which
these data support the various hypotheses about human origins, and these debates turn on
abstractions of statistical analyses of scarce and fragmentary human fossils. The stone tools
of east Asia would seem to support the Multiregional Evolution/Continuity hypothesis in
that east Asian forms seem to show similarity over hundreds of thousands of years as well
as differences that distinguish them from those of other areas. But if replacement by Africans
occurred in east Asia after 50,000 years ago, as Klein suggests, then the archaeological evid-
ence becomes even more ambiguous. The few well dated and excavated sites of this period
show some minor indications of greater use of “style” in the form of pierced shells and other
artifacts. That these changes represent an African invasion, however, is far from clear.


THE EVIDENCE FROM WESTERN ASIA AND EUROPE
We know a great deal more about the prehistory of Europe and western Asia than of the
rest of the world. One might optimistically think this fact would result in a much more
uniform interpretation of this evidence, but in fact disagreements about the European and
western Asian evidence are even more intense than those for Africa and east Asia.
      About all scholars agree on is that (1) there were humans living in Europe and western
Asia by 500,000 years ago but they were not Homo sapiens sapiens; (2) a distinctive form of
human, the “Neandertals,” who were different from us in important anatomical ways, lived
in Europe and western Asia between about 130,000 and 30,000 years ago; and (3) by
30,000 –27,000 years ago all the Neandertals and other distinctive physical forms of
humans, except ourselves, Homo sapiens sapiens, had disappeared.69
     To review this evidence requires discussion of a bewildering array of site names, fossil
names, types of technologies, and so on. To focus all these data and to make them coherent,
one can consider again the kinds of evidence stipulated earlier as to be expected on the
basis of the Total Replacement model. That is, do we see various kinds of evidence in
the European fossil and archaeological record that Africans invaded western Asia and
Europe at some point after about 200,000 years ago and drove the indigenous people in
these areas into extinction by virtue of some advantage in intelligence, technology, or other
feature?
     To set the stage for an examination of the evidence bearing on this question, we must
go back to the beginning of human occupations in Europe and western Asia. As noted
earlier, a few sites in the Middle East date, perhaps, to more than 500,000 years ago (e.g.,
‘Ubeidiya, in Israel), and some fragmentary ﬁnds of human bones and archaeological sites

156   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      in Europe seem securely dated to before 500,000 years ago (see earlier). Other important
      hominin ﬁnds from the Middle East are discussed later in the context of the Neandertals.
            To begin with the physical types of hominins that made these transitions, Chris
      Stringer (and his colleagues) and Erik Trinkaus have arranged most of the fossils between
      500,000 and 30,000 into an order based on morphology.70 Grade 1 hominins may be as old
      as 500,000 years, but dating these fossils has proved difﬁcult in most cases. Some Grade 1
      fossil specimens come from Europe. Trinkaus notes that some of these have been classiﬁed
      as Homo erectus and others seem to have Neandertal traits (see later), but as a group they
      seem to be consistent with a gradual change toward modern human forms (e.g., increased
      size of the cranial vault and decreasing mean dimensions of molars).
           In Europe these Grade 1 hominins are followed by a group that seems to fall between
      the grades, in that they are quite archaic in some characteristics but also resemble slightly
      the Neandertals, who generally seem later in time than the Grade 1 group. A good example
      of these intermediate Grade 1–2 fossils is from Swanscombe, England, along the Thames
      River, not far from London. In 1935 workers in a cement plant uncovered a cranial bone
      from a gravel bank, and a year later another cranial fragment was found nearby that articu-
      lated perfectly with the ﬁrst bone. Later, during excavations connected with preparations
      for the 1944 Allied invasion of France, another bone from the same skull was found just
      25 m from the site of the ﬁrst ﬁnd. It is very possible, incidentally, that more hominin bones
      were included in the gravel used to make concrete for ﬂoating docks during the D-Day
      operation.
           In the same gravel layers that produced these bones, excavators recovered the bones of
      extinct forms of elephants, deer, rhinoceroses, and pigs, which, together with subsequent
      chemical analysis and geological evidence, dated the Swanscombe fossils to between
      400,000 and 250,000 years ago, when the abundance of horses, elephants, rhinoceroses, and
      other big-game species would have made England an ideal place for generalized hunting-
      and-gathering groups.71 Nor is there any problem explaining how these hominins would
      have gotten there, since Britain and Ireland were physically joined to Europe by a land
      bridge at various times during the Pleistocene.
           The Swanscombe cranial remains are probably those of a woman of 20–25 years of age,
      with a cranial capacity of about 1,325 cm3—well within the range of modern humans.72
      Hand-axes roughly similar to those of the Acheulian assemblages of France and Africa are
      among the most frequent tools in the level where the skull was found, but lower levels
      contain only ﬂakes and choppers. Similar ﬂakes and choppers have been found elsewhere
      in England and are commonly referred to as the Clactonian assemblage.73 A wooden object
      that looks like the shaped end of a spear was found at Clacton and is one of the earliest
      wooden artifacts recovered anywhere, dating to 400,000–200,000 years ago. Stone projectile
      points are not found at Swanscombe, Zhoukoudian, or any other site prior to about 150,000
      years ago, and thus the wooden spear fragment—if that is what it was used for—may be a
      clue to how these Middle Pleistocene peoples managed to kill animals. If animals were
      trapped in bogs, they could have been killed by multiple stab wounds with wooden spears—
      although it could not have been pleasant work.
           The Swanscombe hominin is usually considered part of a biological group that
      includes a fossil from Steinheim, Germany. This cranium, dated to about 250,000 years ago,
      probably belonged to a young woman whose brain size and facial features place her between
      Homo erectus and ourselves. Unfortunately, no artifacts were found with the Steinheim

                                                        THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS          157


skull, so we cannot compare the site with the material from
southern England. Nonetheless, the physical differences
between this individual and Homo erectus at least raise the
possibility that the transition from Homo erectus to Homo
sapiens was well underway by 300,000 to 250,000 years ago and
was taking place in more than one part of western Europe.
     Excavations in a cave site in the French Pyrenees unearthed
a skull (the Arago skull) and two mandibles (Figure 4.16) dated
to about 200,000 years ago that seemed to ﬁll the gap between
Homo erectus and the European Neandertals. 74 The skull
possesses some morphological characteristics of the east Asian
Homo erectus, but lacks the incipient keel at the top of the skull
usually found in these populations. The large size of the teeth and
mandible and the structure of the chin seem to foreshadow the
features of the “classic” (western European) Neandertal.
     Late Homo remains have also been found at Bilzingsleben
in eastern Germany, along with a somewhat atypical assemblage
of very small tools with much larger implements, all quite
different from the typical Acheulian assemblage. In fact,
Svoboda has argued that the many small tools found at Arago,
Vértesszöllös, and Bilzingsleben developed out of adapting to        FIGURE 4.16 The Arago skull from France.
cold, open landscapes and thus could be expected to be               This individual is now considered to be an early
different from the tools used in more forested environments.75       European Neandertal.
     In general, tool technology, diet, site locations, and average
group size in Europe about 200,000 years ago do not seem
much different from those of several hundred thousand years earlier, but clearly,
population densities were increasing, and as people moved into more diverse niches there
was an increasing variety in the stone tools associated with them.
     Until recently these various early European Homo sapiens were viewed as represen-
tatives of the changes that eventuated in us, Homo sapiens sapiens, but recent evidence raises
many questions about this interpretation. A key element in interpreting these archaic
Homo fossils is the Neandertals.


THE MIDDLE TO UPPER PALEOLITHIC PERIOD
(C. 300,000– 40,000 B.P.)

    I held it truth, with him who sings
       To one clear harp in divers tones,
       That men may rise on stepping-stones
    Of their dead selves to higher things.
                   Alfred, Lord Tennyson, from
                               In Memoriam76
    There are multiple ways in which Homo sapiens diverged physically and behaviorally
from pre-sapiens forms of Homo in the period between about 300,000–40,000 years ago.77

158   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      This is visible in many radical changes in human physical characteristics and material
      culture, including (1) an increase of average human brain size from about 1,100 to about
      1,450 cm3 (although local variability was high, and the modern range of normal brain
      functioning is at least 1,000 to 2,000 cm3); (2) changes in physical form such that modern
      Homo sapiens sapiens have less robust skeletons, a more prominent chin, smaller or absent
      brow ridges, smaller teeth, a higher rounded skull, and other physical characteristics;78
      (3) increased human population numbers and densities—again with considerable local
      variation; (4) many technological innovations, including the atlatl (throwing stick), bone
      and wood tools of diverse types, and techniques for extracting a relatively great amount of
      cutting edge from a given amount of stone; (5) increased aesthetic expression in ﬁgurines,
      usually of bone or stone, beautiful wall paintings and rock carvings, burial techniques, and
      objects used for personal adornment; (6) a shift from generalized hunting patterns to
      concentrations in some areas on gregarious herd mammals like deer, reindeer, and horses;
      and (7) the appearance of artifact styles and trade in exotic items that bespeak the ﬁrst
      manifestation of some sort of regional “ethnic” identity”79 that exceeds by a wide margin
      the local band society—in short, changes that may reﬂect the “total restructuring” of social
      relationships during the period from the Middle to Upper Paleolithic.80
           As noted earlier, the Total Replacement, African Origins, or Eve model contends that
      modern humans evolved ﬁrst and only in Africa and only a few hundred thousand years
      ago or less, and then migrated to the rest of the world, displacing all other hominin forms,
      and with little or no genetic interchange with them. If this is true, then, as interesting as
      these many European and Asian fossils and sites of hundreds of thousands of years ago are,
      the people who left these remains had almost nothing to do with us in terms of our physical
      or cultural heritage.
           This is a difﬁcult premise for many anthropologists to accept because so much of what
      we think we know about human evolution has been based on sites such as Zhoukoudian
      in China, Toralba-Ambrona in Spain, and so on. If the African Origins model is correct,
      however, these sites were created by a form of human that has virtually nothing to do with
      us genetically, and probably little to do with us culturally.
           Alternatively, the Multiregional Evolution, Continuity, or Candelabra models propose
      that sometime between about one and two million years ago a generic Homo ancestor of
      ours spread out across the warmer latitudes of Africa, the Middle East, Asia, and possibly
      the southernmost fringe of Europe; then, with the passage of the millennia, although these
      groups began to diverge somewhat as they adapted to local and different environments,
      across the whole range of Homo they were evolving toward Homo sapiens as a result
      of gene ﬂow that connected all human groups to some extent and because they were
      all under similar evolutionary selective forces as generalized hunter-foragers, so that
      they all converged at about 30,000 years ago as one species, Homo sapiens—but with the
      physical differences that distinguish modern Europeans from, for example, modern
      Chinese.
           For many archaeologists, one of the best test cases for resolving at least some aspects
      of the Total Replacement versus Multiregional Continuity ideas can be found in a relatively
      recent hominin group widely known to both archaeologists and the general public—the
      Neandertals. Our record of them is both abundant and long studied—Neandertals have
      provided one of the most numerous fossil bone assemblages for a hominin group, as well
      as more than 100 years of archaeological research on their sites.

                                                       THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS        159


The Neandertals
Nothing about the Neandertals seems simple. Evidence suggests they lived between about
130,000 and 30,000 years ago, but their precise period in history is difﬁcult to deﬁne. Most
of them seemed to have lived in Europe and western Asia, some as far east as central Asia
and in much of the Middle East. The “Classic,” or western, Neandertals were different from
us and from their contemporaries in Africa, east Asia, and Australia in various physical
characteristics, but scholars disagree on the extent and signiﬁcance of these differences.
Some think the Neandertals could speak with about as much ﬂuency as we do, others think
the Neandertals did not have the mentality or vocal apparatus for normal human speech.
Scholars disagree perhaps most heatedly about what “happened” to the Neandertals: That
is, are we descendants of the Neandertals, or did they lose out in competition with our
ancestors?
     Because they belonged to the ﬁrst pre-modern human identiﬁed, the Neandertals
received much of the initial hostility to the concept of human evolution. From the
beginning, anthropologists, clergy, and others held that the Neandertals were an aberrant
stage in human development, not directly related to our own—presumably superior—
ancestors. Some scholars, however, suspected that the Neandertals were the connecting link
between Homo erectus and at least some populations of Homo sapiens sapiens. In 1957 a
conference on the Neandertal produced evidence that Neandertal brain size on the average
was larger than that of some modern human groups and that there were no grounds for
concluding that their brains were structurally inferior or that they did not walk fully erect.
In fact, it was suggested that “if he could be reincarnated and placed in a New York
subway—provided that he were bathed, shaved, and dressed in modern clothing—it is
doubtful he would attract any more attention than some of its other denizens.”81
     Yet there are differences between ourselves and the
Neandertals (Figure 4.17). The characteristics most frequently
used to deﬁne them are (1) a receding or virtually absent
chin; (2) large cheekbones and prominent brow ridges curving
over the eye orbits and connecting across the bridge of the
nose; (3) prognathism (protruding lower face); (4) a strong
masticatory apparatus, including larger front teeth than are
found in most modern human populations; (5) a short
(average of perhaps 5 feet) but powerful stature, with thick and
slightly curved long bones; and (6) a cranial capacity within the
range of modern humans, though slightly larger on average for
the classic “Western” type.
     Erik Trinkaus has shown how the shapes and sizes of
Neandertal teeth and heads vary in many obvious and also
subtle ways from our own.82 He interprets the projecting
mid-face of the Neandertals as a feature selected by natural
selection in part “to facilitate the use of the anterior teeth as a
vise.”83 Neandertals would have had no problems with candied
apples or corn on the cob, had they been available.
     Based on their legs and lower bodies, Trinkaus suggested        FIGURE 4.17 A Neandertal skull from Shanidar,
that the overall impression of Neandertal locomotor anatomy          Iraq.

          160       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                               is “one of great strength, as with the upper
                                                               limb, but also one adapted for endurance for
                                                               prolonged locomotion over irregular terrain.”
                                                               Trinkaus concludes that the anatomy of their
                                                               legs “suggests that they spent a signiﬁcant
                                                               portion of their waking hours moving across the
                                                               landscape . . . far more than did early modern
                                                               humans.”84 The Neandertals would have been a
                                                               bit short to be good offensive football linemen,
                                                               but they would have made superstar wrestlers or
                                                               baseball catchers, given their tremendous arm
                                                               strength (though their ability to grip the ball
                                                               might have been less than ours).
                                                                    The Neandertals were adept stone tool-
                                                               makers. Most of their tools belong to the
                                                               Mousterian stone tool industry (named after
                                                               the site of Le Moustier in southern France),
                                                               which includes several distinctive stylistic and
                                                               functional elements (Figure 4.18). The scores of
                                                               Mousterian sites in the Dordogne region of
                                                               southwestern France include cave sites, rock
                                                               shelters, and “open-air” locations, and one of the
                                                               largest and most complex Mousterian sites here
                                                               is a cave in the Combe Grenal Valley, near the
                                                               Dordogne River. Francois Bordes uncovered
                                                               64 superimposed occupational levels in this
                                                               cave, spanning the period from about 85,000–
                                                               45,000 years ago, with few long periods of
FIGURE 4.18 Some typical tool types of the Mousterian period.  abandonment. The lowest levels contained
The Neandertals made effective stone tools for a variety of    tools resembling the Acheulian tools found
purposes.                                                      at Swanscombe, but all later levels had the
                                                               classic Mousterian tools usually associated with
                  Neandertals. More than 19,000 Mousterian implements were collected and analyzed from
                  this cave, and the tools from different levels contrast sharply. Some levels contained many
                  small ﬂake-like pieces of stone, while others had concentrations of scores of “toothed” or
                  “denticulated” tools. Moreover, analysis of the different levels revealed that certain types of
                  tools tended to be spatially associated with a number of other types. That is, levels
                  containing a relatively high number of points would usually contain relatively large
                  numbers of scrapers and ﬂakes—but few denticulates.
                       This diversity of tools may seem relatively unimportant, but it was the focus of a long
                  debate that involved issues fundamental to the development of the discipline of archaeology
                  and to contemporary views of human origins. The speciﬁc case of the Mousterian tools
                  became part of a larger question: How are we to measure and interpret variability in ancient
                  artifacts? For the Mousterian tools, François Bordes spent years in excavation and analysis
                  to establish a typology that has been the framework for much of the work done on this
                  period. Bordes classiﬁed all Mousterian tools into four categories, based on the relative

                                                       THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS        161


frequencies of certain types.85 Bordes considered various explanations of the diversity of
Neandertal tools, such as that this variability reﬂected different time periods, climates, or
seasons of the year. On the basis of the archaeological evidence, however, he rejected these
possibilities and eventually concluded that the four different clusters of tools are the
remains of four distinct cultural traditions, or “tribes,” which developed certain kinds of
tool manufacture and retained these distinctive expressions over the 100,000 years of the
Mousterian period. Bordes’s vision of the Mousterian was one in which different tribes of
Neandertals wandered much of the Old World for generation after generation, through
tens of thousands of years, each group maintaining its unique styles of tool manufacture
and meeting the others infrequently and usually with hostility.
      This vision was questioned by Lewis and Sally Binford, who assumed that Mousterian
tool variability was largely a reﬂection of the different tasks Neandertals had to perform to
meet successfully the demands of their environment.86 They tried to test their interpretation
by a statistical analysis of Mousterian tools from three widely separated sites: the Jabrud
Rock Shelter near Damascus, Syria; Mugharet es-Shubbabiq Cave in Israel; and an “open-
air” station near Houpeville, France. Each site contained several different levels, represent-
ing different occupations; the total number for all three sites was 16. Lithics from each site
were classiﬁed in terms of Bordes’s system and statistically analyzed for evidence that these
groups of tools were used for different economic activities, rather than simply representing
stylistic traditions. Factor analysis was the statistical method used to determine which of
the tool types were usually found in proximity to one another in the various levels of the
different sites. On this basis they deﬁned several different “tool
kits,” whose presumed functions included tool preparation,
wood-working, butchering, and various other tasks.
      But the exact nature of Neandertal tool-making variability
has remained a matter of dispute. A recent model proposed by
Harold Dibble, for example, suggests that most of the variab-
ility in types of scrapers is the result of how often Neandertals
resharpened these tools (Figure 4.19).87 Imagine that you need
a sharp-edged ﬂake for some task. You strike an appropriate
ﬂake off a core and use it, but the edge dulls. To continued using
the same piece, you resharpen (strike small ﬂakes off ) the dull
edge. You now have a single-edge sidescraper (in the Bordian
typology). You can continue to resharpen that same edge
several times, or you can choose to use and then resharpen the
opposite lateral side of the ﬂake. Once you resharpen that
second edge, you have a double sidescraper (in the Bordian
typology). Dibble’s model thus proposes that much of the
variability we see in Mousterian scrapers is simply the result of
how a stone artifact is resharpened, rather than linking those
scraper shapes to activities or different groups of Neandertals.


NEANDERTAL CULTURE AND SOCIETY                                      FIGURE 4.19 Dibble’s scraper reduction
                                                                    model shows how a single sidescraper is trans-
As if the slurs cast on Neandertal intelligence and posture by      formed into a transverse sidescraper simply
early archaeologists were not enough, some anthropologists          through the process of resharpening the tool.

162   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      have questioned whether or not Neandertals were able to produce the range of sounds
      necessary for normal human speech. P. Lieberman and E. Crelin reconstructed the vocal
      apparatus of Neandertals using a computer simulation based on the measurement of a
      classic Neandertal, and using the vocal tracts of chimpanzees and human infants for
      comparison, they concluded that western European Neandertals would not have been able
      to make some vowels, such as e, and perhaps some labial and dental consonants, such as
      b and d.88 Others doubt that the Neandertals could speak at all. Frayer and Wolpoff 89
      challenge the old idea that the size and shape of the hyoid bone and other Neandertal
      anatomy are sufﬁciently different from that of modern humans to be used as evidence that
      the Neandertals had any less linguistic ability than we do. Lieberman90 also has recently
      revised his earlier opinion about the speech of early hominins, contending that they likely
      did have language.
           Archaeologists have long believed that, whatever their verbal ﬂuency, the Neandertals
      were at least human enough to bury their dead. Excavations at La Chapelle-aux-Saints, in
      France, revealed a Neandertal corpse apparently laid out in a shallow trench, with a bison
      leg placed on his chest, and the trench ﬁlled in with bones, tools, and other debris—perhaps
      representing offerings of meat and implements. At La Ferrassie, France, a Neandertal
      “cemetery” was found, where a man, a woman, two children, and two infants seem to have
      been buried. A ﬂat stone slab was on the man’s chest, the woman was in a ﬂexed position,
      and, toward the back of the cave, the skull and skeleton of one of the children were buried
      in separate holes, about 1 m apart. At Teshik-Tash, in Siberia, a Neandertal child was buried
      in a grave with goat skulls whose horns seemingly had been jabbed into the ground. At
      Shanidar Cave in Iraq, the soil near a Neandertal’s body contained massive quantities of
      ﬂower pollen. Ralph Solecki, the excavator, and Arlette Leroi-Gourhan, the palynologist,
      concluded that the skeleton had been buried with garlands of ﬂowers.
           But in these and other cases the evidence is at least somewhat equivocal. Even in the
      best of circumstances, archaeological excavation is a messy, ambiguous business of judging
      the signiﬁcance of faint changes in the texture and color of sediments, and the Neandertal
      cave burials are notoriously difﬁcult to excavate and interpret. Such caves have been homes
      not just to people but to hundreds of thousands of generations of cave bears, rodents, and
      other animals, and the natural processes of roof fall and sediment accumulation make for
      a confusing stratigraphic sequence. Thus, where one excavator may see a Neandertal
      carefully buried in a pit with a rock slab placed on his chest, another may observe evidence
      of a Neandertal who simply expired and was covered with rocks falling from the cave roof
      and by other debris. Thus some scholars see no evidence that any Neandertals were
      intentionally buried, while others believe that the Neandertals invested death with human-
      like emotion and ritual.91 Richard Klein, for example, suggests that the Neandertals did in
      fact bury their dead, but probably only as a matter of hygiene and without any or much
      ceremony.92 Lawrence Straus concludes93 that Neandertal burial was a rare event, but he
      also makes the useful point that it is not at all clear than even Homo sapiens sapiens always
      buried their dead.
           There is good evidence that Neandertals were not insensitive to the plight of the
      handicapped. Some Neandertals evidently suffered terribly from arthritis or had lost limbs
      and so could not have contributed much to the group’s food supply. Yet, they must have
      been supported by the rest of their society. Despite these touching displays of societal
      concern, there is also some evidence that Neandertals killed, butchered, and perhaps ate

                                                       THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS       163


one another. At Krapina in Yugoslavia, excavations revealed 20 Neandertals—men, women,
and children—whose skulls and long bones had been smashed and split in suspicious ways.
But Trinkaus and others question whether cannibalism was actually practiced.94
     All Neandertals were apparently hunters and gatherers, but they must have varied
considerably throughout their range in the kinds of resources they exploited. The
archaeological record is no doubt biased because most Neandertal sites found and
excavated are those made evident by masses of animal bones associated with stone tools;
the remains of plant foods and wooden tools, of course, do not preserve nearly so well and
are not as easily found.
     Neandertal population densities appear to have been low, and it is likely that most
Neandertals lived with the same group of 25 or 50 people their whole lives, from time to
time meeting other bands for mate exchanges. They were skilled hunters, locked into
seasonal migrations with the animals they hunted, but in most habitats they probably
foraged widely for eggs, birds, plants, and other small resources. They competed quite
successfully with other predators for game, but must have occasionally lost out to the
zoological carnival of horrors whose ranges they shared. Giant cave bears, saber-toothed
cats, and wolves occasionally “selected out” an unfortunate Neandertal: “Some days you
eat the bear, some days the bear eats you” was probably no empty cliché to them.
     Trinkaus95 examined 40 nearly complete Neandertal skeletons as well as bones from
166 other Neandertals, from both Europe and the Middle East, and compared their
estimated age at death to the age at death for a variety of other groups, including ethno-
graphically observed groups like the Yanomamö hunter-gatherers of South America and
the !Kung Bushmen of southern Africa, as well as archaeologically retrieved skeletons from
North America, Japan, Mexico, and elsewhere. Noting all the biases and other problems in
estimating time of death and other factors, Trinkaus concluded that the Neandertals
experienced relatively high “young adult mortality”96—meaning that a higher percentage
of Neandertals died during their young adult years than did in these other groups. Trinkaus
suggests that these mortality patterns may be the result of various factors, including a
relatively high level of adaptive stress. Almost all Neandertals would have been required to
have a high degree of mobility, except infants in arms.


NEANDERTALS AND HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS
William Golding, in his novel The Inheritors, imagined a world of the past in which
peaceful, egalitarian, vegetarian Neandertals faced oblivion at the hands of villainous, meat-
eating, beer-drinking Homo sapiens sapiens. This literary version of the Total Replacement
model is studded with obvious symbolism intended to elevate this imaginary conﬂict into
a statement about the human condition, but it is an interesting anthropological scenario as
well, raising many questions. Throughout the ages, for example, humans have expressed
a ﬁne democratic and egalitarian spirit in few areas of life, but one of them—to some
extent, at least—is in sexual congress: Wherever different “races” have coexisted, they have
immediately and continually interbred. Did the Neandertals and other humans mate?
     Such a question brings us back to the contrasting models of human origins. As these
indicate, some scholars believe that no Neandertal genes are represented in contemporary
human populations, while others think that some or even a lot of Neandertal genetic
inheritance can be seen in contemporary European populations.

           164      PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                      Who is right? We begin
                                                                                 with the intriguing fact that
                                                                                 the Neandertals entirely “dis-
                                                                                 appeared” as a physical type
                                                                                 sometime after about 30,000
                                                                                 years ago. No Neandertal
                                                                                 bones have been found post-
                                                                                 dating this time, and in some
                                                                                 sites tool types widely believed
                                                                                 to be associated with Neandertals
                                                                                 are overlain with levels con-
                                                                                 taining tools different in style.
                                                                                 The Neandertals successfully
                                                                                 lived over much of Europe
                                                                                 and the Middle East for tens
                                                                                 of thousands of years—why
                                                                                 should they have vanished?
FIGURE 4.20 Overview of the Middle Paleolithic site of Qafzeh, Israel.                These and other ideas
                                                                                 about the relationship of
                                                                                 Neandertals to other early
                 Homo sapiens, and the relationship of both to ourselves, still cannot be tested systematically
                 and conclusively against the archaeological record because there are so many gaps and
                 biases in this record. But recent discoveries have at least given a sounder empirical basis for
                 some of these debates about the Neandertals. A key site here is Qafzeh (Figure 4.20). Helene
                 Valladas and her colleagues used thermoluminescence to date 20 burnt ﬂint tools from
                 Qafzeh, a cave near Nazareth, in Israel, in strata that contained the bones of a somewhat
                 modern-looking Homo sapiens.97 Other human remains have been found at Qafzeh, and
                 electron spin resonance dating was done on some of these.98 Various scholars have
                 concluded on the basis of this analysis that a primitive form of modern humans lived here
                 92,000 years ago, and perhaps earlier—but at least 30,000 years before Neandertals
                 inhabited this region. Valladas and her colleagues speculate that Neandertals came into the
                 Middle East about 60,000 years ago, perhaps migrating into the Mediterranean areas as
                 glaciers expanded during the Pleistocene. Thus, if modern humans evolved in Africa long
                 before they reached Qafzeh, as the DNA evidence might suggest, then the Qafzeh region
                 might have been a contact area between Neandertals and early modern humans—since the
                 Neandertals lived all over Europe 125,000 years ago.
                      The Qafzeh dates raise many questions. There is no molecular biological or genetic
                 evidence that modern people originated in the Middle East, so it is presumed that any early
                 modern Homo sapiens sapiens in this area would have descended from Africans. As Erik
                 Trinkaus noted, if early modern humans reached the Middle East 92,000 years ago, they
                 must have lived there in some relationship to the Neandertals for tens of thousands of years,
                 since Neandertal remains in the Middle East dating to the period between 60,000 and
                 36,000 are well documented.99
                      The human remains from Qafzeh must be understood in the context of evidence from
                 nearby sites, especially the cave sites of Skhul (early modern Homo sapiens sapiens), Tabun
                 (Neandertal), and Kebara (Neandertal). New dates from human remains at Skhul suggest

                                                        THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS        165


some of the individuals may have lived there as early as 100,000 years ago, and other ﬁnds
at Skhul and Tabun indicate repeated human occupations between about 60,000 and
40,000 years ago.
     So, who were these people in the Levant between 100,000 and 40,000 years ago, and
what do they have to do with us?
     Advocates of the Total Replacement model see these remains as belonging to two
different species, one (Homo sapiens sapiens) superior to the other (the Neandertals) and
in the process of replacing them, not mating with them. These scholars see “modern”
elements in the crania of some of these hominins and very little overlap between these
Levantine modern humans and the Neandertals in important elements of the post-cranial
skeleton, such as the length of the pubis. But other scholars see these humans as belonging
to the same general population and exhibiting anatomical variation that is “less, often
considerably less, than normally found in a modern city.”100
     If the replacement of other humans by Homo sapiens sapiens occurred after 50,000
years ago, however, then the earliest “modern” Homo sapiens at Qafzeh could have been
members of a population of archaic humans who were also replaced.
     Given these ambiguities of interpretations of anatomy, what about the tools? Even the
staunchest advocates of the original versions of the Total Replacement model have difﬁculty
seeing an intrusive culture in the Levantine artifacts. There seems to be great continuity in
the kinds of tools made, the species of game hunted, and other aspects of culture.101
     In some ways the eastern Mediterranean can be considered part of “Africa” during
periods of the Pleistocene,102 given its proximity and similarities of climate and ecology. We
might expect, then, these kinds of ambiguities in interpretations of what happened in the
eastern Mediterranean. But what about Europe?
     The major differences between Neandertals and ourselves are in head and face shapes
and sizes, but the Neandertal skeleton, especially the limbs and hip bones, is also different
in size and morphology from that of modern humans. The torsional strength of Neandertal
leg bones, for example, is about twice that of moderns.103 Tools may have had a role in
changing the selective pressures on the teeth, but how could tools or any other factor have
altered the skeletal parts?
     We know that Neandertals had a lengthy evolutionary history in Europe, and some
scholars have suggested that Neandertals became biologically adapted to resist the cold
conditions of glacial Europe. This involved natural selection for features that gave Neandertals
a reproductive advantage—“classic” western European Neandertals evolved their distinctive
features as part of adapting to cold climates and had so little genetic connection to people
living elsewhere in the world that they became distinctive.104 Eventually, however, they were
absorbed or displaced by more modern-looking humans. Other scholars, however,
maintain that the fossils from central European Neandertals all exhibit morphological
changes in the direction of modern hominins.105
     If the Neandertals were entirely replaced by modern Homo sapiens sapiens moving
out of Africa, it is possible that this extinction involved a social transformation, not just
some slight difference in tool-making ability or other skill. Olga Soffer, for example,
argues106 for the appearance of modern human family structure and the division of labor
by sex. She suggests that sites left by Neandertals are small and do not show the clusters of
distinct artifacts that we would expect if people in various age and sex groups were doing
different tasks in an integrated extended family. Perhaps most important, she sees no

           166       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                      evidence of symbolic abilities, as might have been expressed in ﬁgurines, cave painting, or
                      other media. In contrast, Soffer suggests that modern Homo sapiens sapiens left sites that
                      show substantial evidence of a society in which there was a clear division of labor by sex,
                      that they expressed themselves symbolically to a much greater degree, and, in general,
                      developed the sense of kinship that one ﬁnds as the basic organizing principle of all known
                      hunter-forager groups.
                           Determining the presence of a division of labor by sex or of kinship, of course, is very
                      difﬁcult given the types of cultural materials—mainly stone tools and animal bones at most
                      sites—we normally recover from the archaeological record. Much debate about the
                      Mousterian (Middle Paleolithic) and Upper Paleolithic in Europe has thus centered on the
                      types of stone tools characteristic of each tradition, as well as the addition of organic
                      technology, such as points made out of bone or antler, and personal ornamentation and
                      symbolism.
                           Unlike the sequence of tools at, for example, Qafzeh (in Israel) and Zhoukoudian (in
                      China), the European archaeological record does appear to show a relatively sudden change:
                      At many sites levels of “Mousterian” tools dating to the period when Neandertals were here
                      are overlain with occupational debris containing substantially different stone tools and
                      other remains that may or may not be the products of Homo sapiens sapiens.107 But does
                      this reﬂect replacement of one group by another?
                                                                                        Much of the debate on this
                                                                                   topic has to do with debates
                                                                                   about stone-tool technolog-
                                                                                   ies. The Aurignacian tool kit
                                                                                   (Figure 4.21) has been found
                                                                                   all over Europe and into the
                                                                                   Middle East in sites dated to
                                                                                   between about 40,000 to 30,000
                                                                                   years ago (some dates are
                                                                                   outside this range).108 To the
                                                                                   specialist, these Aurignacian
                                                                                   tools look completely differ-
                                                                                   ent from the Mousterian tools
                                                                                   traditionally associated with
                                                                                   Neandertals across this same
                                                                                   area, Europe and the Middle
                                                                                   East. Mousterian tools are pri-
                                                                                   marily made of ﬂakes, whereas
                                                                                   Aurignacian tools include a lot
                                                                                   of blades, bladelets, burins,
                                                                                   and other distinctive tools.
                                                                                   Often the people who made
                                                                                   Mousterian tools and those
                                                                                   who made the Aurignacian ones
FIGURE 4.21 European tool kits, 35,000–11,000 years ago. The more diversiﬁed       used the same sources of ﬂint
economies of the late Pleistocene are reﬂected in increasingly diverse tool kits   and they often hunted about
compared to earlier periods (not drawn to scale).                                  the same range of animals, but

                                                            THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS      167


these two stone-tool industries are made in very different ways and in radically different
shapes. There is no evidence that the Mousterian tools were gradually developed into
Aurignacian ones109—in many sites Aurignacian assemblages lie directly on top of levels
containing Mousterian tools. To some scholars, the lack of modern human fossils in
western Europe at the time of the appearance of the Aurignacian leaves open the possibility
that the earliest Aurignacian may be associated with Neandertals.
      Recently, Straus’s analysis of the results of intensely dating many Spanish Aurignacian
sites with both radiocarbon and uranium-series dates, and comparing them with those
from the Europe and the Middle East, revealed that “[f]ew if any other European
Aurignacian assemblages have been reliably shown to be as old as the Spanish ones.”110 This
pattern of dates may conﬂict with the idea that the Neandertals were driven into extinction
by people who radiated out of Africa and abruptly replaced Neandertals by virtue of a
superior technology—as might be represented by the Aurignacian tool kit. If that scenario
were accurate, we would expect the Spanish Aurignacian sites to be the youngest, not the
oldest, because presumably the modern Homo sapiens sapiens coming out of Africa arrived
ﬁrst in the Middle East, after which generations of their descendants and their descendants’
descendants moved through eastern Europe, and only eventually into southwestern-most
Europe, Spain. Alternatively, if people came out of Africa across the Straits of Gibraltar and
arrived in Europe ﬁrst in Spain, we would expect many Upper Paleolithic sites in southern
Spain, and there are virtually none. As Straus notes, “[g]iven the present chronometric
situation, it would be necessary for such a migration to have taken place virtually
instantaneously to account for the Spanish dates. No possible migration patterns can be
conﬁdently reconstructed on the basis of the available chronometric dates for early
Aurignacian sites.”111
      Another key site in these debates about the relationship of the Neandertals to ourselves
is in France at Saint-Cesaire.112 Human occupations here date to about 36,000 years ago—
precisely the period when Neandertals were disappearing from the archaeological record.
The problem is that, while the tools found at this site appear to be Upper Paleolithic in their
stylistic and functional attributes, the human body found with them appears to be a
Neandertal. As Trinkaus notes:

    If the Chatelperronian industry was produced solely by Neandertals and all the Aurignacian
    assemblages were the products of early modern humans . . . then there must have been
    temporal overlap of these two human groups in western Europe. . . . Even if a direct
    biological-industrial association cannot be assumed, it is still evident that Neandertals were
    present in western Europe less than [35,000 years ago] and that early modern humans were
    present there by at least [30,000 years ago].113

     The signiﬁcance of this is that 5,000 years is a very short time for the physical changes
observed between Neandertals and modern humans to have occurred. The oldest artifacts
associated with modern humans in Europe belong to the Aurignacian period. The lowest
levels in which Aurignacian-style tools were found at Abric Romaní, in Spain, yielded
radiocarbon dates of about 37,000 years ago, but uranium series dates put this site at about
40,000 years ago, and it shows an “abrupt” replacement of earlier levels containing
Mousterian remains.114
     But other anthropologists suggest that the Neandertals were simply evolving into
modern humans and that the association of Upper Paleolithic tools with the later forms of

           168       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                 Neandertals is exactly what one would expect if this
                                                                 regional evolution process took place, even if
                                                                 there continued to be gene ﬂow into Europe from
                                                                 outside. Fred Smith, for example, sees clear signs
                                                                 of reduction over time in the size of the brow-
                                                                 ridges of Neandertals at Krapina and Vindija in
                                                                 Yugoslavia, and at other central European sites.115
                                                                 Trinkaus and Duarte116 have even suggested that
                                                                 the child buried at Largo Velho in Portugal (Figure
                                                                 4.22) around 27,000 years ago is a hybrid between
                                                                 Neandertals and modern humans.
                                                                      Some scholars have focused on stature and
                                                                 body proportions in debates about the relationship
                                                                 of Neandertals to us. The European Cro-Magnon
                                                                 after 30,000 years ago appears to have, on average,
                                                                 much longer limbs than did the Neandertals.
                                                                 Relatively long limbs are associated with adapta-
                                                                 tions to heat (as with the Dinka of East Africa
                                                                 today), whereas short limbs are associated with
                                                                 cold adaptation, such as in Eskimos and other
                                                                 north Asians. But it is difﬁcult to make direct
                                                                 equations between stature and height, given that
                                                                 “culture,” in the form of clothes, ﬁre, and so on,
                                                                 modify the direct effects of climate. Still, there are
                                                                 many puzzling bits of evidence. The tallest of the
                                                                 post-Neandertal Pleistocene Europeans seem to
                                                                 appear just before 20,000 years ago, in the coldest
                                                                 period of the Pleistocene, when we might have
FIGURE 4.22 The Largo Velho rock shelter in Portugal             expected natural selection to favor a shorter,
yielded a burial of a child that some reseachers believe rep-    stockier body type; and then later, in warmer
resents a “hybrid” between Neandertals and modern humans.
                                                                 periods, stature seems to have declined—again, the
                                                                 opposite of what we might expect.117 Stature is so
                       directly related to diet and other factors, however, that we should not expect to see a clear
                       correlation between it and temperature in every case—except in the long term, and even
                       then the relationship is likely to be modiﬁed by migrations, differences in technology and
                       economy, and other factors.

                     Models of Modern Human Origins: Summary The most recent academic debates
                     about models of modern human origins reveal profoundly different conclusions, with
                     scholars disputing everything from the size and shape of particular characteristics of speciﬁc
                     fossil skulls to the nature of basic evolutionary processes. Some see the Neandertals as an
                     archaic form of human who made no signiﬁcant contribution to ourselves,118 some believe
                     that modern Europeans represent an admixture of African and Neandertal genes,119 and
                     some see evidence in the Neandertal fossil record of an evolution toward modern humans
                     and believe that the Neandertals became the modern humans of Europe through regional
                     evolution and genic exchange with other populations outside Europe.120

                                                       THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS        169


    It may be that these disputes are never resolved to everyone’s satisfaction on the basis
of evidence. For many, however, the recent genetic studies of Neandertal samples from
Europe121 are the ﬁnal “nail in the cofﬁn” for Neandertals as ancestors to modern humans.
The mtDNA differences between Neandertals and modern humans shown in these
studies would simply seem to be too numerous for Neandertals to be anything other than
extremely distant “cousins” who suffered the fate of many animal species throughout
time—extinction.
    One thing is absolutely certain. No one in the past 25,000 years has experienced the
wonder of encountering a hominin in the landscape who is not us—Homo sapiens sapiens.


Life, Art, and Ritual in the Upper Paleolithic
Writing about art is like dancing about
architecture.— Anonymous

In 1868, near the Spanish port of Santander, so the story goes, a hunter’s dog fell into a
crevice in some boulders, and in rescuing the animal the hunter moved some rocks,
revealing the opening of a cave. The owner of the land on which the cave (known as
Altamira) was located, a Spanish nobleman and amateur archaeologist, eventually began to
excavate the cave ﬂoor. He found some stone artifacts, but, according to the story, was
unaware of the paintings in the cave until his 12-year-old daughter visited the site and
glanced at the ceiling. In the glow of her lantern she saw beautiful visions of animals. The
central painting is of a group of about 25 animals, mainly bison, with a few horses, deer,
wolves, and boars (Figure 4.23). Roughly life-size, these paintings were done in rich browns,
yellows, reds, and blacks, and the natural conﬁguration of the cave ceiling had been used
to emphasize the shape of the animals. The rounded haunch of a bison, for example, was
painted over a natural bulge in the stone ceiling, creating a three-dimensional effect.122
     Scholarly reception to the Altamira discoveries was almost uniformly negative. Some
respected prehistorians even hinted that Don Marcelino, their discoverer, had hired an art
student to fake these paintings, while another scholar dismissed them as simply the expres-
sion “of a mediocre student of the modern school.” So abused
by critics was the Don that eventually he padlocked the cave,
and he died in 1888 without having seen his discoveries
accepted as true Paleolithic expressions. Years later, when
many more paintings and other art works had been discovered,
Altamira’s antiquity was ﬁnally acknowledged, and most of
these paintings are now given dates between about 17,000 and
12,000 years ago. Analysis shows that the colors were produced
by mixing natural mineral pigments, such as ocher and
manganese dioxide, with a binder (blood, urine, vegetable
juice, or something similar), and that they were either brushed
on with an implement made of animal hair or applied by
making a kind of crayon from the pigments and lubricant.
Some painting may also have been done by using a pipe to
blow the powdered pigments on a surface prepared with                FIGURE 4.23 A bison painted on the ceiling at
animal fat. Many of these paintings were executed in the dark        Altamira, Spain.

          170       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                              recesses of caves, by light provided by lamps made of stone
                                              bowls ﬁlled with animal fat, with a wick made of lichens, grass,
                                              or juniper.123
                                                   During World War II, paintings on a scale comparable to
                                              those of Altamira were discovered at Lascaux Cave, in France.
                                              Researchers estimate that the Lascaux paintings date to about
                                              17,000 years ago, but were done on many different occasions
                                              and perhaps over a much longer span. Many varieties of animals
                                              are depicted here, including some one hopes were imaginary.
                                              The animals are often painted as if they are in motion, and the
                                              general effect is very impressive (Figure 4.24). One of the many
                                              curious things about these and other Upper Paleolithic cave
                                              paintings is that while the animals are depicted in very real,
                                              very representational terms, the ﬁgures of humans are either
                                              simple stick drawings or else weird half-humans, half-animals.
                                                   The most stunning recent discovery has been the cave
                                              chambers at Chauvet in the Ardèche Valley of southern
                                              France, found by three spelunkers in 1994.124 The wealth of
                                              images include both animals commonly shown in cave art—
                                              horses, bison, mammoth, and aurochs (an extinct form of wild
                                              cattle)—as well as those that are less frequently depicted in the
                                              other cave art sites—musk ox, leopard, cave bear, cave lion,
FIGURE 4.24      A painted reindeer from      rhinoceros, and an owl (Figure 4.25). Incredibly, Chauvet
Lascaux, France.                              Cave is also the oldest of the cave art sites, dating to about
                                              32,400 years ago—it is some 15,000 years older than the cave
                                                                               art at Lascaux and Altamira.
                                                                                    We must accept at the
                                                                               onset that we can never really
                                                                               know the thoughts of these
                                                                               long-dead Paleolithic artists.
                                                                               The same might be said of
                                                                               Vincent Van Gogh or any
                                                                               other artist, of course, given
                                                                               that aesthetic expressions can
                                                                               never be fully, rationally com-
                                                                               prehended, even by the artist.
                                                                               But neither Van Gogh’s work
                                                                               nor Paleolithic art can be
                                                                               expected to be random with
                                                                               regard to theme, technique, or
                                                                               style. Art can be expected to tell
                                                                               us something about the artist.
                                                                               And in any case, there is some-
                                                                               thing profoundly unsatisfying
                                                                               about analyses of ancient
FIGURE 4.25 An engraved horse from Chauvet Cave, France.                       peoples based only on stone

                                                       THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS        171


tools, hut foundations, and other techno-environmental residues. Most people, including
archaeologists, wish to know the “minds” of ancient peoples, and in few ways do these seem
so accessible as in their art.
     People apply the term Paleolithic art to a great range of materials, including cave
paintings, rock carvings, sculpted and carved animal bones, ivory statuettes, and baked clay
objects. As Margaret Conkey noted,125 one should probably not imagine that all these
expressions were fundamentally aesthetic in nature, in the sense that we think of aesthetics
as removed from economic function. An early interpretation of the great cave paintings was
that they were expressions of sympathetic magic, done to ensure success in hunting and
other activities. By picturing animals with spears stuck in them or caught in traps, Upper
Paleolithic people may have thought they increased their chances of killing and trapping
these animals. Many of the paintings are in small, hidden passages where working con-
ditions were very cramped, suggesting that these pictures were not created for the pleasure
of the general viewing public. Then again, many paintings are superimposed on one, two,
or even more older ones, indicating perhaps that these efforts were ritual in nature, not
simply artistic. In fact, the most common themes of these Upper Paleolithic artists were
food and sex, with food receiving most of the attention.
     These interpretations of Paleolithic art were challenged by
Andre Leroi-Gourhan, who plotted the relative frequencies of
lions, mammoths, bison, reindeer, and other animals in caves
with many such representations; he concluded that these
paintings were invested with cosmological signiﬁcance—
reﬂecting in various ways the patterns in which Paleolithic
peoples ordered their world.126
     The disemboweled bulls, prancing deer, and other hunt-
ing scenes, plus the popularity of the penis and vulva motifs,
suggest to some that these earliest of Spanish and French
impressionists were men. But Elizabeth Fisher has argued that
students of cave art have concealed the high frequency of
female sex organs represented and thus the implication that
many of the artists were probably women.127 Line markings
that some archaeologists have considered calendrical devices,
Fisher thinks may be records of menstrual periods.
     In recent years various alternative explanations of
Paleolithic art have been suggested (Figure 4.26). Lewis-
Williams and Dowson have argued that much of Paleolithic
art was the product of people in “entopic,” or altered, states of
consciousness—either through drugs or meditation.128 They
note that ethnographic studies of contemporary hunter-
gatherers show wide use of hallucinogens, trances, and such
altered states to produce paintings and carvings. They also        FIGURE 4.26 Entopic forms are images seen
argue that it seems a feature of human neuroanatomy that           during trances and other states of altered con-
images perceived in altered states of consciousness include        sciousness. They are a widespread phenomenon
both “real” representational forms and fantastic nonrepres-        among modern human groups and have been
entational forms and that people tend to project these images      suggested as an explanation for some of the
on walls and ceilings in their minds. Thus, “Tracing projected     engraved and painted Upper Paleolithic images.

          172       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                    mental images with a ﬁnger in the sand or on the soft wall of a cave to experience them
                    more fully would have ‘ﬁxed’ them and would have been an initial step in the history of
                    art. They were merely touching them and marking what was already there.”129
                         The study of Paleolithic visual imagery and art is a demonstration of a point made well
                    by Hodder, that archaeology is not necessarily a neutral discipline in which analyses are
                    scientiﬁc and culture-free.130 Paleolithic art has often been a “Rorschach test,” in the sense
                    that modern-day observers have tried to read into it the mind and spirit of primitive
                    humans, but they perhaps have learned more about their own psyches than about the
                    primitives’. In any case, as Conkey notes, “‘paleolithic art’ [is] an extremely diverse and
                    abundant repertoire of material culture that cannot be accounted for by any inclusive
                    umbrella except perhaps as ‘cultural.’ ”131


                    HUMAN COLONIZATION OF THE WORLD:
                    CIRCA 30,000–10,000 YEARS AGO

                    One main factor in the upward trend of animal
                    life has been the power of wandering.
                    Alfred North Whitehead

                 Unless the earth is truly different from every other known celestial body, any humans left
                 on this lovely green-blue world in a few billion years will be converted to their component
                 atoms—along with the pyramids of Egypt, the Great Wall of China, and all other human
                 artifacts and natural features—and vaporized in a supernova such that they will spend
                 eternity as elements of a timeless universe.
                      Given our human history, however, we can anticipate that our descendants will have
                 long since colonized other worlds when that fateful day comes. However tenuous our links
                 to these distant successors may become, some portion of “us” may reverberate through
                                                                               space and time until the universe
                                                                               once again collapses on itself.
                                                                                    Thus, “in our beginning
                                                                               is our end,” perhaps. For our an-
                                                                               cestors have always wandered,
                                                                               always colonized. Generation
                                                                               after generation, they left
                                                                               Africa, probed Europe and
                                                                               Asia, settled the Americas,
                                                                               Australia, the farthest ends of
                                                                               the planet (Figure 4.27). Many
                                                                               of the readers of this book can
                                                                               expect to see human colonies on
                                                                               the moon and perhaps beyond
                                                                               in their lifetimes. Exponential
                                                                               functions are impressive aspects
                                                                               of our universe. In time a
                                                                               single mutated virus turns into
FIGURE 4.27 An early burial at Lake Mungo, Australia.                          uncountable billions and

                                                       THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS       173


disperses throughout a system. We may not like the analogy, but we may “infect” the
universe in the same way.
     All this may seem far from the sturdy human hunter-foragers of the past hundred
thousand years, but we are linked to them by the long-term growth functions of which we
are all a part.
     In various chapters of this book the focus is a major question about a particular human
development: Why did culture evolve, how did Homo sapiens sapiens emerge as the only
remaining hominins? If we ask “why” they colonized the world, we are left with the
“because it’s there” kind of answer Sir Edmund Hillary gave when asked why he climbed
Mt. Everest. Simple demographic models suggest that any population will colonize appro-
priate environments through growth and migration, and our own ancestors’ travels seem
adequately “explained” by such formulations. But it is also hard to deny a human “instinct”
for travel, an inherent desire to see what’s beyond the next hill or valley. Also, as we have
noted previously, maintaining genetic variability through genic exchange confers great
advantages in terms of long-term survival.
     If there is in fact an instinctive human urge to travel, it would be “adaptive” in an
evolutionary sense, for long-term evolutionary success comes with dispersal and variation.
Our ancestors accomplished both: They penetrated almost all of the world before the end
of the Pleistocene, and although they remained a single species, they developed great variety
in their physical forms and cultural adaptations.
     On the one hand, the superﬁcial variations our ancestors acquired as they colonized
the world are the most trivial in all of human evolution; on the other hand, these differences
of skin color, facial features, and other characteristics, and the cultural differences that
accompanied them, are of the greatest socioeconomic and political importance in today’s
world—for human variations are inextricably linked to the idea of “race.” Despite the
rejection of this concept by many scholars, the concept of “race” is likely to remain with
us until gene ﬂow is sufﬁcient that obvious differences in physical appearance all but
disappear. Most anthropologists do not like the concept of “race” because, aside from the
negative social problems associated with it, the characteristics used by most people to deﬁne
race appear to be superﬁcial, to be crude typologies imposed on a multidimensional
underlying variability, and to be poorly correlated in some ways with underlying genetic
relationships of various groups.132 “Black” skin tones, for example, are shared by Australian
Aborigines and west Africans—two groups of people whose degree of genetic relatedness
may be much less than that between west Africans and Scandinavians. Physical features
such as skin tones, degree of hair follicle “curl,” nose shape and eyelid shape, and so on,
tend to fall on geographic clines—that is, they exhibit variation over space and through
time that is continuous, not discrete. And often variations within groups (polymorphism)
is greater than that between groups (polytypy).133
     For good or ill, however, the migrations and radiations of our ancestors over the past
30,000 years have produced or continued group differences that remain an important part
of today’s cultural world.134


The World at 30,000 Years Ago
Soon after 30,000 years ago the world was inhabited by only one human species, Homo
sapiens sapiens—ourselves—and our ancestors had penetrated almost every environment
of the Old World, and perhaps the New World as well (see chapter 5). Across this great

174   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      expanse people had developed a great diversity of tools, in stone, bone, and other materials,
      much of which has probably long since disappeared from the archaeological record. The
      evidence of ﬁsh hooks and barbed spear-points suggests that many people had ﬁnally added
      ﬁsh to their diet—a seemingly obvious choice, but one that does not appear to have been
      made by many people until after 20,000 years ago. In many environments ﬁsh can greatly
      supplement other foods and thereby support much greater human populations with
      considerable reliability. Other technological advances, such as the atlatl, or throwing stick,
      probably also greatly extended the hunting prowess of many groups, and exploitation of
      plant foods was probably also rapidly improving in efﬁciency.


      Late Pleistocene Climates and Geography
      If we were ever fortunate enough to ﬁnd people of about 30,000 years ago well-preserved
      in some glacier, we would probably see few differences between them and us. Over much
      of the world human teeth have become smaller during the past 30,000 years and some
      subtle changes in other aspects of our form and physiology have occurred, but not much
      else about us physically is different from the people of 30,000 years ago. Human brain size
      was slightly larger for some of the people at that time, but it is unlikely that they were of a
      fundamentally different mentality.
           By 30,000 years ago people were living in almost every part of the Old World, and in
      Australia; their arrival in the Americas was certainly before 15,000 years ago, but the
      evidence for earlier occupations (see chapter 5) is controversial.
           Oscillating sea levels had some role in this dispersal, since in some periods land bridges
      allowed people to walk from Southeast Asia to many areas that are now Indonesian islands,
      such as Java, Sumatra, and Borneo. Rising sea levels may also have forced people into
      migrations, even though the rates at which these levels rose were likely slow enough that
      no single individual had a personal sense of them. Thiel argues that people on islands in
      danger of being submerged by rising waters made the colonizing trips to Australia 50,000
      or more years ago.135 Elsewhere, people had to abandon many other low-lying areas, such
      as the shores of the eastern Mediterranean and the broad plains that now lie under the
      English Channel.
           These climatic alterations and ensuing changes in geography and ecology can be thought
      of as giant engines, acting to mix and move human populations, offering adaptational
      challenges that elicited human ingenuity in various forms. But people were never simple
      passive victims of climatic and ecological happenstance: Humans not only developed the
      technology to make a living in the vast span of the world but also evolved the social systems
      that were an indispensable part of this adaptation.


      Late Pleistocene Europeans
      Between about 30,000 and 19,000 years ago, European climates began a long cooling
      trend, with some periods of extreme cold, but for most of the period the summers
      were cool and the winters relatively mild. The rich European grasslands and mixed forest
      habitats supported great numbers of herbivores, including reindeer, deer, bison, wild ox,
      ibex, woolly rhinoceros, and mammoths. France seems to have been densely occupied
      during this period, particularly near the conﬂuence of the Dordogne and Vezere rivers

                                                         THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS           175


(Figure 4.28). This lovely part
of the world is a well-watered,
heavily forested limestone for-
mation, honeycombed with
caves and rock shelters, which
offered excellent places to live.
Mammoths, horses, and many
other animals were hunted by
these Upper Paleolithic peoples,
but the reindeer was the staff
of life: At many sites 99 percent
of all the animal bones found
belonged to reindeer; reindeer
hides provided clothing and
coverings for shelters; reindeer
antlers were the hammers used
to produce the long elegant
blades for which these people       FIGURE 4.28 The Les Eyzies region of southern France is known for its concen-
are justly famous; and reindeer     tration of Upper Paleolithic cave and rock shelter sites, including many famous cave
bone was the raw material for       art sites.
ﬁsh gorges, needles, awls, and
other important tools.
      Reindeer travel long distances each year as they follow the grazing lands from one
climatic zone to another. Thus, through the reindeer herds Upper Paleolithic peoples of
southern France could exploit land they had never seen; the reindeer would browse their
way to the far north each year and then return to southern France for the winter, at which
time they could be harvested.
      Average human group size may have been relatively large during the Upper Paleolithic
in Europe, the Middle East, and other areas because of the requirements of hunting large
gregarious mammals such as reindeer, bison, horses, and wild cattle. With some of these
species, an efﬁcient hunting technique is the drive, where many people work together to
stampede a herd over a cliff or into a bog. Such mass slaughter also requires many people
to process the carcasses, and a large group would also have been advantageous in these
circumstances as a means of defending particularly favorable places along the animals’
migration routes.
      The overall population also increased in some parts of Europe—and probably much
of Eurasia—during the last millennia of the Pleistocene. Several factors were probably
important in this population growth. The stone-tool technology of this period, with its
indirect percussion and pressure techniques, was vastly more efﬁcient than previous
industries. Spear throwers, or atlatls, were also in common use—a very signiﬁcant
innovation considering the heavy reliance on big game, since an atlatl can increase the range
of a short spear from about 60 m, if thrown by hand, to about 150 m (Figure 4.29).
Eventually, the bow and arrow also added signiﬁcantly to hunting effectiveness. Some of
the earliest evidence of bows and arrows comes from the Stellmoor site, near Hamburg,
Germany, where about a hundred wooden arrows dating to approximately 10,000 years ago
were recovered. But the bow-arrow combination was probably invented independently and

           176       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                    perhaps long before 10,000
                                                                                    years ago, if small stone tools
                                                                                    called microliths were used as
                                                                                    arrowheads.
                                                                                         Life in the Upper
                                                                                    Paleolithic was somewhat more
                                                                                    severe than one might imagine.
                                                                                    From a sample of 76 Upper
                                                                                    Paleolithic skeletons drawn
                                                                                    from sites in Europe and Asia,
                                                                                    Vallois found that less than
                                                                                    half of these individuals had
                                                                                    reached the age of 21, that only
                                                                                    12 percent were over 40, and
                                                                                    that not a single female had
                                                                                    reached the age of 30.136 In fact,
                                                                                    the distribution of ages and
                                                                                    sexes represented by these
                                                                                    skeletons was not signiﬁcantly
                                                                                    different from what one might
FIGURE 4.29 The atlatl, or spearthrower, was an important new technology in the
                                                                                    expect from a comparable
Upper Paleolithic. Here, John Whittaker of Grinnell College demonstrates how an
atlatl is used.                                                                     sample of Neandertals.137 But
                                                                                    even worse, many skeletons
                                                                                    evidenced rickets, malnutri-
                      tion, and other diseases and deformities. Not content with nature’s provisions for
                      population control, Upper Paleolithic peoples seem also to have occasionally slaughtered
                      each other. At the site of Sandalja II (12,000 b.p.), near Pula, Yugoslavia, for example, the
                      skeletal remains of 29 people were found in a smashed and splintered condition. Elsewhere,
                      there is unmistakable evidence of wounds from arrows and spears.
                           By about 14,000 years ago, the people of western Europe had developed ﬁsh traps to
                      harvest the countless salmon that migrated up the rivers there each year. This relatively late
                      exploitation of ﬁsh in Europe has a parallel in prehistoric southeastern North America,
                      where Native Americans lived for thousands of years subsisting primarily on deer, mussels,
                      and a variety of plant foods, almost totally ignoring the myriad ﬁsh in nearby lakes and
                      streams. If salmon were present in great numbers in European rivers during the Mousterian
                      and early Upper Paleolithic, their exploitation may have been blocked by the terms of
                      human adaptation to reindeer and other animals. Reindeer and other game would have
                      been a more dependable resource for humans, in the sense that at least some of these
                      animals would have been available year-round, while the salmon would have been sharply
                      seasonal. Salmon runs, in fact, might have conﬂicted with the scheduling of reindeer
                      hunting, and as a consequence these peoples may have been far from the river, exploiting
                      different resources, at the time the salmon were most available. Perhaps even more
                      important, the successful exploitation of salmon would have required technological
                      readaptation on a major scale. Catching salmon one by one would not have been especially
                      productive: Their real utility probably came only after nets, ﬁsh weirs, drying racks,
                      smoking racks, and other largely nonportable technology came into common use.

                                                            THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS            177


     The slow growth of
worldwide human population
density through most of the
Pleistocene would seem to
suggest that Upper Paleolithic
populations were not in
any sense “driven” by popula-
tion pressures to exploit new
resources, such as reindeer and
salmon. Rather, it seems the
reverse: As people began to
devise ways to exploit rich
salmon streams, reindeer herds,
and other resources, larger
groups could be supported.
And just a slight increase in
fertility or the number of           FIGURE 4.30 The reconstruction of a 27,000-year-old settlement at Dolni
offspring who lived on the           Vestonice illustrates how people used shelters to colonize the frigid plains of eastern
average to reproductive age          Europe.
would in the long run produce
vastly greater population densities.
     And it was not just in France and the ecologically richer parts of Europe that populations
were growing in the late Pleistocene. Olga Soffer has documented, for example, the ingenuity
of generations of peoples as they adapted to the harsh winters of the central Russian Plain.138
One of the most amply documented Upper Paleolithic cultures in eastern Europe is the
Kostenki-Bershevo culture centered in the Don River Valley, about 470 km southeast of
Moscow. About 25,000–11,000 years ago, the Kostenki-Bershevo area was an open grassland
environment, with no rock shelters, caves, or other natural habitations, and with very little
wood available for ﬁres. People here left a variety of archaeological sites, including base camps,
where pithouses were constructed by digging a pit a meter or so deep, ringing the excavation
with mammoth bones or tusks, and then draping hides over these supports (Figure 4.30).
The savage winters of Pleistocene Russia must have required constantly burning ﬁres, and
the great quantities of bone ash found at these sites indicate that these ﬁres were often fed
with mammoth bones in lieu of very scarce wood. Some excavated pithouses were relatively
large, with many hearths, suggesting that several families may have passed the winter together.
The people of Kostenki subsisted primarily through big-game hunting, mainly of herd
animals such as horses, with an occasional mammoth, wild cow, or reindeer. Numerous
wolf and fox bones at these sites probably reﬂect the hunting of these animals for their fur
for clothing. Like their Upper Paleolithic counterparts elsewhere, the Kostenki people
manufactured a variety of decorative items, including “Venus” ﬁgurines (representations
of women, usually with exaggerated secondary sexual characteristics) (Figure 4.31).


Late Pleistocene Asians
Until recently, few Upper Paleolithic sites were known in East Asia. Excavations at
Zhoukoudian revealed levels dating to about 10,000 years ago containing approximately

           178       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                seven individuals—all of whom had been killed, but
                                                                apparently not eaten. One individual had clearly died
                                                                from an arrow or small spear wound to the skull, and
                                                                another had been beaten about the head with a large
                                                                stone. Elsewhere, two skulls have been retrieved from
                                                                Wadjak, in central Java, but dating these has proved
                                                                difﬁcult.
                                                                      Hundreds of late Pleistocene sites have been
                                                                found in Japan. Dating these sites is difﬁcult, but the
                                                                classic European Upper Paleolithic blade and burin
                                                                industries are well represented in Japan, particularly
                                                                in the northern areas across from Siberia.
                                                                      The earliest known stone tools from Southeast
                                                                Asia may be those of the Sonviian assemblage from
                                                                northern Vietnam, dating to about 23,000 b.p.,139 but
                                                                the Hoabinihian lithics of about 12,000 years ago
                                                                are the earliest widespread Upper Paleolithic lithic
                                                                industry in this area.
                                                                      One of the most intriguing problems in Asian
                                                                prehistory is the initial colonization of Australia.
                                                                One has to imagine that people who were living in a
                                                                world in which the Neandertals still had 15,000 years
                                                                of domination of Europe left somehow managed to
                                                                ﬂoat or sail. The geology seems to admit no other
                                                                possibilities, because even with the most extreme
                                                                estimates of the extent to which Pleistocene glaciers
                                                                lowered worldwide sea levels, people could not have
                                                                got to Australia except over some very deep water.
FIGURE 4.31 Cast of Venus ﬁgurine from Willendorf,              Nor is swimming a realistic possibility. Probably
Austria. These ﬁgurines are widespread across much
                                                                thousands of coastal ﬁsherfolk were washed out to
of Europe during the Gravettian Upper Paleolithic period,
suggesting a shared belief system.
                                                                sea and drowned in many millennia of typhoons and
                                                                ﬂoods, before some fortunate castaways ﬁnally made
                                                                it to Australia.
                             In any case, between 60,000 and 45,000 years ago, the ancestors of the Australian
                      Aborigines somehow managed to cross about 65 km of open ocean to reach Australia. And
                      while it is possible that an occasional boat of ﬁsherfolk was shipwrecked on the New
                      Guinea–Australia coast, computer simulations that take into account normal fertility rates
                      and the genetic diversity of modern populations suggest that more than just a boatload or
                      two of colonists founded that area’s present aboriginal population.140 Two distinct groups
                      of ancient people have been found there,141 which some scholars believe indicate coloniza-
                      tion by two different groups, one a more gracile type, by 50,000 years ago, the other a more
                      robust people, before 20,000 years ago. Like their contemporaries in America, the late
                      Pleistocene Australians lived at a time when many large and small animal species were becom-
                      ing extinct, and their possible role in this extinction pattern remains a matter of controversy.
                             The Australian Aborigines offer a wonderful subject for meditations on the nature of
                      humanity. Consider: These people lived in what may have been nearly complete isolation

                                                        THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS        179


for more than 40,000 years in an ecologically diverse continent, and when ﬁrst encountered
by Europeans in the seventeenth century, their technology hardly approached the sophistica-
tion of the Neandertals: just simple stone tools and rudimentary wooden implements. Yet
they evolved a kinship system and cosmology that most non-Aborigines can only
apprehend dimly after many years of study.



SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

We began this chapter with humans of about 1.5 million years ago spread out along the
warm margins of Africa and Asia, making a reasonable living with little more than crude
stone tools, intellectual abilities far poorer than our own, and probably only the rudiments
of human social organization. We end this chapter, in effect, with ourselves, in the form of
our late Pleistocene relatives of just 30,000 years ago. As to what happened in this period
of a million and a half years, we have a lot of data, but not enough to describe with certainty
some of the most important evolutionary patterns and dynamics. Every year anthropologists
meet in conferences around the world to discuss their research, and this year, like last year
and every previous year, they will debate the origins of modern humans. Like this chapter,
these debates will end with no real resolution. Some anthropologists are convinced that one
or another of these models of human origins is accurate, but no one really knows. Even
with a tenfold increase in ﬁnds of relevant human fossils, these debates would likely
continue for years to come. If Richard Klein is correct,142 for example, the origins of modern
humans may have arisen directly from a single mutation, perhaps in a single individual,
that allowed one group of East Africans to conceptualize time, space, and human possi-
bilities in a way superior to that of all other humans. Such a mutation could have occurred
and left no trace in fragmentary crania. If Frayer, Wolpoff, Thorne, Smith, and Pope—all
advocates of multiregional continuity in human evolution—are correct, they apparently
will need much additional data to convince their colleagues.
      Yet, as noted earlier, it is not necessarily pointless to review evidence and arguments
in unresolved debates. In these conﬂicting ideas about the nature and history of our origins
we can see how “science” operates and we can get a sense of the signiﬁcance of these intellec-
tual problems. Currently, hardly a day passes without the announcement of some new
breakthrough in identifying the genetic basis for some aspect of the human condition, from
our personalities to our susceptibility to disease. To the extent that we are expressions of our
genes, our history and fate, then, are in the selective forces of the past hundreds of thousands
of years. These forces and these genetic patterns are, of course, the basic data in these
debates about modern human origins.
      Given the pace of genetic research, it is not impossible that we will eventually be able
to re-create a Neandertal, but until we do and then give him or her the SATs, we will not
be able to resolve arguments conclusively about just who these people were, what they were
capable of, and how they relate to us.
      In searching for causes of the increasing brain size and other changes that took place
between 400,000 and 30,000 years ago, we might note that rates of evolutionary change
frequently seem to be higher along the margins of a species’ range. This may have been the
case with Homo, as bands of these hominins probed far into England, northern Europe,

180   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      and perhaps northern Eurasia, and began to specialize in various forms of hunting,
      scavenging, and gathering. The Swanscombe and Steinheim individuals, with their nearly
      modern brain size, may be reﬂections of these developments along the northern periphery.
      Gene ﬂow in most hunting-and-gathering societies is sufﬁciently high that these changes
      in brain size and facial architecture would probably have been quickly disseminated over a
      wide area.
           But the “margins” of a cultural animal like early humans can be culturally and
      technologically—not just geographically—deﬁned. As noted later, brain sizes may have
      increased most rapidly in Africa, not on the world’s cold periphery. Brain tissue has a
      relatively high “cost”: It consumes great amounts of energy and oxygen. Also, giving birth
      to large-brained offspring requires a pelvic bone structure that reduces maternal mobility.
      Since Homo erectus was obviously an efﬁcient hunter, forager, and tool-maker, perhaps the
      increased brain size was related to increasing emotional capacities rather than to
      improvements in the problem-solving abilities that were important in hunting or tool-
      making. Great advantages would accrue to a Pleistocene hunting-and-gathering group that
      could organize itself as part of a social network involving many different bands and
      hundreds of individuals, and perhaps the increasing brain size had to do with the selective
      advantage of being able to generalize emotions to scores of “kinsmen.”
           In any case, the great variability of cranial capacity among “normal” people today, and
      the fact that human brain size seems generally to have increased quite uniformly up to
      about 100,000 years ago, should warn against simplistic explanations of this phenomenon.
           To explain the relatively slow rate of technological change between 2 million and
      100,000 years ago, we must reﬂect on the fact that our ancestors of this period were many
      fewer than the large populations of humans that characterized the world even 10,000 years
      ago. Although technological innovation is not a simple product of the number of minds
      available to create new ideas, a strong relationship exists between population numbers and
      innovation in the simple hunting-gathering economies of the early and middle Pleistocene.
      Even as late as 500,000 years ago, there were probably only a million people in the entire
      world. Also, people of this era tended to live much shorter lives. Few survived past 30 years
      of age, and—although few adolescents of any age have believed it—people learn a great deal
      and retain considerable creativity past 30.
           Finally, if we look beyond the bones and stones and the practical analytical questions
      about our past, we might muse on the implications of the evidence presented here. It is
      worth noting that the facts and models about the dynamics of our ancestry recounted here
      and in chapter 3 all but killed a beautiful world- and life-view. The idea of “Nature, red in
      tooth and claw,” as the means by which we emerged from our reptilian past has appalled
      people since the dark truth of our origins was ﬁrst made evident by Darwin. It is thus
      appropriate to end this chapter with a beautifully somber expression of this mortally
      wounded world and life-view, by Alfred, Lord Tennyson, a contemporary of Darwin, and
      a man profoundly anguished by Darwin’s ideas.

          Are God and Nature then at strife,
            That Nature lends such evil dreams?
            So careful of the type she seems,
          So careless of the single life;

                                                              THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS            181


     That I, considering everywhere
       Her secret meaning in her deeds,
       And ﬁnding that of ﬁfty seeds
     She often brings but one to bear,
     I falter where I ﬁrmly trod,
        And falling with my weight of cares
        Upon the great world’s altar-stairs
     That slope thro’ darkness up to God,
     I stretch lame hands of faith, and grope,
        And gather dust and chaff, and call
        To what I feel is Lord of all,
     And faintly trust the larger hope.
     “So careful of the type?” but no.
        From scarpéd cliff and quarried stone
        She cries, “A thousand types are gone:
     I care for nothing: all shall go . . .”
     ...
     Man, her last work, who seem’d so fair,
      Such splendid purpose in his eyes,
      Who roll’d the psalm to wintry skies,
     Who built him fanes of fruitless prayer,
     Who trusted God was love indeed
      And love Creation’s ﬁnal law—
      Tho’ Nature, red in tooth and claw
     With ravine, shriek’d against his creed—
     Who loved, who sufferd countless ills,
       Who battled for the True, the Just,
       Be blown about the desert dust,
     Or seal’d within the iron hills?
     No more? A monster then, a dream,
       A discord. Dragons of the prime,
       That tare each other in their slime,
     Were mellow music match’d with him.
                    From In Memoriam, 1850


BIBLIOGRAPHY
Adcock, G. J., E. S. Dennis, S. Easteal, G. A. Huttley, L. S. Jermiin, W. J. Peacock, and A. Thorne. 2001.
            “Mitochrondrial DNA Sequences in Ancient Australians: Implications for Modern Human Origins.”
            Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 98(2):537–542.
Aiello, L. C. 1993. “The Fossil Evidence for Modern Human Origins in Africa: A Revised View.” American
            Anthropologist 95:73–96.

182   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      Aiello, L. C., and R. I. M. Dunbar. 1993. “Neocortex Size, Group Size, and the Evolution of Language.” Current
                   Anthropology 34:184 –192.
      Arens, W. 1979. The Man-Eating Myth. New York: Oxford University Press.
      Arensburg, B., and A. Belfer-Cohen. 1998. “Sapiens and Neandertals. Rethinking the Levantine Middle Paleolithic
                   Hominids.” In Neandertals and Modern Humans in Western Asia, ed. T. Akazawa, K. Aoki, and
                   O. Bar-Yosef, pp. 311–327. New York: Plenum Press.
      Arsuaga, J-L., I. Martinez, A. Garcia, J-M. Carretero, and E. Carbonell. 1993. “Three New Human Skulls from the
                   Sima de los Huesos Middle Pleistocene Site in Sierra de Atapuerca, Spain.” Nature 362:534 – 537.
      Asfaw, B., Y. Beyene, G. Suwa, R. C. Walter, T. D. White, G. WoldeGabriel, and T. Yemane. 1992. “The Earliest
                   Acheulean from Konso-Gardula.” Nature 360:732–735.
      Bafﬁer, D., and M. Julien. 1990. “L’Outillage en Os des Niveaux Châtelperroniens d’Arcy-sur-Cure (Yonne).” In
                   Paléolithique Moyen Récent et Paléolithique Supérieur Ancien en Europe, ed. C. Farizy, pp. 329 – 334.
                   Nemours: Mémoires du Musée de Préhistoire d’Ile de France 3.
      Bahn, P. G. 1994. “New Advances in the Field of Ice Age Art.” In Origins of Anatomically Modern Humans, eds.
                   M. H. Nitecki and V. Nitecki. New York: Plenum Press.
      Bahn, P., and J. Vertus. 1988. Images of the Ice Age. New York: Viking Press.
      Barham, L., and K. Robson-Brown, eds. 2001. Human Roots: Africa and Asia in the Middle Pleistocene. Bristol:
                   Western Academic & Specialist Press.
      Barton, C. M., G. A. Clark, and A. E. Choen. 1994. “Art as Information: Explaining Upper Paleolithic Art in
                   Western Europe.” World Archaeology 26(2):185–207.
      Bar-Yosef, O. 1994. “The Lower Paleolithic of the Near East.” Journal of World Prehistory 8:211–265.
      ———. 2002. “The Upper Paleolithic Revolution.” Annual Review of Anthropology 31:363 – 393.
      Bar-Yosef, O., and N. Goren-Inbar. 1993. “The Lithic Assemblages of ‘Ubeidiya: A Lower Paleolithic Site in the
                   Jordan Valley.’ ” Qedem (Jerusalem) 45:1–266.
      Bar-Yosef, O., and B. Vandermeersch. 1993. “Modern Humans in the Levant.” Scientiﬁc American (April):94 –
                   100.
      Bednarik, R. G. 1992. “Paleoart and Archaeological Myths.” Cambridge Archaeological Journal 2:27– 43.
      ———. 2003. “A Figurine from the African Acheulian.” Current Anthropology 44(3):405– 413.
      Bellwood, P. 1986. The Prehistory of the Indo-Malaysian Archipelago. Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
      ———. 1987. “The Prehistory of Island Southeast Asia: A Multidisciplinary Review of Recent Research.” Journal
                   of World Prehistory 1(2):171–224.
      Bender, M. 1983. “Comment on G. Krantz (CA 21:773 –79).” Current Anthropology 24(1):113.
      Berger, T. D., and E. Trinkaus. 1995. “Patterns of Trauma Among the Neandertals.” Journal of Archaeological
                   Science 22:841– 852.
      Bermúdez de Castro, J. M., J. L. Arsuaga, E. Carbonell, A. Rosas, I. Martínez, and M. Mosquera. 1997. “A Hominid
                   from the Lower Pleistocene of Atapuerca, Spain: Possible Ancestor to Neandertals and Modern
                   Humans.” Science 276:1392–1395.
      Binford, L. R. 1981. Bones: Ancient Men and Modern Myth. New York: Academic Press.
      ———. 1984. Faunal Remains from Klasies River Mouth. New York: Academic Press.
      ———. 1985. “Human Ancestors: Changing Views of Their Behavior.” Journal of Anthropological Archaeology
                   4(4):292–327.
      Binford, L. R., and S. Binford. 1966. “A Preliminary Analysis of Functional Variability in the Mousterian of
                   Levallois Facies.” In Recent Studies in Paleoanthropology (American Anthropologist special publication),
                   pp. 238 –295.
      Binford, L., and N. Stone. 1986. “Zhoukoudien: A Closer Look.” Current Anthropology 27(5):453– 475.
      Bischoff, J. L., R. Julià, and R. Mora. 1988. “Uranium-Series Dating of the Mousterian Occupation at Abric
                   Romani, Spain.” Nature 332:668 – 670.
      Bischoff, J. L., K. Ludwig, J. Francisco Garcia, E. Carbonell, M. Vaquero, T. W. Stafford, and A. J. T. Jull. 1994.
                   “Dating of the Basal Aurignacian Sandwich at Abric Romani (Catalunya, Spain) by Radiocarbon and
                   Uranium-series.” Journal of Archaeological Science 21:541–551.
      Boaz, N. T., R. L. Ciochon, Q. Xu, and J. Liu. 2000. “Large Mammalian Carnivores as an Taphonomic Factor in
                   the Bone Accumulation at Zhoudoukian.” Acta Anthropologica Sinica. Supplement to Vol. 19:224–234.
      Bocquet-Appel, J.-P., and P. Y. Demars. 2000. “Neanderthal Contraction and Modern Human Colonization of
                   Europe.” Antiquity 74:544 – 552.
      Bordes, F. 1961a. Typologie du paleolithique ancien et moyen. Bordeaux: Publication de l’Institut de Prehistoire de
                   l’Universite de Bordeaux.
      ———. 1961b. “Mousterian Cultures in France.” Science 134:803 – 810.
      ———. 1972. A Tale of Two Caves. New York: Harper & Row.
      Bordes, F., and D. de Sonneville-Bordes. 1970. “The Signiﬁcance of Variability in Paleolithic Assemblages.” World
                   Archaeology 2:61–73.
      Boule, M., and H. Vallois. 1932. Fossil Men. London: Thames and Hudson.

                                                                      THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS                 183


Bowdler, J. M., R. Jones, and A. G. Thorne. 1970. “Pleistocene Human Remains from Australia: A Living Site and
             Human Cremation from Lake Mungo, Western New South Wales.” World Archaeology 2:39 – 60.
Bower, B. 1988. “An Earlier Dawn for Modern Humans?” Science News 133:138.
Brace, C. L. 1975. “Review of Shanidar: The First Flower People. by R. Solecki.” Natural History 80:82 – 86.
Brace, C. L., D. P. Tracer, L. Allen Yaroch, J. Robb, K. Brandt, and A. Russel Nelson. 1993. “Clines and Clusters
             Versus ‘Race’: A Test in Ancient Egypt and of a Death on the Nile.” Yearbook of Physical Anthropology
             36:1–31.
Bräuer, G. 1992. “Africa’s Place in the Evolution of Homo sapiens.” In Continuity or Replacement: Controversies in
             Homo sapiens Evolution, ed. G. Bräuer and F. H. Smith. Rotterdam: A. A. Balkema.
Brennan, M. U. 1991. Health and Disease in the Middle and Upper Paleolithic of Southwestern France: A
             Bioarchaeological Study, Ph.D. Dissertation, New York University, New York.
Brooks, A. S., D. M. Helgren, J. S. Cramer, A. Franklin, W. Hornyak, J. M. Keating, R. G. Klein, W. J. Rink, H. P.
             Schwarcz, J. N. L. Smith, K. Stewart, N. E. Todd, J. Verniers, and J. E. Yellen. 1995. “Dating and Context
             of Three Middle Stone Age Sites with Bone Artifacts in the Upper Semliki Valley, Zaire.” Science
             268:548–552.
Brothwell, D. 1961. “Upper Pleistocene Human Skull from Niah Caves, Sarawak.” Sarawak Museum Journal 9:323.
Brown, K. A., and M. Pluciennik. 2001. “Archaeology and Human Genetics: Lessons for Both.” Antiquity
             75:101–106.
Brown, P., T. Sutikna, M. J. Morwood, R. P. Soejono, Jatmiko, E. Wayhu Saptomo, and R. Awe Due. 2004. “A
             New Small-Bodied Hominin from the Late Pleistocene of Flores, Indonesia.” Nature 431:1055–1061.
Cann, R. L., Rickards, O., and J. K. Lum. 1995. “Mitochondrial DNA and Human Evolution: Our One Lucky
             Mother.” In Origins of Anatomically Modern Humans, eds. M. H. Nitecki and V. Nitecki. New York:
             Plenum Press.
Cann, R. L., M. Stoneking, and A. C. Wilson. 1987. “Mitochondrial DNA and Human Evolution.” Nature
             325:31–36.
Caramelli, D., C. Lalueza-Fox, C. Vernesi, M. Lari, A. Casoli, F. Mallegni, B. Chiarelli, I. Dupanloup, J.
             Bertranpetit, G. Barbujani, and G. Bertorelle. 2003. “Evidence for a Genetic Discontinuity Between
             Neanderthals and 24,000-Year-Old Anatomically Modern Humans.” Proceedings of the National
             Academy of Sciences 100(11):6593 – 6597.
Carbonell, E., J. M. Bermudez de Castro, J. L. Arsuaga, J. C. Diez, A. Rosas, G. Cuenva-Bescos, R. Sala, M.
             Mosquera, and X. Rodríguez. 1995. “Lower Pleistocene Hominids and Artefacts from Atapuerca-TD6
             (Spain).” Science 269:826 – 830.
Carlisle, R. C., and M. I. Siegel. 1974. “Some Problems in the Interpretation of Neanderthal Speech Capabilities.
             A Reply to Lieberman.” American Anthropologist 76:319–322.
Carroll, L. 1920. Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland. Through the Looking Glass and the Hunting of the Snark. New
             York: The Modern Library.
Cavalli-Sforza, L. L., P. Menozzi, and A. Piazza. 1994. The History and Geography of Human Genes. Princeton, NJ:
             Princeton University Press.
Chase, P. G. 1986. The Hunters of Combe Grenal: Approaches to Middle Paleolithic Subsistence in Europe. Oxford:
             BAR International Series 286.
Chase, P. G., and H. L. Dibble. 1987. “Middle Paleolithic Symbolism: A Review of Current Evidence and
             Interpretations.” Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 6:263–294.
Clark, G. A., ed. 1991. Perspectives on the Past: Theoretical Biases in Mediterranean Hunter-Gatherer Research.
             Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
———. 2002. “Neanderthal Archaeology—Implications for Our Origins.” American Anthropologist 104:50 – 67.
Clark, G. A., and J. Lindly. 1991. “On Paradigmatic Biases and Paleolithic Research Traditions.” Current
             Anthropology 32:577–587.
Clottes, J. 2001. “France’s Magical Ice Age Art: Chauvet Cave.” National Geographic (August) 200(2):104 –121.
Clottes, J., A. Beltrán, J. Courtin, and H. Cosquer. 1992. “The Cosquer Cave on Cape Morgiou, Marseilles.”
             Antiquity 66:583–598.
Conkey, M. 1980. “The Identiﬁcation of Prehistoric Hunter-Gatherer Aggregation Sites: The Case of Altamira.”
             Current Anthropology 21:609 – 630.
———. 1987. “New Approaches in the Search for Meaning? A Review of Research in Paleolithic Art.” Journal of
             Field Archaeology 14(4):413 – 430.
Conway, B., J. McNabb, and N. Ashton, eds. 1996. Excavations at Barnﬁeld Pit, Swanscombe, 1968–72. London:
             British Museum.
Coon, C. S. 1962. The Origin of Races. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Davidson, I., and W. Noble. 1989. “The Archaeology of Perception: Traces of Depiction and Language.” Current
             Anthropology 30:125–155.
De Beaune, S. A. 1987. “Paleolithic Lamps and Their Specialization: A Hypothesis.” Current Anthropology
             28(4):569–577.

184   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      Dennell, H. M., H. M. Rendell, and A. E. Hailwood. 1988a. “Late Pliocene Artefacts from Northern Pakistan.”
                   Current Anthropology 29(3):495– 498.
      ———. 1988b. “Early Tool-Making in Asia: Two Million Year Old Artefacts in Pakistan.” Antiquity 62:98 –106.
      D’Errico, F., and A. Nowell. 2000. “A New Look at the Berekhat Ram Figurine: Implications for the Origins of
                   Symbolism.” Cambridge Archaeological Journal 10(1): 123 –167.
      D’Errico, F., J. Zilhão, M. Julián, D. Bafﬁer, and J. Pelegrin. 1998. “Neanderthal Acculturation in Western Europe?
                   A Critical Review of the Evidence and Its Interpretation.” Current Anthropology 39(2):S1–S44.
      Dibble, H. L. 1995. “Middle Paleolithic Scraper Reduction: Background, Clariﬁcation, and Review of the Evidence
                   to Date.” Journal of Archaeological Method and Theory 2(4):299 – 368.
      de Vos, J., P. Sondaar, and C. Swisher. 1994. “Dating Hominid Sites in Indonesia.” Science 266:1726 –1727.
      Dubois, E. 1921. “The Proto-Australian Fossil Man of Wadjak, Java.” Proceedings: Koninklijke Nederlandse
                   Akademie van Wetenschappen 23:1013.
      Falk, D. 1975. “Comparative Anatomy of the Larynx in Man and the Chimpanzee: Implications for Language in
                   Neanderthal.” American Journal of Physical Anthropology 43:123 –132.
      Falk, D., C. Hildebolt, K. Smith, M. J. Morwood, T. Sutikna, P. Borwn, Jatmiko, E. W. Saptomo, B. Brunsden,
                   and F. Prior. 2005. “The Brain of LB1, Homo ﬂoresiensis.” Science 308:243–245.
      Farizy, C. 1990. “The Transition from Middle to Upper Palaeolithic at Arcy-sure-Cure (Yonne, France):
                   Technological, Economic and Social Aspects.” In The Emergence of Modern Humans, ed. P. Mellars.
                   Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
      Ferraro, G., W. Trevatham, and J. Levy. 1994. Anthropology. An Applied Perspective. St. Paul, MN: West Publishing
                   Company.
      Fisher, E. 1979. Woman’s Creation. New York: McGraw-Hill.
      Frankel, D. 1991. Remains to Be See: Archaeological Insights into Australian Prehistory. Melbourne:
      Longman Cheshire.
      Frayer, D. W. 1986. “Cranial Variation at Mladec and the Relationship Between Mousterian and Upper Paleolithic
                   Hominids.” Anthropos 23:243–256.
      Frayer, D. W., and M. H. Wolpoff. 1993. “Comment on ‘Glottogenesis and Modern Homo sapiens’ (R. G. Milo
                   and D. Quiatt).” Current Anthropology 34(5):582–584.
      Frayer, D. W., M. Wolpoff, A. G. Thorne, F. H. Smith, and G. G. Pope. 1993. “Theories of Modern Human Origins:
                   The Paleontological Test.” American Anthropologist 95:14 –50.
      ———. 1994. “Getting It Straight.” American Anthropologist 96:424 – 438.
      Freeman, L. G. 1975. “Acheulian Sites and Stratigraphy in Iberia and the Maghreb.” In After the Australopithecines,
                   ed. K. W. Butzer and G. L. Isaac. The Hague: Mouton.
      ———. 1994. “Torralba and Ambrona: A Review of Discoveries.” In Integrative Paths to the Past: Paleoanthropolog-
                   ical Advances in Honor of F. Clark Howell, ed. R. S. Corruccini and R. L. Ciochon. Englewood Cliffs,
                   NJ: Prentice Hall.
      Freeman, M. 1971. “A Social and Economic Analysis of Systematic Female Infanticide.” American Anthropologist
                   73:1011–1018.
      Gabunia, L., and A. Vekua. 1995. “A Plio-Pleistocene Hominid from Dmanisi, Georgia.” Nature 373:509–512.
      Gabunia, L., A. Vekua, D. Lordkipanidze, C. C. Swisher III, R. Ferring, A. Justus, M. Nioradze, M. Tvalchrelidze,
                   S. C. Antón, G. Bosinski, O. Jöris, M-A. de Lumley, G. Majsuradze, and A. Mouskhelishvili. 2000.
                   “Earliest Pleistocene Hominid Cranial Remains from Dmanisi, Republic of Georgia: Taxonomy,
                   Geological Setting, and Age.” Science 288:1019 –1025.
      Gambier, D. 1989. “Fossil Hominids from the Early Upper Paleolithic (Auignacian) of France.” In The Human
                   Revolution: Behavioral and Biological Perspectives on the Origins of Modern Humans, ed. P. Mellars and
                   C. B. Stringer. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
      Gamble, C. 1994. Timewalkers: The Prehistory of Global Colonization. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
      Gargett, R. H. 1989. “Grave Shortcomings: The Evidence for Neanderthal Burial.” Current Anthropology
                   30(2):157–190.
      Garn, S., and W. Block. 1970. “The Limited Nutritional Value of Cannibalism.” American Anthropologist 72:106.
      Gee, H. 1995. “New Hominid Remains Found in Ethiopia.” Nature 373:272.
      Gisis, I., and O. Bar-Yosef. 1974. “New Excavations in Zuttiyeh Cave, Wadi Amud, Israel.” Paléorient 2:175 –180.
      Goebel, T. 1995. “The Record of Human Occupation of the Russian Subarctic and Arctic.” Byrd Polar Research
                   Center Miscellaneous Series M–335:41– 46.
      Goren-Inbar, N., S. Belitsky, K. Verosub, E. Werker, M. Kislev, A. Heimann, I. Carmi, and A. Rosenfeld. 1992.
                   “New Discoveries at the Middle Pleistocene Acheulian Site of Gesher Benot Ya’aqov, Israel.”
                   Quarternary Research 38:117–128.
      Gould, S. J. 1989. Wonderful Life. New York: W.W. Norton.
      Halverson, J. 1987. “Art for Art’s Sake in the Paleolithic.” Current Anthropology 28(1):63 – 89.
      Harpending, H. 1994. “Gene Frequencies, DNA Sequences, and Human Origins.” Perspectives in Biology and
                   Medicine 37:384 –394.

                                                                    THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS                185


Harrold, F. B. 1989. “Mousterian, Châtelperronian, and Early Aurignacian in Western Europe: Continuity or
             Discontinuity.” In The Human Revolution: Behavioral and Biological Perspectives on the Origins of
             Modern Humans, ed. P. Mellars and C. B. Stringer. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
———. 2000. “The Chatelperronian in Historical Context.” Journal of Anthropological Research 56:59 –75.
Harvati, K., S. R. Frost, and K. P. McNulty. 2004. “Neanderthal Taxonomy Reconsidered: Implications of 3D
             Primate Models of Intra- and Interspeciﬁc Differences.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
             101:1147–1152.
Hayden, B. 1993. “The Cultural Capacities of the Neandertals: A Review and Re-Evaluation.” Journal of Human
             Evolution 24:113–146.
Haynes, C. V. 1992. “Contributions of Radiocarbon Dating to the Geochronology of the Peopling of the New
             World.” In Radiocarbon After Four Decades, ed. R. E. Taylor, A. Long, and R. S. Kra. New York:
             Springer-Verlag.
Herrnstein, R. J., and C. Murray. 1996. The Bell Curve: Intelligence and Class Structure in American Life. New York:
             Simon and Schuster.
Hodder, I. 1986. Reading the Past: Current Approaches to Interpretation in Archaeology. Cambridge, England:
             Cambridge University Press.
Hoffecker, J. G., W. R. Powers, and T. Goebel. 1993. “The Colonization of Beringia and the Peopling of the New
             World.” Science 259:46 –53.
Holloway, R. L., Jr. 1989. “Comment on ‘On Depiction and Language.’” Current Anthropology 30(3):331–
             332.
Howell, F. C. 1961. “Isimila: A Paleolithic Site in Africa.” Scientiﬁc American 205:118 –131.
———. 1994. “A Chronostratigraphic and Taxonomic Framework of the Origin of Modern Humans.” In Origins
             of Anatomically Modern Humans, ed. M. H. Nitecki and V. Nitecki. New York: Plenum Press.
Hublin, J-J. 1990. “Les Peuplements Paléolithiques de’Europe: Un Point de Vue Géographique.” In Paléolithique
             Moyen Récent et Paléolithique Supérieur Ancien en Europe, ed. C. Farizy, pp. 29–37. Nemours:
             Mémoires du Musée de Préhistoire d’Ile de France 3.
Isaac, G. 1975. “Sorting Out the Muddle in the Middle—An Anthropologist’s Post-Conference Appraisal.” In After
             the Australopithecines, ed. K. W. Butzer and G. Isaac. The Hague: Mouton.
———. 1984. “The Archaeology of Human Origins: Studies of the Lower Palaeolithic in East Africa, 1971–1981.”
             Advances in World Archaeology 3:1– 89.
James, S. R. 1989. “Hominid Use of Fire in the Lower and Middle Pleistocene: A Review of the Evidence.” Current
             Anthropology 30(1):1–26.
Jelinek, A. J. 1982a. “The Tabun Cave and Paleolithic Man in the Levant.” Science 216:1369–1375.
———. 1994. “Hominids, Energy, Environment, and Behavior in the Late Pleistocene.” In Origins of Anatomically
             Modern Humans, ed. M. H. Nitecki and V. Nitecki. New York: Plenum Press.
Jones, R. 1990. “From Kakadu to Kutikina: The Southern Continent at 18,000 Years Ago.” In The World at 18,000
             BP: Low Latitudes, ed. C. Gamble and O. Soffer. London: Unwin Hyman.
Jorgensen, G. 1977. “A Contribution of the Hypothesis of a Little More Fitness of Blood Group O.” Journal of
             Human Evolution 6:741–744.
Klein, R. G. 1973. Ice-Age Hunters of the Ukraine. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
———. 1987. “Reconstructing How Early People Exploited Animals: Problems and Prospects.” In The Evolution
             of Human Hunting, ed. M. H. Nitecki and D. V. Nitecki. New York: Plenum Press.
———. 1999. The Human Career. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
———. 1995. “Anatomy, Behavior, and Modern Human Origins.” Journal of World Prehistory 9(2):167–198.
———. 2003. “Whither the Neanderthals?” Science 299:1525 –1527.
Klein, R. G., and B. Edgar. 2002. The Dawn of Human Culture. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Krings, M., C. Capelli, F. Tschentscher, H. Geisert, S. Meyer, A. von Haeseler, K. Grossschmidt, G. Possnert,
             M. Paunovic, and S. Pääbo. 2000. “A View of Neanderthal Genetic Diversity.” Nature Genetics
             26:144–146.
Krings, M., A. Stone, R. W. Schmitz, H. Drainitzki, M. Stoneking, and S. Pääbo. 1997. “Neanderthal DNA
             Sequences and the Origin of Modern Humans.” Cell 90:19 – 30.
Kuzmin, Y. V. 1994. “Prehistoric Colonization of Northeastern Siberia and Migration to America: Radiocarbon
             Evidence.” Radiocarbon 36:367–376.
Lahr, M. M. 1994. “The Multiregional Model of Modern Human Origins: A Reassessment of Its Morphological
             Basis.” Journal of Human Evolution 26:23–56.
Larichev, V., U. Khol’ushkin, and I. Laricheva. 1987. “Lower and Middle Paleolithic of Northern Asia:
             Achievements, Problems, and Perspectives.” Journal of World Prehistory 1(4):415 – 464.
Laville, H., Rigaud J.-P., and J. Sackett. 1980. Rock Shelters of the Perigord. New York: Academic Press.
Leakey, L. S. 1951. Olduvai Gorge, 1931–1951. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Leroi-Gourhan, A. 1968. “The Evolution of Paleolithic Art.” Scientiﬁc American 209(2):58 –74.
———. 1982. The Dawn of European Art. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.

186   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      Leveque, F., A. M. Backer, and M. Guilband, eds. 1993. Context of a Late Neandertal: Implications of
                  Multidisciplinary Research for the Transition to Upper Paleolithic Adaptations at Saint-Cesaire, Charente-
                  Maritime, France. Madison, WI: Prehistory Press.
      Leveque, F., and B. Vandermeersch. 1980. “Les Decouvertes de Restes Humains dans un Horizon Castelperronien
                  de Saint-Cesaire (Charente-Maritime).” Bulletin de la Societe Prehistorique Francaise 77:35.
      Lewis-Williams, J. D., and T. A. Dowson. 1988. “The Signs of All Times: Entopic Phenomena in Upper Paleolithic
                  Art.” Current Anthropology 29(2):201–246.
      Lieberman, D. E. 1995. “Testing Hypotheses About Recent Human Evolution from Skulls.” Current Anthropology
                  36:159–197.
      Lieberman, L., and F. L. C. Jackson. 1995. “Race and Three Models of Human Origin.” American Anthropologist
                  97(2):231–242.
      Lieberman, P. E. 1991. Uniquely Human: The Evolution of Speech, Thought, and Selﬂess Behavior. Cambridge, MA:
                  Harvard University Press.
      ———. 2002. “On the Nature and Evolution of the Neural Bases of Human Language.” Yearbook of Physical
                  Anthropology 45:36 – 61.
      Lieberman, P. E., and E. S. Crelin. 1971. “On the Speech of Neanderthals.” Linguistic Inquiry 2:203 –222.
      Lieberman, P. E., E. S. Crelin, and D. H. Klatt. 1972. “Phonetic Ability and Related Anatomy of the Newborn and
                  Adult Human, Neanderthal Man, and the Chimpanzee.” American Anthropologist 74:287.
      Lindly, J. M., and G. A. Clark. 1990. “Symbolism and Modern Human Origins.” Current Anthropology 31:233–240.
      Littleﬁeld, A., L. Lieberman, and L. T. Reynolds. 1982. “Redeﬁning Race: The Potential Demise of a Concept in
                  Physical Anthropology.” Current Anthropology 23(6):641– 655.
      Lourandos, H. 1997. Continent of Hunter-Gatherers: New Perspectives in Australian Prehistory. New York:
                  Cambridge University Press.
      Lovejoy, O., and E. Trinkaus. 1980. “Strength of Robusticity of the Neanderthal Tibia.” American Journal of
                  Physical Anthropology 53:465 – 470.
      Lumley, H. de, and M. A. de Lumley. 1971. “Decouverte de restes humains anteneandertaliens dates du debut du
                  Riss la Caune de l’Arago (Tautavel, Pyrenees-Orientales).” Comptes Rendus de l’Academie des Sciences
                  de Paris 272:1739 –1742.
      Lumley, M. A. de. 1975. “Ante-Neanderthals of Western Europe.” In Australopithecus Paleoanthropology:
                  Morphology and Paleoecology, ed. R. H. Tuttle. The Hague: Mouton.
      Macaulay, V., C. Hill., A. Achilli, C. Rengo, D. Clarke, W. Meehan, J. Blackburn, O. Semino, R. Scozzari,
                  F. Cruciani, A. Taha, N. K. Shaari, J. M. Raja, P. Ismail, Z. Zainuddin, W. Goodwin, D. Bulbeck,
                  H.-J. Bandelt, S. Oppenheimer, A. Torroni, and M. Richards. 2005. “Single, Rapid Coastal Settlement
                  of Asia Revealed by Analysis of Complete Mitochondrial Genomes.” Science 308:1034 –1036.
      Marks, J. 1995. Human Biodiversity: Genes, Race, and History. Hawthorne, NY: Aldine de Gruyter.
      Marshack, A. 1976. “Some Implications of the Paleolithic Symbolic Evidence for the Origins of Language.” Current
                  Anthropology 17:274 – 282.
      McBrearty, S., and A. S. Brooks. 2000. “The Revolution That Wasn’t: A New Interpretation of the Origin of
                  Modern Human Behavior.” Journal of Human Evolution 39:453–563.
      Mellars, P. 1985. “The Ecological Basis of Social Complexity in the Upper Palaeolithic of Southwestern France”.
                  In Prehistoric Hunter-Gatherers: The Emergence of Cultural Complexity, ed. T. D. Price and J. Brown.
                  Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
      ———. 1989. “Major Issues in the Emergence of Modern Humans.” Current Anthropology 30:349–385.
      ———, ed. 1990. The Emergence of Modern Humans. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
      ———. 1992. “Cognitive Changes and the Emergence of Modern Humans in Europe.” Cambridge Archaeological
                  Journal 1:63–76.
      ———. 1993. “Archaeology and the Population-Dispersal Hypothesis of Modern Human Origins in Europe.” In
                  The Origin of Modern Humans and the Impact of Chronometric Dating, eds. M. J. Aitken, C. B. Stringer,
                  and P. A. Mellars. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
      Mellars, P., and C. Stringer, eds. 1989. The Human Revolution. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
      Melnick, D. J., and G. A. Hoelzer. 1993. “What Is mtDNA Good for in the Study of Primate Evolution?”
                  Evolutionary Anthropology 2(1):2–10.
      Meltzer, D. J. 1993. “Pleistocene Peopling of the Americas.” Evolutionary Anthropology 1:157–169.
      Mercier, N., and H. Valladas. 1994. “Thermoluminescence Dates for the Paleolithic Levant.” In Late Quaternary
                  Chronology and Paleoclimates of the Eastern Mediterranean. ed. O. Bar-Yosef and R. S. Kra. Tucson:
                  Radiocarbon.
      Milo, R. G., and D. Quiatt. 1994. “Language in the Middle and Late Stone Ages: Glottogenesis in Anatomically
                  Modern Homo sapiens.” In Hominid Culture in Primate Perspective, ed. D. Quiatt and J. Itani. Niwot:
                  University Press of Colorado.
      Mountain, J. L., A. A. Lin, A. M. Bowcock, and L. L. Cavalli-Sforza. 1993. “Evolution of Modern Humans:
                  Evidence from Nuclear DNA Polymorphisms.” In The Origin of Modern Humans and the Impact of

                                                                   THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS               187


            Chronometric Dating, ed. M. J. Aitken, C. B. Stringer, and P. A. Mellars. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
            University Press.
Nitecki, M. H., and D. V. Nitecki, eds. 1995. Origins of Anatomically Modern Humans. New York: Plenum Press.
O’Connell, J. F., K. Hawkes, and N. Blurton-Jones. 1988. “Hadza Scavenging: Implications for Plio/Pleistocene
            Hominid Subsistence.” Current Anthropology 29:356 – 363.
Olsen, J. W., and S. Miller-Antonio. 1992. “The Paleolithic in Southern China.” Asian Perspectives 31:129–160.
Olszewski, D. I. 1999. “The Early Upper Palaeolithic in the Zagros Mountains.” In Dorothy Garrod and the Progress
            of the Palaeolithic, ed. W. Davies and R. Charles, pp. 167–180. Oxford: Oxbow Books.
———. in press. “Issues in the Development of the Early Upper Paleolithic, and a ‘Transitional’ Industry from
            the Zagros Region.” In Transitional Industries in Europe and Western Asia, ed. J. Riel-Salvatore and
            G. A. Clark. British Archaeological Reports International Series. Oxford: Archaeopress.
Ovchinnikov, I. V., A. Götherström, G. P. Romanova, V. M. Kharitonov, K. Lidén, and W. Goodwin. 2000.
            “Molecular Analysis of Neanderthal DNA from the Northern Caucasus.” Nature 404:490 – 493.
Parés, J. M., and A. Pérez-Gonzalez. 1995. “Paleomagnetic Age for Hominid Fossils at Atapuerca Archaeological
            Site, Spain.” Science 269:830 – 832.
Pelcin, A. 1994. “A Geological Explanation for the Berkehat Ram Figurine.” Current Anthropology 35:674 – 675.
Petraglia, M. 1999. “The First Acheulian Quarry in India: Stone Tool Manufacture, Biface Morphology, and
            Behaviors.” Journal of Anthropological Research 55(1):39–70.
Pope, G. G. 1984. “The Antiquity and Palaeoenvironment of the Asian Hominidae.” In The Evolution of the East
            Asian Environment, ed. R . O. I. Whyte. Hong Kong: Center of Asian Studies, University of Hong Kong.
———. 1989. “Bamboo and Human Evolution.” Natural History 10(89):49–56.
Prideaux, T., and the Editors of Time-Life. 1973. Cro-Magnon Man. New York: Time-Life.
Relethford, J. H. 2001. “Absence of Regional Afﬁnities of Neandertal DNA with Living Humans Does Not Reject
            Multiregional Evolution.” American Journal of Physical Anthropology 115:95–98.
Renfrew, C. 1988. “Archaeology and Language.” Current Anthropology 29(3):437– 468.
Rice, P. C., and A. L. Paterson. 1985. “Cave Art and Bones: Exploring the Interrelationships.” American
            Anthropologist 87(1):94 –100.
Rightmire, P. 1990. The Evolution of Homo erectus. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
———. 1992. “Homo erectus: Ancestor of Evolutionary Side Branch?” Evolutionary Anthropology 1:43 – 49.
Rink, W. J., H. P. Schwarcz, F. H. Smith, and J. Radovcic. 1995. “ESR Ages for Krapina Hominids.” Nature
            387:173–176.
Roberts, D. F. 1953. “Body Weight, Race and Climate.” American Journal of Physical Anthropology NS 11:533–558.
Roberts, M. B., Stringer, C. B., and Parﬁtt, S. A. 1994. “A Hominid Tibia from Middle Pleistocene Sediments at
            Boxgrove, UK.” Nature 369:311–312.
Roberts, R. G., R. Jones, N. A. Spooner, M. J. Head, A. S. Murray, and M. A. Smith. 1994. “The Human
            Colonisation of Australia: Optical Dates of 53,000 and 60,000 Years Bracket Human Arrival at Deaf
            Adder Gorge, Northern Territory.” Quaternary Science Reviews 13:575–586.
Roe, D. A. 1981. The Lower and Middle Paleolithic Periods in Britain. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Roebroeks, W. 1994. “Updating the Earliest Occupation of Europe.” Current Anthropology 35:301– 305.
Roebroeks, W., and T. van Kolfschoten. 1994. “The Earliest Occupation of Europe: A Short Chronology.”
            Antiquity 68:489–503.
Ruff, C. B. 1993. “Climatic Adaptation and Hominid Evolution: The Thermoregulatory Imperative.” Evolutionary
            Anthropology 2:65–107.
Rushton, J. P. 1994. Race, Evolution, and Behavior: A Life History Perspective. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction
            Publishers.
Russell, M. D. 1987a. “Bone Breakage in the Krapina Hominid Collection.” American Journal of Physical
            Anthropology 72:373 – 380.
———. 1987b. “Mortuary Practices at the Krapina Neandertal Site.” American Journal of Physical Anthropology
            72:381–398.
Schick, K. 1992. “Geoarchaeological Analysis of an Acheulean Site at Kalambo Falls, Zambia.” Geoarchaeology
            7(1):1–26.
Schick, K. D., and D. Zhuan. 1993. “Early Paleolithic of China and Eastern Asia.” Evolutionary Anthropology
            2(1):22–35.
Schwarcz, H. P. 1994. “Chronology of Modern Humans in the Levant.” In Late Quaternary Chronology and
            Paleoclimates of the Eastern Mediterranean, ed. O. Bar-Yosef and R. S. Kra. Tucson: Radiocarbon.
Semino, O., G. Passarino, P. J. Oefner, A. A. Lin, S. Arbuzova, L. E. Beckman, G. De Benedicts, P. Francalacci, A.
            Kouvatsi, S. Limborska, M. Marcikiæ, A. Mika, B. Mika, D. Primorac, A. S. Santachiara-Benerecetti,
            L. L. Cavalli-Sforza, and P. A. Underhill. 2000. “ The Genetic Legacy of Paleolithic Homo sapiens in
            Extant Europeans: A Y Chromosome Perspective.” Science 290:1155–1159.
Serge, A., and A. Asconzi. 1984. “Italy’s Earliest Middle Pleistocene Hominid Site.” Current Anthropology
            25(2):230–235.

188   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      Sevink, J., E. H. Hebeda, H. N. Priem, and R. H. Verschure. 1981. “A Note on the Approximately 730,000-Year-
                   Old Mammal Fauna and Associated Human Activity Sites Near Isernia, Central Italy.” Journal of
                   Archaeological Science 8:105 –106.
      Shapiro, H. 1974. Peking Man. New York: Simon and Schuster.
      Shea, J. J. 1988. “Spear Points from the Middle Paleolithic of the Levant.” Journal of Field Archaeology
                   15(4):441– 456.
      ———. 2003. “Close Encounters: Neandertals and Modern Humans in the Middle Palaeolithic Levant.” The
                   Review of Archaeology 24(1):42 – 56.
      Sherry, S. T., A. R. Rogers, H. Harpending, H. Soodyall, T. Jenkins, and M. Stoneking. 1994. “Mismatch
                   Distributions of mtDNA Reveal Recent Human Population Expansions.” Human Biology 66:671– 675.
      Shipman, P. 1983. “Early Hominid Lifestyle: Hunting and Gathering or Foraging and Scavenging?” In Animals
                   and Archaeology: Hunters and Their Prey, ed. J. Clutton-Brock and C. Grigson. Oxford, England: British
                   Archaeological Reports.
      Shipman, P., and J. Rose. 1983. “Early Hominid Hunting, Butchering and Carcass-Processing Behaviors:
                   Approaches to the Fossil Record.” Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 2:57– 98.
      Singer, R., and J. Wymer. 1982. The Middle Stone Age at Klasies River Mouth in South Africa. Chicago: University
                   of Chicago Press.
      Singer, R., B. Gladfelter, and J. Wymer. 1993. The Lower Paleolithic Site at Hoxne, England. Chicago: University
                   of Chicago Press.
      Smith, F. H. 1982. “Upper Pleistocene Hominid Evolution in South-Central Europe: A Review of the Evidence
                   and Analysis of Trends.” Current Anthropology 23(6):667– 703.
      ———. 1994. “Samples, Species, and Speculations in the Study of Modern Human Origins.” In Origins of
                   Anatomically Modern Humans, ed. M. H. Nitecki and V. Nitecki. New York: Plenum Press.
      Smith, F. H., J. F. Simek, and M. S. Hamill. 1989. “Geographic Variation in Supraorbital Torus Reduction During
                   the Later Pleistocene (c. 80,000–15,000 bp).” In The Human Revolution: Behavioural and Biological
                   Perspectives on the Origins of Modern Humans, ed. P. Mellars and C. B. Stringer. Edinburgh: Edinburgh
                   University Press.
      So, J. K. 1980. “Human Biological Adaptation to Arctic and Subarctic Zones.” Annual Review of Anthropology
                   9:63 – 82.
      Soffer, O. 1985. The Upper Paleolithic of the Central Russian Plain. New York: Academic Press.
      ———. 1993. “Upper Palaeolithic Adaptations in Central and Eastern Europe and Man-Mammoth Interactions.”
                   In From Kostenki to Clovis, ed. O. Soffer and N. D. Praslov. New York: Plenum Press.
      ———. 1994. “Ancestral Lifeways in Eurasia—the Middle and Upper Paleolithic Records.” In Origins of
                   Anatomically Modern Humans, ed. M. H. Nitecki and D. V. Nitecki. New York: Plenum Press.
      ———, ed. 1987. The Pleistocene Old World: Regional Perspectives. New York: Plenum Press.
      Soffer, O., and C. Gamble, eds. 1990. The World in 18,000 B.P. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
      Soffer, O., and N. D. Praslov, ed. 1995. From Kostenki to Clovis: Upper Paleolithic–Paleo-Indian Adaptations. New
                   York: Plenum Press.
      Speth, J. D. 1990. “Seasonality, Resource Stress, and Food Sharing in So-Called ‘Egalitarian’ Foraging Societies.”
                   Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 9:148 –188.
      Spoor, F., B. Wood, and F. Zonneveld. 1994. “Implications of Early Hominid Labryinthine Morphology for
                   Evolution of Human Bipedal Locomotion.” Nature 369:645 – 648.
      Steegmann. A. T., F. J. Cerny, and T. W. Holliday. 2002. “Neandertal Cold Adaptation: Physiological and Energetic
                   Factors.” American Journal of Human Biology 14: 566 –583.
      Stoneking, M. 1993. “DNA and Recent Human Evolution.” Evolutionary Anthropology 2:60 –73.
      Straus, L. G. 1993/1994. “Upper Paleolithic Origins and Radiocarbon Calibration: More New Evidence from
                   Spain.” Evolutionary Anthropology 2(6):195–198.
      ———. 1995. Iberia Before the Iberians: The Stone Age Prehistory of Cantabrian Spain. Albuquerque: University
                   of New Mexico Press.
      Straus, W., and A. Cave. 1957. “Pathology and the Posture of Neanderthal Man.” Quarterly Review of Biology
                   32:348.
      Stringer, C., and G. Bräuer. 1994. “Methods, Misreading, and Bias.” American Anthropologist 96:416 – 424.
      Stringer, C., and C. Gamble. 1993. The Search for the Neanderthals. London: Thames and Hudson.
      Stringer, C., F. C. Howell, and J. K. Melentis. 1979. “The Signiﬁcance of the Fossil Hominid from Petralona,
                   Greece.” Journal of Archaeological Science 6:235 –253.
      Svoboda, J. 1987. “Lithic Industries of the Arago, Vertesszollos, and Bilzingsleben Hominids: Comparison and
                   Evolutionary Interpretation.” Current Anthropology 28(2):219 –227.
      Swisher, C., G. H. Curtis, T. Jacob, A. G. Getty, A. Suprijo, and Widiasmoro. 1994. “Age of the Earliest Known
                   Hominids in Java, Indonesia.” Science 263:1119 –1121.
      Taborin, Y. 1990. “Les Prémices de la Parure.” In Paléolithique Moyen Récent et Paléolithique Supérieur Ancien en
                   Europe, ed. C. Farizy, pp. 335 – 344. Nemours: Mémoires du Musée de Préhistoire d’Ile de France 3.

                                                                    THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS                189


Tchernov, E. 1988. “Age of ‘Ubeidiya Formation (Jordan Valley, Israel) and the Earliest Hominids in the Levant.”
            Paléorient 14(2):63 – 65.
———. 1994. “New Comments on the Biostratigraphy of the Middle and Upper Plesitocene of the
            Southern Levant.” In Late Quaternary Chronology and Paleoclimates of the Eastern Mediterranean,
            ed. O. Bar-Yosef and R. S. Kra. Tucson: Radiocarbon.
Thackeray, A. I. 1992. “The Middle Stone Age South of the Limpopo River.” Journal of World Prehistory 6:385–440.
Thiel, B. 1987. “Early Settlement of the Philippines, Eastern Indonesia, and Australia-New Guinea: A New
            Hypothesis.” Current Anthropology 28(2):236 –241.
Thieme, H. 1997. “Lower Palaeolithic Hunting Spears from Germany.” Nature 385:807– 810.
Thorne, A. 1980. “The Arrival of Man in Australia.” In The Cambridge Encyclopedia of Archaeology. New York:
            Crown Publishers/Cambridge University Press.
Thorne, A. G., and M. Wolpoff. 1981. “Regional Continuity and Australasian Pleistocene Hominid Evolution.”
            American Journal of Physical Anthropology 55:337– 349.
Torroni, A., H.-J. Bandelt, L. D’Urbano, P. Lahermo, P. Moral, D. Sellitto, C. Rengo, P. Forster, M.-L. Savontaus,
            B. Bonné-Tamir, and R. Scozzari. 1998. “mtDNA Analysis Reveals a Major Late Paleolithic Expansion
            from Southwestern to Northeastern Europe.” American Journal of Human Genetics 62:1137–1152.
Trinkaus, E. 1982. “Evolutionary Continuity Among Archaic Homo sapiens.” In The Transition from Lower to
            Middle Palaeolithic and Origin of Modern Man, ed. A. Ronen. Oxford: BAR International Series 151.
———. 1983. The Shanidar Neanderthals. New York: Academic Press.
———. 1985. “Cannibalism and Burial at Krapina.” Journal of Human Evolution 14:203 –216.
———. 1986. “The Neanderthals and Modern Human Origins.” Annual Review of Anthropology 15:193 – 218.
———. 1995. “Neanderthal Mortality Patterns.” Journal of Archaeological Science 22:121–142.
Trinkaus, E., and C. Duarte. 2003. “The Hybrid Child from Portugal.” Scientiﬁc American Special Edition: New
            Look at Human Evolution 13(2):32 – 33.
Trinkaus, E., and W. W. Howells. 1979. “The Neanderthals.” Scientiﬁc American 241:118 –133.
Trinkaus, E., and P. Shipman. 1992. The Neanderthals: Changing the Image of Mankind. New York: Alfred A.
            Knopf.
Turner, A. 1992. “Large Carnivores and Earliest European Hominids: Changing Determinants of Resource
            Availability During the Lower and Middle Pleistocene.” Journal of Human Evolution 22:109 –126.
Valladas, H., J. Clottes, M.-M. Geneste, M. A. Garcia, M. Arnold, H. Cachier, and N. Tisnérat-Laborde. 2001.
            “Evolution of Prehistoric Cave Art.” Nature 413:479.
Valladas, H., J. L. Reyss, J. L. Joron, G. Valladas, O. Bar-Yosef, and B. Vandermeersch. 1988.
            “Thermoluminescence Dating of Mousterian ‘Proto-Cro-Magnon’ Remains from Israel and the
            Origin of Modern Man.” Nature 331:614–616.
Vallois, H. 1961. “The Social Life of Early Man: The Evidence of the Skeletons.” In Social Life of Early Man, ed. S.
            Washburn. Chicago: Aldine.
Van Andel, T. J., and W. Davies, eds. 2003. Neanderthals and Modern Humans in the European Landscape During
            the Last Glaciation: Archaeological Results of the Stage 3 Project. Cambridge, England: McDonald
            Institute for Archaeological Research.
Vekua, A., D. Lordkipanidze, G. P. Rightmire, J. Agusti, R. Ferring, G. Maisuradze, A. Mouskhelishvili,
            M. Nioadze, M. Ponce de Leon, M. Tappen, M. Tvalchrelidze, and C. Zollikofer. 2002. “A New Skull
            of Early Homo from Dmanisi, Georgia.” Science 297:85 – 89.
Vértes, L. 1975. “The Lower Palaeolithic Site of Vérteszöllös, Hungary.” In Recent Archaeological Excavations in
            Europe, ed. R. Bruce-Mitford, pp. 287–301. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Villa, P. 1991. “Middle Pleistocene Prehistory in Southwestern Europe: The State of Our Knowledge and
            Ignorance.” Journal of Anthropological Research 47(2):193 –218.
———. 2001. “Early Italy and the Colonization of Western Europe.” Quaternary International 75:113 –130.
Walker, A., and R. E. Leakey, eds. 1993. The Nariokotome Homo erectus Skeleton. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
            University Press.
Warren, S. H. 1911. “Palaeolithic Wooden Spear from Clacton.” Quarterly Journal of the Geological Society
            (London) 67:cxix.
Weidenreich, F. 1946. Apes, Giants, and Man. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
White, J. P., and J. F. O’Connell. 1982. A Prehistory of Australia, New Guinea and Sahul. Sydney: Academic.
White, R. 1982. “Rethinking the Middle/Upper Paleolithic Transition.” Current Anthropology 23:169–191.
———. 1986. Dark Caves and Bright Visions. New York: American Museum of Natural History.
———. 1989. “Production Complexity and Standardization in Early Aurignacian Bead and Pendant
            Manufacture.” In The Human Revolution: Behavioral and Biological Perspectives on the Origins of
            Modern Humans, ed. P. Mellars and C. B. Stringer. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
———. 1992. “Beyond Art: Toward an Understanding of the Origins of Material Representation in Europe.”
            Annual Review of Anthropology 21:537– 564.
White, T. D. 1991. “The Question of Ritual Cannibalism at Grotta Guattari.” Current Anthropology 32(2):103–138.

190   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      White, T. D., B. Asfaw, D. Degusta, H. Gilbert, G. D. Richards, G. Suwa, and F. C. Howell. 2003. “Pleistocene
                  Homo sapiens from Middle Awash, Ethiopia.” Nature 423:742 –747.
      Windels, F. 1965. The Lascaux Cave Paintings. London: Faber and Faber.
      Wobst, H. M. 1977. “Stylistic Behavior and Information Exchange.” In For the Director: Research Essays in Honor
                  of James B. Grifﬁn, ed. C. Cleland. Ann Arbor: Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan,
                  No. 61.
      Wolpoff, M. 1968. “Climatic Inﬂuence on the Skeletal Nasal Aperture.” American Journal of Physical Anthropology
                  29:405 – 423.
      Wolpoff, M. H., J. Hawks, D. W. Frayer, and K. Hunley. 2001. “Modern Human Ancestry at the Peripheries: A
                  Test of the Replacement Theory.” Science 291:293 –297.
      Wolpoff, M., Xinzhi Wu, and A. G. Thorne. 1984. “Modern Homo sapiens Origins: A General Theory of Hominid
                  Evolution Involving the Fossil Evidence from East Asia.” In The Origins of Modern Humans: A World
                  Survey of the Fossil Evidence, ed. F. H. Smith and F. Spencer. New York: Alan R. Liss.
      Wolpoff, M. H., A. G. Thorne, F. H. Smith, D. W. Frayer, and G. G. Pope. 1994. “Multiregional Evolution: A
                  World-Wide Source for Modern Human Populations.” In Origins of Anatomically Modern Humans,
                  ed. M. H. Nitecki and V. Nitecki. New York: Plenum Press.
      Wu Rukang and Jia Lampo. 1994. “China in the Period of Homo habilis and Homo erectus.” In History of
                  Humanity, Vol. 1, ed S. J. De Laet. Londond: Routledge.
      Wymer, J. J. 1964. “Excavations at Barnﬁeld Pit, 1955 – 60.” In The Swanscombe Skull, ed. C.D. Ovey, pp. 19 – 61.
                  London: Royal Anthropological Institute.
      Yellen, J. E., A. S. Brooks, E. Cornelissen, M. J. Mehlman, and K. Stewart. 1995. “A Middle Stone Age Worked
                  Bone Industry from Katanda, Upper Semliki Valley, Zaire.” Science 268:553 –556.
      Zhu, R. X., R. Potts, F. Xie, K. A. Hoffman, C. L. Deng, C. D. Shi, Y. X. Pan, H. Q. Wang, R. P. Shi, Y. C. Wang,
                  G. H. Shi, and N. Q. Wu. 2004. “New Evidence on the Earliest Human Presence at High Northern
                  Latitudes in Northeast Asia.” Nature 431:559 – 562.



      NOTES
        1. Last Poems, 1922, no. 12.
        2. Gould, Wonderful Life.
        3. Although it will be interesting to follow developments in the recent discovery in Indonesia of Homo ﬂore-
           siensis (see Brown et al., “A New Small-Bodied Hominin from the Late Pleistocene of Flores, Indonesia”).
           These hominins, dubbed by some of their discoverers and in the popular press as “hobbits,” date to about
           18,000 years ago, and thus, at least in this isolated island context, are contemporary with modern forms of
           humans. Homo ﬂoresiensis stood only about 3 feet tall and had a brain size in the range of Australopiths,
           about 380 c3; it was obviously a quite different animal than us.
        4. Klein, The Human Career, pp. 283 – 295.
        5. Ibid., p. 409.
        6. Other names of early hominins include Homo antecessor (Spain), Homo heidelbergensis (Africa and Europe),
           Homo louisleakeyi (Africa), and Homo rhodesiensis (Africa). See Klein, The Human Career; McBrearty
           and Brooks, “The Revolution That Wasn’t: A New Interpretation of the Origin of Modern Human
           Behavior.”
        7. Reviewed in Klein, The Human Career, pp. 333 – 338.
        8. Isaac, “The Archaeology of Human Origins,” p. 60.
        9. Isaac, “Sorting Out the Muddle in the Middle – An Anthropologist’s Post-Conference Appraisal,” p. 504.
       10. Shipman, “Early Hominid Lifestyle.”
       11. Impressive numbers of hand-axes at sites could also be the result of taphonomic processes; see, for
           example, Schick, “Geological Analysis of an Acheulean Site at Kalambo Falls, Zambia.”
       12. Binford, Bones, Ancient Men and Modern Myth, p. 294; idem., “Human Ancestors.”
       13. Several claims have been made for the early use of ﬁre, perhaps as early as 1.4 million years ago in Africa,
           but closer analyses of these ﬁnds suggest instead that taphonomic processes are responsible. Natural brush
           ﬁres, for example, leave a scatter of charcoal across both sites and the surrounding region. See, for example,
           James, “Hominid Use of Fire.”
       14. Roberts, “Body Weight, Race and Climate.”
       15. Binford, “Human Ancestors: Changing Views of Their Behavior.”
       16. Gabunia et al., “Earliest Pleistocene Hominid Cranial Remains from Dmanisi, Republic of Georgia:
           Taxonomy, Geological Setting, and Age.”
       17. Zhu et al., “New Evidence on the Earliest Human Presence at High Northern Latitudes in Northeast Asia.”
       18. de Vos, Sondaar, and Swisher, “Dating Hominid Sites in Indonesia.”

                                                                    THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS                 191


19. Bar-Yosef and Goren-Inbar, “The Lithic Assemblage of ‘Ubeidiya: A Lower Paleolithic Site in the Jordan
    Valley”; Tchernov, “Age of ‘Ubeidiya Formation (Jordan Valley, Israel) and the Earliest Hominids in the
    Levant.”
20. Klein, “Anatomy, Behavior, and Modern Human Origins.”
21. Klein, ibid., p. 178.
22. These are the Homo antecessor remains. See Bermúdez de Castro et al., “A Hominid from the Lower
    Pleistocene of Atapuerca, Spain: Possible Ancestor to Neandertals and Modern Humans.”
23. Sevink et al., “A Note on the Approximately 730,000-Year-Old Mammal Fauna and Associated Human
    Activity Sites Near Isernia, Central Italy”; but see Villa, “Early Italy and the Colonization of Western Europe,”
    who raises questions about the very early date, as well as taphonomic issues in site formation.
24. Wu Rukang and Jia Lampo, “China in the Period of Homo habilis and Homo erectus.”
25. Ibid.
26. Boaz et al., “Large Mammalian Carnivores as a Taphonomic Factor in the Bone Acumulation at
    Zhoudoudian.”
27. Arens, The Man-Eating Myth.
28. Garn and Block, “The Limited Nutritional Value of Cannibalism.”
29. Shapiro, Peking Man.
30. Freeman, “Acheulian Sites and Stratigraphy in Iberia and the Maghreb,” p. 664.
31. Ibid.
32. Evidence for wooden throwing spears has been found elsewhere in Europe, at the site of Schöningen in
    Germany at 400,000 years ago (see Thieme, “Lower Palaeolithic Hunting Spears from Germany”), and pos-
    sibly in England at the site of Clacton-on-Sea (see Warren, “Palaeolithic Wooden Spear from Clacton”).
33. See Binford, “Human Ancestors,” for a scavenging interpretation; but for contrasting view, see Shipman and
    Rose, “Evidence of Butchery and Hominid Activities at Torralba and Ambrona.”
34. Vértes, “The Lower Palaeolithic Site of Vértesszöllös, Hungary.”
35. There are some controversial examples of possible ﬁgurines from, for example, Berkehat Ram in Israel (see
    Pelcin, “A Geological Explanation for the Berkehat Ram Figurine”; D’Errico and Nowell, “A New Look at
    the Berekhat Ram Figurine: Implications for the Origins of Symbolism”), and Tan Tan in Morroco (see
    Bednarik, “A Figurine from the African Acheulian”).
36. Bender, “Comment on G. Krantz (CA 21:773 –79).”
37. White, “Beyond Art: Toward an Understanding of the Origins of Material Representation in Europe,” p. 560.
38. Klein, “Anatomy, Behavior, and Modern Human Origins.”
39. Through the Looking-Glass.
40. Frayer et al, p. 16.
41. Ibid., p. 17.
42. Ibid., pp. 17–18.
43. Leakey, Olduvai Gorge.
44. Weidenreich, Apes, Giants, and Man.
45. See also Coon, The Origins of Races.
46. Ferraro et al., Anthropology, p. 129, presents a simpliﬁed description of this issue.
47. Aiello, “The Fossil Evidence for Modern Human Origins in Africa: A Revised View.”
48. Melnick and Hoelzer, “What Is mtDNA Good for in the Study of Primate Evolution?” p. 9.
49. Frayer et al., “Theories of Modern Human Origins: The Paleontological Test.”
50. Ibid., p. 39.
51. See Krings et al., “Neanderthal DNA Sequences and the Origin of Modern Humans”; Krings et al., “A View
    of Neanderthal Genetic Diversity”; Ovchinnikov et al., “Molecular Analysis of Neanderthal DNA from the
    Northern Caucasus”; and Caramelli et al., “Evidence for a Genetic Discontinuity Between Neandertals and
    24,000-Year-Old Anatomically Modern Europeans.”
52. See, for example, Bräuer, “Africa’s Place in the Evolution of Homo sapiens.”
53. The following points of evidence are adapted from Frayer et al., “Theories of Modern Human Origins: The
    Paleontological Test,” pp. 19 – 20.
54. Ibid.
55. Olszewski, “Issues in the Development of the Early Upper Paleolithic, and a ‘Transitional’ Industry from the
    Zagros Region.”
56. White et al., “Pleistocene Homo sapiens from Middle Awash, Ethiopia.”
57. McBrearty and Brooks, “The Revolution That Wasn’t: A New Interpretation of the Origin of Modern
    Human Behavior.”
58. Singer and Wymer, The Middle Stone Age at Klasies River Mouth in South Africa.
59. McBrearty and Brooks, “The Revolution That Wasn’t: A New Interpretation of the Origin of Modern
    Human Behavior.”
60. Frayer et al., “Theories of Modern Human Origins: The Paleontological Test,” pp. 19 – 20.

192   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


       61. McBrearty and Brooks, “The Revolution That Wasn’t: A New Interpretation of the Origin of Modern
           Human Behavior.”
       62. Klein and Edgar, The Dawn of Human Culture, pp. 23 – 26.
       63. Brooks et al., “Dating and Context of Three Middle Stone Age Sites with Bone Points in the Upper Semliki
           Valley, Zaire.”
       64. Jones, “From Kakadu to Kutikina: The Southern Continent at 18,000 Years Ago”; Frankel, Remains to Be
           Seen.
       65. Pope, “The Antiquity and Palaeoenvironment of the Asian Hominidae”; Wolpoff et al., “Modern Homo
           sapiens Origins: A General Theory of Hominid Evolution Involving the Fossil Evidence from East Asia”;
           Thorne, “The Arrival of Man in Australia.”
       66. See table 2 in Frayer et al., “Theories of Modern Human Origins: The Paleontological Test,” for their argu-
           ment that proponents of the Eve hypothesis have systematically misinterpreted the data from Africa with
           regard to shovelling.
       67. Frayer et al., “Theories of Modern Human Origins: The Paleontological Test,” p. 22.
       68. The one continuity exception that proponents of Total Replacement might allow is the recent discovery of
           Homo ﬂoresiensis on Flores Island, Indonesia (see endnote 3). Homo ﬂoresiensis is thought to be a descen-
           dant of the Asian Homo erectus.
       69. With the possible exception of Homo ﬂoresiensis, dated to as late as 18,000 years ago.
       70. Stringer et al., “The Signiﬁcance of the Fossil Hominid from Petralona, Greece”; Trinkaus, “Evolutionary
           Continuity Among Archaic Homo sapiens.”
       71. Conway et al., Excavations at Barnﬁeld Pit, Swanscombe, 1968 – 72; Wymer, “Excavations at Barnﬁeld Pit,
           1955–60.”
       72. Ibid., p. 22.
       73. Roe, The Lower and Middle Paleolithic Periods in Britain.
       74. de Lumley, “Ante-Neanderthals of Western Europe.”
       75. Svoboda, “Lithic Industries of the Arago, Vértesszöllös, and Bilzingsleben Hominids: Comparison and
           Evolutionary Interpretation.”
       76. Tennyson was alluding to Goethe here.
       77. White, “Rethinking the Middle/Upper Paelolithic Transition”; others have referred to this as a “revolution”
           (see Bar-Yosef, “The Upper Paleolithic Revolution”).
       78. Lieberman, “Testing Hypotheses About Recent Human Evolution from Skulls.”
       79. Wobst, “Stylistic Behavior and Information Exchange.”
       80. White, “Rethinking the Middle/Upper Paleolithic Transition.”
       81. Straus and Cave, “Pathology and the Posture of Neanderthal Man.”
       82. Trinkaus, “The Neandertals and Modern Human Origins.”
       83. Ibid., p. 203.
       84. Ibid., p. 205.
       85. Bordes, Typologie du Paleolithique Ancien et Moyen.
       86. Binford and Binford, “A Preliminary Analysis of Functional Variability in the Mousterian of Levallois
           Facies.”
       87. Dibble, “Middle Paleolithic Scraper Reduction: Background, Clariﬁcation, and Review of the Evidence to
           Date.”
       88. Lieberman and Crelin, “On the Speech of Neanderthals.”
       89. Frayer and Wolpoff, “Comment on ‘Glottogenesis and Modern Homo sapiens.’ ”
       90. Lieberman, “On the Nature and Evolution of the Neural Bases of Human Language,” p. 58.
       91. For a review of the evidence and dissenting comments on this topic, see Gargett, “Grave Shortcomings: The
           Evidence for Neandertal Burial”; Chase and Dibble, “Middle Paleolithic Symbolism”; Brace, “Review of
           Shanidar: The First Flower People, by R. Solecki,” p. 86.
       92. Klein, “Anatomy, Behavior, and Modern Human Origins.”
       93. Straus, Iberia Before the Iberians: The Stone Age Prehistory of Cantabrian Spain.
       94. Russell, “Bone Breakage in the Krapina Hominid Collection”; “Mortuary Practices at the Krapina Neandertal
           Site”; and Trinkaus, “Cannibalism and Burial at Krapina.”
       95. Trinkaus, “Neandertal Mortality Patterns.”
       96. Ibid., p. 121.
       97. Valladas et al., “Thermoluminescence Dating of Mousterian ‘Proto-Cro-Magnon’ Remains.”
       98. Schwarcz, “Chronology of Modern Humans in the Levant.”
       99. Trinkaus, quoted in B. Bower, “An Earlier Dawn for Modern Humans?” p. 138.
      100. Frayer et al., “Theories of Modern Human Origins: The Paleontological Test,” p. 37; see also Arensburg and
           Belfer-Cohen, “Sapiens and Neandertals: Rethinking the Levantine Middle Paleolithic Hominids.”
      101. Shea, “Spear Points from the Middle Paleolithic of the Levant”; summarized in Frayer et al., “Theories of
           Modern Human Origins: The Paleontological Test,” p. 20.

                                                                    THE ORIGINS OF HOMO SAPIENS SAPIENS                193


102. Klein, “Anatomy, Behavior, and Modern Human Origins.”
103. Lovejoy and Trinkaus, “Strength of Robusticity of the Neanderthal Tibia.”
104. Ruff, “Climatic Adaptation and Hominid Evolution: The Thermoregulatory Imperative”; Steegmann et al.,
     “Neandertal Cold Adaptation: Physiological and Energetic Factors.”
105. Smith, “Upper Pleistocene Hominid Evolution in South-Central Europe: A Review of the Evidence and
     Analysis of Trends”; Wolpoff et al., “Modern Human Ancestry at the Peripheries: A Test of the Replacement
     Theory.”
106. Soffer, “Ancestral Lifeways in Eurasia – the Middle and Upper Paleolithic Records.”
107. Reviewed in Straus, “Upper Paleolithic Origins and Radiocarbon Calibration: More New Evidence from
     Spain.”
108. Ibid., p. 197.
109. Olszewski, “The Early Upper Palaeolithic in the Zagros Mountains.”
110. Ibid., p. 196.
111. Ibid.; but see Bocquet-Appel and Demars, “Neanderthal Contraction and Modern Human Colonization of
     Europe” for an alternate model using radiocarbon dates to show the “advancing wave” of Aurignacian-using
     modern humans.
112. Leveque and Vandermeersch, “Les Decouvertes de Restes Humains.”
113. Trinkaus, “The Neandertals and Modern Human Origins,” p. 198.
114. Bischoff et al., “Dating of the Basal Aurignacian Sandwich at Abric Romani (Catalunya, Spain) by
     Radiocarbon and Uranium-Series.”
115. Smith, “Upper Pleistocene Hominid Evolution in South-Central Europe: A Review of the Evidence and
     Analysis of Trends.”
116. Trinkaus and Duarte, “The Hybrid Child from Portugal.”
117. Frayer et al., “Theories of Modern Human Origins: The Paleontological Test,” p. 32.
118. Relethford, “Absence of Regional Afﬁnities of Neandertal DNA with Living Humans Does Not Reject
     Multiregional Evolution.”
119. Trinkaus and Duarte, “The Hybrid Child from Portugal.”
120. Wolpoff et al., “Multiregional Evolution: A World-Wide Source for Modern Human Populations.”
121. See endnote 51.
122. Prideaux et al., Cro-Magnon Man, pp. 93–94.
123. De Beaune, “Paleolithic Lamps and Their Specialization: A Hypothesis.”
124. Clottes, “France’s Magical Ice Age Art: Chauvet Cave.”
125. Conkey, “New Approaches in the Search for Meaning? A Review of Research in ‘Paleolithic Art.’ ”
126. Leroi-Gourhan, “The Evolution of Paleolithic Art.”
127. Fisher, Woman’s Creation.
128. Lewis-Williams and Dowson, “The Signs of All Times: Entopic Phenomena in Upper Paleolithic Art.”
129. Ibid., p. 215 (emphasis theirs).
130. Hodder, Reading the Past; also see Straus, Iberia Before the Iberians: The Stone Age Prehistory of Cantabrian
     Spain.
131. Conkey, “New Approaches in the Search for Meaning? A Review of Research in ‘Paleolithic Art,’ ” p. 422.
132. Marks, Human Biodiversity: Genes, Race, and History.
133. Ibid; Brace et al., “Clines and Clusters Versus ‘Race’: A Test in Ancient Egypt and the Case of a Death on the
     Nile.”
134. Current news stories (for example, the Philadelphia Inquirer of April 17, 2005) report on the start of the ﬁve-
     year Genographic Project that will analyze the DNA of 100,000 people worldwide in an effort to trace, in
     detail, the migrations of humans after modern humans left Africa. The North American center is at the
     University of Pennsylvania, under the direction of Dr. Theodore Schurr of the Department of Anthropology.
135. Thiel, “Early Settlement of the Philippines, Eastern Indonesia, and Australia-New Guinea: A New
     Hypothesis.”
136. Vallois, “The Social Life of Early Man: The Evidence of the Skeletons.”
137. Ibid.
138. Soffer, The Upper Paleolithic of the Central Russian Plain.
139. Bellwood, The Prehistory of the Indo-Malaysian Archipelago.
140. White and O’Connell, “Australian Prehistory: New Aspects of Antiquity.”
141. Thorne, “The Arrival of Man in Australia.”
142. Klein, “Anatomy, Behavior, and Modern Human Origins.”

