5
The First Americans

    At break of day the shore was thronged with
    people all young . . . all of good stature, ﬁne
    looking. . . . I was anxious to learn whether
    they had any gold, as I noticed that some of the
    natives had rings hanging from holes in their
    noses. . . . I tried to get them to go for some, but
    they could not understand they were to go.
    Christopher Columbus (13 October 1492)




    C        olumbus and most “discoverers” of the New World were not surprised to ﬁnd
             “Indians” there because they thought they had landed in India, or perhaps Japan.
    But as soon as Europeans realized they were not in the Orient and became aware of the rich
    diversity of New World cultures, they began to struggle with the problem of the origin of
    the Native Americans. The Bible, the ﬁnal authority for most Europeans of this era, was
    strangely silent on the very existence of this “second-earth,” so Europeans began
    speculating on how the “Indians” could have reached the New World from the Garden of
    Eden, where they were assumed to have originated. Early explorers were greatly impressed
    by “similarities” between Egyptian and aboriginal American cultures, such as the great
    pyramids to be found in Egypt, Mexico, and the Mississippi Valley, and so some concluded
    that the Native Americans were descendants of Ham, one of Noah’s sons, who was
    also thought to have been the father of the Egyptians.1 Another popular idea was that the
    Native Americans were descendants of the “lost tribes of Israel,” Jews who had been evicted
    from Palestine by the Assyrians around 1100 b.c. The “lost tribes” idea eventually was
    incorporated into the doctrines of the Church of the Latter-Day Saints, whose Book of
    Mormon concludes that Native Americans were remnants of tribes of Israel that had come
    to the New World by ship hundreds of years before Columbus. Others believed that Native
    Americans were descendants of people who ﬂed Atlantis or other lost worlds that some
    think were destroyed thousands of years ago by volcanic eruption.
         But by a.d. 1590 a Spanish Jesuit, José de Acosta, had proposed that Native Americans
    had come from Asia, and by a.d. 1781 Thomas Jefferson could describe the peopling of the
    New World in terms most scholars today think are accurate:

         Late discoveries of Captain Cook, coasting from Kamschatka to California, have proved
         that if the two continents of Asia and America be separated at all, it is only by a narrow

                                                       194

                                                                             THE FIRST AMERICANS             195


     straight. So that from this side also,
     inhabitants may have passed into
     America; and the resemblance                         10,000 years ago      Beginning of development of later
     between the Indians of America                                             Paleoindian cultures in the Americas
     and the eastern inhabitants of Asia,                 10,500 years ago      Caverna da Pedra Pintada, Brazil, South
     would induce us to conjecture, that                                        America
     the former are the descendants                       11,500 years ago      Clovis culture, North and Central America
     of the latter, or the latter of the
     former: excepting indeed the                         11,600 years ago      Broken Mammoth, Mead, and Swan Point,
     Eskimaux, who, from the same                                               Alaska, North America

     circumstances of resemblance, and                    12,500 years ago      Monte Verde, Chile, South America
     from identity of language, must be
     derived from the Groenlanders,                16,900–10,900 years ago      Cactus Hill, Virginia, North America

     and these probably from some
                                                          19,600 years ago      Meadowcroft Rockshelter, Pennsylvania, North
     of the northern parts of the old
                                                                                America
     continent.2
                                                       20–15,000 years ago      Initial peopling of the Americas begins


In their search for clues to the origins of             25,000 years ago    Earliest known sites in Siberia
Native Americans, Jefferson and others
of his age were struck by the close
physical resemblance between Native
Americans and Asians: dark brown eyes;
black, coarse, straight hair; and relatively
widely spaced cheekbones (Figure 5.1). But differences were also apparent: Except for the
Eskimos and Aleuts, most aboriginal Americans had less pronounced epicanthic folds (part
of the eyelid) than those that distinguish east Asian populations, and many Native
Americans had relatively more prominent noses than east Asians.
     Europeans also noted that the New World included an impressive diversity of
languages—in some cases people who lived relatively close to one another spoke mutually
unintelligible languages—and that none of the languages of Native Americans bore any
obvious resemblance to Old World languages. Thus, it seemed certain that although the
aboriginal Americans were probably descendants of Asian peoples, they must have lived in
America for a long time for such physical and linguistic divergence to have occurred.
     That people have lived in the New World for at least 11,000 years has been evident for
a long time. In 1908 a cowboy riding along the edge of a gully in New Mexico, near the
town of Folsom, discovered some “arrowheads” and animal bones protruding from a layer
of soil about 6 m beneath the surface of the plain. Eventually, in 1925, his ﬁnds came to the
attention of J. D. Figgins, director of the Colorado Museum of Natural History, who began
a long series of excavations at this site.3 A primary ﬁnd was a long, “ﬂuted” (it had two long
strips removed near the base and parallel to the length of the point) “projectile point” that
was embedded in the ribs of a species of bison that had been extinct for about 10,000 years
(Figure 5.2). Since most archaeologists and others were skeptical of the idea that humans
had been in the New World that long, Figgins insisted on excavating the site with a
committee of archaeologists on hand to watch his every move so that no one could claim
the evidence had been faked.
     In 1932 another important ﬁnd was made, this time near the town of Clovis, New
Mexico (Figure 5.3). Here, too, large blade tools were discovered in association with extinct

          196      PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                          animals. But at this site artifacts somewhat different
                                                          from those at Folsom were found in a layer beneath
                                                          some “Folsom points.” Analysis suggested a date of
                                                          about 11,000 years ago for the earliest Clovis-style
                                                          artifacts, and within a few years artifacts similar in
                                                          size, shape, and style to the Clovis points were dis-
                                                          covered at many different places in North America.
                                                          Since then, stone points resembling Clovis artifacts
                                                          have been found in much of North and South
                                                          America, from the Arctic to the tip of South America.
                                                               Disputes about early Americans thus focus
                                                          on the question of whether or not anyone was
                                                          here before the Clovis cultures in existence about
                                                          11,500 years ago.
                                                               For many years, the majority of archaeologists
                                                          believed that the ﬁrst Americans came from Asia via
                                                          a land route. As we shall see, however, there is
                                                          increasing evidence suggesting that a coastal route
                                                          may also be a more viable explanation. Some have
                                                          even suggested a migration from Europe using
                                                          skin boats across the northern Atlantic, although
                                                          there are many dubious aspects of this particular
                                                          hypothesis. Thus, the term “Native American”
                                                          is something of a misnomer, for on the grand
                                                          chronology of the human species, the time differ-
                                                          ence between the arrival of the very ﬁrst humans in
                                                          the New World and that of Columbus is relatively
                                                          trivial. All Americans are immigrants, and evidence
FIGURE 5.1 An early photograph of a Native American.      suggests that some living Native Americans are
Physical resemblances between Americans and Asian
                                                          descendants of groups that came to the Americas
peoples reﬂect their common origins.
                                                          thousands of years after the ﬁrst immigrants.


                   ROUTES FOR THE INITIAL COLONIZATION OF THE
                   AMERICAS

                   Analyses of the initial colonization of the Americas usually focus on four related questions:
                   What Old World people were the ancestors of the ﬁrst Americans? When did the ﬁrst
                   people enter the New World and colonize subarctic and temperate zones? What routes did
                   they follow in colonizing North and South America? What kinds of technologies and
                   economies did these initial waves of colonists have?
                        These questions may seem to be rather simple empirical problems, subjects of
                   speculation studied on the basis of inadequate data about questions that may be
                   intrinsically important but without much wider signiﬁcance. Whether the ﬁrst Americans
                   arrived in the New World 30,000 years ago or 13,000 years ago would not seem to make
                   much difference in the grand scheme of things.

                                                                      THE FIRST AMERICANS       197


     But the colonization of the New World does have much
greater signiﬁcance than these simple questions might suggest.
Most important is the fact that the subsequent history of these
peoples in the New World was largely independent of
inﬂuences from the Old World. Whenever they ﬁrst arrived,
New World peoples give us a comparative case—a long and
rich cultural history that can be compared with that of the Old
World. Moreover, the colonization of the New World involves
one of the most complex issues in paleolithic archaeology, the
nature and processes of human adaptive radiation. All animal
species seem to radiate across the world “naturally” until they
reach the limits of their adaptation. Some tropical species,
such as the elephant, evolved cold-adapted subspecies that
allowed them penetrate into the far north of both the Old and
New Worlds, but even these evolutionary adaptations could
not produce an animal capable of supporting its huge bulk in
the icy extremes of the poles. Evolutionary change seems to be
                                                                   FIGURE 5.2 Some types of early American pro-
most rapid along the limits of adaptations, but measuring the      jectile points.
tempo of evolutionary change in extinct species is difﬁcult.
     Human patterns of migration and adaptive radiation are
a complex blend of evolving physical characteristics and culture. Thus, the New World
archaeological record provides us with an opportunity to study in detail a complex mosaic
of human adaptations across a gigantic and highly varied landscape.
     Why people came to the Americas has never been an issue. People, like other animal
species, seem to penetrate their entire available range “naturally.” The “budding-off”
process described in the previous chapter is probably applicable to the colonization of the
Americas. Ethnographic studies tell us that hunter-forager groups often increase to a
certain size level until friction
develops among some mem-
bers of the group, or resources
become too scarce, and then
the social unit splits, with some
members going off into new
territory. The long winter
nights of northern Asia doubt-
less offered ample opportunity
to brood on what a jerk one’s
cousin was, or to muse on what
Garden of Eden might lie over
the horizon, and as a result of
tens of thousands of years of
group-ﬁssioning, population
growth, and small group social
interactions, the world was
populated.
     There remains some doubt
about how people ﬁrst got to         FIGURE 5.3 The Clovis site in New Mexico.

           198       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                     North America because, as we saw in the previous chapter, people were certainly living in
                     Australia long before 30,000 years ago, and there seems no way they could have reached
                     there except by boat. Some archaeologists still believe that the evidence strongly suggests
                     that the ﬁrst Americans traveled there the old-fashioned way—they walked—although,
                     increasingly, researchers are more convinced that the earliest Americans came by boat.


                     The “Ice-Free Corridor”
                     Any explanation of the colonization of the New World from Asia must consider the kinds
                     of physical environments these colonists would have faced, and recent research has
                     challenged many traditional ideas on this point (Figure 5.4).
                          Today, Eskimos using skin boats easily cross the 90 km of open sea separating Siberia
                     and America, and recently an American woman slathered herself with grease and actually
                     swam from Alaska to Siberia. But such a sea crossing would not have been necessary during
                     much of the Pleistocene. During periods of glacial advance within the last million years,
                     enormous quantities of water were converted to ice, lowering the sea level sufﬁciently to
                     expose a 1500- to 3000-km-wide expanse of the ﬂoor of the Bering Sea. This land bridge—
                     usually referred to as Beringia (Figure 5.5)—was most recently available from about 25,000




FIGURE 5.4 Between 60,000 and 12,000 years ago, world climate warmed several times, opening routes between the Arctic
and more southern latitudes of the New World. Two possible periods of colonization are during the Mid-Wisconsin
Interglacial, about 40,000 years ago, and after the Late Wisconsin Glaciation, about 18,000 years ago.

                                                                            THE FIRST AMERICANS          199




                                                                                            Mead,
                                                                                          Swan Point,
                                                                                Nenana Broken Mammoth
                                                                                 Valley




Mal’ta, Afontova Gora




 Masterov
  Kliuch




FIGURE 5.5 Several archaeological sites in Siberia may be of cultures ancestral to the ﬁrst Americans.


to 14,000 years ago. And, for many decades, the majority of archaeologists believed that
walking across Beringia from Siberia to Alaska, and then south through Canada using the
“ice-free” corridor was the route for the peopling of the Americas.
     The kinds of resources Beringia would have offered hunter-foragers would have
depended on the period in which the migrants crossed. At various times, ocean currents
created an ice-free, tundra-covered connection from eastern Siberia across the land bridge
and into central Alaska. These conditions are reﬂected in the many non-Arctic-adapted
animal species that crossed from Asia to America during the Pleistocene. Prior to 10,000 years
ago, species of deer, bison, camels, bears, foxes, mammoths, moose, caribou, and even
rodents crossed from Siberia into the New World. Going the other way—from America to
Asia—were foxes, woodchucks, and, during the early Pleistocene, the ancestors of modern
forms of horses, wolves, and other animals.4 In some periods Beringia would not have been
particularly rich—there is even the possibility of dust storms, so dry and barren was most
of it.5 But at other times, migrants on the land bridge in the brief but warm summers of
some periods of the Pleistocene would have found musk-oxen and other large herbivores,
along with ﬁsh, birds, and sea mammals along the shore.
     Interior Alaska and Canada were relatively rich environments in the mid-Wisconsin
interglacial, and at times humans may have had a narrow but clear ice-free run all the way
from Alaska into the northern United States. Pollen cores from easternmost Beringia
suggest that from 30,000 to 14,000 years ago, the time when most archaeologists think the
ﬁrst Americans arrived, Beringia may have been relatively cool and dry, although some
reconstructions of the landscape suggest that it had a mosaic of steppe-tundra, covered

200   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      mainly in grasses and sedges, along with meadows in valleys. 6 Meadows, of course, would
      have been attractive grazing habitats for the large Pleistocene herd mammals—woolly
      mammoths, horses, long-horned bison—that people of this time period hunted.
           Southward migrations from Alaska may only have been possible during a few intervals
      because it is generally thought that for most of the Pleistocene the way would have been
      blocked by coalescing ice sheets (Figure 5.6). Even if these ice sheets did not completely
      bar the way south, it is not clear that the “ice-free” corridor would have been habitable for
      people until after 11,000 years ago.7 This date is relatively late—as we shall see—compared
      to the dates of some archaeological sites now known from areas south of the ice sheets, such
      as in Virginia and Chile. Traveling through the “ice-free” corridor thus remains a viable
      route, but perhaps it is not the route that the earliest people took to arrive in the Americas
      south of the glaciers (see later).
           The exact path the these early Americans may have taken is not known, but the most
      likely course would be along the southern coast of the Beringia, then into Alaska north of
      the Brooks Range, up the Yukon River Valley, then into the Mackenzie River Valley, and
      from there southward, along the eastern slopes of the Rockies and on into the Dakotas and
      then farther southward. Along the coast of Beringia were probably abundant resources in
      the form of ﬁsh, birds, eggs, invertebrates, and many plant foods. If groups did come this
      way, it is unlikely that we shall ever be able to document their journey archaeologically, for
      the rising seas of the post-Pleistocene era have submerged the ancient shoreline.
           If they came across the middle of the land bridge, a reliance on big-game hunting would
      have been essential, and the migrants were almost certainly not constantly on the move
      southward. The budding-off process described earlier is the usual one in cases when new
      species move into empty niches, and many thousands of years may have passed between
      the time the ﬁrst human set foot on the land bridge and the year the ﬁrst groups arrived in
      the mid-latitudes of North America.
           North winds blowing off the northern glacial ice sheets made the climate of Pleistocene
      North America much different from today’s climate. Much of Nevada and Utah was covered
      by Lake Bonneville, of which only a shrinking remnant (the Great Salt Lake) remains.
      Wyoming, Iowa, and other parts of the Great Plains were vast pine, spruce, and tamarack
      forests and lush open grasslands. To the south, the area between the Mississippi River and
      the Rockies was a verdant mosaic of grasslands, lakes, and birch and alder forests. In eastern
      North America huge expanses of coniferous forests stretched from the edge of the glacial
      ice sheets to the lower Ohio River Valley.
           The animals inhabiting this wilderness of 14,000–12,000 years ago closely approximate
      a modern hunter’s vision of paradise. Giant moose, 3 m and more in height, could be found
      in many of the wetter areas, along with Castoroides, a species of beaver as large as a modern
      bear (Figure 5.7). Along the woodland edges of the southeastern United States were large
      populations of giant ground sloths, ungainly creatures fully as tall as modern giraffes. In
      more open country were vast herds of straight-horned bison, caribou, musk-oxen, horses,
      and mammoths—some 4 m high at the shoulders. In the more forested areas of the east
      and south were the mammoth’s cousin, the mastodon, a more solitary animal than the
      mammoth and apparently a browser rather than a grassland grazer. Amid all these large
      creatures were rabbits, armadillos, birds, camels, peccaries, and other animals. And the
      carnivores that such a movable feast attracted were equally impressive. Packs of dire wolves
      roamed most of the New World, as did panthers as large as modern lions and two species

                                                                                                      THE FIRST AMERICANS   201




                                2    4

                                     3




                                1

                                             9

                                     10 16            14
                                                                               25
                                       8
                         12     11
                                                                                    30
                                                                           26
                                     6   7                      28
                                                 15
                                         5                 29

                                                      19                  27

                                                 13


                                                                     18
                                                                                               23
                                                                                         24
                                                                                                          21
                                                                                                                20




                                                                                                        22




                                                                                    17




     1 Ritchie-Roberts          9 Anzick                             17 Monte Verde           23 Taima Taim
     2 Dry Creek              10 Wilson Butte Cave                   18 El Bosque             24 El Jobo
     3 Blueﬁsh Caves          11 China Lake                          19 Lerma                 25 Dutchess Quarry Cave
     4 Old Crow               12 Santa Rosa Island                   20 Boqueirão of          26 Meadowcroft Rockshelter
     5 Naco                   13 Iztapan                                Pedra Furada          27 Little Salt Spring
     6 Lehner                 14 Dutton                              21 Caverna da            28 Lewisville
     7 Murray Springs         15 Clovis                                 Pedra Pintada         29 Levi Rockshelter
     8 Lamb Springs           16 Colby                               22 Alice Böer            30 Cactus Hill



FIGURE 5.6 Some of the earliest known American sites. Most of these sites range from 20,000 to
10,000 years ago.

           202        PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                             of saber-toothed cat, one about the size
                                                                             of a lion.8 Thus, the ﬁrst Americans were
                                                                             hardly entering an “empty niche,” since
                                                                             these ferocious predators no doubt
                                                                             provided stiff competition for people
                                                                             trying to specialize in hunting. Central
                                                                             and South America were also rich game
                                                                             preserves during and just after the
                                                                             Pleistocene.

                                                                             Coast Hopping from
                                                                             Beringia
                                                                              We might expect that if the immigrants
                                                                              crossed Beringia primarily along its
                                                                              southern coast, then the groups migrat-
                                                                              ing south would have retained some
                                                                              elements of the generalized hunting,
                                                                              ﬁshing, and foraging economies required
                                                                              in the intertidal zone. The idea that
                                                                              people used watercraft to “hop” along
                                                                              the coastline of what is now Canada at
                                                                              least as far south as the Columbia River
                                                                              —the boundary between the modern
                                                                              states of Washington and Oregon—and
                                                                              perhaps farther still, along the coast into
                                                                              South America, is not new.9 For many
                                                                              years, however, the main obstacles to
FIGURE 5.7 Some large mammals of Pleistocene America. The scale               accepting this route as a viable idea were
preserves relative size.                                                      a lack of evidence—because sites would
                                                                              lie deep beneath the current coastal
                         seas—and the assumption that the glacial ice sheets extended completely to the sea along
                         the Canadian coast, allowing no possibility for landfall.10
                              Sea waters have not receded in recent years, so why are archaeologists now more
                         willing to accept the coastal route as a better option than the “ice-free corridor?” This shift
                         in viewpoint, which is due to several lines of accumulating evidence, is a good example of
                         how the scientiﬁc process works—new data are used to correct, reﬁne, update, and,
                         sometimes, overturn the existing paradigm (model). These new data have come mainly
                         from two sources—securely dated early archaeological sites and paleoenvironmental
                         research.
                              Although there were occasional claims for early people living in the Americas before
                         about 12,000–15,000 years ago, the vast majority of these claims did not stand up to
                         rigorous scrutiny of either the contexts of the archaeological artifacts or the dating of the
                         sites.11 A few sites, however, such as Meadowcroft Rockshelter in Pennsylvania (see later),
                         offered tantalizing suggestions that people were in the Americas before the “ice-free”
                         corridor was available for travel between the two Canadian glacial sheets. Since then, several

                                                                          THE FIRST AMERICANS      203


other early sites, such as Cactus Hill in Virginia and Monte Verde in Chile (see later), have
been documented. These sites, although somewhat controversial when ﬁrst discovered,
have now been generally accepted as legitimate early sites by most archaeologists.
      The presence of these early sites south of the glaciers—in the case of Monte Verde,
thousands of kilometers south of the ice sheets—threw a harsh light of reality on the idea
that the “ice-free” corridor was the earliest route of entry. And, of course, archaeologists
have never had evidence for sites in the “ice-free” corridor area that dated before 11,000 years
ago, a fact that was not often mentioned by proponents of the “ice-free” corridor.12 At best,
the archaeology in the “ice-free” corridor was no older than the Clovis archaeological tra-
dition (see later)—long-thought to be representative of the earliest people in the Americas
and called the “Clovis-ﬁrst” model—or was younger than the Clovis phenomenon.
      The existence of legitimate pre-12,000-year-old sites south of the glaciers, however,
spurred further intensive work by geologists and paleoecologists on two fronts—the
context and conditions of the “ice-free” corridor itself and studies of the coastal areas and
continental shelf from Alaska to the Northwest coast of the United States. This research has
shown that the “ice-free” corridor was a feature created by the retreat of the glaciers. In the
period from 30,000 to 11,500 years ago, large parts of the corridor were blocked by glacial
ice, so that no one could have used this as a route of entry.13 Another important considera-
tion comes from paleoenvironmental reconstruction and modeling. These indicate that
even those portions of the “ice-free” corridor that might have been penetrated by early
Americans in the interval after 18,000 years ago could not have supported people. There
simply would have been too few animals to hunt and thus not enough available nutrition
to feed people.14
      These considerations—the late date for the availability of the “ice-free” corridor and
its ecological viability—shifted the peopling of the Americas research focus to coastal areas
as a route of entry (Figure 5.8). Several remarkable discoveries offer considerable support
for the coast-hopping route of entry. Through a combination of deep-sea cores into the
Northwest coast continental shelf and digital sounding mapping of the continental shelf to
a depth of 150 m below modern sea level, we have an emerging picture of portions of this
coast for the period when people may have been present. The deep-sea cores provide pollen
data allowing reconstruction of the vegetation of this previously exposed land surface, as
well as sediment information crucial to estimating the timing for when this land was
submerged by rising sea levels.15
      The areas of the now submerged coastlines so far investigated were characterized by
open tundra, including grasses, sedges, and dwarf willows. Mapping of the continental shelf
shows evidence for lakes, rivers, and beaches.16 Although glaciers would have extended all
the way to the sea in some parts of the coastline, other portions were unglaciated not long
after the maximum extent of the glaciers (23,000–19,000 years ago) and certainly after
16,000 years ago. These unglaciated locales are sometimes called coastal refugia—attractive
areas scattered up and down the northwestern coastline of the Americas that were suitable
for landfall in a coast-hopping model of entry, if not also for more extended periods of
human habitation. Quite signiﬁcantly, these coastal refugia were available to humans at
least 1,000–2,000 years before the “ice-free” corridor.17
      The coastal route into the Americas south of the glaciers would also have been much
more economically feasible for early people compared to the “ice-free” corridor. Coastal
regions provide many attractive resources, including shellﬁsh, marine ﬁsh, seals and other

           204        PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY



                                                  Arctic Ocean

                                    Be
                                      rin
                                         gi
        N O RTH                             a


       A MER I CA




                                                                                              Atlantic
                                                                                               Ocean



                    Pacific Ocean

            0         1.000 mi

            0    1.000 km


FIGURE 5.8 The coastal route into the Americas from Beringia. Many entry points are possible once south of the glaciated
region.



                      sea mammals, and possibly also migratory waterfowl.18 How far south did early Americans
                      travel via this route?
                           At the very least, the coastal route must have been used until somewhere in the vicinity
                      of Washington/Oregon. From this point, people could have moved inland, adopting
                      terrestrial hunting-and-gathering economies to replace coastal ﬁshing, hunting, and
                      gathering. Alternatively, some groups may have continued farther south along the coastal
                      route, with some models hypothesizing touchdown along the Isthmus of Panama19 and
                      others landfall in South America.20 However far south people may have used the coastal
                      route before traveling inland, one thing is certain. Within a couple of thousand years of
                      entry south of the glaciers, human groups were nearly everywhere in the Americas.
                           Despite the attractiveness of the coast-hopping model, however, there remains one
                      obstacle—the lack of an archaeological record. As we saw earlier, the drowning of ancient
                      coastal areas by rising sea levels at the end of the Pleistocene has been the limiting factor
                      for archaeological research. Mandryk and her colleagues, however, note, “Extremely rapid
                      sea-level rise beginning 10,300 bp . . . increases the chances of preservation of any early
                      archaeological sites from this period due to rapid burial.”21 We can anticipate that
                      continued research focused on the continental shelf of the northwest coast may eventually
                      yield this long-sought-after evidence for human presence.

                                                                           THE FIRST AMERICANS      205



                                                 Arctic Ocean


        N O RT H
       A MERICA




                                                                                             Atlantic
                                                                                              Ocean



                   Pacific Ocean

            0        1.000 mi

            0    1.000 km


FIGURE 5.9 The Atlantic route proposed for a Solutrean migration from Europe to the Americas.



Across the Atlantic from Europe
Another sea route idea has been recently proposed by Dennis Stanford and Bruce Bradley.22
They argue that the Americas were reached by people traveling by skin boats across the
northern Atlantic from Europe, although they don’t claim that these groups were
necessarily the ﬁrst people to arrive in the Americas. In fact, this model is directed explicitly
at explaining the origins of the Clovis tradition (see later) in the Americas.
     The Atlantic route proposes that permanent sea ice linked Ireland to the Grand Banks
area (near Newfoundland) during the period of the maximum extent of the last glacial period,
some 23,000–19,000 years ago (Figure 5.9). The presence of this ice front theoretically
created conditions that allowed a weak warm sea current that ﬂowed counter-clockwise from
the coast of Ireland toward the Grand Banks. Given the existence of maritime adaptations
in parts of western Europe, people using skin boats could eventually make the 2,500-km
journey along the ice front, hunting sea mammals and ﬁshing to provide food and oil for
heating and cooking.23
     What about archaeological evidence for this route? The primary line of evidence used
by Stanford and Bradley is the resemblance of Clovis stone artifacts in North America to
those of an Upper Paleolithic tradition from Spain and France called the Solutrean. They
note that the stone ﬂaked bifaces—points or spearheads—are very similar in appearance

           206       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                   and in the technological pro-
                                                                                   cesses used to manufacture
                                                                                   them (Figure 5.10). They also
                                                                                   point out that many artifacts
                                                                                   made of bone, antler, and
                                                                                   ivory are similar in Clovis and
                                                                                   Solutrean assemblages.
                                                                                        Stanford and Bradley also
                                                                                   cite genetic evidence (see later)
                                                                                   that may support their model.
                                                                                   This comes from the study of
                                                                                   mtDNA and shows the pre-
                                                                                   sence of the X haplogroup, a
                                                                                   European genetic lineage, in
                                                                                   some Native Americans popu-
                                                                                   lations.24 Stanford and Bradley
                                                                                   thus argue that the X haplo-
                                                                                   group entered the Americas via
                                                                                   Solutrean people traveling the
                                                                                   Atlantic route.
                                                                                         The Stanford and Bradley
FIGURE 5.10 Proponents of the Atlantic route suggest that there are similarities    model has been heavily criti-
between New World Clovis points (left) and Old World Solutrean points (right) (not
                                                                                    cized by archaeologists and is
drawn to scale).
                                                                                    not accepted as a feasible idea
                                                                                    by most. Why is this? It turns
                   out that there are many good arguments that can be made showing major ﬂaws in this
                   model; these have been recently summarized by Lawrence Straus.25
                         The ﬁrst of these arguments is based on the chronology of the Clovis and Solutrean.
                   Both traditions are well dated using the radiocarbon technique. Solutrean sites in France
                   and Spain fall into the interval between about 21,000 and 17,000 years ago, while Clovis
                   sites are dated to between 11,500 and 10,900 years ago.26 As Straus notes, the Solutrean
                   bifaces, as well as the techniques used to manufacture them, are about 5,000 radiocarbon
                   years older than their supposed counterpart in the Clovis tradition. There simply were no
                   Solutrean biface-making people in Europe at the time that Clovis appears in the Americas.
                   This same argument would apply to any potential similarities in artifacts made of antler,
                   ivory, or bone.
                         Straus also points out that at the height of the last glacial period, which is when
                   Stanford and Bradley propose that people crossed the Atlantic along the ice front, there is
                   no evidence for human occupation in Europe north of Paris.27 Additionally, while Solutrean
                   people are known to have exploited near-shore sea resources such as shellﬁsh, as well as the
                   salmon and trout found in rivers as well as the sea, there is no evidence that Solutreans had
                   adaptations to deep-water ﬁshing or the hunting of sea mammals.
                         The fact that some techniques used to make bifaces in the Solutrean and Clovis
                   traditions are similar could be no more than independent invention. Making stone artifacts
                   is a reductive process—the person making a stone tool can only fashion it by reducing it,
                   that is, by knocking pieces of stone off the artifact, and there are only so many ways in which

                                                                        THE FIRST AMERICANS      207


this can be done. Making a stone tool is thus quite unlike making pottery vessels, which is
an additive process, with all sorts of options ranging from types of handles to types of
decoration to types of temper added to ensure that the pots don’t break during ﬁring.
Similarities in stone artifact techniques are thus often due to the simple fact that there are
a limited number of options available to make a particular kind of stone artifact.
     Even the genetic evidence of the X haplogroup in some Native American groups can
be explained in ways that do not involve the crossing of the Atlantic Ocean by Solutreans.
In his discussion of this mtDNA lineage, Theodore Schurr summarizes another possibility:
“[T]he lack of haplogroup X mtDNAs in Asian and Siberian groups . . . suggests that these
haplotypes originated outside of eastern Siberia, perhaps taken through Beringia by an
ancient Eurasian migratory event distinct from the migration(s) that brought the other four
mtDNA lineages to the Americas.”28
     Although the coast-hopping model from Beringia to south of the ice sheets is not
perfect—and no model ever is—this route appears to be the most likely explanation for
how the ﬁrst people arrived in the Americas.


EVIDENCE FOR THE FIRST AMERICANS

With this sense of the possible entry routes, environments, and resources that the New
World offered, we can examine the biological ancestry of the ﬁrst Americans, the
chronology and geography of their colonization, and the economic and technological basis
of their colonization. To do this, we can appeal to several categories of evidence involving
(1) the biological anthropology of Native Americans and possible ancestral groups in the
Old World; (2) linguistic evidence—in the sense of those clues that indigenous New World
languages can provide us about the cultural origins, cultural relationships, and migration
patterns of the ﬁrst Americans; and (3) the archaeological records both of the New World
and of the areas in the Old World from which the colonists might have come.


Biological Anthropological Evidence
By 100,000 years ago, Old World peoples seem to have had all the skills at making clothes,
ﬁre, and tools that would have been necessary for the trek to the New World. But intensive
research has failed to turn up any New World human skeletons that cannot be ﬁtted comfor-
tably within our own species, Homo sapiens sapiens. And because the ﬁrst H. sapiens sapiens
appear in the Middle East and Europe about 35,000–40,000 years ago, we might assume
that the aboriginal Americans must have come over since then, but we do not know when
the ﬁrst Homo sapiens sapiens appeared in the east Asian areas—early Upper Paleolithic
assemblages including bone and antler tools appear in the region from Uzbekistan to
Siberian about 40,000–30,000 years ago, but there are no associated human fossils.29
     With regard to the Old World ancestors of Native Americans, the physical
anthropological data strongly suggest that they were, of course, east Asians, and were almost
certainly the Pleistocene peoples of the areas near Alaska. Earlier questions focused on
whether the genetic ancestors of these east Asian people were, for example, people from
coastal areas west of Japan, or north central Chinese, or western Asians who migrated east

               208             PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY



   R US S I A                                                                                                      ALASKA
                                                                                                                    (U.S.)
    0                 500 mi

    0        500 km                                      Arctic Ocean
  NORWAY
               SWEDEN


                 FINLAND
               EST.
           LATV.
   LITH.

   BELARUS




 UKRAINE



                                                     Altai region

  GEORGIA


    AZERB.
                                                                                               CHINA
                                  KAZAKHSTAN
                                                                                                                     JAPAN
IRAN            TURKM.         UZBEKISTAN                           MONGOLIA
                                                        CHINA                                           N. KOREA
FIGURE 5.11 The Altai region in Siberia, a possible origin area for populations entering the Americas based on genetic
data.



                               from northern Eurasia. Since then, accumulating genetic evidence suggests that the region
                               of the Altai Mountains in Siberia (Figure 5.11) may be the source for these early founding
                               populations.30
                                    Many scholars have analyzed the teeth, skulls, and other physical features of early and
                               current Native Americans in hopes of identifying their origins. It is uncertain when some
                               east Asian populations developed epicanthic folds, small noses, and relatively ﬂat facial
                               proﬁles, but in view of the prominent noses of most Native Americans and their non-
                               Mongolian eye shapes, it is apparent that these differences can be attributed to one or more
                               possibilities: The Americans are only distantly related to these populations, they emigrated
                               before the Asian populations developed their distinctive features, these different
                               characteristics existed in different Asian populations, and what we see in the contrasts of
                               Amerind populations are the results of successive migrations by different human groups.
                               We have very little evidence on which to estimate rates of evolutionary change in these
                               superﬁcial physical characteristics, and variations in them are thus difﬁcult to interpret.31
                                    Teeth preserve well, have morphological characteristics that are under relatively simple
                               genetic control, and seem to change relatively quickly under changing selective conditions.
                               Figure 5.12 indicates the relative frequency in various groups of incisor “shoveling”—the
                               degree to which the lingual surface of incisors is curled or ridged. On this trait alone, one

                                                                         THE FIRST AMERICANS        209




FIGURE 5.12 Variations in human teeth shapes reﬂect genetic ancestry. Incisor “shoveling”—the curved cross-sectional
shape of incisors—occurs most frequently in northeast Asian and New World peoples and distinguishes them from the
rest of the world. This evidence supports the view that the New World was colonized by three successive migrations
from Asia.



would clearly see north Chinese ancestry for Native Americans.32 Turner looked at many
different features of teeth, including shoveling, and variations in the number of roots of
premolars and molars. By comparing large samples of teeth on many different measurements,
Turner concluded that (1) New World groups are more like Asians than like Europeans,
(2) all New World groups resemble each other more than they do most Old World
populations, (3) dental variation is greater in North America than in South America, and
(4) there are three “clusters” of New World peoples.33
     As Turner notes, these characteristics seem to make sense if there were three distinct
migrations into the Americas. It is very difﬁcult, however, to estimate rates of change in
these kinds of physical features, and thereby to estimate how long ago the migrations to the
Americas began, but Turner’s calculations estimate a date of about 12,000 years ago for the
initial colonization of the New World, with two much later waves of colonizations.
     These separate migrations also seem to be reﬂected in a study by Steele and Powell,
who did a complex statistical analysis of measurements on the teeth, skulls, and skeletons
of the earliest known Americans and compared them to various other populations. Their
results indicate that the earliest Americans were different physically from more recent
Native Americans and northern Asians, having longer and narrower braincases and shorter
and narrower faces.34

210   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


           Just as DNA has been used to estimate the divergences that mark the early hominin
      record (see chapters 3 and 4), so too the genetic diversity of Native Americans has been
      considered as evidence concerning when the New World was colonized and who colonized
      it. Analyses of DNA from both Siberians and Native Americans have led some scholars
      to conclude that the original colonization of the Americas occurred sometime between
      34,000 and 17,000 years ago, but as always, these estimates are somewhat speculative and
      disputed.35 At the very least, this research shows that more than one “wave” of colonists
      came to the New World and that the earliest of these populations likely was from a
      population similar to that now found in the Altai Mountains region of Siberia, with
      contributions from East Asian areas such as Japan and Korea.36
           It is interesting to note that these various studies of Native American physical
      anthropology have some relevance for the problem of the origins of modern Homo sapiens
      sapiens (chapter 4). On the basis of their general dental morphology, Turner labeled
      north Asians and Americans as sinodonts and the eastern and southern Asians as
      sundadonts, and he noted that both are very different from Europeans. As we noted in
      chapter 4, some scholars see traces of these sinodont and sundadont patterns in humans in
      Asia going back many hundreds of thousands of years, and on that basis they argue against
      the idea that we are all today descended from Africans who replaced all these very early
      Asian peoples.


      Linguistic Evidence
      Various scholars have also tried to estimate the date and patterns of New World
      colonization by examining Native American languages. Just as the resemblances among
      English, Greek, Persian, and other languages point toward a common Indo-European
      original language, the Native American languages have been screened for signs of common
      origin. One analysis of this problem is made by Joseph Greenberg, who argues that New
      World languages reﬂect three periods of colonization—the earliest, which is associated with
      Amerind, then a group of what are called Na-Dene speakers, and ﬁnally, at a later time,
      Eskimo-Aleut speakers.37 Each of these three language groups probably originated from
      separate Old World language families, and there is some (controversial) evidence that all
      the world’s languages can be traced to a single language family.38 But like studies of teeth,
      estimates of the time of New World colonization on the basis of language changes must be
      considered quite speculative.


      Archaeological Evidence
      One might think that good, solid archaeological data—bones and stones—would be a ﬁrm
      basis for analyzing New World colonization. In fact, at this time there are a growing number
      of indications that people were in the New World and south of Alaska before about 12,000
      years ago. That they were there by 11,500 years ago and thereafter is certain, since scores of
      sites have been dated by many different methods to 11,500 years ago and later.
           But the evidence for occupations earlier than 15,000 years ago, and certainly for
      periods prior to 20,000 years ago, although intriguing, is far from convincing. One might
      think that, since hundreds of Asian sites have been securely dated to before 13,000 years
      ago, then, as weak as negative evidence is, this would suggest that there are no American

                                                                         THE FIRST AMERICANS      211


sites of comparably early age. But it is at least possible that people were in the New World
long before 13,000 years ago but simply left no traces that have been found yet. In the North
American East, for example, exposed land surfaces in what would have been resource-rich
areas of Tennessee, Alabama, and the Ohio Valley are extremely old, and artifacts found on
them are difﬁcult to date. Crude “pebble-tools” on these land surfaces could conceivably
be the only surviving traces of very early occupations here. These pebble-tools show simplicity
and extreme patination in comparison to other artifacts. The absence of projectile points
and the simplicity of these early artifacts may mean that the earliest immigrants were not
highly specialized big-game hunters, which suggests that they came over during the warmer
periods of the Pleistocene as generalized hunters and gatherers. We cannot be certain, of
course, because successful big-game hunters (like Homo erectus) used crude stone tools, but
these pebble–tools do not look as if they were specialized killing or butchering implements.
Nor have they been found with butchered animal bones or in environmental circumstances
suggesting specialized hunting.
     Except for this pebble-tool complex, however, to a large degree arguments about the
date of New World colonization come down to one’s belief in speciﬁc radiocarbon dates.
And although the radiocarbon dating method has been shown to be broadly accurate
around the world (see chapter 2), any single radiocarbon date can be misleading because
of any number of factors, ranging from natural contamination through oil seeps or coal
deposits to incompetent laboratory technicians. When the ﬁrst radiocarbon dates were
produced on Egyptian materials, for example, Egyptologists rejected these “scientiﬁc” dates
because they conﬂicted with a decidedly unscientiﬁc farrago of evidence from king-lists,
artifact styles, and so on. But the Egyptologists were right. Until archaeologists discovered
that radiocarbon dates had to be corrected for past ﬂuctuations in the amounts of
radiocarbon in the atmosphere, these radiometric dates were off by centuries.
     Because individual radiocarbon dates are sometimes suspect, archaeologists try to
work with suites of dates or with comparisons of Asian or Siberian artifact styles and sites
and the earliest New World sites and implements. But when we try to do this, we ﬁnd that
similarities between North Asian and early American stone tools are very much in the eye
of the beholder.


North Asian Evidence
We might expect to ﬁnd a long trail of archaeological sites stretching from northeastern
Siberia along the sea ﬂoor of the now-submerged land bridge into central Alaska, and then
southward. If these early immigrants were big-game hunters, we would expect many sites
to be concentrations of animal bones, hearths, and ﬂint tools appropriate for killing and
preparing these animals. Alas, the gap between the real and ideal—so persistent in all
archaeological research—is particularly great in this case. Some sites do ﬁt this pattern, but
the evidence is far from conclusive. First of all, it is only recently that adequate surveys of
northeastern Siberia have been undertaken. Aside from the rigors of the Arctic climate, the
politics of doing surveys amid intercontinental ballistic missile silos and radar stations has,
until recently, deterred most Western scholars. Russian archaeologists,39 nonetheless, have
done excellent research in these areas, and now that Siberia is opening to Western scholars,
collaborative research is beginning to clarify the cultural relationships of Pleistocene east
Asian and North American cultures.

212   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


           Present evidence suggests that before about 40,000 years ago, Siberia had extremely
      low population densities or was unsettled altogether—its great frigid interior swamps and
      forests may have barred human colonization, at least until huts had been developed. In any
      case, the earliest known sites in northeastern Siberia date to no more than about 25,000 years
      ago and reﬂect a life focused on the hunting of mammoths and other large animals. Projectile
      points, scrapers, and burins—tool types associated with big-game hunters all over the Old
      World—are the most frequent implements at Siberian sites, such as Mal’ta, Afontova gora
      II, and other sites of this period (see Figure 5.5). Perhaps most importantly, current
      paleoecological evidence suggests that human groups in Siberia shifted southward during
      the height of the last glacial period, and that it was only after 16,000 years ago that they
      were able to expand northward again and into Beringia.40
           Stone tools, for example, from Mal’ta in deposits radiocarbon-dated to 14,750 years
      ago do not include Clovis-style points but seem to show at least similarities to early
      American assemblages—although there do not appear to be many large, ﬁnely crafted
      projectile points.41 Haynes has even raised the possibility that Mal’ta represents an
      intermediate point in migrations of eastern European people across Siberia and into the
      New World—which he thinks is plausible because of the similarities between Clovis
      assemblages and late Pleistocene eastern European industries42—and which possibly could
      coincide with the introduction of the X haplogroup mtDNA lineage into the Americas
      (see earlier).
           N. Dikov’s work on the shores of Lake Ushki offers at least some evidence about
      possible links to the Americas. Dikov found the remains of what appears to be a large camp,
      in which people lived in hide or wood shelters. The center of one camp area was a deep
      burial pit in which the poorly preserved fragments of a body were found, along with about
      a thousand soft stone beads, some pendants of the same material, and some amber beads.
      The whole area of the burial was covered with red ocher, used probably to simulate blood
      or a living complexion on bodies.
           Radiocarbon dating places the Ushki sites about 11,000–12,000 years ago.43 For
      purposes of linking this site to the Americas, it is signiﬁcant that Dikov found stone points
      in the bifacial, leaf-shape form that resemble those from the North American Great Basin
      of about the same time period. This might suggest a widespread bifacial point tradition,
      although the Lake Ushki sites appear to be too late to represent people ancestral to the
      Clovis tradition in the Americas.
           Dikov reviewed the evidence for other sites on the way to what would have been
      Beringia and concluded that nothing “challenges the conservative view that the signiﬁcant
      population movements from Asia occurred after the peak of the last glaciation, which was
      some 18,000 years ago.”44


      North and South American Evidence
      The evidence is also somewhat sketchy on the American side of the land bridge. The Alaskan
      and northern Canadian climates make surveys very difﬁcult, and farther south the constant
      waxing and waning of the glacial ice sheets and the vast riverine systems that drained them
      have thoroughly chewed up much of the land along the Canadian corridor. No doubt many
      sites in these areas have long since been scoured away by ice or water. The oldest sites
      currently known in the Alaskan area date to about 11,600 years ago and include Broken

                                                                     THE FIRST AMERICANS       213


Mammoth, Mead, and Swan
Point.45 They are part of the
Nenana complex, with artifacts
such as “teardrop-shaped”
projectile points, endscrapers
and side scrapers, burins, and
lanceolate projectile points, as
well as the use of red ochre
(Figure 5.13). James Dixon
notes that all of the Nenana
complex sites are small and
appear to have been only brieﬂy
occupied. 46 They are found
mainly in high spots such as
bluff tops, giving a panoramic
view to the human groups using
the camps.
                                     FIGURE 5.13 Examples of Nenana Complex stone artifacts in Alaska.
      Ironically, the site with
perhaps the best claim to a pre-
12,000 years ago date in the
Americas is among the farthest
south, Monte Verde, in south
central Chile (Figure 5.14).
Here Tom Dillehay and his
crew have excavated a camp
site that has been radiocarbon-
dated to about 12,500 years
ago, and below the levels of
that age are layers of tools and
debris that may be much older,
perhaps up to 33,000 years
old.47
      Monte Verde is particularly
interesting because, unlike
most other sites of this age, it is
                                     FIGURE 5.14 Excavations at Monte Verde, Chile, yielded remains of ancient
not a cave or rock shelter. It is    dwellings dating to c. 12,500 years ago.
an open-air site located in a
cold, wet, forested area that
was covered by a peat bog and
thereby extremely well preserved. A piece of mastodon ﬂesh was found intact, plus a human
footprint, log foundations for huts, animal skins, numerous plant remains, and many other
remains. Almost all the bones from the site were from seven mastodons, which appear to
have been killed elsewhere and carried home in large segments. Scores of plants were eaten,
and remains of some plants with medicinal properties were found in the camp debris. Trade
with other groups was indicated by the presence of salt, bitumen, non-native plants, and
other commodities. Dillehay estimates that 30–50 people lived at Monte Verde at one time,

214   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      with an impressive degree of occupational specialization in wood-working, stone-tool
      manufacturing, and other skills.
           Monte Verde, is one of the most important sites in the New World. If people were here
      at 12,500 years ago, they must have been in the New World far earlier; if they lived in the
      almost sedentary communities that Monte Verde seems to represent, many models of
      hunting-foraging economies may not apply to much of the New World’s earliest
      populations. And if the layers of the site dated by radiocarbon methods to 33,000 years ago
      really are that old, then most of the debates about New World colonization have been beside
      the point.
           The evidence for extensive penetration of South America by 10,500 years ago, and
      perhaps as early as 11,500 years ago, is accumulating, even in difﬁcult environments like
      the interior of Brazil.48 Anna Roosevelt and her colleagues have recently described one of
      these early sites, the Caverna da Pedra Pintada at Monte Alegre, which is in the Amazon
      region of Brazil.49 Two strata in the cave contain Paleoindian occupations. These have
      hearths and carbonized seeds, as well as stone artifacts including triangular bifacial points
      with stems (Figure 5.15). There are also examples of painted rock art on the walls of the
      cave. The thousands of pieces of carbonized plants found in these layers show that humans
      at Monte Alegre gathered tree fruits as part of their diet. These are tropical rain forest




      FIGURE 5.15 Stone artifacts from Caverna de Pedra Pintada, Brazil, document human presence
      in interior South America before 10,500 years ago.

                                                                         THE FIRST AMERICANS         215


species, including Brazil nuts and various edible palm tree
fruits.50 Paleoindians here also made use of ﬁsh, freshwater
mussels, tortoise, and aquatic turtles. This type of gathering-
and-foraging subsistence economy, which Roosevelt believes
is contemporary with Clovis Paleoindians, is quite different
from the subsistence economies described for Clovis occupa-
tions in North America.
     One of the most controversial and potentially important
early New World sites is Meadowcroft Rock Shelter, near
Avella, Pennsylvania, where many layers of alluvial sediments
were deposited by a tributary of the Ohio River (Figure 5.16).
Interspersed in these alluvial sediments are many clear
indications of human occupation, including prismatic ﬂint
blades, basketry, and hearths. Millennia of reoccupation left a
16-foot-thick “layercake” of tools, bones, baskets, and other
debris. The question is, how far back does Meadowcroft’s
earliest occupation date? The site was excellently excavated,
and there is no question about the provenience of the artifacts.
A bit of charred basketry from near the bottom was
radiocarbon-dated to 19,600 +/− 2,400 and 19,150 +/− 800
years b.p. Charcoal from a level beneath the basketry dates to
                                                                    FIGURE 5.16 Meadowcroft Rockshelter, PA, is
as old as 37,000 years ago, but there were no associated
                                                                    one of several sites said to contain evidence for
artifacts. Unfortunately, there is some suggestion that the         pre-Clovis occupations in the New World.
samples may have been contaminated by groundwater and
that the site’s stratigraphy has been misunderstood.51 The
kinds of bones found at the site also pose some problems, in that they do not seem to be
from animals one would expect this close to the glaciers that would have pushed far down
into the northeastern United States in the late Pleistocene.
     The stone tools of Meadowcroft’s earliest levels are similar to the typical Clovis
assemblage of 11,500 years ago, but some blade sizes and types are different. Adovasio has
compared the Meadowcroft lithics to those from other sites and suspects that they may
represent a link between Old World tool industries and early North American cultures,
such as the Clovis.52
     But if the earlier dates for Meadowcroft are accepted, it means that people were in the
continental United States before the last glacial advance, which implies that the ice sheets
were in fact no barrier and that the scarcity of sites found is a matter of inadequate
searching, low population densities, and the post-depositional destruction of sites.
     If people entered the New World 30,000 or more years ago, it might seem surprising
that more archaeological sites have not been found dating to this period; after all, hundreds
of Old World sites date to this age. But population densities in Europe and other parts of
the Old World had been slowly building for hundreds of thousands of years before people
entered the New World. In addition, most European sites of this age are found in caves and
rock shelters, and there are relatively few of these along the probable route into the New
World. Alternatively, the ﬁrst Americans may have worked out adaptations to cold climates
that did not require caves. Indeed, their ancestors must have done this because there are
no caves along the Siberia-Beringia-Alaska route.

          216       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                      Another problem in locat-
                                                                                 ing early sites in eastern North
                                                                                 America is that in much of the
                                                                                 lower Mississippi area, alluvia-
                                                                                 tion has been so great that
                                                                                 many such sites would be buried
                                                                                 under tens of meters of soil.
                                                                                 And in the rest of the South
                                                                                 and East, where the glacial ice
                                                                                 sheets never extended, the
                                                                                 present land surface is millions
                                                                                 of years old. Thus, soft-drink
                                                                                 bottles and ancient artifacts
                                                                                 can be found in virtually the
                                                                                 same soil because accumula-
                                                                                 tion of soil over these areas
                                                                                 has been so slow for millions
FIGURE 5.17 The site of Cactus Hill, VA, has yielded a pre-Clovis horizon.       of years. Additionally, bones
                                                                                 and other datable materials do
                                                                                 not preserve well under these
                                                                                 humid, exposed conditions.
                        Still, there are suitable land surfaces in North America where pre-Clovis occupations
                  could have been preserved. One of these is the recently discovered site of Cactus Hill in
                  Virginia (Figure 5.17).53 The occupations here are on a relict sand dune and include both
                  a Clovis period occupation and, underneath that, a pre-Clovis horizon named “Blade” by
                  the site’s investigators because it yielded quartzite blades.54 Radiocarbon dates on natural
                  wood particles from the lowest sand deposit show that the sand dune was forming around
                  19,000 years ago or perhaps slightly earlier. Another date of around 16,900 years ago was
                  obtained from natural charcoal in sterile deposits immediately below the “Blade” occupa-
                  tion. The overlying Clovis horizon is radiocarbon dated to 10,900 years ago. These dates
                  form an age bracket for the “Blade” occupation, which must be somewhere in the interval
                  between 10,900 and 16,900 years ago.
                        David Whitley and Ronald Dorn evaluated hypothetical migration and fertility rates
                  for a population entering North America through Beringia and compared them with sites
                  whose ages are accepted by nearly all archaeologists, and they conclude that “it is impossible
                  to reconcile the Clovis-ﬁrst hypothesis with empirical evidence accepted by its own
                  advocates.”55

                    THE CALIBRATION OF PALEOINDIAN RADIOCARBON DATES
                    One of the signiﬁcant advances in research on Paleoindian complexes in recent years has
                    been the calibration or correction (see chapter 2) of radiocarbon dates for these
                    occupations. Stuart Fiedel has summarized the results, noting that the correction curves
                    indicate that radiocarbon dates for ages in the late Pleistocene are some 2,000 years too
                    young.56 Although we have used uncalibrated or uncorrected radiocarbon dates in the dis-
                    cussions in this chapter, in actual fact, Clovis period occupations date to between 13,400 and
                    13,000 calibrated radiocarbon years ago, and the pre-Clovis occupation at Monte Verde to

                                                                                THE FIRST AMERICANS       217


           14
cal BP       C bp     Climate           WESTERN                   EASTERN                  SOUTH
                                        NORTH AMERICA             NORTH AMERICA            AMERICA
 9,000      8,200
 9,500      8,500                                                 bifurcate points
            8,700
10,000      9,000                       PLANO
                                        COMPLEXES
10,500      9,400
            9,500                                                 KIRK
11,000
            9,900                                                 PALMER, KESSELL
11,500     10,200                       AGATE BASIN
                      –YD ends–
           10,300
12,000     10,500                                                 DALTON                   MONTE
                                                                                           ALEGRE
           10,500
12,500
           10,700                                                 MID-PALEO
           11,000     –YD begins–       FOLSOM                    Debert                   FELL I
13,000     11,100                         GOSHEN?
           10,300     —                 CLOVIS                    CLOVIS
           10,600     IACP
13,500     11,700
                      Allerød
           11,800
14,000     12,000     OD and ACR                   (biface/blade industries?)              Monte
           12,300                                                                          Verde
14,500
           12,600     Bølling begins
15,000

FIGURE 5.18 The calibration of radiocarbon dates shows that the ﬁrst people in the Americas
arrived 2000 years earlier than previously thought. However, pre-Clovis sites (earlier than 13,500 cal
bp) remain controversial. Monte Verde is the most widely accepted site of pre-Clovis occupation
(about 14,500 cal bp). However, a few scholars such as Stuart Fiedel (personal communication 2006),
noting the peculiarity of stone tools and discrepancies in the site reports, still question this site’s
authenticity and antiquity.


about 14,400 calibrated radiocarbon years ago (Figure 5.18). Gaining 2,000 years of time also
has implications for those researchers who have calculated the timing for the colonization
of the New World using genetic “clocks” or even “clocks” based on the length of time it is
thought to take for the development of the various Native American languages.57


EARLY PALEOINDIAN ECONOMIES

For many thousands of years after people reached mid-continental and southern latitudes
in the New World, population densities were probably extremely light, and most bands no

           218       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                            doubt stayed in the same general mixed forest and
                                                            grassland environments their ancestors had adapted to
                                                            in more northern areas. By about 11,000 years ago,
                                                            however, they began to display greater diversity in
                                                            subsistence strategies as they evolved adaptations to a
                                                            greater range of environments.
                                                                   Archaeologists think their reconstructions of
                                                            these early American cultures may be somewhat
                                                            inaccurate because of the nature of the archaeological
                                                            record these cultures left. The easiest archaeological
                                                            sites to ﬁnd are those with large stone tools and the
                                                            bones of large animals, and many early New World
                                                            sites are of this type: dozens of stone tools intermixed
                                                            with mammoth, bison, and other bones, often near
                                                            streams or bogs where hunters ambushed these
                                                            animals. But there may be many less obvious sites—
                                                            those not yet found because they are not marked by
                                                            masses of animal bones or impressive stone tools. In
                                                            1987, for example, a Clovis site in a Washington State
                                                            apple orchard (the Ritchie Roberts Site) was found
                                                            when holes were dug for new trees, and beautiful,
                                                            exceptionally large stone points were unearthed
                                                            (Figure 5.19). But if this had been an earlier site
                                                            containing only crude pebble tools, it is highly
                                                            improbable that it would ever have been recognized.
                                                            In short, extreme biases are likely in our recognition
                                                            of the early American archaeological record. Many
                                                            archaeologists question, for example, even the
FIGURE 5.19 An cache of extraordinary Clovis points         presumption that the Clovis and Folsom peoples were
including this example was recovered from the Richie-       mainly big-game hunters, although there is some
Roberts site, WA.                                           evidence that groups along the tundra zone, in New
                                                            York and Massachusetts, specialized in caribou. 58
                                                            Meltzer argues that in much of the southeast United
                     States, the people who left the many ﬂuted points in this area were generalized foragers who
                     probably used many of the points as hafted knives, not as spear points.59 And Dixon points
                     out that the “spectacular and well-publicized Clovis kill sites may be the least typical and
                     the least useful sites for interpreting . . . early New World adaptations.”60
                          Numerous surface ﬁnds of Clovis ﬂuted points are known from the northern part of
                     Mexico, especially from Sonora.61 These likely are of comparable age to Clovis occupations
                     in North America, that is, 11,000 years ago or older. But it is the area of Lake Texcoco in
                     the Basin of Mexico that has yielded sites showing an association of mammoths and stone
                     artifacts, indicating hunting and butchering events. The Paleoindians who were responsible
                     for the Lake Texcoco archaeological record, however, were not Clovis groups, but appear
                     to represent later complexes perhaps related to those of the American West.62 The
                     consistency with which mammoths are found in these sites may seem to reﬂect an economy
                     specialized in hunting large animals, but most of the people of Mexico at this time were

                                                                     THE FIRST AMERICANS       219


probably generalized hunters and gatherers, and only because of the great size and
preservation of the mammoth bones do we ﬁnd so many of these sites.
      But there is no question that some people did kill and eat big animals. Excavations at
Iztapan 2, in Mexico, yielded a mammoth skeleton with cut-marks made by stone tools.
The base of the skull was smashed, perhaps to get at the brain, a very nutritious resource.
A lanceolate and a leaf-shaped projectile point were found with this mammoth.63
      Perhaps the most direct way to demonstrate hunting of large animals by early Americans
is to ﬁnd residues of animal tissue on the tools themselves, and in a few cases this is possible.
At least one of the large ﬂuted points at the Ritchie Site in eastern Washington State was
found to have traces of blood on it—in fact, probably from a mammoth.
      The earliest distinctive and widely distributed tool complex found in the North
American East is distinguished by the presence of large stone projectile points. Most such
points are between 12 and 30 cm long and occasionally have been “ﬂuted.” Formerly, many
archaeologists thought these eastern points were imitations of the Folsom and Clovis
points, but it is now evident that these larger points occur as early—and probably earlier—
in the eastern woodlands as on the Plains and are
more numerous in the East: Alabama alone, for
example, has yielded more ﬂuted points than the
entire western half of North America.64
      Other evidence of hunting comes from Arctic
sites, such as Dry Creek, Trail Creek, and similar
occupations, most of which date to between 11,000
and 8,000 years ago. These sites seem to be hunting
camps in unglaciated areas and are marked by
bifacial knives, tiny blades, and the bones of horses,
bison, hares, ducks, and other animals. By this time,
these Arctic hunters may have been pursuing a
dying way of life, as the glaciers and the rich animal
life they supported were slowly withdrawing.65
      Shortly after 8,000 years ago at least some
groups in the American West were undoubtedly
specializing in hunting big game. They often
practiced “jump hunting,” in which many people
cooperated to stampede bison herds or other
animals over a precipice, killing them by the score.
Where there were no convenient precipices,
animals were driven into natural cul-de-sacs,
where they could be easily killed (Figure 5.20). In
sites reﬂecting these practices, archaeologists ﬁnd
the bones of hundreds of bison, many showing
clear butchering marks. These hunters took cuts of
meat from these animals in a way that showed a
shrewd appreciation of their nutritional value.66 By
drying the meat, these hunters could accumulate
large food reserves, and the skin, hide, and bones        FIGURE 5.20 Overview of the bison kill at the Olson-
of the bison had many uses.                               Chubbuck site, CO.

220   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


           A good example of the varied nature of early American adaptations is the Desert West.
      The Desert West refers to the area between the Rocky Mountains and the Sierra Nevada
      and Cascade Mountain range, extending from Canada to southern Mexico.67 About 12,000
      years ago, when the glacial ice sheets were still a kilometer high along the northern border
      of the United States, some of the Desert West was probably cooler and wetter than it is
      today and had many large lakes and marshes. Then, between 12,000 and 10,000 years ago,
      the lakes shrank, rivers ceased to ﬂow, and springs began to dry up.
           The Desert West has less diverse ﬂora and fauna than most other parts of North
      America, but for most of the last 10,000 years it has supported large populations
      of squirrels, rabbits, marmots, wood rats, peccaries, and other small animals, as well as
      localized herds of deer, bison, elk, and big-horn sheep. Sunﬂowers, pickleweed, yucca,
      piñon nuts, and other vegetable foods are available seasonally in most of this area. Resource
      diversity is particularly great as one moves up and down the hills and ridges of the Desert
      West: A single day’s climb can take one from a desert environment to Arctic-Alpine
      environments in the uplands. An especially important element in the subsistence of
      prehistoric peoples of the Desert West was the lakes and marshes probably present here
      during much of the Pleistocene. Fish, waterfowl, invertebrates, marsh plants, and many
      other resources were exploited as soon as colonization began and have played an import-
      ant part in determining human settlement here to the present. Generally, then, the
      Desert West offers archaeologists an opportunity to study the many ways prehistoric
      populations in this area have adapted their subsistence strategies, population densities,
      technologies, and seasonal movements to the nuances of a somewhat extreme physical
      environment.
           The earliest reliably dated sites are all between 12,000 and 10,000 years old, although
      remains of earlier occupations will probably be found when the archaeology of the Desert
      West is better known. Many of the rock shelters and caves in the Desert West were
      submerged by lakes during the late Pleistocene, so most of the early sites may be “open-
      air” sites and thus difﬁcult to ﬁnd and date.
           The ﬁrst well-documented Desert West cultures are represented by lithic artifacts very
      like the Clovis points that appeared in the Great Plains about 12,000 years ago. These
      artifacts have been found at many locations in the Desert West, but almost all were surface
      ﬁnds, with no associated animal or plant remains that could tell us much about either the
      age or the economy of these cultures. Often associated with these points are stone artifacts
      usually interpreted as gravers, borers, and other types of projectile points.
           From about 11,000 to 8,000 years ago, many of the Desert West peoples apparently
      organized their economies around the resources of lakes and marshes, while groups in more
      arid areas probably adopted a more generalized hunting-and-gathering strategy. Remains
      of pole-and-thatch huts have been found in some areas, but the size, location, and contents
      of most sites of this period suggest that for most of the year Desert West peoples lived in
      small bands and followed complex seasonal rounds, exploiting different resources as they
      became available.

      Pleistocene Extinctions
      The spread of human hunting-and-gathering societies over the New World after 12,000
      years ago, at the end of the last glacial period, coincides with the extinction of many animal

                                                                         THE FIRST AMERICANS      221


species, and by about 10,000 years ago, all or most of the mammoths, mastodons, long-
horned bison, tapirs, horses, giant ground sloths, dire wolves, camels, and many other
creatures had disappeared.68 Extinction is, of course, a natural evolutionary development
and can be accounted for by known biological processes. But the number of animal species
that became extinct in the New World and their apparently rapid rate of extinction has led
some to conclude that human hunters forced many New World animals into extinction
shortly after the Pleistocene.69
     But people may have had little or nothing to do with these extinctions. Donald Grayson
and David Meltzer note that only two animals that became extinct—the mammoth and the
mastodon—are known from Clovis kill sites, and of all the Clovis sites, only 14 have this
association between an extinct animal and Clovis artifacts.70 Perhaps even more signiﬁcant,
game species were not the only ones to die out. Grayson has shown that numerous species
of birds also became extinct at this time, and it is difﬁcult to believe that people could have
played any role in this.71 Also, some “big-game” species such as the mastodon lived in the
North American South and East while humans were there and are known to have died out
shortly after the end of the Pleistocene, but their bones have rarely been found in
association with evidence of human activities. Thus, it would seem that at least some larger
animals became extinct without much human assistance. Finally, we might also note that
there is no archaeological evidence that the hunting practices most likely to lead to animal
extinctions, such as drives and jumps, were ever used during the period, some 10,000–8,000
years ago, when most of the larger species became extinct.
     Kelly and Todd present an alternative to the overkill model, arguing that the Clovis
peoples were unlike most known hunter-foragers in that they may have had very little
processing technology for food storage, relying instead on proﬁcient hunting using high-
quality ﬂint bifacial tools, and shifting their range as they exhausted the resources of an
area.72 They suggest that the pattern of Pleistocene extinctions would have been similar even
if people had never entered the New World.
     If we rule out human hunting as the most important factor in these extinctions, what
alternative explanation can we give? Many have been suggested, but none is really very
satisfactory. Clearly, the immediate post-Pleistocene period was one of radical climate
change, and no doubt this was of some importance. Of 31 genera of mammals that became
extinct, however, only 7 had entered the New World during the last 70,000 years; all the
others had managed to adapt to the climatic changes of the previous interglacial periods,
which were fully as dramatic as those after the last glacial retreat. Why did they become
extinct after the last period?
     Some have suggested that New World animals might have been decimated by diseases
introduced from the Old World during one of the later intervals when the Bering land
bridge route was open—a situation reminiscent of the frightful casualties inﬂicted on
aboriginal Americans by smallpox, measles, and other diseases introduced by the
Europeans. Such epidemics, however, usually do not cause species to become extinct: They
decimate local populations over a large area but generally leave small pockets of resistant
individuals who eventually reestablish the species.
     As Grayson has pointed out, it is entirely possible that these Pleistocene extinctions
were the results of climatic changes and human interactions of fairly subtle and presently
unknown dimensions.73 Research directed toward this question will likely need to focus on
each separate animal and its ecological requirements.74

222   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


           Human population densities rose in many parts of the New World, and, as we will see
      in chapter 15, by 7,000 years ago some hunting-and-gathering societies were already in the
      process of domesticating plants and beginning the transition to the agricultural, complex
      cultures of late prehistoric America.


      SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

      Evidence for early sites, such as Monte Verde and Cactus Hill, has lent considerable support
      to the idea that initial peopling of the Americas was via a coastal route from Beringia to at
      least as far south as Washington and Oregon. This process seems to have been underway
      by about 13,500 years ago. Use of the “ice-free” corridor as an entry into what is now the
      United States was simply not feasible before 11,500 years ago because this corridor did not
      come into existence until then. It is only later human groups who were able to use this
      route—perhaps traveling in both directions.
           We know that people were here in substantial numbers by 11,000 years ago, and within
      a few thousand years they had occupied most of the more productive New World areas and
      were beginning to diversify culturally. It seems unlikely that the massive wave of extinctions
      of large animals after about 11,000 years ago had much to do with human activities.
           The initial colonization of the New World may seem to be an epochal development,
      but it was in fact just one aspect of the great radiation of the human species during the late
      Pleistocene. From Australia to South America to Siberia and the Arctic, people colonized
      the world and adapted to its many environments.


      BIBLIOGRAPHY
      Adovasio, J. M. 1993. “The Ones That Will Not Go Away: A Biased View of Pre-Clovis Occupation in the New
                  World.” In From Kostenki to Clovis: Upper Paleolithic Paleo-Indian Adaptations, ed. O. Soffer and N.
                  D. Praslov. New York: Plenum Press.
      Adovasio, J. M., and R. C. Carlisle. 1987. “The First Americans.” Natural History 95(12):20 –27.
      Adovasio, J. M., J. Donahue, and R. Stuckenrath. 1990. “The Meadowcroft Rockshelter Radiocarbon Chronology,
                  1975 –1990.” American Antiquity 55(2):348 –354.
      Adovasio, J. M., J. Donahue, J. D. Gunn, and R. Stuckenrath. 1981. “The Meadowcroft Papers: A Response to
                  Dincauze.” Quarterly Review of Archaeology 2:14 –15.
      Aikens, C. M. 1978. “Archaeology of the Great Basin.” Annual Review of Anthropology 7:71– 87.
      Anderson, D. G. 1995. “Recent Advances in Paleoindian and Archaic Period Research in the Southeastern United
                  States.” Archaeology of Eastern North America 23:145 –176.
      Anderson, D. G., and M. K. Faught. 1998. “The Distribution of Fluted Paleoindian Projectile Points: Update
                  1998.” Archaeology of Eastern North America 26:163 –187.
      ———. 2000. “Paleoindian Artifact Distributions: Evidence and Implications.” Antiquity 74:507–513.
      Anderson, D. G., and J. C. Gillam. 2000. “Paleoindian Colonization of the Americas: Implications from an
                  Examination of Physiography, Demography, and Artifact Distribution.” American Antiquity
                  65(1):43 – 66.
      Arnold, J. E., M. R. Walsh, and S. E. Hollimon. 2004. “The Archaeology of California.” Journal of Archaeological
                  Research 12(1):1–73.
      Aveleyra Arrowyo de Anda, L., and M. Maldonado-Koerdell. 1953. “Assocation of Artifacts with Mammoths in
                  the Valley of Mexico.” American Antiquity 18:332–340.
      Barnosky, A. D., P. L. Koch, R. S. Feranec, S. L. Wing, and A. B. Shabel. 2004. “Assessing the Causes of Late
                  Pleistocene Extinctions on the Continents.” Science 306:70 –75.
      Beaudoin, A. B., M. Wright, and B. Ronaghan. 1996. “Late Quaternary Landscape History and Archaeology in the
                  ‘Ice-Free’ Corridor: Some Recent Results from Alberta.” Quaternary International 32:113 –126.

                                                                                        THE FIRST AMERICANS          223


Beck, C. 1997. “The Terminal Pleistocene/Early Holocene Archaeology of the Great Basin.” Journal of World
             Prehistory 11(2):161–236.
Bettinger, R. L. 1977. “Aboriginal Human Ecology in Owens Valley: Prehistoric Change in the Great Basin.”
             American Antiquity 42:3 –17.
Boldurian, A. T., and J. L. Cotter. 1999. Clovis Revisited: New Perspectives on Paleoindian Adaptations from
             Blackwater Draw, New Mexico. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Museum.
Bonnichsen, R., and K. L. Turnmire, eds. 1991. Clovis: Origins and Adaptations. Corvallis: Center for the Study of
             the First Americans, Oregon State University.
Crawford, M. H. 1993. “DNA Variability and Human Evolution.” Evolutionary Anthropology 2(4):115.
Cwyner, L. C., and J. C. Ritchie. 1980. “Arctic Step-Tundra: A Yukon Perspective.” Science 208:1375 –1377.
DeJarnette, D. L. 1967. “Alabama Pebbletools: The Lively Complex.” Eastern States Archaeological Federation
             Bulletin 26.
Derev’anko, A. P. 1998. The Paleolithic of Siberia: New Discoveries and Interpretations. Urbana: University of
             Illinois Press.
Dikov, N. N. 1977. Monuments in Kamchatka, Chukotka, and the Upper Reaches of the Kolyma: Asia Joining America
             in Ancient Times. Moscow: Nauka.
———. 1987. “On the Road to America.” Natural History 97(1):12–15.
Dixon, E. J. 1993. Quest for the Origins of the First Americans. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
———. 2001. “Human Colonization of the Americas: Timing, Technology and Process.” Quaternary Science
             Reviews 20:277–299.
Dillehay, T. D. 1987. “By the Banks of the Chinchihuapi.” Natural History 96(4):8 –12.
———. 1997. Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile. Volume 2: The Archaeological Context and
             Interpretation. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
Dincauze, D. 1981. “The Meadowcroft Papers.” The Quarterly Review of Archaeology 2:3 – 4.
Fiedel, S. 1999. “Older Than We Thought; Implications of Corrected Dates for Paleoindians.” American Antiquity
             64:95–116.
Figgins, J. D. 1927. “The Antiquity of Man in America.” Natural History 27:229 –239.
Fladmark, K. 1979. “Routes: Alternate Migration Corridors for Early Man in North America.” American Antiquity
             44:55–69.
———. 1986. British Columbian Prehistory. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
———. 1987. “Getting One’s Berings.” Natural History 95(11):8 –19.
Frison, G. C., M. Wilson, and D. J. Wilson. 1976. “Fossil Bison and Artifacts from an Early Altithermal Period
             Arroyo Trap in Wyoming.” American Antiquity 41:28 –57.
Frison, G. C., R. L. Andrews, J. M. Adovasio, R. C. Carlisle, and R. Edgar. 1986. “A Late Paleoindian Animal
             Trapping Net from Northern Wyoming.” American Antiquity 51(2):352–361.
Goebel, T., M. R. Waters, and M. Dikova. 2003. “The Archaeology of Ushki Lake, Kamchatka, and the Pleistocene
             Peopling of the Americas.” Science 301:501–505.
Goebel, T., M. R. Waters, and M. N. Mescherin. 2001. “Masterov Kliuch and the Early Upper Palaeolithic of the
             Transbaikal, Siberia.” Asian Perspectives 39(1–2):47–70.
Grayson, D. K. 1977. “Pleistocene Avifaunas and the Overkill Hypothesis.” Science 195:691– 693.
———. 1987. “Death by Natural Causes.” Natural History 96(5):8 –13.
———. 1993. Desert’s Past: A Natural Prehistory of the Great Basin. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
Grayson, D. K., and D. J. Meltzer. 2003. “A Requiem for North American Overkill.” Journal of Archaeological
             Science 30:585–593.
Greenberg, J. H., C. G. Turner II, and S. L. Zegura. 1986. “The Settlement of the Americas: A Comparison of the
             Linguistic, Dental, and Genetic Evidence.” Current Anthropology 27(5):477– 497.
Guadalupe Sanchez, M. 2001. “A Synopsis of Paleo-Indian Archaeology in Mexico.” Kiva 67(2):119 –136.
Guthrie, R. D. 1980. “The First Americans? The Elusive Arctic Bone Culture.” The Quarterly Review of Archaeology
             1:2.
———. 1984. “Mosaics, Allelochemics, and Nutrients: An Ecological Theory of Late Pleistocene Megafaunal
             Extinctions.” In Quaternary Extinctions: A Prehistoric Revolution, ed. P. S. Martin and R. G. Klein,
             pp. 259–298. Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
Haag, W. G. 1962. “The Bering Strait Land Bridge.” Scientiﬁc American 206:112–123.
Hagelberg, E. 1993. “Ancient DNA Studies.” Evolutionary Anthropology 2(6):199–207.
Hall, R., D. Roy, and D. Boling. 2004. “Pleistocene Migration Routes into the Americas: Human Biological
             Adaptations and Environmental Constraints.” Evolutionary Anthropology 13:132–144.
Haynes, C. V., Jr. 1974. “Elephant Hunting in North America.” New World Prehistory: Readings from Scientiﬁc
             American, ed. E. Zubrow et al. San Francisco: Freeman.
———. 1987. “Geofacts and Fancy.” Natural History 97(2):4 –12.
Haynes, C. V., Jr., R. E. Reanier, W. P. Barse, A. C. Roosevelt, M. Lima da Costa, L. J. Brown, J. E. Douglas,
             M. O’Donnell, E. Quinn, J. Kemp, C. Lopes Machado, M. Imazio da Silveira, J. Feathers, and

224   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                   A. Henderson. 1997. “Dating a Paleoindian Site in the Amazon in Comparison with Clovis Culture.”
                   Science 275:1948 –1952.
      Hopkins, D. M., J. V. Matthews, Jr., C. E. Schweger, and S. B. Young. 1982. Paleoecology of Beringia. New York:
                   Academic Press.
      Jablonski, N. G., ed. 2002. The First Americans: The Pleistocene Colonization of the New World. San Francisco:
                   Memoirs of the California Academy of Sciences, No. 27.
      Jaffe, A. J. 1992. The First Immigrants from Asia: A Population History of the North American Indians. New York:
                   Plenum Press.
      Kelly, R. L., and L. C. Todd. 1988. “Coming into the Country: Early Paleoindian Hunting and Mobility.” American
                   Antiquity 53(2):231–244.
      Larichev, V., U. Khol’ushkin, and I. Laricheva. 1987. “Lower and Middle Paleolithic of Northern Asia:
                   Achievements, Problems, and Perspectives.” Journal of World Prehistory 1(4):415 – 464.
      ———. 1993. “The Upper Paleolithic of Northern Asia: Achievements, Problems, and Perspectives III:
                   Northeastern Siberia and the Russian Far East. Journal of World Prehistory 6(4):441– 476.
      Lively, M. 1965. “The Lively Complex: Announcing a Pebble Tool Industry in Alabama.” Journal of Alabama
                   Archaeology 11:103 –122.
      Lorenz, J. G., and D. G. Smith. 1996. “Distribution of Four Founding mtDNA Haplogroups Among Native North
                   Americans.” American Journal of Physical Anthropology 101:307–323.
      Lyell, C. 1863. Principles of Geology. London: Murray.
      Malouf, D. 1993. Remembering Babylon. New York: Pantheon Books.
      Mandryk, C. A. S., H. Josenhans, D. W. Fedje, and R. W. Mathewes. 2001. “Late Quaternary Paleoenvironments
                   of Northwestern North America: Implications for Inland Versus Coastal Migration Routes.”
                   Quaternary Science Reviews 20:301–314.
      Marks, J. 1995. Human Biodiversity: Genes, Race, and History. Hawthorne, NY: Aldine de Gruyter.
      Martin, P. S., and J. E. Guilday. 1967. “A Bestiary for Pleistocene Biologists.” In Pleistocene Extinctions: The Search
                   for a Cause, ed. P. S. Martin and H. E. Wright, Jr. New Haven: Yale University Press.
      Martin, P. S., and R. Klein, eds. 1984. Quaternary Extinctions: A Prehistoric Revolution. Tucson: University of
                   Arizona Press.
      Martin, P. S., and H. E. Wright, Jr., eds. 1967. Pleistocene Extinctions: The Search for a Cause. New Haven: Yale
                   University Press.
      Mehringer, P., Jr. 1977. “Great Basin Late Quaternary Environments and Chronology.” In Models in Great Basin
                   Prehistory: A Symposium, ed. D. D. Fowler. Desert Research Institute Publications in the Social Sciences
                   12:113–168.
      Meltzer, D. J. 1988. “Late Pleistocene Human Adaptations in Eastern North America.” Journal of World Prehistory
                   2(1):1–52.
      Meltzer, D. J., D. K. Grayson, G. Ardila, A. W. Barker, D. F. Dincauze, C. V. Haynes, F. Mena, L. Núñez, and D.
                   J. Stanford. 1997. “On the Pleistocene Antiquity of Monte Verde, Southern Chile.” American Antiquity
                   62(4):659 – 663.
      Moismann, J. E., and P. S. Martin. 1975. “Simulating Overkill by Paleoindians.” American Scientist 63:304 –313.
      Orquera, L. A. 1987. “Advances in the Archaeology of the Pampa and Patagonia.” Journal of World Prehistory
                   1(4):333 – 413.
      Osborn, G., and K. Bevis. 2001. “Glaciations in the Great Basin of the Western United States.” Quaternary Science
                   Reviews 20(13):1377–1410.
      Oviatt, C. G., D. B. Madsen, and D. N. Schmitt. 2003. “Late Pleistocene and Early Holocene Rivers and Wetlands
                   in the Bonneville Basin of Western North America.” Quaternary Research 60(2): 200–210.
      Pitulko, V. V., P. A. Nikolsky, E. U. Girya, A. E. Basilyan, V. E. Tumskoy, S. A. Koulakov, S. N. Astakhov, E. Y.
                   Pavlova, and M. A. Anisimov. 2004. “The Yana RHS Site: Humans in the Arctic Before the Last Glacial
                   Maximum.” Science 303:52–56.
      Roosevelt, A. C., M. Lima da Costa, C. Lopes Machado, M. Michab, N. Mercier, H. Valladas, J. Feathers, W.
                   Barnett, M. Imazio da Silveira, A. Henderson, J. Sliva, B. Chernoff, D. S. Reese, J. A. Holman, N. Toth,
                   and K. Schick. 1996. “Paleoindian Cave Dwellers in the Amazon: The Peopling of the Americas.”
                   Science 272:373 –384.
      Ruhlen, M. 1987. “Voices from the Past.” Natural History 96(3):6 –10.
      Schmitz, P. E. 1987. “Prehistoric Hunters and Gatherers of Brazil.” Journal of World Prehistory 1(1):53 –126.
      Schurr, T. G. 2000. “Mitochondrial DNA and the Peopling of the New World.” American Scientist 88(3):246 –
                   253.
      Stanford, D., and B. Bradley. 2002. “Ocean Trails and Prairie Paths? Thoughts About Clovis Origins.” In The First
                   Americans: The Pleistocene Colonization of the New World, pp. 255 –271. San Francisco: Memoirs of the
                   California Academy of Sciences, No. 27.
      Steele, D. G., and J. F. Powell. 1993. “Paleobiology of the First Americans.” Evolutionary Anthropology
                   2(4):138 –146.

                                                                                           THE FIRST AMERICANS           225


Stewart, T. D. 1973. The People of America. New York: Scribner’s.
Stone, A. C., and M. Stoneking. 1993. “Ancient DNA from a Pre-Columbian Amarind Population.” American
            Journal of Physical Anthropology 92:463 – 471.
Straus, L. G. 2000. “Solutrean Settlement of North America? A Review of Reality.” American Antiquity 65:219 –
            226.
Tankersley, K. B. 1997. “Variation in the Early Paleoindian Economies of Eastern North America.” American
            Antiquity 63:7–20.
Taylor, R. E., C. V. Haynes, Jr., D. L. Kirner, and J. R. Southon. 1999. “Radiocarbon Analyses of Modern Organics
            at Monte Verde, Chile: No Evidence for a Local Reservoir Effect.” American Antiquity 64:455 – 460.
Torroni, A., T. G. Schurr, M. F. Cabell, M. D. Brown, J. V. Neel, M. Larsen, D. G. Smith, C. M. Vullo, and D. C.
            Wallace. 1994. “Asian Afﬁnities and the Continental Radiation of the Four Founding Native American
            Mitochondrial DNAs.” American Journal of Human Genetics 53:563 –590.
Turner, C. G., II. 1987. “Tell-Tale Teeth.” Natural History 96(1):6 –10.
Vescelius, G. S. 1981. “Early and/or Not-So-Early Man in Peru: Guitarrero Cave Revisited.” Quarterly Review of
            Archaeology 2:8 –13, 19–20.
Wagner, D. P., and J. M. McAvoy. 25,004. “Pedoarchaeology of Cactus Hill, a Sandy Paleoindian Site in
            Southeastern Virginia, U.S.A.” Geoarchaeology: An International Journal 19(4):297–322.
Warren, C., and A. Ranere. 1968. “Outside Danger Cave: A View of Early Men in the Great Basin.” In Early Man
            in Western North America, ed. C. Irwin-Williams. Portales: Eastern New Mexico University Press.
Wheat, J. B. 1972. “The Olsen-Chubbuck Site: A Paleo-Indian Bison Kill.” Washington, DC: Memoirs of the Society
            for American Archaeology, No. 26, pt. 2.
Whitley, D. S., and R. I. Dorn. 1993. “New Perspectives on the Clovis vs. Pre-Clovis Controversy.” American
            Antiquity 58(4):626 – 647.
Yurtsev, B. A. 2001. “The Pleistocene ‘Tundra-Steppe’ and the Productivity Paradox: The Landscape Approach.”
            Quaternary Science Review 20:165–174.
Zegura, S. L. 1987. “Blood Test.” Natural History 96(7):8 –11.



NOTES
 1. Stewart, The People of America, p. 60.
 2. Quoted in Stewart, The People of America, p. 70; it should be noted that Jefferson thought it possible for reverse
    migration from the Americas into Asia and then back again.
 3. Figgins, “The Antiquity of Man in America.”
 4. Haag, “The Bering Strait Land Bridge,” p. 269.
 5. Cwyner and Ritchie, “Arctic Step-Tundra: A Yukon Perspective”; also see Dixon, Quest for the Origins of the
    First Americans.
 6. Yurtsev, “The Pleistocene Tundra-Steppe and the Productivity Paradox: The Landscape Approach.”
 7. Mandryk et al., “Late Quaternary Paleoenvironments in Northwestern North America: Implications for
    Inland vs. Coastal Migration Routes.”
 8. Martin and Wright, Pleistocene Extinctions: The Search for a Cause, pp. 32–33.
 9. Fladmark, “Routes: Alternate Migration Corridors for Early Man in North America”; Dixon, “Human
    Colonization of the Americas: Timing, Technology and Process.”
10. Fladmark, British Columbian Prehistory; idem., “Getting One’s Berings.”
11. One famous example of this is the site of Calico Hills in California. Among the proponents for the great
    antiquity of this site, which was claimed to be at least 30,000 years old, was Louis Leakey. Extensive exam-
    ination of the site’s context, however, has shown that while some of the artifacts are real, they are simply
    deposited on the surface of a very old Pleistocene terrace. In other words, the artifacts are younger than the
    context with which they are associated (Haynes, “Geofacts and Fancy”; Arnold et al., “The Archaeology of
    California,” p. 9).
12. Beaudoin et al., “Late Quaternary Landscape History and Archaeology in the ‘Ice-Free’ Corridor: Some Recent
    Results from Alberta.”
13. Mandryk et al., “Late Quaternary Paleoenvironments of Northwestern North America: Implications for
    Inland Versus Coastal Migration Routes,” pp. 303 –304.
14. Ibid.
15. Ibid., pp. 305–307; see also Fladmark, “Routes: Alternate Migration Corridors for Early Man in the Americas.”
16. Mandryk et al., “Late Quaternary Paleoenvironments of Northwestern North America: Implications for
    Inland Versus Coastal Migration Routes,” pp. 305 –307.
17. Ibid., p. 307.
18. Fladmark, “Routes: Alternate Migration Corridors for Early Man in the Americas,” p. 61.

226   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      19. Anderson and Gilliam, “Paleoindian Colonization of the Americas: Implications from an Examination of
          Physiography, Demography, and Artifact Distribution.”
      20. Dixon, “Human Colonization of the Americas: Timing, Technology and Process.”
      21. “Late Quaternary Paleoenvironments of Northwestern North America: Implications for Inland Versus
          Coastal Migration Routes,” p. 307.
      22. This idea was initially available and made widely public only in news stories, and therefore was not subject to
          peer review typical of professional journal publication (Straus, “Solutrean Settlement of North America? A
          Review of Reality,” p. 219). Since then, one paper by Stanford and Bradley (“Ocean Trails and Prairie Paths?
          Thoughts About Clovis Origins”) has been published in an edited volume.
      23. Stanford and Bradley, “Ocean Trails and Prairie Paths? Thoughts About Clovis Origins,” pp. 264 –265.
      24. A haplogroup is an mtDNA lineage that shares the same genetic variants; see Schurr, “Mitochondrial DNA
          and the Peopling of the New World.”
      25. Straus, “Solutrean Settlement of North America? A Review of Reality.”
      26. Dates given here are uncalibrated years ago; see Fiedel, “Older Than We Thought: Implications of Corrected
          Dates for Paleoindians,” for calibrated dates for Clovis and other Paleoindian traditions.
      27. Straus, “Solutrean Settlement of North America? A Review of Reality,” p. 221.
      28. “Mitochondrial DNA and the Peopling of the New World,” p. 253.
      29. Goebel et al., “Masterov Kliuch and the Early Upper Palaeolithic of the Transbaikal, Siberia”; Pitulko et al.,
          “The Yana RHS Site: Humans in the Arctic Before the Last Glacial Maximum.”
      30. Schurr, “Mitochondrial DNA and the Peopling of the New World.”
      31. Marks, Human Biodiversity: Genes, Race, and History.
      32. Turner, “Tell-Tale Teeth.”
      33. Turner, “Tell-Tale Teeth”; Greenberg et al., “The Settlement of the Americas: A Comparison of the Linguistic,
          Dental, and Genetic Evidence,” p. 484.
      34. Steele and Powell, “Paleobiology of the First Americans.”
      35. Crawford, “DNA Variability and Human Evolution”; Schurr, “Mitochondrial DNA and the Peopling of the
          New World.”
      36. Hall et al., “Pleistocene Migration Routes into the Americas: Human Biological Adaptations and
          Environmental Constraints”; Schurr, “Mitochondrial DNA and the Peopling of the New World.”
      37. Greenberg et al., “The Settlement of the Americas: A Comparison of the Linguistic, Dental, and Genetic
          Evidence.” Although Greenberg’s linguistic analysis was originally considered controversial, genetic evidence
          has provided some support for the later migration of the Na-Dene speakers (see Torroni et al., “Asian
          Afﬁnities and Continental Radiation of the Four Founding Native American mtDNAs”). Unlike Greenberg’s
          notion of three migration waves, however, many scholars believe that the picture is far more complex, with
          multiple waves of migrants into the New World.
      38. Ruhlen, “Voices from the Past.”
      39. See, for example, Larichev et al., “The Upper Paleolithic of Northern Asia: Achievements, Problems, and
          Perspectives III: Northeastern Siberia and the Russian Far East”; Derev’anko, The Paleolithic of Siberia: New
          Discoveries and Interpretations.
      40. Mandryk et al., “Late Quaternary Paleoenvironments of Northwestern North America: Implications for
          Inland Versus Coastal Migration Routes,” p. 310.
      41. Haynes, “Geofacts and Fancy,” p. 12.
      42. Ibid.
      43. Goebel et al., “The Archaeology of Ushki Lake, Kamchatka, and the Pleistocene Peopling of the Americas.”
          Radiocarbon dates in the text are given in uncalibrated radiocarbon years; in articles such as Goebel et al.,
          these ages are expressed in calibrated radiocarbon ages, in this case, to about 13,000 years ago for the earliest
          occupation at Ushki Lake.
      44. Dikov, “On the Road to America,” p. 15.
      45. Dixon, “Human Colonization of the Americas: Timing, Technology and Process,” p. 283.
      46. Ibid., p. 284.
      47. Dillehay, “By the Banks of the Chinchihuapi”; Meltzer et al., “On the Pleistocene Antiquity of Monte Verde,
          Southern Chile.”
      48. Haynes et al., “Dating a Paleoindian Site in the Amazon in Comparison with Clovis Culture.”
      49. Roosevelt et al., “Paleoindian Cave Dwellers in the Amazon: The Peopling of the Americas.”
      50. Other fruits come from trees such as the achuá, the muruci da mata, and the apiranga (ibid., p. 379).
      51. Dincauze, “The Meadowcroft Papers”; cf. Adovasio et al., “The Meadowcroft Papers: A Response to
          Dincauze.”
      52. Adovasio and Carlisle, “Pennsylvania Pioneers.”
      53. Wagner and McAvoy, “Pedoarchaeology of Cactus Hill, a Sandy Paleoindian Site in Southeastern Virginia,
          U.S.A.”
      54. Ibid., p. 297.

                                                                                         THE FIRST AMERICANS           227


55. Whitley and Dorn, “New Perspectives on the Clovis vs. Pre-Clovis Controversy.”
56. Fiedel, “Older Than We Thought: Implications of Corrected Dates for Paleoindians.”
57. Ibid., p. 110.
58. Meltzer, “Late Pleistocene Human Adaptations in Eastern North America.”
59. Ibid., p. 43.
60. “Human Colonization of the Americas: Timing, Technology and Process,” p. 294.
61. Guadalupe Sanchez, “A Synopsis of Paleo-Indian Archaeology in Mexico.”
62. Ibid., p. 129.
63. Aveleyra Arroyo de Anda and Maldonado-Koerdell, “Association of Artifacts with Mammoths in the Valley
    of Mexico.”
64. Anderson and Faught, “The Distribution of Fluted Paleoindian Projectile Points: Update 1998”; Anderson,
    “Recent Advances in Paleoindian and Archaic Period Research in the Southeastern United States.”
65. Hopkins et al., Paleoecology of Beringia.
66. Wheat, “The Olsen-Chubbuck Site: A Paleo-Indian Bison Kill.”
67. For surveys of Desert West archaeology, see Grayson, Desert’s Past: A Natural Prehistory of the Great Basin;
    Beck, “The Terminal Pleistocene/Early Holocene Archaeology of the Great Basin.”
68. Interestingly, the area around Lake Texcoco in Mexico may have been a refugia for at least some of these
    Pleistocene animals, as late types of Paleoindian points (post-11,000 years ago) are associated with now extinct
    mammoth and horses at these sites (Guadalupe Sanchez, “A Synopsis of Paleo-Indian Archaeology in
    Mexico,” pp. 129–130).
69. Martin and Wright, Pleistocene Extinctions; Haynes, “Elephant Hunting in North America”; Moismann and
    Martin, “Simulating Overkill by Paleoindians”; Martin and Klein, Quaternary Extinctions. A Prehistoric
    Revolution.
70. “A Requiem for North American Overkill,” p. 588.
71. Grayson, “Pleistocene Avifaunas and the Overkill Hypothesis.”
72. Kelly and Todd, “Coming into the Country: Early Paleoindian Hunting and Mobility.”
73. Grayson, “Death by Natural Causes.”
74. Grayson and Meltzer, “A Requiem for North American Overkill,” p. 591.

6
The Origins of Agriculture

    The greatest events come to pass without any
    design; chance makes blunders good. . . . The
    important events of the world are not
    deliberately brought about: they occur.
    George C. Lichtenberg




    A          n alien visitor to earth might understandably conclude that humans naturally and
               instinctively cultivate plants, for he, she, or it would see that almost every human
    residence and community, from the meanest third world hovel to the lush parks of the
    world’s richest metropolises, are adorned with ﬂowers and dependent for their very
    existence on the farming of plants. It would be manifestly obvious to such a visitor that
    human civilizations were largely the product of human abilities to extract energy from
    plants.
          The systematic cultivation of plants to create an artiﬁcial food supply, however, has
    never been an instinctive part of the human repertoire. In fact, it is a comparatively recent
    human activity, practiced for far less than 1 percent of the time our genus has existed.
    And it involved a radical alteration in the way people lived. The several million years
    separating the ﬁrst tool-using hominins of Africa and the French cave artists of just
    20,000 years ago encompassed a period of momentous change. Human brain size trebled,
    an impressive array of specialized tools replaced the crude stone implements of our
    Paleolithic forefathers, and people colonized most of the world. In one important respect,
    however, all Pleistocene societies, from the barely human hominins of two million years
    ago to the creative hunter-foragers of just 10,000 years ago, were alike: They made their
    living by gathering and hunting their food, not by producing it, in the sense that they
    did not “farm.”
          We can look back, perhaps even with a bit of pride, at the adaptability and sheer
    resilience of our ancient hunting-gathering forebears. Their generations spanned millions
    of years, in every kind of environment, from the high Arctic to the jungles of the Amazon.
    They survived and came to inhabit much of the world by means of a profound knowledge
    of environments, a sophisticated yet still portable technology, and ﬂexible small-group
    social structures that efﬁciently scaled human groups to available resources. As Robert Kelly
    noted, “There are no Gardens of Eden on earth, no single locales, that can provide for all
    human needs. Mobility . . . was the ﬁrst means humans used to overcome this problem.”1

                                                    228

                                                                                   THE ORIGINS OF AGRICULTURE          229


                     OLD WORLD                                                             NEW WORLD


        3,600 years ago     Appearance of domesticated soybeans
                1600 B.C.   in north China
                                                                              4,200 years ago     Domestication of potatoes in
                                                                                      2200 B.C.   South America
      6–5,000 years ago     Food-producing economies reach northern
             4–3000 B.C.    Europe
                                                                              5,500 years ago     Domestication of llamas and
                                                                                      3500 B.C.   guinea pigs in South America
        8,000 years ago     Beginning of spread of food-producing
                6000 B.C.   economies from the Near East into Europe
                                                                              5,500 years ago     Domestication of maize in
                                                                                      3500 B.C.   Mexico/Mesoamerica
        8,000 years ago     Appearance of domesticated pig in the
                6000 B.C.   northern Fertile Crescent
                                                                            6–5,000 years ago     Domestication of beans in
                                                                                    4–3000 B.C.   Mexico/Mesoamerica
        8,500 years ago     Appearance of domesticated millet in
                6500 B.C.   north China
                                                                              7,700 years ago     Domestication of beans in
                                                                                      5700 B.C.   South America
      9–8,000 years ago     Appearance of domesticated rice in
             7–6000 B.C.    south-central China
                                                                       10,700–9,800 years ago     Domestication of squash in
                                                                                8700–7800 B.C.    Mexico
        9,000 years ago     Appearance of domesticated cattle in
                7000 B.C.   the northern Fertile Crescent


     10–8,000 years ago     Appearance of domesticated goats and
             8–6000 B.C.    sheep in the eastern Fertile Crescent


 10,300–9300 years ago      Appearance of domesticated wheat in
         8300–7300 B.C.     the western Fertile Crescent


 10,500–7600 years ago      Early Neolithic food-producing economies
         8500–5600 B.C.

       12,000 years ago     Domestication of the dog
               10000 B.C.

12,500–10,500 years ago     Natufian culture
        10500–8500 B.C.

14,500–12,500 years ago     Geometric Kebaran culture
        12500–10500 B.C.

    22–14,500 years ago     Kebaran culture
           20–12500 B.C.

       22,000 years ago     Appearance of Epipaleolithic
              20000 B.C.    (post-Paleolithic) hunter-gatherers

230   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      Even today, a few hunter-gatherer societies persist on the margins of modern states. But
      the regions of the world where hunting-gathering was the primary basis of human life began
      to contract rapidly, soon after the ﬁrst farmers appeared. Just after 10,000 years ago, people
      in several widely separated areas of the world began to domesticate a few plant and animal
      species. At about the same time they built villages, began living in them year-round, and
      began to subsist mainly on plants they cultivated and animals they kept. In most environ-
      ments these agricultural economies have been able to produce much greater amounts of
      food than hunting and gathering could. Today, hunter-gatherers exist only in the Amazon
      Basin, the Arctic, and the few other places where hunting-gathering is still (or until recently
      was) more feasible than agriculture, and even in these few areas hunter-gatherers depend
      in part on their neighbors’ agricultural economies.
            Two curious facts emerge when we look at the history of human agriculture: First, all
      of the largest and most complex civilizations throughout history have been based on the
      cultivation of only a few genera—in fact, just six plant genera—wheat, barley, millet, rice,
      maize, and potatoes. Other plants, such as sorghum, beans, yams, taro, and thousands
      more, have been critical to the survival of many peoples, and domesticated animals have
      also been important sources of calories and power, but the six plant genera listed here have
      been the main caloric engines of “civilizations.” Second, one of the particularly striking
      characteristics of the “agricultural revolution” is that not only was it rapid and widespread,
      but it also happened independently in different parts of the world at about the same time.
      For millions of years our ancestors subsisted solely on the proceeds of hunting and
      gathering, yet within just a few thousand years, between about 10,000 and 3,500 years ago,
      people all over the world began growing crops and establishing agricultural economies
      based on, for example, potatoes in the Andes, maize in Mexico, wheat and barley in
      Southwest Asia, rice in China, and many other crops in many other places.
            The fact that very few species provide most of the world’s food, and that plants and
      animals were domesticated at about the same time at different places in the world, raises
      important questions. Is there something entirely special, for example, about these particular
      plants that they became the staples of people around the world, or do they represent chance
      associations between people and particular plant species at speciﬁc times? And why did
      people make the transition to a life based on these and other plants? Agriculture has had
      such tremendous importance in human affairs that one is tempted to the logical fallacy of
      assuming that the factors that ﬁrst produced agricultural economies must be equally
      momentous. They may have been; at this point we do not know. Perhaps only slight
      changes in climate, population density, or technology set off the “agricultural revolution.”
      We know approximately where and when the most important domesticates ﬁrst appeared
      but, as we shall see, the reasons why they appeared where they did and when they did are
      still not fully understood. Almost all general explanations of agricultural origins, as we shall
      see, appeal to the same three basic factors: climate changes, rising population densities, and
      improving technologies. Yet combining these factors into a compelling explanation of all
      the world’s agricultural origins remains difﬁcult.
            In this chapter we review some of the evidence of early domestication and farming and
      consider more abstract questions concerning why people become farmers after so many
      long years of hunting-foraging, why agriculture appeared in many different places in the
      world at about the same time, and how agricultural economies came to dominate the
      world.2

                                                                  THE ORIGINS OF AGRICULTURE       231


AGRICULTURE, DOMESTICATION, AND SEDENTARY
COMMUNITIES

Discussions of agricultural origins involve many specialized terms, and some of these are
rather vague and descriptive. The difference between a “crop” and a “weed,” for example,
is in a sense a cultural construct rather than a precise botanical concept. Luther Burbank,
the pioneering American botanist, deﬁned a weed as a plant whose uses to humanity
simply had not yet been discovered. Geneticists Blumler and Byrne deﬁne a weed as “an
uncultivated plant taxon that beneﬁts from human impacts or ‘disturbance’”;3 but they
note that it also has an economic deﬁnition in the sense of weeds as plants that reduce
crop yields. Even the species names given to speciﬁc plants and animals, as well as cultural
terms such as “farming” and “domesticated,” are attempts to impose static categories on a
dynamic and multidimensional underlying variability. The easy “opposites,” too, of
“hunter-forager”/“agriculturalist” and “wild”/“domesticated” camouﬂage underlying
continuous variability.4
     Thus, some precision in terminology is useful. The key concept in the notion of
agriculture involves human efforts to modify the environments of plants and animals to
increase their productivity and usefulness.5 By weeding, hoeing, watering, fashioning
scarecrows, penning pigs, and a thousand other farming activities, people over the
millennia have sought to get more food out of their labors. But hunter-gatherers also
modify the environments of plants and animals. Some of them, for example, set ﬁres to
open up habitats for certain plants and animals; others, simply by collecting and eating wild
species, modify the environments of others and have an effect on these gene pools.
Agriculture, however, usually involves systematic and purposeful modiﬁcation of plant and
animal environments with the goal of increasing productivity. This deﬁnition of agricul-
ture, like that of domestication, is relative. At the one extreme are the simple efforts a group
might make to suppress weeds near a stand of wild wheat; at the other are contemporary
agri-businesses where crops are grown on precisely leveled ﬁelds and treated with pesticides
and fertilizers and where chickens live out unremarkable lives in cages until a computer
determines that their ratio of food-consumption and growth has reached a critical—and
fatal—value.
     The term cultivation is often used in lieu of, or in combination with, the concept of
agriculture. Blumler and Byrne deﬁne cultivation as the “growing of plants from seeds,
bulbs, shoots, and so on.”6 They note that cultivated plants are not always domesticated
and that cultivation may have long preceded domestication in some cases.
     The essence of domestication in many deﬁnitions is mutualism. David Rindos, for
example, has deﬁned domestication as a “coevolutionary process in which any given taxon
diverges from an original gene pool and establishes a symbiotic protection and dispersal
relationship with the animal feeding upon it.”7 When people domesticate plants and
animals, they do so by active interference in the life cycles of these species in such a way
that subsequent generations of these organisms are in more intimate association with, and
often of more use to, people. By interfering in these life cycles, people have produced plants
and animals that are less “ﬁt,” in some ways, than their undomesticated relatives:
Domesticated maize, for example, no longer has an effective natural mechanism for seed
dispersal, because the seeds are all clustered on a cob that, without human intervention,

232   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      usually remains tightly attached to the plant. Similarly, a variety of sheep in Southwest
      Asia has been selectively bred over the last several thousand years so that its tail is a 5-
      to 8-pound mass of fat, making it necessary, it is said, for people to help some of these
      animals mate.
           In general, humans have intruded in the natural cycles in that they have altered these
      plants’ dormancy cycles, dispersal mechanisms, and physical and chemical defenses against
      the animals that eat them.8 People have altered animal genera in ways usually directed at
      exaggerating characteristics that are useful to humans, such as meat, milk production,
      ﬂeece, docility, traction power, environmental tolerance, and so forth. People have focused
      much of their domestication efforts on animals with genetically based aptitude for
      imprinting dominance hierarchies, such as sheep, cattle, and geese. By intruding on these
      hierarchical impulses, people have produced the docility that makes animal exploitation
      simple and efﬁcient.
           But the kinds of mutualistic relationships we think of as domestication and agriculture
      are not unique to humans and their plant and animal food, nor do they depend on human
      intellect. As Rindos notes, species of African cultivator ants “farm” fungi in a very real sense.
      They prepare special beds of plant debris and excrement, in special chambers in the ant
      nest. The ants are meticulous about growth conditions within the chamber; numerous
      ventilation passages are dug, and these are opened or closed to regulate both temperature
      and humidity. To construct the beds, the ants chew the substrate material to make a pulpy
      mass and deposit it in layers in the chamber. The bed is then planted with propagules from
      previously maintained beds. Constant care is given the beds. The ants remove alien fungi
      and add anal and salivary secretions, which apparently have a positive effect on the growth
      of the fungi. These cultivation activities encourage the production, by the fungus, of small
      whitish round bodies, the so-called kohlrabi structures. These structures are the principal
      food of the ant colony.9
            One does not see tiny scarecrows or silos among these ants, but Rindos’s point is well
      taken: In terms of their ecological relationship with the sustaining species, ants do not differ
      signiﬁcantly from us. And if this is true, the import of his observation is obvious: What we
      consider the uniquely human activities of domestication and agriculture are in fact
      somewhat common ecological relationships that can be “ﬁxed” by natural selection without
      regard to the intelligence or volition of the organism involved. In fact, “domestication” is
      to some extent a matter of perspective: If one looks at domestication from the cereals’ point
      of view, for example, people have proved to be excellent devices for cereals to conquer
      the world. Wheat, which in its undomesticated forms was limited to small areas of the
      Middle East, has managed to extend its range from South America to central Russia, all by
      “domesticating” humans in such a way that they became dependent on it. As much as we
      are the creators of modern plant and animal hybrid domesticates, then, we are their cre-
      ation; we are locked together in coevolutionary embrace. In these transitions to agriculture
      and sedentary life we see a subtle evolutionary dynamic in which people were physically
      changed as they physically changed the plants and animals on which they depended.10
      Agricultural economies allowed the evolution of epidemic diseases such as cholera that
      “selected out” untold millions of people with genetic susceptibilities to these diseases.
      Agricultural diets generally increase periodontal and dental diseases and relax selection for
      robust dentition, so that the spread of agriculture across the world has resulted in a gradual
      reduction in human teeth size and strength—and in dental health.

                                                                     THE ORIGINS OF AGRICULTURE           233


      This issue of the importance of human intentions remains a major point of contention
in studies of agricultural origins. We live in an age in which farmers are constantly and
intentionally manipulating plants and animals in order to effect desired changes in them,
so it is not surprising that some scholars think this same intentionality was a critical factor
in agricultural origins.11 People may have begun to domesticate many plant and animal
genera not out of the desire or intention of making these plants more useful to people, but
rather through making relatively minor and unintentional changes in the way they
exploited them. Any plant or animal species regularly eaten or used by people will reﬂect
this relationship in its genetic characteristics, and thus all through the Pleistocene hunters
and gatherers had some effect on the genetic makeup of various plant and animal species.
But the low population densities and mobile way of life of the period before about 10,000
years ago kept people from exploiting plant and animal populations with sufﬁcient
intensity to perpetuate the kinds of mutations represented by contemporary maize and
fat-tailed sheep.
      Domestication seems to have been in most cases a relatively long-term process, not
something that an occasional genius invented. As discussed later, for example, it took
several thousand years to change the wild ancestor of maize into something that looks like
an ear of corn. And domestication has usually taken place as a long-term process in which
the physical characteristics of plant and animal species change as these species’ relationships
to their human consumers change. Some scholars believe that domestication of wheat
and other plants may have happened over only a few years, while others contend that it
took centuries (Figure 6.1).
And human intentions to
domesticate plants and animals
are neither archaeologically
retrievable nor logically import-
ant to this notion of dom-
estication. As Rindos points
out: “People could not create
the variation [in plants and
animals] that would permit
domestication, they could only
select; and they could not have
known how important the
products of their selection
would become.”12 According
to this point of view, human
intentions and goal-oriented
behavior, while important, are
not archaeologically retriev-
able and in most cases must be
assumed to be constants: That         FIGURE 6.1 The world was forever changed by mutualistic relationships that
is, there is no reason to believe     evolved between people and large seeded grasses sometime before about 15,000 years
that agriculture appeared in          ago. Agriculture was only the last stage of the evolution of these relationships, but
one place and not another             the large and reliable harvests made possible by the domestication of wheat and
because in the latter case people     barley were the basis on which ancient and modern civilizations evolved.

234   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      just did not successfully analyze the situation and solve the problems of adaptation. And at
      another level, what people thought they were doing in making the adaptations that led
      to domestication and agriculture does not matter; it is what they actually did, in the sense
      of eating this or that kind of food, moving from one area to another seasonally, and so
      on, that is important. But other scholars disagree and see the origins of domesticates
      as processes in which human intentions “speeded-up” the process almost from the
      beginning.13
           As noted earlier, another issue in studying the problem of agricultural origins is
      determining why people chose the particular genera they did to domesticate and cultivate.
      We will examine this question later in this chapter with regard to the economic equations
      in speciﬁc areas of the world where agriculture appeared independently, such as Southwest
      Asia. But whatever the importance of human intentionality in producing agricultural
      economies, it is important to recognize that human food and taste “preferences” seem to
      have played little role in agricultural origins. In fact, food preferences and other cultural
      aspects of the diverse human interactions with the foods they eat are a fascinating example
      of the blend of economic forces and ideologies that govern human actions. One must
      recognize, for example, that maggoty meat, fresh cow blood, rotted ﬁsh-heads, charred
      goat-intestines, tuna noodle casserole, sheep eyes, pot roasts simmered in packaged onion
      soup—all these are today savored with as much gusto as anything from the restaurants of
      Milan or Paris. Economic conditions usually are the major determinants of food
      preferences and of food production. The reason local supermarkets offer special prices on
      New Zealand lamb and not Labrador retrievers has more to do with the economics of
      raising these animals (and the economic conditions of the ancient societies in which they
      were ﬁrst domesticated) and with the accidents of cultural ideologies than with the foods’
      intrinsic tastes. There are few more convincing demonstrations that food preferences are
      primarily “styles” and cultural constructs, rather than reﬂections of the inherent subtleties
      and complexities of tastes and textures, than the crowds of people of all nations who queue
      for hamburgers at a McDonald’s in Rome (near the Spanish Steps), less than 100 m from
      the competitively priced 37-item antipasto buffet at the Ristorante a la Rampa.
           As we shall see later, a complex set of factors seems to have determined why speciﬁc
      genera became domesticated and cultivated while others did not. In terms of historical
      impact, one of the most important things about agriculture is that it produces not just great
      amounts of food, it supplies reliable and predictable amounts of food, and thereby allows
      population densities to rise and people in many areas of the world to live year-round in the
      same place—in sedentary communities. Such communities probably ﬁrst appeared in
      Southwest Asia as much as 1,000 years before domesticated wheat or barley, while in
      Mesoamerica at least ﬁve plant species were in the process of domestication several
      thousand years before the ﬁrst sedentary or agricultural communities appeared. But in both
      cases the transition to agriculture provided strong pressures for permanent residence in one
      particular place.
           Sedentary life usually involves the construction of permanent structures. For a million
      years and more before agriculture, people built crude shelters and lived in caves, but in
      almost every case they moved to other camps for part of the year because they had to go to
      where their food was, and this changed continually as animals migrated, wild plants
      changed with the seasons, and so forth. In many areas of the world, people probably had
      to break up into seasonal groups and spend part of the year away from their kinfolk to thin

                                                                  THE ORIGINS OF AGRICULTURE       235


their population density to a level that could be supported in the leanest seasons of the year.
By 10,000 years ago, human societies were tied together by trade networks and, probably,
by social bonds that extended beyond the group that lived together for most of the year.
Traditionally, archaeologists have imagined the people of this period as egalitarian and
organized only in simple forms of bands and tribes. But we don’t really know if this was
true. As we shall see in later chapters, wherever there is plentiful and reliable food and other
resources, our ancestors have responded in one way, and one way only: They have social
systems that exaggerate differences among themselves and among their social groups in
access to wealth, power, and prestige.
     When our ancestors began living year-round in the same villages, a complex set of
relationships between people, plants, and animals was established that had never existed
before. Village life has many effects on the human community. Compared to hunting-
foraging societies, village communities usually have higher fertility rates, higher incidences
of epidemic diseases, and a basic economic unit based on the family, not the group. Village
life also allows the accumulation of material goods. There is a tremendous “inertia” in
village agriculture, once it is established. In only a few environments can people move easily
from agricultural to other kinds of economies, for the essence of agriculture is that one
concentrates one’s energies on a very limited number of species that are very reliable. In
most agricultural economies, activities that conﬂict with agricultural production are soon
abandoned. In Denmark, for example, analysis of human bone composition shows that in
one area along the ocean shore, people before 4,000 b.c. lived mainly on marine resources,
but after that time they subsisted almost entirely on agricultural products, even though
their villages were within a few hundred meters of the rich ﬁsh and other resources of
the shore.14
      The change to village life was a radical shift in the way people dealt with each other
and the world, and it produced a completely new social fabric. Here, too, it is probably a
mistake to think of these ﬁrst villagers in terms of consciously trying to identify all problems
they encountered in making a living in this new setting and organizing themselves socially,
or their developing a wide range of new behaviors to meet these new needs. People cannot
always be considered entirely rational consumers who put together economies that are
optimally efﬁcient, and we cannot explain agricultural origins simply as the natural
outcome of people who search through all the possibilities and put together the best
economy based on their technology. But everything cultural is subjected to natural selection
to some extent, and so we must consider agriculture to be the outcome, at least in part, of
behaviors that “worked.”


HYPOTHESES ABOUT THE ORIGINS OF DOMESTICATION,
AGRICULTURE, AND SEDENTARY COMMUNITIES

    Cursed is the ground for thy sake,
    in sorrow shalt thou eat of it all the days of thy life,
    Thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth to thee
    In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread.
                                          Genesis 3:17–18

236   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


           To begin with, we can dismiss the idea that people domesticated plants and animals
      because someone came from outer space and taught them how to do it, or because someone
      in ancient Syria had a brilliant idea and it spread around the world, or because people
      simply got sick of chasing animals and wanted an easier way to live.
           The roughly contemporary appearance of a vast variety of domesticates, from palm
      trees to potatoes, across the same approximate latitudes around the world, and the several
      millennia it took for hunting and gathering to give way to farming in most areas, make any
      of these scenarios improbable. And, although there is great variability, hunters and
      gatherers tend to have more leisure time than primitive agriculturists—farming is hard
      work, as even the suburban gardener knows full well. Moreover, hunters-foragers do not
      seem to spend their time in continual efforts to improve their lot—or designing cathedrals
      or composing string quartets. Studies of these groups around the world show that they
      spend almost all of their spare time talking or sleeping—skills, as Sharp notes, that most of
      them have already thoroughly perfected.15
           Even so, the idea that people became farmers because it was an easier way of life than
      hunting-foraging seems so plausible—particularly to most Westerners—that it is hard to
      discredit this myth.
           The worldwide origins of agriculture constitute a complex evolutionary and historical
      event, and thus cannot be expected to be analyzable in mechanical terms: That is,
      evolutionary sequences are by deﬁnition inherently unpredictable in terms of their
      speciﬁcs. After all, no one could have predicted the evolution of tigers—or of us—from the
      world’s fauna of 100 million years ago. Nothing that has a history in which natural selection
      has had an effect can be explained in mechanical deterministic terms like those of physics.
           But the origins of agriculture tempt one to look at it in somewhat mechanical and
      deterministic terms because it happened independently, in several places in the Old and
      New Worlds alike, and at about the same time and in similar environments. Anyone
      considering the problem of agricultural origins has to be impressed by three major
      categories of evidence; ﬁrst, we know that world climates changed greatly just before
      domestication and agriculture ﬁrst appeared in the Old World; second, world population
      densities had also been increasing for hundreds of thousands of years before agricultural
      origins; and third, human technology seems to have been improving in many ways over the
      whole history of our genus. Not surprisingly, climate change and population growth are
      included in most models of agricultural origins, and there is some suggestion in many
      hypotheses that the accumulation of knowledge about tool-making was an important
      element in the transition to agriculture.


      Early Hypotheses About Agricultural Origins
      Among the ﬁrst hypotheses about agricultural origins was the so-called Oasis Hypothesis,
      an idea associated with the Australian archaeologist V. Gordon Childe,16 who attempted to
      explain the origins of agriculture in terms of the climate changes associated with the end
      of the Pleistocene some 10,000 years ago. Childe and other advocates of this idea suggested
      that as the world became warmer and drier, people, animals, and plants would be forced
      into close conjunction and human communities would be under stress to ﬁnd new food
      sources, and out of this propinquity and need would arise animal domestication and then
      farming.17

                                                              THE ORIGINS OF AGRICULTURE       237


      Doubts about the accuracy of the Oasis Hypothesis appeared when it was
demonstrated that the wild ancestors of wheat and barley did not grow in the areas where
post-Pleistocene oases were thought to have been concentrated, and by evidence that
deserts and oases had not formed in most of Southwest and Central Asia at the time
domestication began. But more recently, various scholars have reassessed the evidence and
ﬁnd support for the general idea that post-Pleistocene changes in patterns of rainfall and
other climatic factors did have a role in the origins of agriculture (see later).18
      Another early idea about agricultural origins has been termed the Natural Habitat
Hypothesis. Harold Peake and Herbert Fleure suggested in 1926 that the ﬁrst domesticates
and agriculturalists would have appeared in the upper valley of the Euphrates River because
they knew that this is the “natural habitat” of wild species of wheat and barley. In the early
1950s Robert Braidwood of the University of Chicago organized a series of excavations to
evaluate post-Pleistocene climatic changes and to look for early farming communities. His
expeditions were among the ﬁrst to include specialists in botany, geology, and zoology as
well as archaeology, and this multidisciplinary approach has proven to be a highly
successful research strategy. This work redeﬁned the natural zone of plants to include many
areas outside the upper Euphrates Valley.
      Braidwood’s excavations at Jarmo, in the hill country of northern Iraq, revealed an
agricultural settlement dating to about 6500 b.c.—much earlier than had been found
elsewhere.19 Jarmo was a settlement of a few dozen mud-walled huts inhabited by people
who relied partly on wild plants and animals, such as snails, pistachios, and acorns, but
who also seem to have been involved in herding domesticated goats and, perhaps, sheep
(Figure 6.2). Braidwood also found at Jarmo the remains of partially domesticated wheat
in association with grinding stones, sickle blades, and storage pits. Braidwood suggested
that the cumulative effects of generations of interaction between people, plants, and
animals in these natural habitat zones led to agriculture.
      Braidwood’s research into agricultural origins was one of
the few systematic investigations into this problem at the time,
and he provided crucial evidence for the next stage of research
on this problem—trying to understand the precise mechanisms
by which agriculture appeared. Evidence that some of the
earliest agricultural communities had appeared, not in the
middle of the natural habitat, but on the margins or outside of
it20 raised the possibility that agriculture was not just a natural
result of people exploiting wild stands of wheat and barley.
      Also, a series of experiments was performed by botanist
Jack Harlan in eastern Anatolia in 1966 in which, using a
crude sickle made with ﬂint blades set in a wooden handle, he
was able to harvest wild emmer wheat at the rate of about
6.25 pounds per hour (Figure 6.3).21 A family of four or ﬁve
could probably have collected a year’s supply of grain with
only a few weeks’ labor, and this would seem to suggest that
the people who lived in the natural habitat of wheat and
barley had perhaps the least incentive to domesticate and             FIGURE 6.2 Aerial view of excavations at
farm it because they could collect more than enough from              Jarmo, Iraq, an important early farming
wild stands.                                                          settlement.

           238       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                          Population growth has
                                                                                     also been an important element
                                                                                     in most accounts of agricul-
                                                                                     tural origins. Mark Cohen, for
                                                                                     example, argues that “the nearly
                                                                                     simultaneous adoption of agri-
                                                                                     cultural economies throughout
                                                                                     the world could only be ac-
                                                                                     counted for by assuming that
                                                                                     hunting and gathering popula-
                                                                                     tions had saturated the world
                                                                                     approximately 10,000 years
                                                                                     ago and had exhausted all pos-
                                                                                     sible (or palatable) strategies
                                                                                     for increasing their food supply
                                                                                     within the constraints of the
                                                                                     hunting-gathering life-style.
                                                                                     The only possible reaction to
FIGURE 6.3 Prehistoric Near Eastern hunter-gatherers ﬁrst made use of seeds
from wild grass stands, such as those seen in this photograph.
                                                                                     further growth in population,
                                                                                     worldwide, was to begin arti-
                                                                                     ﬁcial augmentation of the food
                                                                                     supply.”22
                           A major problem in assessing any hypothesis based on ancient population densities is
                      the difﬁculty of estimating changes in these densities with any precision using archaeological
                      data. One has to locate all the relevant archaeological sites (of which many are certain to
                      have been destroyed or not found), then estimate the numbers of people at each site, and
                      then develop a chronology for these sites that is ﬁne enough to reconstruct changes over
                      fairly short periods of time. Consequently, most population estimates based on
                      archaeological data must be considered extremely speculative; and the relationship between
                      agriculture and demographic change remains complex and not well understood.
                           Marvin Harris has formulated an explanation of agricultural origins that resembles
                      Cohen’s in its stress on increasing human populations, declining worldwide availability of
                      large game animals, and the competition among groups for survival.23 In addition, Harris
                      considers a fascinating topic—food taboos. In trying to explain food taboos he has
                      illuminated some of the central problems of trying to understand human economic history.
                      Consider, for example, the humble pig. Eventually Islam, Judaism, and some Hindu
                      religions instituted complete bans on pork to the extent that, even today, riots ﬂare in some
                      parts of the world if pigs invade religious areas.
                           Pigs are one of the most efﬁcient converters of garbage, animal wastes, and other
                      materials discarded by farmers—better in many respects than goats, sheep, or cows. In
                      preindustrial economies and today around the world in Europe, America, and China, the
                      pig is used to convert grains that are not made into food or whisky into portable, storable
                      food. So why should the sturdy farmers of the Middle East reject such a good food source
                      after millennia in which the pig was a staple part of the diet?
                           Harris dismisses the notion that this prohibition has anything to do with the common
                      infection of pigs with trichinae, parasites that can kill people.24 Recent studies have shown

                                                                   THE ORIGINS OF AGRICULTURE       239


that pigs raised in hot climates seldom transmit this disease; moreover, Southwest Asian
farmers ate cattle, sheep, and goats, which carry anthrax, brucellosis, and other diseases as
dangerous or more so than anything pigs can transmit.
     Instead, Harris explains prohibitions of pork in terms of the cost-beneﬁt ratio of the
animal in early subsistence agricultural systems. Pigs, unlike sheep, goats, and cattle, cannot
subsist on husks, stalks, or other high-cellulose foods; their natural diet is tubers, roots,
nuts, and fruits. Also, pigs are native to woodlands and swamps and do not tolerate direct
sun and open country well. Thus, the clearing of land coincident with the spread of
agriculture in Southwest Asia greatly reduced the habitat and natural foods available to pigs,
and, increasingly, pigs had to be fed on grain, which brought them into competition with
people; they also had to be provided with artiﬁcial shade and considerable water. Moreover,
Harris points out that, in contrast to some other domesticates, pigs cannot be milked,
sheared, ridden, or used to pull a plow. In short, they lost their cost effectiveness relative to
sheep, goats, and cattle, and their eventual proscription made excellent economic “sense.”
     And, as in all instances, it is not important that people ever recognize their motives in
cases of such prohibitions: Natural selection “ﬁxes,” or perpetuates, economically sound
behaviors, regardless of what people think their motives are.
     Against Harris and his supporters are many people who believe that Harris is propagat-
ing a bastardized version of a misconception of Marxian theory.25 Sahlins, for example,
points to the United States, where millions of cattle are slaughtered every year but where
virtually every horse lives out its full life in relative luxury and, usually, enjoying consider-
able affection. Why, Sahlins asks, do Americans arbitrarily proscribe horsemeat and accept
beef? Sahlins answers his own question, arguing that it is because every culture creates its
own belief systems from its unique blend of economy, society, and ideology.
     All this is rather far from the poor abandoned pigs of Southwest Asia, but the point is
an important one. For if archaeologists must seek the causes of changes in the archaeological
record (like the succession of pig bones by sheep and goat bones in the levels of a site) in
the cultural mediation of “the mode of cultural organization,” they will have to apply
techniques of archaeological analysis currently not known or, possibly, not within the
capacities of any other than a Divine Intellect.


Contemporary Models of Agricultural Origins
Another general explanation of agricultural origins has been proposed by Brian Hayden.
He begins with the assumption that ancient hunters and gatherers were, like most people,
trying to maintain the reliability and stability with which they could get food.26 He suggests
that for the last several million years our ancestors diversiﬁed their “income” by eating a
wide range of plant and animal species and developing digging sticks, hand-axes, nets, and
all the other implements of pre-agricultural peoples. Rather than a constant drive from
population growth or “pressure” which forced these innovations and broadening of diets,
Hayden envisions great stability in the population-to-resources balance.
     But by the end of the Pleistocene 10,000 years ago, all the larger, more obvious animal
species had been exploited, and people faced with the same kinds of cyclical food shortages
that always had been humankind’s lot could only turn to grasses, seeds, ﬁsh, and mice—in
other words, the smaller, in some ways less desirable species. Hayden uses here a division
of the animal world according to reproductive “strategy”: “k”-selected species, like deer, are

240   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      long-lived, tend to have long maturation periods, have only one or a few offspring each
      reproductive cycle, and are susceptible to over-exploitation; “r”-selected species, on the
      other hand, like grasses, which reproduce in incalculably large numbers, are genetically
      plastic, live only a year, are extremely resistant to overexploitation, and quickly reestablish
      themselves after ﬂoods, ﬁres, and droughts.
           Switching to a diet of mainly “r”-selected species, Hayden argues, would have
      encouraged a sedentary way of life; stimulated the development of ground-stone tools,
      wooden implements, and other agricultural devices; stabilized the food supply; and
      lessened the need for group cooperation and common food storage. In Hayden’s view, the
      rise of agriculture is just a “natural and logical extension of the trends” that led to the late
      Pleistocene refocusing of exploitation strategies from big-game animals to smaller animals
      and plants.
           As for the timing and location of the ﬁrst agricultural economies:
          It is especially notable that domestication did not ﬁrst occur where the environments were
          rich enough to support sedentary, hunting-gathering-based ranked societies, with wealth
          competition and primitive valuables, such as those found in California, the Northwest
          Coast, Florida, and Palestine. According to my model, even though these areas had the
          highest population densities, their resource bases would have been much more stable and
          they would have experienced resource stress relatively infrequently. Because sedentism,
          wealth competition, and ranking in rich environments did not result in domestication in
          these areas, it is reasonable to conclude that such developments were not sufﬁcient, or
          perhaps even necessary, conditions for domestication. Instead, domestication can be more
          usefully linked to the same Paleolithic processes which gave rise to the Mesolithic and
          Archaic: the effort to increase resource reliability in areas of frequent stress.27
      Although climatic change does not play a large role in Hayden’s explanation for the rise
      of agriculture, other researchers such as Joy McCorriston and Frank Hole,28 and Andrew
      Moore and Gordon Hillman,29 have suggested that climatic events at the end of the
      Pleistocene were a critical factor—at least for the origins of agriculture in Southwest Asia,
      particularly the Levant (Syria, Lebanon, Jordan, and Israel).
           Between about 22,000 and 16,000 years ago, glaciers expanded over many areas of
      America and Eurasia, altering climates around the world. Southwest Asia was generally
      cooler and drier in this period, but there were shorter cycles of climate change, periods of
      several thousand years in which the climates became relatively warmer or cooler, drier or
      wetter.30 For most of this period, the sea coasts expanded as ocean levels fell. Forests covered
      coastal areas around the northern and eastern Mediterranean, but many higher areas of
      Southwest Asia were dry steppe or grasslands.
           Then between about 16,000 and 11,000 years ago, as the glaciers retreated, most of
      Southwest Asia became warmer. Between about 14,500 and 11,000 years ago the eastern
      Mediterranean appears to have experienced a period of relatively high rainfall, but then
      between 11,000 and 10,000 years ago there were periods of growing aridity.31 The rising sea
      levels of these warmer periods would have submerged from 10 to 20 km of coastal plains
      around much of Southwest Asia, perhaps forcing people into new areas. The average annual
      rise would have been only 7–8 mm, so one should not imagine late Pleistocene hunter-
      foragers scurrying in front of unexpected ﬂoods.32
           It is against this backdrop of climatic change that we can examine the archaeological
      record to see how patterns of people-plant-animal interactions changed in ways that might

                                                                THE ORIGINS OF AGRICULTURE      241


explain agricultural origins in this period. Since there were many previous glacial ﬂuctu-
ations and climatic changes in this area that did not produce agriculture, these climatic
variations are obviously not a complete explanation of agricultural origins; but it is not
without signiﬁcance for the timing and location of agricultural origins that they coincided
with these environmental changes. Subtle changes in seasonality, maximum heat and cold,
and other factors have complex impacts on ecologies, and it is difﬁcult to sort these out for
periods in the distant past.
     Joy McCorriston and Frank Hole,33 for example, argue that about 10,000 years ago, as
the Pleistocene ended, the climates of the Jordan Valley and adjacent areas of the Middle
East became much more arid and more sharply seasonal. They suggest that the climate
changes of this period encouraged the growth and spread of annual species of cereals and
legumes, and that because the summers were hyper-arid and there were few resources
available, people began to store more of their food, which in turn required them to become
more sedentary—to stay near their stored foods. They note that these climate changes
resulted in the establishment of agriculture because at the time they occurred, people in
this area had developed tools for processing wild cereals and had partially depleted their
environments of some of the wild plants and animals that had sustained Pleistocene
hunter-foragers here.
     Andrew Moore and Gordon Hillman34 offer a broadly similar argument, although they
focus on the period just prior to the end of the Pleistocene. This climatic episode—known
as the Younger Dryas—occurred between 11,000 and 10,000 years ago and represented a
return to the cooler and drier settings typical of the last glacial period. After beneﬁting
from the gradual improvement in climate that occurred after 16,000 years ago, a return
to conditions more typical of glacial periods was a rude shock to human foraging groups.
The consequences are reﬂected in stresses on their systems of foraging and also in their
settlement patterns. People who had been sedentary—at least to some extent—either
became more mobile in their search for food resources or developed new and novel ways
of exploiting foods such as the wild cereal grasses. The development of these new
subsistence systems gave rise to the transition between hunting-gathering and farming
about 10,000 years ago.
     But there were many periods of climatic alteration in the past hundreds of thousands
of years in which agriculture did not emerge, and domestication and agriculture appeared
in an extremely diverse range of environments, from cold valleys high in the Andes to the
plains of southern Palestine to the humid lowlands of Southeast Asia. If climate change was
such a powerful force for agricultural origins, how could it have affected such a diverse
range of habitats to produce the same results?
     A novel explanation for this phenomenon has been proposed recently by Peter
Richerson, Robert Boyd, and Robert Bettinger.35 Theirs is also a climate-based hypothesis,
but one that looks beyond the evidence of selected single regions, such as Southwest Asia,
to explain the transition to farming economies throughout the world. Using climatic
information derived from ice and ocean cores, as well as mathematical modeling of
population and innovation dynamics, Richerson and his colleagues argue that the
Pleistocene was, quite simply put, “hostile to agriculture.”36 The data from the cores
indicate that the Pleistocene was arid, had low atmospheric CO2—which impacts plant
photosynthesis—and had highly variable short-term climatic ﬂuctuations—human groups
could not afford to become dependent on a single food resource under these conditions.

           242       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                          The advent of the Holocene—the geological epoch in which we live today—
                     signiﬁcantly altered these relationships. Climatic ﬂuctuations became less variable37 and
                     rainfall and atmospheric CO2 increased, thus expanding opportunities for plant abundance
                     and reliability. Richerson and his colleagues point out that human groups who adopt the
                     use of efﬁcient subsistence systems that focus on plants will, over the long run, be more
                     successful than other human groups who are less efﬁcient.38 This is thus the context in
                     which agricultural systems independently came into existence in many different
                     geographical areas, although offset in timing by several millennia in some cases.
                          And in a quite sobering reﬂection, Richerson and his colleagues end with the following
                     thoughts:

                         Those who are familiar with the Pleistocene often remark that the Holocene is just the
                         “present interglacial.” . . . Sustaining agriculture . . . would be a considerable technical
                         challenge. At the very best, lower CO2 concentrations and lower average precipitation
                         suggest that world average agricultural output would fall considerably. . . . [T]he intrinsic
                         instability of the Pleistocene climate system, and the degree to which agriculture is likely
                         dependent upon the Holocene stable period, should give one pause (Broecker 1997).39

                     With regard to theories of agricultural origins, it is at least plausible that more powerful
                     explanations of this phenomena must somehow take into account social and ideological
                     factors. As Barbara Bender40 has noted, many groups around the world in the period just
                     before agriculture seem to be different from their predecessors in intriguing ways. They
                     were trading more extensively, and their burials and other artifacts seem to suggest a
                     growing sense of ethnic identity and status differentiation (Figure 6.4). These may have
                     stimulated intensiﬁed production and exchange in ways that affected the transition to
                     agriculture. It is tempting to see these changes as reﬂections or results of the economic
                                                                                   changes, but societies are
                                                                                   integrated functional units in
                                                                                   which change is not easily
                                                                                   explained strictly in terms of
                                                                                   clearly identiﬁable causes and
                                                                                   effects.
                                                                                        Along these lines, Brian
                                                                                   Hayden has suggested that ritual
                                                                                   feasting was an important
                                                                                   driving factor in early complex
                                                                                   foraging groups.41 Control of
                                                                                   production by corporate groups
                                                                                   in complex hunter-gatherer
                                                                                   societies—kinship groups in
                                                                                   this case—leads to surpluses
                                                                                   that can be used for acquiring
                                                                                   labor through marriage, for
                                                                                   producing or obtaining prestige
FIGURE 6.4 Natuﬁan hunter-gatherers sometimes buried people in elaborately         items, or for hosting feasts to
decorated clothing. Note the marine shell beads adhering to the skull. These were  enhance power and prestige.
probably sewn onto a cap or hat.                                                   Once human groups become

                                                                   THE ORIGINS OF AGRICULTURE       243


invested in political organization that emphasizes competition between groups, any
impacts on acquiring surpluses—such as those caused by climatic change—may lead to the
origins of agriculture as people seek methods to acquire surpluses and to maintain these
power structures. Hayden’s feasting model therefore suggests that agriculture potentially
begins not in marginal areas, but in resource-rich regions.
      Finally, Ian Hodder has also offered a social explanation for the origins of agriculture.42
He juxtaposes the notions of nature and culture, with humans acting as the agents of
transformation from wild (nature) to domesticated (culture).43 This is a symbolic transition
that facilitated competition between groups, and as some people became more sedentary,
some aspects of everyday practical activities took on symbolic roles in society. Hodder
argues, for example, that the household—the domus—and the activities within it became
“a metaphor for the domestication of society.”44 People’s fears, emotions, and feelings
helped create long-term dependencies that were acted out in a drama that sought to
manipulate and control the “wild.”45 Social control of nature is therefore a mechanism to
facilitate storage, food processing, food exchange, feasts, and so forth.
      In the rest of this chapter we examine in detail two cases of the transition to agriculture
—Southwest Asia and Mesoamerica—and attempt to match this evidence to these and
other ideas about agricultural origins.


EARLY DOMESTICATION AND AGRICULTURE:
THE POST-PALEOLITHIC BACKGROUND

We must assume that, to some extent, the causes of agriculture are to be found in the
thousands of years of hunting-gathering that immediately preceded the ﬁrst agricultural
societies. A critical interval may be the period between 22,000 and 8,000 years ago—a time
of major climatic changes for much of the world.
     In Western Europe, population densities shifted as the herds of reindeer and horses
that once supported many hunting bands moved northward with the retreating glaciers.
Some people moved with them, but others worked out subsistence strategies stressing
plants, smaller game, and ﬁsh. Salmon became especially important in Europe as traps,
drying racks, and other tools were developed to make salmon exploitation a reliable way to
make a living. In Southwest Asia, parts of Africa, and parts of the Americas, some late
Pleistocene and early post-Pleistocene peoples began to eat more small game, ﬁsh, waterfowl,
clams, wild cereals, and similar foods; elsewhere, big-game hunting specializations persisted.
In North America, for example, some groups centered their lives around vast bison herds.46
     Where a shift to smaller, more varied resources was made, technologies also changed.
The bow and arrow and throwing stick were important innovations, and new tools were
developed to dig plants, trap wild fowl, and prepare and cook this broader diet (Figure 6.5).
Small, simple, geometric stone tools predominated in many areas. The world about 12,000
years ago was relatively diverse culturally, as some groups remained big-game hunters while
others took up ﬁshing, intensive foraging, and other pursuits. Thus, a great diversity of
plants and animals was being exploited with varying intensities and technologies in a wide
range of climates. Out of this vast mixture of peoples, plants, animals, and places the ﬁrst
domesticates and farmers appeared (Figure 6.6).

            244        PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                                 But which of these groups
                                                                                            became agriculturalists and
                                                                                            why? Although all the people
                                                                                            before about 10,000 years
                                                                                            ago were hunter-gatherers,
                                                                                            this term covers a wide range
                                                                                            of economies. 47 Much of the
                                                                                            variability in hunter-gatherer
                                                                                            adaptations seems to be linked
                                                                                            to food storage.48 Alain Testart
                                                                                            notes that some hunter-
                                                                                            gatherers store large amounts
                                                                                            of food, others do not, and that
                                                                                                  storing hunter-gatherer
                                                                                                  societies exhibit three
                                                                                                  characteristics—sedent-
                                                                                                  ism, a high population
                                                                                                  density,      and      the
FIGURE 6.5 After about 10,000 years ago, people all over Europe began to exploit                  development of socioe-
a much greater diversity of plants and animals than did their Pleistocene                         conomic inequalities
predecessors. This shift is reﬂected in Mesolithic ﬁshing and hunting equipment:                  —which have been
(1) limpet hammer; (2) bone ﬁsh-spear with microlith barbs, southern Sweden;                      considered typical of
(3) barbed point in red deer antler, c. 7500 b.c., Star Carr, Yorkshire; (4) leister              agricultural societies and
prongs of Eskimo ﬁshermen (shows how the barbed point may have been used);                        possible only with an
(5) net-making needle (?) and (6) bone ﬁsh hook, Denmark; (7, 8) microliths or                    agricultural way of life.
transverse arrowheads, one found in peat hafted in wood with sinew binding,                       Furthermore, their eco-
Denmark; (9) core-ax with transversely sharpened edge, Sussex; (10) ﬂake-axe,                     nomic cycle—massive
Denmark.                                                                                          harvest and intensive
                                                                                                  storage of a seasonal
                                                                                                  resource—is the same as
                             that of societies based on the cultivation of cereals. The difference between storing hunter-
                             gatherers and agriculturalists lies in whether the staple food species are wild or
                             domesticated: this proves to be only a minor difference, since it does not affect the main
                             aspects of society. Agriculturalists and storing hunter-gatherers together are neatly in
                             opposition to non-storing hunter-gatherers. The conclusion to be drawn is that it is
                             certainly not the presence of agriculture or its absence which is the relevant factor when
                             dealing with such societies, but rather the presence or absence of an economy with intensive
                             storage as its cornerstone.49

                            Thus, in looking for causes of agricultural economies, we must consider kinds of
                       adaptations where storage is a potential factor. This relates directly to certain types of foods.
                       Cereals store well, but many tubers do not. Sheep, pigs, barnyard fowl, and other animals
                       can also be considered a form of food storage, since one simply feeds them excess or
                       unwanted foods until the need arises to eat them.
                            In looking for the origins of agriculture, we can look for environments where food
                       storage was an early and important option. It is probably also signiﬁcant, as Kent Flannery
                       notes, that the major seed crops that supported the ﬁrst farmers and remain the basis of
                       modern economies, including wheat, barley, millet, and rice, appear to have derived from

                                                                    THE ORIGINS OF AGRICULTURE        245




FIGURE 6.6 Early archaeological occurrences of some important Old World and New World
domesticates. Domestication is a process, not an event, and these speciﬁc sites represent only some
early occurrences of species domesticated over wide areas. Many other species have been
domesticated.


wild ancestors that were “third-choice” foods: plants that were usually more difﬁcult to
gather and process than other wild plants and thus were probably ﬁrst eaten in quantity
because people had to do so, not because they wanted to.50 On the other hand, most of these
third-choice foods are easily storable, plentiful, easy to grow, and, as annuals, genetically
malleable—altering the selective forces on them each year can quickly change them
genetically.
     Aspects of the shift to cereals and other resources may help explain how agriculture—
once it was in its initial stages—changed human demographic patterns. In hunting-
gathering societies, fertility rates are suppressed signiﬁcantly simply by maternal mobility:
A pregnant woman’s chances of spontaneous abortion go up considerably if she walks a lot
and works heavily. Thus, those late Pleistocene groups that became less mobile, perhaps

246   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      because they began to concentrate on salmon runs or wild cereal patches, might have
      experienced a rise in fertility rates. Also, a direct correlation exists between the amount of
      carbohydrates in the diet and fertility rates. Studies have shown that it is almost impossible
      for a woman to become pregnant until she has about 27,000 calories, or 20–25 percent
      of her body weight, stored as fat51 (the authors assume no liability for the accuracy of this
      statistic). Nursing a child requires about 1,000 calories a day, and in many hunter-gatherer
      societies, the rigors of mobility and their high-protein diet can mean that nursing itself
      prevents sufﬁcient fat build-up for a successful subsequent pregnancy for about three years.
      But with the change to a high-carbohydrate, cereal-based diet and restricted mobility of
      sedentary life, fertility rates may well have risen rapidly.52


      THE ORIGINS OF DOMESTICATION, AGRICULTURE, AND
      SEDENTARY COMMUNITIES IN SOUTHWEST ASIA

      The best known and perhaps the world’s ﬁrst case of the origins of domestication and
      agriculture occurred in Southwest Asia and involved peoples and environments ranging
      from Afghanistan to Greece over a time period of at least 14,000 years. From this region
      came domesticated sheep, goats, cattle, pigs, wheat, barley, and many other crops on which
      much of the world today depends.
           The environment in which this transition took place is extremely complex. Millions of
      years ago movements of the earth’s crust forced the Arabian Peninsula toward the stable
      Iranian Plateau, compressing the land in between so that it is pleated like the folds of an
      accordion. At the end of the Pleistocene, the uplands of the Fertile Crescent (Figure 6.7)
      supported large herds of wild sheep, goats, and cattle and, in many areas, dense stands of




                                    Abu Hureyra




                                      Ohalo II

                                      Jericho
                                                   Ain Ghazal




      FIGURE 6.7    The “Fertile Crescent” and some important early pre-agricultural and agricultural
      sites.

                                                                  THE ORIGINS OF AGRICULTURE       247


wild wheat and barley. In lower elevations and wetter regions, lakes and streams had
abundant supplies of waterfowl and ﬁsh.


Southwest Asian Domesticates
To understand the origins of agriculture in Southwest Asia, we have to understand the
domestication of wheat, barley, cattle, sheep, and goats, for these have been the primary
food sources in this area from about 10,000 years ago to the present day. Lentils and other
legumes may have been domesticated here earlier,53 and pigs were more important than
cattle, sheep, and goats in some areas and places, but in general it was wheat and barley and
cattle, sheep, and goats that supported Southwest Asia’s cultural evolution.
     If you were a peasant agriculturalist forced to farm the wild ancestors of wheat and
barley, you would have had a hard time. Wild wheat, for example, has many limitations as
a food crop: Its distribution is sharply limited by temperature, soil, and moisture. As a
result, stands of these grains can be widely scattered and therefore difﬁcult to harvest. Much
greater efﬁciency could be attained if these plants could be adapted to a greater variety of
temperature, soil, and moisture ranges—especially to the torrid summers of the lowlands,
where the rivers offered the potential of irrigation agriculture.
     Also, the rachis, the segment of the stalk to which the kernels of wheat or barley are
attached, becomes extremely brittle as wild wheat ripens. This brittleness is essential to the
successful propagation of these plants because it allows the seeds to be separated from
the plant and dispersed by the merest touch of an animal or simply the force of the wind.
The head of the plant becomes brittle gradually, from top to bottom, and seed dispersal is
spread over one to two weeks. Although this is advantageous for the plant because it
prevents the seeds from sprouting in a dense mass of competing seedlings, it poses problems
for the human collector. If the grain is gathered when quite ripe, the slightest contact will
cause the rachis to fall off, so harvesting with a sickle is difﬁcult—although holding the stalk
over a basket and tapping it with a stick works. If, on the other hand, the grain is harvested
before it is fully mature, excess moisture in the unripe kernels will cause them to rot in
storage. A plant with a tougher rachis and on which the kernels ripen at about the same
time would clearly be more useful to people.
     Another problem with wild wheat is that the kernels are enclosed in very tough
protective husks, called glumes. These protect the seeds from frost and dehydration, but
primitive threshing often will not separate the seeds from the glumes, and the human
digestive tract cannot break down their tough ﬁbers. Thus a cereal with less tough and less
developed glumes would be more digestible.
     Also, each stalk of wild grain has only two rows of kernels. Domesticated varieties have
six rows, rendering them much more productive as a food resource, and wild species had
to change in this direction before it was proﬁtable to invest energy in sowing, cultivating,
and harvesting wheat and barley in many areas—particularly in those areas where natural
conditions were not optimal for wild cereals.
     To base your economy on wheat and barley would also require some specialized tools,
for cutting, transporting, threshing, storing, milling, and baking. A full-time cereal farmer
is best off living year round in a village or town because of the costs of moving large
quantities of grain and because successful harvesting requires that collectors be near stands
at very precise times. In contrast to many plants, wild grain can be collected only during

           248       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                    the few days when the plants
                                                                                    are ripening, and even then
                                                                                    there is considerable com-
                                                                                    petition from birds and other
                                                                                    predators. Another considera-
                                                                                    tion is that women and
                                                                                    children in cereal-gathering
                                                                                    societies could contribute a
                                                                                    great deal to the food supply,
                                                                                    whereas in many societies spe-
                                                                                    cializing in hunting, women
                                                                                    and children have less direct
                                                                                    economic return.
                                                                                         Given all these liabilities
                                                                                    and required cultural adjust-
                                                                                    ments, one might wonder why
                                                                                    and how these cereals were
                                                                                    domesticated. In fact, this
                                                                                    seems to have been a relatively
                                                                                    rapid process in Southwest
                                                                                    Asia, occurring within a few
                                                                                    thousand years (and perhaps
                                                                                    much less [Figure 6.8]), in
                                                                                    several native grasses, includ-
FIGURE 6.8 Domestication of wheat, one of the world’s most important crops,
                                                                                    ing wild barley (Hordeum
involved both human manipulation and natural hybridization between related
genera. Human intervention appears to have been aimed at producing free-            spontaneum), wild einkorn
threshing, nonshattering varieties. The simplest wheats are “diploid,” meaning that (Triticum boeoticum), and
they have two sets of seven chromosomes. Hybridization with related species         wild emmer wheat (Triticum
produced tetraploid wheats, with six sets of chromosomes, which occur only in       dicoccum), each with different
cultivated species of wheat. By mixing genetic material from various species, early habitats and characteristics.
farmers produced forms of wheat that could adapt to diverse habitats.                    At the same time these
                                                                                    plants were being domestic-
                       ated about 10,000 years ago, sheep, goats, pigs, and cattle were also being domesticated. In
                       some areas, such as the southern Mesopotamian alluvial plain, permanent settlement was
                       not possible until domesticated animals were available to supply the fats and proteins that
                       were not readily obtainable from any other source. Domesticated animals also provided a
                       way of converting highland grasses, weeds, shrubs, surplus grain stubble, and other plants
                       into storable, portable, high-quality foods and other usable products. Later, some animals,
                       such as cattle, horses, and donkeys, provided draught and transport power.
                            Each of the economically most important animals domesticated in Southwest Asia
                       involved somewhat different patterns of change. Cattle, for example, became smaller,
                       perhaps as an adaptation to two factors: the problem of keeping cool in the torrid lowlands
                       where most of the farms eventually were located and the relatively poor diet that was
                       available to cattle there in the leanest seasons. Sheep were bred over time to have a thick
                       multilayered ﬂeece that both protected them from intense temperatures and provided an
                       important product—wool.

                                                                      THE ORIGINS OF AGRICULTURE           249


The Archaeological
Record of Plant
and Animal
Domestication
in Southwest Asia

Archaeological sites through-
out Southwest Asia during the
late Upper Pleistocene, from
about 22,000 to 16,000 years
ago, are often concentrations
of stone tools, ash, and the
bones of large, hoofed mammals
(Figure 6.9). Almost all the
meat eaten by people came
from just a few species of
ungulates (hoofed mammals),           FIGURE 6.9 The Upper Paleolithic site of Ain al-Buhayra, Jordan, is on the
mainly       gazelles,    equids      hillside on the left. The whitish deposits on this hillside represent a fossil spring,
(onagers), and aurochs (extinct       while the whitish deposits in the left background are lake bottom sediments.
wild cattle). Based on the tools
and other artifacts from South-
west Asian sites of this period, it appears that the basic social unit was a band of about
15 or 20 people comprising several families who season after season moved through this
area hunting animals and gathering plants.
     To understand how these age-old patterns of human adaptation were displaced in just
a few thousand years by farmers, we must look in detail at a variety of evidence. The best
known archaeological record of this transition is that of the Levant, the area that extends
from southeastern Anatolia into the Sinai Peninsula, and east into what is now western
Syria and Jordan.
     The Levantine cultures of between 22,000 and 14,500 years ago belong to a tradition
called Kebaran (named, as so many ancient peoples are, after stone tools from a particular
site), followed from about 14,500 to 12,500 years ago by the Geometric Kebaran cultures, and
from 12,500 to 10,500 years ago by the Natuﬁan cultures.54 One aspect that distinguishes
each of these is the type of small stone tools—microliths. Kebaran cultures have non-
geometric forms, Geometric Kebaran cultures have geometric forms such as triangles and
trapezes, and Natuﬁan culture has lunates (half-moon shaped) forms.
     If the Kebaran peoples were doing something that inexorably led their remote
descendants to become farmers, it is not usually obvious in their archaeological traces. Such
traces are almost all small concentrations of bones and stone that reﬂect a people skilled
principally in hunting deer and other large grazing animals. One possible exception to this
pattern is the site of Ohalo II— near the Sea of Galilee—which has been radiocarbon–dated
to about 19,000 years ago (Figure 6.10). This Kebaran site was wonderfully preserved when
it was buried by rising lake levels; a period of low water levels exposed the site in the late
1980s and early 1990s, and it was excavated then. Ohalo II is notable for the preservation
of the remains of several brush structures and, most importantly, large quantities of charred

           250       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                     plant foods. 55 We therefore
                                                                                     know that people living at
                                                                                     Ohalo II were exploiting
                                                                                     cereals such as wild barley and
                                                                                     wild emmer wheat. They also
                                                                                     collected and ate wild almonds,
                                                                                     wild olives, wild pistachios,
                                                                                     and wild grapes. 56 Ohalo II
                                                                                     shows without a doubt that
                                                                                     Levantine hunter-gatherer
                                                                                     groups used wild cereals as
                                                                                     food thousands of years before
                                                                                     the advent of agriculture. But
                                                                                     Kebaran use of these cereals
                                                                                     did not result in the develop-
                                                                                     ment of agricultural lifeways
                                                                                     during this period.
FIGURE 6.10 The Early Epipaleolithic site at Ohalo II, Israel, has excellent organic      Studies of Kebaran sites
preservation because the site was submerged when lake levels in the Sea of Galilee   and  those of later periods led
rose.                                                                                several scholars to the conclu-
                                                                                     sion that there was a “broad
                      spectrum revolution” between 20,000 and 10,000 years ago, in which people in Southwest
                      Asia and many other parts of the world began eating a broader range of foods.57 In addition
                      to the wide range of plant and animal species found in some sites toward the end of this
                      period, the variety and efﬁciency of tools used seems to have increased as these millennia
                      passed. Not only do grinding stones appear in quantity, but also barbed spears and arrows,
                      bows, knives made by setting ﬂint ﬂakes into bone or wood, and other tools indicate a
                      greater range of subsistence activities. Some animal species were exploited systematically
                      for the ﬁrst time, and the grinding stones, “sickles,” and other new tools indicate that
                      vegetable foods, including wild cereal grasses, likely were important parts of the diet. Minor
                      local trade in seashells was carried on, and substantial huts appeared in some areas.
                           But in some ways, the broad spectrum revolution and the agricultural revolution may
                      together form an example of that “great tragedy of Science—the slaying of a beautiful
                      hypothesis by an ugly fact,” as Thomas Huxley put it. In a long and thorough review of the
                      evidence from Southwest Asia, archaeologist Donald Henry came to two conclusions:
                          First, the proposal of a gradual broadening of the economy leading to a more secure
                          subsistence base, the emergence of sedentary communities, and a growth in population can
                          be rejected. Such a trend is not indicated by the pre-Natuﬁan subsistence evidence.
                          Secondly, the emergence of large sedentary communities, as represented by the Natuﬁan,
                          can best be explained by the intensive exploitation of cereals and nuts. Specialization, as
                          opposed to diversiﬁcation, characterized the Natuﬁan economy. Although small animal
                          species did form a larger portion of the diet in Natuﬁan times than earlier, these food
                          sources furnished an exceedingly small, almost negligible, part of the overall diet. Instead
                          the specialized hunting of gazelle and the intensive collection of cereals and nuts
                          contributed the greatest part of the subsistence base.58
                     Some evidence of the specialized gazelle hunting that Henry mentions has been provided
                     by Legge and Rowley-Conwy, who have shown that around 11,000 years ago, in the

                                                                   THE ORIGINS OF AGRICULTURE      251


Euphrates Valley in Syria, at the site of Tell Abu Hureyra
people intensively hunted gazelles.59 Of the 60,000 identiﬁable
animal bones found at this site, about 80 percent are from
gazelles—and from gazelles of all sizes and ages and both sexes.
Near the site are the traces of stone enclosures, and Legge and
Rowley-Conwy have concluded that for thousands of years the
people of Tell Abu Hureyra drove herds of gazelle into these
enclosures and killed them all. Many of these enclosures have
been found and it is possible that eventually the gazelle were
driven so close to extinction that people turned to sheep and
goats, and in the process domesticated them.
                                                                      FIGURE 6.11 Lunates (a type of microlith) are
                                                                      common stone tools found during the Natuﬁan
THE NATUFIAN CULTURE                                                  period in the Levant.

In the archaeological record of the Natuﬁan period, from
about 12,500 to 10,500 years ago, in the Levant, we see clear
evidence of agricultural origins. The stone tools of the Natuﬁans include many lunate (i.e.,
shaped like a segment of the moon) ﬂakes of chert (Figure 6.11), but there is also something
new: They used “sickle blades” that show a pattern of wear characteristic of harvesting
cereals, rushes, and reeds. Also, querns (milling stones), mortars, pestles, pounders, and
other ground stone tools occur in abundance at Natuﬁan sites, and many such tools show
signs of long, intensive use. There is also evidence that these heavy grinding stones were
transported long distances, more than 30 km in some cases,60 and this is not something
known to have been done by people of preceding periods. Fish hooks and gorges and net
sinkers attest to the growing importance of ﬁsh in the diet in some areas. Stone vessels
indicate an increased need for containers. Studies of attrition—dental wear—of the teeth
of Natuﬁans also strongly suggest that these people specialized to some extent in collecting
cereals,61 or at the very least, in eating stone-ground plant foods. But they were also still
hunter-foragers, who intensively hunted gazelle and deer in more lush areas and wild goats
and equids in more arid zones.
     The Natuﬁans had a different settlement pattern from that of their predecessors. Some
of their “base-camps” are far larger (over 1,000 m2) than any of the earlier periods, and they
may have lived in some of these camps for half the year or even more. In some of the camps
people made foundations and other architectural elements out of limestone blocks. Trade
in shell and other commodities seems to have been on the rise, and we suspect that
exchange of perishables, such as skins, foodstuffs, and salt, was also increasing. Salt
probably became for the ﬁrst time a near necessity: People who eat a lot of meat get many
essential salts from this diet, but diets based on cereals can be deﬁcient in salts. Salt was
probably also important as a food preservative in early villages.
     While some of the later Natuﬁan peoples retained a mobile way of life, others
established sedentary communities, such as at Ain Mallaha, near Lake Huleh, Israel,
which between 12,000 and 10,500 years ago comprised about 50 huts, most of them
circular, semi-subterranean, rock-lined, and from 2.5 to 9.0 m in diameter (Figure 6.12).
Mortars and pestles litter the site and occur in most huts (Figure 6.13), and storage pits
were found both in individual huts and in the compound’s interior. These people may have
been simply collecting wild cereals instead of cultivating them, but the pattern quickly
changed.

           252       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                         As always, there is more to
                                                                                    a major cultural change than
                                                                                    simply a shift in economics.
                                                                                    The Natuﬁans made (and
                                                                                    presumably wore) beads and
                                                                                    pendants in many materials,
                                                                                    including marine shells that
                                                                                    had to be imported from the
                                                                                    Red Sea and from the Mediter-
                                                                                    ranean, and it is possible this
                                                                                    ornamentation reﬂects a grow-
                                                                                    ing sense of ethnic identity
                                                                                    and perhaps some differences
                                                                                    in personal and group status.
                                                                                    Cleverly carved ﬁgurines of
                                                                                    animals and other subjects
                                                                                    occur in many sites. 62 More
                                                                                    than 400 Natuﬁan burials have
                                                                                    been found, most of them
                                                                                    simple graves. Grave goods are
FIGURE 6.12 Simpliﬁed plan of an early settlement at Ain Mallaha (Israel).         infrequent, but some burials
Compounds of circular huts such as those at Ain Mallaha were widespread in         indicate concern with the
Southwest Asia after about 8000 b.c., but by 6000 b.c. had been superseded largely  philosophical implications of
by villages of rectangular huts.                                                    death: At Ain Mallaha one
                                                                                    elderly person was buried with
                                                                                    a young canid—perhaps a
                       puppy (Figure 6.14).63 In the late Natuﬁan period, some Natuﬁans began burying the body
                       and head of selected people in different but prepared graves. As Belfer-Cohen notes, these
                       burials may reﬂect an ancestor cult and a growing sense of community emotional ties and
                       attachment to a particular place, and toward the end of the Natuﬁan period people in this
                       area were making a strict separation between living quarters and burial grounds. Compared
                       to the earlier Pleistocene cultures of the Levant, there appears to have been considerable
                       social change in the Natuﬁan.
                            The question of why the Natuﬁans differed in these and other ways from their
                       predecessors, and why they made these ﬁrst steps toward the farming way of life, remains
                       unclear. There were climate changes, of course, and growing aridity and rising population
                       densities may have forced them to intensify exploitation of cereals, which in turn might
                       have stimulated the development of sickles and other tools and the permanent com-
                       munities that make agriculture efﬁcient. But precisely how these factors interacted with
                       others is poorly understood.


                     THE SOUTHWEST ASIAN NEOLITHIC
                     The earliest farmers of the Middle East appear to have been simultaneously domesticat-
                     ing plants and animals, but animal domestication may have begun slightly earlier and
                     been a longer process than that of cereals. Hillman and Davies,64 for example, estimate that

                                                                   THE ORIGINS OF AGRICULTURE          253


wheat and barley could have
been domesticated in parts of
the Middle East in 200 years
or less.
     So we begin with the
animals. The dog65 is no doubt
the oldest animal domesticate
in Southwest Asia, probably
having been fully domestic-
ated between 22,000 and
10,000 years ago. Hunters and
gatherers the world over are
known to have remarkably
unsentimental ideas about
pets, and we should probably
see the early domestication of
dogs as a result of a symbiotic,
utilitarian relationship. Dogs
probably served as watchdogs,
assisted in the hunt, and were
eaten as a starvation food.
     But in economic terms,
the most important domestic-
ated animals in Southwest Asia       FIGURE 6.13 Common implements for grinding and preparing grain in Iraq,
are sheep and goats. Beginning       between 7000 and 4000 b.c. The ceramic husking tray (above) was used to strip grain
about 8,000 years ago to the         from chaff; the heavy stone quern and round pestle (below) were used to grind grain
present, most meat, milk, and        to ﬂour.
hide products used in the
region have come from these animals.
     Detecting the process of animal domestication on the basis of archaeological data is a
complex matter on which archaeologists disagree, but the concept of domestication in an
archaeological sense usually involves four classes of evidence.66 Just the presence of an
animal species outside its natural range, such as the presence of highland species of sheep
in lowland environments, may indicate herding. Second, in most animals, morphological
changes occur as domestication progresses. In sheep and goats, the size and shape of horns
are major factors in reproductive success, since the larger males ﬁght with their horns to
establish breeding hierarchies. As humans domesticated these animals, however, they
relaxed selective pressures for large, strong horns (Figure 6.15), and the size and shape of
horns changed (morphological changes can also occur at the microscopic level). A third
indication of domestication may be evidence of abrupt increases in the number of some
species relative to others, which cannot be accounted for by natural causes (e.g. 5 at many
Southwest Asian sites the proportion of sheep and goat bones increased dramatically,
relative to other animals, at about 8,000 years ago). Finally, age and sex ratios that differ
from those of wild herds may also be evidence of domestication.
     Early evidence of sheep domestication may be the presence of sheep bones in Neolithic
(c. 11,000–8,000 years ago) settlements in the Jordan Valley. These bones reﬂect no

           254       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                     morphological changes in the direction of domestication, but
                                                     since sheep and goats are not native to this area, their presence
                                                     here probably reﬂects intentional introduction.
                                                          Ethnographic studies of modern pastoralists suggest that
                                                     they typically sell or eat 50 percent or more of the animals born
                                                     each year. Those animals sold or eaten are principally the
                                                     males, since the females can be kept for reproduction and only
                                                     a few males are required to service the breeding population.
                                                     Once a male has reached two years of age, any further invest-
                                                     ment of food or time in him yields little additional return.
                                                     Even before the distortions introduced by modern urban
                                                     markets, the economic importance of sheep and goats was
                                                     mainly in the milk, cheese, yogurt, and wool obtained from
                                                     these animals. A well-kept animal can supply many times its
                                                     own weight in nutritious, storable foods each year for several
                                                     years, so only young males are regularly slaughtered for meat.
                                                          Evidence from two sites near Zawi Chemi Shanidar in
                                                     Iraq indicates that similar selective slaughtering may have
                                                     been underway as early as 10,000 years ago. Prior to 14,000
                                                     years ago, only about 20 percent of the animals killed and
                                                     eaten at one of the sites were immature, but by 10,000 years
                                                     ago, 44–58 percent of the sheep and 25–43 percent of the goats
                                                     eaten were immature when butchered.67
FIGURE 6.14 This Natuﬁan burial from Ain
                                                          At Ganj Dareh, in the mountains of western Iran, there is
Mallaha, Israel, has an elderly person buried with
a young canine, possibly a puppy (upper left).       evidence  that by 10,000 years ago, goats were being herded and
                                                     managed with selective culling of the subadult males,68 and
                                                     there is much other evidence that all over Southwest Asia,
                       sheep, goats, cattle, pigs, and other animal species were well into the process of being
                       domesticated and integrated into a cereal-based farming way of life.
                             Some of the earliest evidence for domesticated grain cultivation in the Levant comes
                       from the lower levels of Jericho (c. 10,300–9,300 years ago), next to the springs in the center
                       of this oasis. At some time during this period domestic forms of wheat and barley were
                       cultivated in quantity here. Neither wild wheat nor barley appears to have been native to
                       the arid wastelands that surround the site, so these grains were probably brought down
                       from the uplands of the Jordan Valley and grown at Jericho, perhaps as wild species initially.
                       No domestic animals were used in this period, but wild gazelles, goats, cattle, and boars
                       were intensively hunted. Two thousand or more people probably lived at Jericho at any
                       time between 10,300 and 9,300 years ago, and although the earlier communities were
                       apparently unwalled, around 9,300 years ago the inhabitants built a massive stone wall,
                       3 m thick, 4 m high, and perhaps 700 m in circumference—perhaps to protect the
                       settlement from ﬂoodwater erosion. Asphalt, sulfur, salt, and a little obsidian seem to have
                       been traded, but in moderate quantities.
                             And people living in the northern Levant were making the transition to sedentary
                       communities based on intensive plant collection.
                             One of these communities was at Tell Abu Hureyra, on the Euphrates River east of
                       Aleppo, Syria. The late Epipaleolithic settlement here consisted of a series of hut pits

                                                                       THE ORIGINS OF AGRICULTURE         255




FIGURE 6.15 The essence of archaeological interpretation is to discern patterns of change in the
archaeological record over time. Here, the goat horn cores found at some sites in western Iran indicate
that the shape of these horns was changing rapidly between 7500 b.c. and 3700 b.c. One explanation
is that in the process of domestication the selective forces that kept these horns quadrilateral—and
therefore relatively strong—were being relaxed, probably as a result of the domestication process.
Farmers kept goats in herds and selectively bred them, and the strength of the horns apparently was
no longer an important determinant of the reproductive success of these goats.


excavated into the virgin subsoil (Figure 6.16). Abu Hureyra is located at the intersection
of two vegetation zones—the riverine forest and the woodland-steppe—while a third major
zone—the park-woodland—is not far away. Large quantities of charred plant remains were
recovered from the site, including wild rye, wild wheat, feather grasses such as Stipa

           256       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                       —which have edible seeds—club-rush with edible nutlets,
                                                       other small grasses that yield edible seeds, and chenopod
                                                       seeds. Other plant food resources might have included
                                                       almonds and acorns, although remains of these were not
                                                       actually found at the site. Interestingly, Gordon Hillman and
                                                       Susan College have identiﬁed a few grains of domesticated rye
                                                       that have been AMS radiocarbon-dated to about 11,000 years
                                                       ago. Although whether these represent rye that has been
                                                       domesticated by people or those grains that represent the
                                                       genetic variation within the rye gene pool might be an open
                                                       question for some, Hillman states that the available evidence
                                                       leads him to conclude that the inhabitants of Abu Hureyra had
                                                       domesticated rye.69
                                                            At the same time that agricultural economies were evolv-
                                                       ing in the Levant, specialized nomadic economies were also
FIGURE 6.16 Epipaleolithic hunter-gatherers            probably developing.70
constructed several pit-like structures at Tell Abu         Kent Flannery has noted that many contemporary
Hureyra, Syria.                                        African peoples live in compounds of circular huts and that
                                                       most such societies share several characteristics: (1) Only one
                       or two people are usually housed in each hut; (2) many of the huts are not residential, but
                       are used for storage, kitchens, stables, and the like; (3) huts are often placed in a circle
                       around a cleared space; (4) food space is usually open and shared by all occupants; and
                       (5) perhaps most important, the social organization of the typical compound, like that of
                       hunting and gathering groups, usually consists of six to eight males, each associated with
                       from one to three women and their respective children, and includes a strong sexual
                       division of labor.71
                             Flannery argues that settlements of adjacent rectangular buildings—which he calls
                       villages—have advantages over settlements of circular buildings—which he calls
                       compounds. The former are more easily enlarged because rooms can simply be added on,
                       whereas increasing the number of circular residences rapidly increases the diameter of the
                       settlement to an unwieldy size.
                             Villages are also more defensible than compounds for a number of reasons. But the
                       primary difference is in their respective capacities for intensiﬁcation of production. In
                       compounds, storage facilities are open and shared, and the basic economic unit is the
                       group; but in villages the basic unit is the family, which maintains its own storage of
                       supplies and thus has greater incentives for intensiﬁcation of production—the seeds, in
                       other words, of private enterprise and the ﬁrst steps toward capitalist economies.72
                             If Flannery is correct, the transition that occurred between 11,000 and 9,000 years ago
                       from compounds of circular structures to villages of rectangular rooms is a reﬂection of
                       changes in social organization, with the nuclear family gradually replacing the hunting-and-
                       gathering group as the unit of economic production. And although the circular-building
                       tradition continued for several thousand years in parts of Southwest Asia (Figure 6.17), it
                       was eventually entirely supplanted by rectangular-unit villages.
                             These kinds of changes appear to be particularly clearly reﬂected at an early agricultural
                       Levantine community, Beidha, in Jordan. Nine thousand years ago there was a farming
                       community here, set amidst grasslands in adjacent valleys, with forests on the slopes above it.

                                                                 THE ORIGINS OF AGRICULTURE        257


This community was occupied
for hundreds of years, and, as
Brian Byrd 73 notes, changes
over time in the architecture of
the village reﬂect fundamental
changes in social organization,
economy, and many other
aspects of life (Figure 6.18). In
the earliest phases, people lived
in small semi-circular build-
ings with few interior features
other than posts. The debris
in these houses suggests that
many activities of daily life
(such as sleeping, tool-making,
preparing and eating food, etc.)
were done in the same interior
spaces. Storage appears to have     FIGURE 6.17 The base of a Neolithic hut structure at Wadi Jilat 23, Jordan.
been communal, as the store-
room is not associated with any
particular house. Over time
this village organization gave
way to one in which people
lived in larger rectangular
buildings that were subdivided
into areas where specialized
activities were done. Some
of the houses were two-story
buildings, with the ﬂoors
divided into what appear to be
separate sleeping areas, tool-
making rooms, storage rooms,
and so forth. Also, in these later
phases, large buildings were
constructed that were centrally
located and appear to have been
public settings for special com-
munity activities, or “formal       FIGURE 6.18 An overview of the Neolithic site of Beidha, Jordan.
venues for events that integrated
the community as a whole.”74
     Soon after 10,000 years ago, sedentary communities and domestic plants and animals
had appeared at several places along the ﬂanks of the Zagros. At Ali Kosh, situated on the
arid steppe of western Iran, at about 9,500 years ago, people hunted gazelles, onagers (wild
asses), and pigs; ﬁshed in the Mehmeh River; collected shellﬁsh; and snared wild fowl. They
also collected vetch and other plants, and between 10,000 and 8,500 years ago they began
growing domestic, two-rowed, hulled barley and emmer wheat. These early farmers lived

           258       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                      in crude clay huts furnished with reed mats, stone bowls, and a few other small household
                      goods, but this settlement was neither rich nor impressive. Possibly the people came here
                      only in the winter, since summers in the region are unearthly hot and the cooler mountains
                      would have provided many plant and animal products. Wild wheat is not native to the Ali
                      Kosh area, but wild barley is available within a few kilometers, and the people here may
                      have been growing grains that had been domesticated elsewhere.75
                           Archaeologists used to think that the earliest communities of farmers in Southwest Asia
                      and elsewhere remained egalitarian societies for centuries, perhaps millennia, after full-time
                      farming became the subsistence base, but if we look at the early agricultural communities
                      in Southwest Asia, we see very early signs of a changing social world (see also chapter 8).
                      At Jericho, in Jordan, soon after 9,000 years ago, the populace built a stone wall some 1.5 m
                      thick and more than 3.5 m high around a complex of mudbrick houses, even though the
                      populace was still hunting and gathering wild resources to complement their primitive agri-
                      culture. If an essential element in cultural complexity is activity specialization to the point
                      that large populations are socially and economically interdependent, Jericho was not a com-
                      plex community; but the construction of the wall indicates that its people were beginning
                      to direct their energies in a way quite different from that of most hunters and gatherers.
                           The disposal of the dead, usually an excellent reﬂection of changing cultural
                      complexity, suggests that people at Jericho and other early Neolithic sites throughout the
                      Levant were much different socially from their predecessors. Forty headless adult bodies
                      were found buried beneath one room at Jericho, and further excavations revealed a cache
                      of skulls that had been reconstructed with plaster, painted, and then decorated with “eyes”
                                                     made from seashells (Figure 6.19). Whether these represent
                                                     ancestor worship, war trophies, or some other ritual will
                                                     probably never be known.
                                                          The importance of the bulldozer as an archaeological
                                                     tool was demonstrated in the late 1970s, when one cut a
                                                     roadway through a hill in Amman, Jordan, exposing a huge
                                                     archaeological site. In 1982 archaeologists began excavating
                                                     this site, now called ’Ain Ghazal (“spring of the gazelles”), one
                                                     of the largest known Neolithic sites in the Middle East.76 The
                                                     ﬁrst major period of occupation at ’Ain Ghazal began at about
                                                     9,400 years ago, and it was probably occupied most or all of
                                                     the time until about 7,000 years ago. Covering approximately
                                                     30 acres, ’Ain Ghazal is about three times larger than Jericho,
                                                     but it is unclear how much of the site was occupied at any one
                                                     time. It probably had at one point at least several hundred
                                                     inhabitants, who lived in mudbrick buildings of various sizes
                                                     and shapes. For its early age, the community of ’Ain Ghazal
                                                     has impressive art. Large plaster ﬁgures of people were found
                                                     under house ﬂoors. Numerous ﬁgures of people and animals
                                                     have been unearthed (Figure 6.20), and in one cache two clay
                                                     ﬁgures of cattle had ﬂint blades stuck into their heads, necks,
FIGURE 6.19 The people of Neolithic Jericho          and chests.
removed the skulls from some bodies and formed            The diet of the early inhabitants of ’Ain Ghazal is
human features on them in plaster.                   impressive in its diversity. Goats were probably both hunted

                                                                 THE ORIGINS OF AGRICULTURE        259


and herded, and sheep, pigs, gazelles, birds, and many other
species were exploited, along with some wheat and barley,
peas, lentils, and many wild plants. But toward the end of its
occupation, the people of ’Ain Ghazal seem to have fallen on
hard times. Late in its history, it seems to have been occupied
only seasonally by pastoral peoples.
     By 8,000 years ago there is evidence of domestic sheep and
goats at sites all over Southwest Asia and even into Greece and
southern Europe, and it appears that once domestication was
well advanced, the spread of sheep- and goat-raising was very
rapid. Most farming villages have hedgerows, patches of weeds
and thorny plants, clippings, and stubble that are perfectly
acceptable to the rather undiscriminating sheep and goats.
     Domestic cattle were herded on the Anatolian Plateau
(central Turkey) by about 7,800 years ago and were probably
present in the Balkans by 8,500 years ago. As with sheep and
goats, cattle domestication seems to have been a widespread
phenomenon, probably beginning sometime after 9,000 years
ago and occurring in many areas from China to western
Europe. Across this vast area, ancient farmers seem to have
bred cattle for reduced size, increased docility and milk
production, and increased tolerance of climatic conditions. An
important step in the evolution of civilizations was the process
by which cattle were adapted to the hot lowlands of the river
valleys. The cattle found there today are thin, small animals
that seem woefully scrawny by comparison to European cattle,
but these Mesopotamia varieties are extraordinarily hardy.
The late shah of Iran tried to “improve” the cattle in the hot
lowland of Iran by importing Dutch and Danish cows that               FIGURE 6.20 Figurines from the early agricul-
were about four times the size of local varieties and produced        tural village of Ain Ghazal, Jordan.
vastly more milk and meat—until they strolled out into the hot
plains (which we [Wenke] were surveying for archaeological remains), where most of them
were felled by heat stroke. These European cattle had to be kept in air-conditioned barns
to be productive, whereas the local varieties could do perfectly well on the hottest day,
eating poor quality foods that would have killed the larger cattle.
     Cattle were probably especially important to the ﬁrst settlers on the southern
Mesopotamian alluvial plain. During the dry, hot summers in this region, few reliable
protein sources are available to primitive agriculturalists, and cow meat and milk
apparently provided a crucial nutritional component. Oxen (castrated bulls) may also have
been used to pull plows and sledges. In many areas of Southwest Asia where rainfall is
sufﬁcient for cereal cultivation, plowing is essential because natural vegetation is thick.
Later, the horse, donkey, and mule were also used as draught animals, and there is evidence
of the use of domesticated horses in the Levant by at least the late fourth millennium b.c.77
     Another important domesticated animal was the pig, whose bones have been recovered
from sites all over Southwest Asia. By 8,000 years ago and even as late as 4,700 years ago,
pig bones represented 20–30 percent of all mammal remains at many large sites.

260   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


           By 8,000 years ago agricultural villages spread over much of Southwest Asia, most of
      them comprising just a few score mud huts, a few hundred people, and the same essential
      economic functions. From Greece to Afghanistan, these villages looked very much alike
      and, taken on the basis of their archaeological remains, they were not impressive in their
      material wealth. Even sites like Jericho and Çatal Hüyük (see chapter 8), which were larger
      than most and had relatively impressive art and architecture, were self-sufﬁcient
      communities without many economic, political, or social ties outside their region. And the
      vast majority of these villagers were simple farmers without great aesthetic, religious, or
      social diversions.
           As unremarkable as these villages were, however, their inhabitants were the ﬁrst to
      focus their lives on agricultural products and to live in the sedentary communities that
      even today are the basic component of Middle Eastern settlement patterns. And as early as
      8,000 years ago, the processes that were to transmute these villages into states and empires
      were already underway.



      OTHER OLD WORLD DOMESTICATES

      The domesticates and allied agricultural economies developed in Southwest Asia proved so
      successful that within centuries of their appearance they had spread far outside the Fertile
      Crescent. By 7,000 years ago farmers at Argissa-Maghula in Greek Thessaly were sub-
      sisting on cultivated emmer wheat and barley as well as domestic cattle and pigs. Recent
      recalibration of carbon-14 dates for scores of early European sites reveals that the basic
      wheat-barley/cattle-pigs-sheep complex diffused at the rate of about a mile a year, reaching
      Bulgaria about 7,500 years ago, southern Italy about 7,000 years ago, and Britain and
      Scandinavia between 6,000 and 5,000 years ago.78 To the east, domestic wheat and barley
      reached the Indus Valley by at least 7,000 years ago (and probably much earlier), and by
      about 2,500 years ago, domestic wheat was in cultivation in northeastern China.
           The processes by which these domesticates and their associated agricultural techniques
      replaced hunting-and-gathering economies in much of the Old World are not well
      known but appear to have involved both the replacement of hunters and gatherers by
      agriculturalists and the conversion of hunters and gatherers to agricultural ways of life
      (see chapter 12).
           The grasslands and forests of temperate Europe and Eurasia contrast sharply with the
      steppes and arid plains of the Fertile Crescent, and the spread of agriculture northward and
      westward required new strains of plants and animals and different social and technological
      adaptations. Methods had to be developed to clear the dense northern forests, and in some
      areas the rich hunting, gathering, and ﬁshing resources formed such a productive food base
      that there was considerable “resistance” to the introduction of agriculture. Despite its long-
      term productivity in most areas, primitive agriculture in even fertile areas of the world was
      probably marked by famine in seasons of bad harvests and by heavy labor—compared to
      hunting-foraging—in the best of times.
           One interesting aspect of the spread of agriculture may have been the spread of Indo-
      European languages and culture. Colin Renfrew, in a highly controversial analysis,79 has
      suggested that Indo-European languages and culture spread into Europe from Turkey and

                                                                 THE ORIGINS OF AGRICULTURE       261


came with agriculture, which seems to have been established in much of Turkey at least
8,000 years ago. This would explain much about why many of the languages of South and
northwest Asia appear to have shared a common ancestry with almost all the native
languages of Europe.
      Egypt’s initial transition to agriculture was based on introductions of wheat, barley,
sheep, and goats from outside the Nile Valley, probably both from the Middle East and
from North African desert and coastal areas.80 In the Sudanese part of the Nile Valley,
sorghum seems to have been the basis of initial agriculture—although the evidence for its
use is scanty.81
      Many herbs, fruits, and other plants were domesticated in India and Southeast Asia,
but it was rice and millet that provided the majority of the food energy for the great Asian
civilizations. Imprints from rice-grain husks have been found in potsherds from sites such
as Hujiawuchang and Pengtoushan—in the middle Yangtze River Valley of south-central
China—by about 8,900 to 8,000 years ago.82 Additionally, the site of Bashidang—also in
the Middle Yangtze and radiocarbon-dated to 8,400–7,700 years ago—yielded more than
10,000 rice grains.83 The Yangtze River region documents an independent transition to
cultivation and agriculture at about the same time that similar events were occurring in the
Fertile Crescent of the Near East.
      Vegeculture of tubers and other crops probably has a long history in the moist
lowlands of Asia. In vegeculture, plants are propagated not from seeds, but from cuttings
taken from leaves, stems, or tubers of plants like yams and taro. Bellwood disputes the
notion that vegeculture generally preceded cereal agriculture in much of tropical Southeast
Asia, but root-crop cultivation may have been the earliest kind of farming in areas like
New Guinea.84
      One of the world’s most important cereals—millet—was apparently domesticated and
ﬁrst cultivated on the great Yellow River ﬂood plain in north China (see Figure 6.6). The
alluvial soils in this area are extremely fertile and sufﬁciently arid so that there was little
vegetation to clear for agriculture in many areas. By about 8,500 years ago scores of villages
existed in north China, most of them subsisting on millet and a few other domesticates and
a considerable amount of hunted and gathered food. These villages usually contained about
200 or 300 inhabitants, who lived in wattle-and-daub houses that looked very much like
the circular houses and compounds marking the evolution of agricultural communities in
Southwest Asia.
      Another crop of considerable importance in north China was soybeans; several wild
varieties are native to this area. The little evidence available suggests soybeans were in
cultivation by at least 3,000 years ago. Soybeans are a remarkably versatile and nutritious
crop, and are also good “green manure,” enriching the soils on which they grow through
nitrogen ﬁxation. The substitution of soybeans for milk and meat in early Chinese diets
explains why many Asian populations never evolved the enzymes necessary to digest milk
products, causing them to suffer intestinal upsets if they eat these foods. Similar
intolerances are found in Africa and South America.
      The establishment of agricultural economies in Japan had some similarities to the
pattern in Europe. In both areas, rich northern forested environments supported dense
populations of hunter-foragers, and, when agriculture came, it supplanted the ancient
hunting-foraging economies at different rates in different areas—slowly in areas heavily
dependent on marine resources, more quickly in others.85

262   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      AGRICULTURAL ORIGINS IN THE NEW WORLD

      In the New World, the most important domesticates were maize, beans, squash, peppers,
      potatoes, turkey, guinea pigs (as a food source), and llamas (although some people would
      add to this list cacao, from which chocolate is derived). Like their Old World relatives, New
      World peoples complemented their staple domesticates with a wide range of other plants,
      including avocados, manioc, sunﬂowers, amaranth, gourds, and cotton, as well as socially
      valued plants like coca (from which cocaine is derived) and tobacco.
            New World peoples, however, did not domesticate any large draught animals suitable
      for plowing or riding perhaps because there were no suitable native species (although the
      Rocky Mountain sheep would seem to have possibilities). This fact alone may explain
      much of the difference between the later cultural histories of the Old and New Worlds:
      Plowing, even the simple, single blade of a wood plow, opens up many areas to agriculture
      that cannot be farmed otherwise. In the Old World, human and material transport was
      dependent from a very early time on domesticated donkeys and, later, horses, and both
      of these allowed warfare and trade to expand enormously. The llama of South America
      certainly was an important transport animal, but it does not compare to either donkeys or
      horses for transport or military uses. Also, no animals equivalent to the Old World pig or
      sheep were domesticated in the New World.
            There were two major centers of plant domestication in the New World, one in
      Mesoamerica, where maize, beans, squash, and sweet potatoes became the most important
      crops, and a second center in the Andean highlands, where potatoes and other root crops
      were grown and llamas were domesticated. But, as in the Old World, these processes of
      domestication and the transition to agriculture were long-term and occurred over a wide
      area, involving many different peoples and species. And just as in the Old World, we see
      the emergence of a very limited range of species as the primary crop plants. Native North
      Americans, for example, domesticated sunﬂowers and other plants, and some of these
      remain commercially important crops even today, but the efﬁciencies of maize, beans,
      squash, and potatoes are such that they were—separately or in combination—the basis of
      life all over the New World when the European colonists ﬁrst arrived.


      Mesoamerica and Central America
      The background of New World domestication, like that of the Old World, is many
      millennia of hunting, gathering, and foraging. Kent Flannery has suggested, for example,
      that the foods the aboriginal Mexican foragers relied on, such as maguey cactus, prickly
      pear, and rabbit, were species that could withstand intensive human consumption for many
      millennia without changing much in their physical characteristics as genera, and that
      because of the nature of these foragers’ seasonal movements, they rarely exerted great
      pressure on these resources for any length of time.86 For example, cactus-fruit collecting
      had to be done during a two- to three-week period, and during this time rabbits would not
      be hunted. This seasonal concentration on resources kept groups small and dispersed for
      most of the year, and one wonders why the Spanish found Mesoamerica (roughly from
      northern Mexico to southern Guatemala) to be a world of cities and farms instead of a
      domain of hunters and gatherers.

                                                                  THE ORIGINS OF AGRICULTURE       263


     Despite effective mechanisms that maintained the hunting-and-gathering way of life for
so long in Mesoamerica, sometime after 8000 b.c. these people—probably unintentionally
—began to domesticate maize, beans, squash, peppers, avocados, and other plant species.
Why and how this happened is not clear. Climate changes, increasing population densities,
and other factors may have been involved, and ecological analyses suggest that in the
beginning the shift to agriculture may have involved only a slight change in the way people
in Mesoamerica hunted and foraged.87
     Robert Reynolds’s computer simulation 88 of dietary changes reﬂected in the
archaeological record of Guilá Naquitz Cave, in Oaxaca, southern Mexico, between 8750
and 6670 b.c. suggests a subtle pattern of adaptations to the changing conditions in this
period. People who lived here eventually focused on a particularly reliable and productive
mix of plant and animal foods, one that Reynolds’s simulation model linked to complex
calculations about travel distances, seasonal availability, and many other factors. He
concluded that cultivation here may have begun as a way to increase the density of certain
plants and to mitigate the effects of wet-year/dry-year ﬂuctuations, increasing human
population densities, and other circumstances.
     Eventually maize was domesticated out of millennia of such manipulations and
cultural ecological contexts. Domesticated maize was the most important food through
much of later Mesoamerican prehistory, and at present it is the only domesticated plant
from this area whose evolutionary history we know in any detail. A few fragments of early
forms of beans, squash, and peppers have been found, but not enough to reconstruct recent
changes in their morphological characteristics. Occasionally there are claims that maize was
either brought to or from the Old World at a very early date, usually based on ancient
sculptures or other art,89 but no trace of ancient corn plants has ever been found in the
Old World.
     Most of our evidence about early plant cultivation in Mesoamerica comes from dry
caves in Tamaulipas,90 Tehuacán, and Oaxaca, so we must immediately suspect biases in
preservation: There is little reason to believe that just because the earliest known maize
comes from thesesites that these sites were the earliest places to domesticate maize. Also,
as Gayle Fritz has noted,91 there is some evidence that for many years scholars have greatly
overestimated the age of maize domestication and agriculture in the New World. Scholars
used to believe that maize domestication evolved out of the hunting-foraging groups who
lived in this area between 10,000 and 5000 b.c. But more recent evidence and dates92 raise
the possibility that domestication and agriculture ﬁrst appeared shortly before 3500 b.c.
and evolved out of hunter-foragers who had become much less mobile than their ancestors,
moving only a few times a year, if at all, and concentrating their efforts on the wild ancestors
of plants they eventually domesticated.
     Until about 1970 the most widely accepted view of maize domestication was advanced
by a geneticist, Paul Mangelsdorf, who argued that domesticated maize evolved from a
“wild maize,” now extinct, with small cobs topped by small tassels. This would have been a
“pod-corn”—that is, the individual kernels would have been enclosed in chaff rather than the
cup-like fruit-case of domesticated varieties. Mangelsdorf explains the extinction of this wild
maize as the result of two factors: overgrazing by European-introduced cattle and genetic
“swamping” from continual hybridization with emerging species of domesticated maize.93
     In the early 1960s, Richard MacNeish excavated several dry caves near Tehuacán,
Mexico, and his ﬁndings clariﬁed some aspects of Mesoamerican agricultural origins.

           264        PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                        Recent radiocarbon dating
                                                                                        results suggest that the plant
                                                                                        remains from different strata
                                                                                        of Tehuacán were mixed, and
                                                                                        thus the site might be less a
                                                                                        record of early maize domestica-
                                                                                        tion than originally thought.
                                                                                        The earliest maize cobs (four
                                                                                        samples) are now dated to about
                                                                                        4,700 years ago or younger
                                                                                        —much younger, as Gayle
                                                                                        Fritz notes,94 than the ﬁfth and
                                                                                        sixth millennium b.c. dates
                                                                                        originally ascribed to these
                                                                                        remains (Figure 6.21). Despite
                                                                                        these revisions and new and
                                                                                        interesting evidence from else-
                                                                                        where, the Tehuacán sequence
                                                                                        remains the best archaeolog-
                                                                                        ical reﬂection of the sequences
                                                                                        of changes in cultural behavior
                                                                                        that were involved in the period
                                                                                        of the origins of agriculture in
FIGURE 6.21 The evolution of maize cob size at Tehuacán, from the smallest cob          Mesoamerica. 95 During the
(left), which dates to about 3500 b.c., to the cob on the far right, an entirely modern
                                                                                        Ajuereado phase (c. 10,000–
variety dating to about b.c./a.d.
                                                                                        7000 b.c.96), people apparently
                                                                                        lived in small mobile groups
                        and exploited many wild plants. But they also depended heavily on hunting, exploiting wild
                        horses, antelopes, and jack rabbits at ﬁrst, and then shifting to deer and cottontail rabbits
                        as post-Pleistocene climates and environments changed, supplementing these resources
                        with gophers, rats, turtles, and birds. In the succeeding El Riego phase (c. 7000–5000 b.c.),
                        people appear to have lived much the same nomadic life in bands, but the groups may have
                        been somewhat bigger, and there is evidence that they were exploiting wild squash, chiles,
                        avocados, and other plants that were later domesticated. In the Coxcatlán phase (5000–
                        3400 b.c.) the size of the groups that made repeated and probably seasonal visits to
                        Tehuacán seems to have grown signiﬁcantly, and they exploited more plants and did less
                        hunting. In the Abeja phase (c. 3400–2300 b.c.), MacNeish believes that the area was
                        occupied by “central-based bands,” people who lived for long periods, and perhaps most
                        of the year, in large camps and relied heavily on cultivated plants. In succeeding periods
                        these Tehuacános used pottery and began to subsist mainly on domesticated maize, beans,
                        squash, and the other staples of Mesoamerica.
                             The Tehuacán botanical remains seemed to conﬁrm Mangelsdorf’s hypothesis: The
                        earliest corn cobs found were very small, and the tassels did indeed emerge from the tops
                        of the fruits. But the early maize found by MacNeish seemed to have many morphological
                        similarities to another wild perennial grass common in the semi-arid, subtemperate regions
                        of Mesoamerica, a grass called teosinte (Zea mexicana), and some botanists questioned

                                                                 THE ORIGINS OF AGRICULTURE       265


Mangelsdorf’s reconstruction, partially because the supposed placement of kernels on a cob
such as wild and domesticated maize would seem a very inefﬁcient mechanism for seed
dispersal.
      In 1972 plant geneticist George Beadle reasserted his argument of some decades
previous: that there had never been a “wild maize,” that domesticated corn instead was a
descendant of teosinte.97 Teosinte is a tall (up to 2 m) annual grass found throughout the
semi-arid and subtropical zones of Mexico and Guatemala, where it thrives in disturbed
areas and rapidly invades open areas such as abandoned cornﬁelds. Teosinte can be found
growing in ﬁelds that also include wild beans and squash, sometimes with the beans twining
around the teosinte stalk. Thus, the three staffs of life for Mesoamerica—maize, beans, and
squash—are a “natural” association.98 Teosinte plants look like maize, except for the seed
structure, where instead of maize’s heavy husk-covered cobs of many rows of kernels,
teosinte has just two rows of 6 –12 triangular kernels enclosed in a very hard covering.
Although these seeds look quite different from maize kernels, Beadle was able to produce
reasonably good popcorn and mock “Fritos” from teosinte kernels.
      Chemical analyses of teosinte and maize and studies of their genetic characteristics
support Beadle’s view of teosinte as the major ancestor of maize—although Mangelsdorf
mounted a spirited counterattack.99
      Domesticated maize shares several characteristics with teosinte. As Emily McClung
de Tapia notes,100 these include: (1) Teosinte and maize frequently and freely hybridize
under natural conditions; (2) they have the same chromosome number, 10, and these
chromosome appear nearly identical in structure; (3) maize and teosinte look very much
alike in anatomy and morphology; and (4) pollen from maize and teosinte are quite similar
in size. She notes, however, that pinpointing where teosinte was transformed into maize, if
this did indeed occur, has proven difﬁcult. The type of teosinte that seems most closely
related genetically to maize is the Chalco-type (Zea Mexicana ssp. mexicana), which is
native to the Basin of Mexico (modern Mexico City and environs), but this may a result of
hybridization.
      If teosinte is the ancestor of domesticated maize, the primary changes in the
domestication process were (1) the development of a less brittle rachis, followed by the
evolution of the cob; (2) the development of a soft fruit-case, so that the kernels could be
shelled free of the cob; and (3) the evolution of larger cobs and more rows of kernels. A
single gene—the so-called tunicate allele—controls to some extent both the brittleness of
the rachis and the toughness of the fruit case, and thus these features could easily have been
produced by direct selection of mutants with these characteristics. The third change,
increased cob size, was very gradual and probably differed sharply from area to area. If the
new dates for the Tehuacán maize remains are accurate (see earlier), maize cobs in this area
were selected for larger and larger size in such a way that the average length grew from a
little less than 2 cm in length to about 13 cm in length between about 3500 b.c. and a.d. 1500.
      Stephen J. Gould accepts Beadle’s claim for the derivation of maize from teosinte, but
he rejects Beadle’s hypothesis of a slow process of gradual genetic change.101 Gould notes
that the Tehuacán maize cobs are smaller than modern varieties, but at least they are cobs,
and we do not ﬁnd intermediate stages between the teosinte “ears,” which botanically
are radically different from the maize ears. Also, as Gould notes, maize and teosinte are
extremely similar genetically, and one would expect that a slow process of domestication
toward maize would have resulted in some major genetic differences.

266   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


           Instead Gould champions Hugh Iltis’s hypotheses about maize domestication. Iltis’s
      argument is a complex botanical and genetic scenario that cannot be examined in detail
      here, but its basic assumption is that there was a small genetic change in teosinte that
      produced what Iltis called a “catastrophic sexual transmutation.”102 Some minor genetic
      mutations could transmute male teosinte tassel spikes to female corn ears. This kind of
      change accords well with Gould’s conception of evolution as a series of sudden changes,
      not the accumulation of gradual changes. But Iltis’s scheme requires that people recognize
      the potential of the “hopeful monsters” a mutant teosinte plant would represent, for it is
      unlikely this mutant would be able to reproduce easily. In this case, human intentions are
      an important part of the overall equation of domestication.
           While maize is an excellent food source, it is deﬁcient in a number of important
      proteins and vitamins, and the evolution of agricultural economies in Mesoamerica derived
      considerable impetus from the domestication of other plant species, the most important of
      which were beans and squash. In fact, the evidence suggests that beans, squash, pumpkins,
      and other plants may have been cultivated before maize. Three species of beans (common
      beans, runner beans, and tepary beans) have wild ancestors in Mesoamerica, and changes
      in their morphological characteristics began to appear at about the same time as those of
      maize. But the earliest known domesticated beans did not make their appearance until
      between 4000 and 3000 b.c.
           The domestication of beans seems to have involved (1) increased seed permeability, so
      that the beans need not be soaked so long in water before being processed; (2) a change
      from a corkscrew-shaped, brittle pod that shatters easily to a straight, limp, non-shattering
      pod; and (3) in some cases, a shift from perennial to annual growth patterns.103 The primary
      importance of beans is that they are rich in lysine, which maize is deﬁcient in; thus the two
      are nutritionally complementary.
           The domestication of squash and pumpkins, members of the genus Cucurbita, seems
      to have been aimed at improving the seeds (rather than the ﬂesh) since wild cucurbita have
      ﬂesh so bitter or thin that they have little food value. Squash and pumpkin seeds, on the
      other hand, like most large seeds are veritable vitamin pills, as they include complex plant
      starches and other nutrients. Squash and pumpkin seeds, in fact, remain a favorite snack
      food, especially in less developed countries. The earliest cultivated squash seeds known are
      from Guilá Naquitz Cave in Oaxaca and date to 8750 to 7840 b.c.104
           Like all other early farmers, the ancient Mesoamericans were domesticating a variety
      of other plants, only some of which were eventually developed into staple food sources.
      Chili peppers, avocados, foxtail grass, “goosefoot” (Chenopodium), various kinds of cactus,
      several root crops, and many other plants were combined in a reliable and highly
      productive agricultural economy (Figure 6.22).
           The species of maize that eventually became the staple crop of North and South
      America seems to have been derived from species indigenous to central Mexico, perhaps
      the area around Mexico City, but the stimulus for the adoption and spread of the
      agricultural and village way of life may also have involved coastal areas. There, rich
      resources in the littoral/terrestrial interface may have provided sufﬁcient food for non-
      agricultural but sedentary communities.105 In time, these sedentary communities could
      have incorporated the new domesticated plants into their “pre-adapted” economies and
      social organizations, forming the ﬁrst agricultural communities. From that point on, the
      superior productivity of village-based agriculture would have ensured its rapid spread over

                                                               THE ORIGINS OF AGRICULTURE        267


all the areas where these crops
could be grown successfully. Cur-
rently we do not have sufﬁcient
data to evaluate this reconstruction
rigorously, but some evidence
indicates it may be correct. Large
mounds of shellﬁsh remains,
cracked rock, and stone tools have
been found on both the Gulf and
Paciﬁc coasts of Mesoamerica, but
few have been excavated or ﬁrmly
dated. Many groups of people lived
in the rich terrestrial/marine niches
along Mexico’s coasts after 3000
b.c., and some of them may have
lived in villages and farmed some
maize and other crops, but the
evidence for substantial farming
and the spread of villages in Mexico
is scanty until shortly after 2000
b.c.106
     With regard to the question
of why agriculture appeared in
Mesoamerica when and where it
did, we are left with the rather          FIGURE 6.22 Some areas of early American domestication and agriculture.
unsatisfactory models discussed           Other areas may be buried under coastal waters or undiscovered in dense
                                          coastal vegetation zones.
earlier in this chapter. The sole
single factors that seem to have
affected most centers of agricultural
origins, from China to Mesoamerica, are the changes in plant, animal, and human
communities that resulted from the change in climates as the glaciers retreated at the end
of the last Pleistocene period. If we then pose the standard challenge to the importance of
these climate changes—speciﬁcally, that they happened many times previously in the
Pleistocene without the same effects—we are left with either accepting the Richerson and
colleagues, explanation or with the surmise that there was something different about the
demography, technological capacities, or some other aspect of human communities 10,000
years ago, compared to earlier groups.


South America
How and when Mexican varieties of domesticated maize spread into Central and South
America are not well known. There are some interesting bits of evidence, however, that
suggest maize may have been cultivated in Ecuador, Peru, Argentina, and Chile as early as
3000 b.c., and perhaps earlier.107
     Physical remains of crops would, of course, be the best evidence for the spread of
agriculture, but the botanical record of early South American cultivation is poorly known.

268   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      Only at sites dated after about 900 b.c. are maize remains commonly found. Deborah
      Pearsall suggests that maize did not become an important crop until after 1500 b.c.108
           Maize was just one of the important food crops in Andean South America, and in some
      areas, potatoes, beans, and quinoa (pronounced “keen-wa”) were the staffs of life. There is
      some evidence that beans may have been domesticated before 8000 b.c., based on a few
      remains from Guitarrero Cave, and there are fairly secure ﬁnds of beans there dating to
      about 5700 b.c.,109 but the evidence of the earliest stages of the domestication of beans and
      many other plants is scanty. The origins of potato domestication, too, are poorly preserved.
      Domesticated potatoes were found in sites in Peru’s Casma Valley in occupations dating to
      2250–1775 b.c.,110 and there are traces of cultivation that may go back as early as about 8000
      b.c.111 This proliﬁc plant, which today is grown in hundreds of varieties in Peru, may not
      store as well as cereals, but it can be grown in wet cold soils where cereals do not do well—
      as evidenced by its popularity in Ireland and northern Europe. The ancient South Americans
      developed a method of storing potatoes by freeze-drying them, and the potato is
      intrinsically very nutritious, and so this plant could provide the stability and reliability of
      production for South Americans that cereals did in many other places.
           It is an interesting footnote to Peruvian plant domestication that quinoa is becoming
      increasingly popular in North America. The seeds of this plant can be milled into a ﬂour
      that has one of the highest protein contents of any plant (but made a miserable chocolate
      chip cookie in one experiment), and health food enthusiasts are using this plant in growing
      numbers.
           The role of animal domestication in early Peru is unclear, but llamas and guinea pigs
      were certainly domesticated in central Peru by 3500 b.c. As in Mexico, however, hunting
      continued to play an important role in many areas until quite late.112
           The relationship of plants and animals, agriculture, and sedentary communities in
      northwestern South America in general suggests that domestication and sedentary
      communities may have preceded specialized agricultural economies in some areas by many
      centuries, particularly on the coast, where small sedentary communities of ﬁshers, foragers,
      and part-time bean and squash cultivators were established before maize cultivation was of
      any importance.
           Deborah Pearsall113 has broken the South American “center” of agricultural origins
      into three complexes. The origins of the Lowland Complex are poorly understood because
      the remains of some of the most important early plants that may have been native to the
      tropical forests, such as manioc (Manihot esculenta) and sweet potatoes (Ipomoea batatas),
      do not preserve very well archaeologically. Maize eventually became a dominant crop in
      the lowlands, but it was preceded and eventually complemented by a wide range of other
      plant foods, ranging from ﬂavoring foods (such as chili peppers) to squash to fruits
      (including avocado and, later, papaya and pineapple). Pearsall’s Mid-Elevation Complex,
      which includes areas between about 1,500 and 3,000 m of elevation, includes amaranths,
      peanuts, jicama, various beans, and other plants, including coca. Here, too, maize
      cultivation eventually relegated many of these crops to the status of supplemental foods,
      but the range of genera domesticated across the Andes and into the lowland coasts and
      forests underscores just how pervasive and ecologically diverse the domestication process
      was. Pearsall’s High-Elevation Complex is found in areas over about 3,000 m of elevation.
      In this cold and agriculturally demanding zone, potatoes and various other tubers provided
      the dietary staple, in combination with meat from domesticated llamas and alpacas.

                                                                 THE ORIGINS OF AGRICULTURE      269


Certainly other plants were cultivated, including quinoa and chenopods, but few traces of
these and other plant remains have been found.


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

Generally, we have no evidence that people of the immediate post-Pleistocene era
experienced recurrent periods of starvation, or that they “invented” domesticates and
agriculture as a way of addressing their immediate food supply problems. Instead, the
situation may well have been one in which, as population densities slowly rose, people
gravitated into various niches where the exploitation of wild wheat and barley, teosinte,
and other third-choice plants was marginally increased. Even if they were not forced into
these areas by expanding population densities and were not under the dire threat of
imminent starvation (so that they radically increased their consumption of these third-
choice foods), the plasticity of some of these species was such that minimal changes in
selective pressures might have quickly and directly rewarded this increased exploitation.
      In this sort of reconstruction it does not seem likely that the timing of wheat and
barley domestication, for example, was the result mainly of “lucky” mutations. All over the
post-Pleistocene world so many diverse animal and plant species were domesticated that
explaining them all in terms of “lucky” mutations would require coincidences of a highly
unlikely nature. Nor was this a technological revolution: The ﬁrst intensive cereal collectors
required only minimal tools—implements certainly no more complex or imaginative than
the ﬁsh traps and bows and arrows of the late Pleistocene.
      Finally, for the individual with too few things to worry about, we might note that there
is a certain danger in the fact that almost all the world’s population now depends for most
of its subsistence on only about 20 genera of plants. As hybrid strains are replacing local
varieties at an ever-increasing rate, the chances for truly catastrophic mutations of new crop
diseases are growing, particularly with expected worldwide changes in climate. The Irish
potato famine was largely the result of a whole country becoming dependent on a single
crop that was cloned from a small genetic population and therefore subject to almost
complete destruction by disease. Eventually the world may be at the same risk. The
transition to economies based on domesticated plants and animals thus is a process still in
operation and one whose future direction is unclear.
      Against this uncertain future seed “banks” have been established, such as the one at
Washington State University, where seeds of more than 1,700 plant species are kept in
special conditions against the day when their genetic resources might be useful. Every
species is a unique and complex product of evolution, whose members are in a sense
chemical factories able to synthesize the most complex compounds from only air, water,
and soil. Not only food but also medicines and many other products are mainly made from
plant materials, and we have every reason to believe that the continuing destruction and
extinction of plant communities in the Amazon Basin and elsewhere in the developing
world will eventually be recognized as irremediable catastrophes. As we have noted
previously, in the evolutionary game in which all of earth’s life-forms participate, there is
usually great advantage to the maintenance of genetic variability. We are so mutually
interdependent with plants and animals that loss of variety in the nonhuman biological
world will almost certainly come back to haunt us.

270   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


           Perhaps we might also ask ourselves if Jared Diamond is correct in his appraisal of the
      origins of agriculture:
           Archaeologists studying the rise of farming have reconstructed a crucial state at which we
           made the worst mistake in human history. Forced to choose between limiting population
           or trying to increase food production, we chose the latter and ended up with starvation,
           warfare, and tyranny. Hunter-gatherers practiced the most successful and longest-lasting
           life style in human history. In contrast, we’re still struggling with the mess into which
           agriculture has tumbled us. . . . [W]ill the plight of famine-stricken peasants gradually
           spread to engulf us all? Or will we somehow achieve those seductive blessings that we
           imagine behind agriculture’s glittering façade.114
           Or has an agricultural way of life resulted in changes that led to better distribution of
      products and access to resources so that life expectancy is now higher and in fact mortality
      rates lower—at least for ﬁrst world nations within the last 100 years or so?


      BIBLIOGRAPHY
      Aitkens, C. M., K. M. Ames, and D. Sanger. 1986. “Afﬂuent Collectors at the Edges of Eurasia and North America:
                  Some Comparisons and Observations on the Evolution of Society Among North Temperate Coastal
                  Hunter-Gatherers.” In Prehistoric Hunter-Gatherers in Japan, ed. T. Akazawa and C. M. Aikens. Tokyo:
                  University of Tokyo Press.
      Akazawa, T., and C. M. Aikens, eds. 1986. Prehistoric Hunter-Gatherers in Japan. Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press.
      Ammerman, A. J., and L. L. Cavalli-Sforza. 1984. The Neolithic Transition and the Genetics of Population in Europe.
                  Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
      Anderson-Gerfaud, P. C. 1990. “Experimental Cultivation and Harvest of Wild Cereals: Criteria for Interpreting
                  Epipalaeolithic and Neolithic Artifacts Associated with Plant Exploitation.” In Préhistoires de
                  L’Agriculture: Nouvelles Approches Experimentales et Ethnographiques, ed. P. C. Anderson-Gerfaud.
                  Valbonne: Monographies du Centre de Recherches Archéologiques.
      Aurenche, O., P. Galet, E. Régagnon-Caroline, and J. Évin. 2001. “Proto-Neolithic and Neolithic Cultures in the
                  Middle East—The Birth of Agriculture, Livestock Raising, and Ceramics: A Calibrated 14C Chronology
                  12,500 –5500 cal BC.” Radiocarbon 43(3):1191–1202.
      Bar-Yosef, O. 1991. “The Early Neolithic of the Levant: Recent Advances.” The Review of Archaeology 12(2):1–18.
      Bar-Yosef, O., and A. Belfer-Cohen. 1992. “From Foraging to Farming in the Mediterranean Levant.” In
                  Transitions to Agriculture in Prehistory, ed. A. B. Gebauer and T. D. Price. Ann Arbor: Prehistory Press.
      Bar-Yosef, O., and F. R. Valla, eds. 1990. The Natuﬁan Culture in the Levant. Ann Arbor: Monographs in
                  Prehistory, Archaeological Series 1.
      Barlow, K. R., and M. Heck. 2002. “More on Acorn Eating During the Natuﬁan: Expected Patterning in Diet and
                  the Archaeological Record of Subsistence.” In Hunter-Gatherer Archaeobotany: Perspectives from the
                  Northern Temperate Zone, ed. S. L. R. Mason and J. G. Hather, pp. 128 –145. London: Institute of
                  Archaeology, University College London.
      Barnard, A. 1983. “Contemporary Hunter-Gatherers: Current Theoretical Issues in Ecology and Social
                  Organization.” Annual Review of Anthropology 12:193 –214.
      Beadle, G. W. 1972. “The Mystery of Maize.” Field Museum of Natural History Bulletin 43:2–11.
      ———. 1980. “The Ancestry of Corn.” Scientiﬁc American 242:112–199.
      Belfer-Cohen, A. 1991. “The Natuﬁan in the Levant.” Annual Review of Anthropology 20:167–210.
      Bellwood, P. 1986. The Prehistory of the Indo-Malaysian Archipelago. Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
      ———. 2001. “Early Agriculturalist Population Diasporas? Farming, Languages, and Genes.” Annual Review of
                  Anthropology 30:181–207.
      Bender, B. 1978. “Gatherer-Hunter to Farmer: A Social Perspective.” World Archaeology 10:204 –222.
      ———. 1985. “Emergent Tribal Formations in the American Midcontinent.” American Antiquity 50(1):52 – 62.
      Binford, L. R. 1968. “Post-Pleistocene Adaptations.” In New Perspectives in Archaeology, ed. S. R. Binford and
                  L. R. Binford. Chicago: Aldine.
      Bird, R. M. 1990. “What Are the Chances of Finding Maize in Peru Dating Before 1000 b.c.?: A Reply to Bonavia
                  and Grobman.” American Antiquity 55(4):828 – 840.
      Blumler, M. A., and R. Byrne. 1991. “The Ecological Genetics of Domestication and the Origins of Agriculture.”
                  Current Anthropology 32(1):23 –54.

                                                                              THE ORIGINS OF AGRICULTURE             271


Boserup, E. 1965. The Conditions of Agricultural Growth. Chicago: Aldine.
———. 1981. Population and Technology. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Boyd, B. 2004. “Agency and Landscape; Abandoning the ‘Nature/Culture’ Dichotomy in Interpretations of the
             Natuﬁan and the Transition to the Neolithic.” In The Last Hunter-Gatherers in the Near East, ed. C.
             Delage, pp. 119 –136. Oxford: Archaeopress, British Archaeological Reports International Series 1320.
Braidwood, R. J. 1960. “The Agricultural Revolution.” Scientiﬁc American 203:130 –141.
Braidwood, R. J., and L. S. Braidwood, eds. 1983. Prehistoric Archaeology Along the Zagros Flanks. Chicago: The
             Oriental Institute.
Brocker, W. S. 1997. “Thermohaline Circulation, the Achilles Heel of Our Climate System: Will Man-Made CO2
             Upset the Current Balance?” Science 178:1582–1588.
Byrd, B. F. 1989. “The Natuﬁan: Settlement Variability and Economic Adaptations in the Levant at the End of the
             Pleistocene.” Journal of World Prehistory 3:159 –197.
———. 1994. “Public and Private, Domestic and Corporate; The Emergence of the Southwest Asian Village.”
             American Antiquity 59(4):639–679.
———. 2005. “Reassessing the Emergence of Village Life in the Near East.” Journal of Archaeological Research
             13(3):231–290.
Byrne, R. 1987. “Climatic Change and the Origins of Agriculture.” In Studies in the Neolithic and Urban
             Revolutions: The V. Gordon Childe Colloquium, Mexico, 1986, ed. L. Manzanilla. British Archaeological
             Reports International Series 349.
Carneiro, R., and D. Hilse. 1966. “On Determining the Probable Rate of Population Growth During the
             Neolithic.” American Anthropologist 68:177–181.
Caton-Thompson, G., and E. W. Gardner. 1934. The Desert Fayum. London: Royal Anthropological Institute.
Cavalli-Sforza, L. L., and M. W. Feldman. 1981. Cultural Transmission and Evolution: A Quantitative Approach.
             Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Childe, V. 1952. New Light on the Most Ancient East, 4th ed. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Clark, J. G. D. 1980. Mesolithic Prelude. The Paleolithic-Neolithic Transition in Old World Prehistory. Edinburgh:
             Edinburgh University Press.
Clark, J. D., and S. A. Brandt, eds. 1984. From Hunters to Farmers. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Cohen, N. M. 1977. The Food Crisis in Prehistory. New Haven and London: Yale University Press.
Cohen, N. M., and G. J. Armelagos. 1984. Paleopathology at the Origins of Culture. New York: Academic Press.
Cowan, C. W., and B. D. Smith. 1993. “New Perspectives on a Wild Gourd in Eastern North America.” Journal
             of Ethnobiology 13:17–54.
Cowan, C. W., and P. J. Watson, eds. 1992. The Origins of Agriculture: An International Perspective. Washington,
             DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
Crawford, G. W., and G.-A. Lee. “Agricultural Origins in the Korean Peninsula.” Antiquity 77:87–95.
Crawford, G. W., and C. Shen. 1998. “The Origins of Rice Agriculture: Recent Progress in East Asia.” Antiquity
             72:858–866.
Crites, G. D. 1993. “Domesticated Sunﬂower in Fifth Millennium B.P. Temporal Context: New Evidence from
             Middle Tennessee.” American Antiquity 58:146 –148.
Davis, S., and F. R. Valla. 1978. “Evidence for Domestication of the Dog 12,000 Years Ago in the Natuﬁan of
             Israel.” Nature 276:608 – 410.
Delage, C., ed. 2004. The Last Hunter-Gatherers in the Near East. Oxford: British Archaeological Reports
             International Series 1320, Archaeopress.
Diamond, J. 1991. “The Worst Mistake in the History of the Human Race.” In Applying Cultural Anthropology,
             ed. A. Podolefsky and P. J. Brown, pp. 72–75. Mountain View, CA: Mayﬁeld Publishing.
———. 1997. Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies. New York: W. W. Norton & Company.
Diener, P., and E. E. Robkin. 1978. “Ecology, Evolution, and the Search for Cultural Origins: The Question of
             Islamic Pig Prohibition.” Current Anthropology 19:493 –540.
Doebley, J. F. 1990. “Molecular Evidence and the Evolution of Maize.” In New Perspectives on the Origin and Evolu-
             tion of New World Domesticated Plants, ed. P. K. Bretting. Economic Botany 44 (Supplement): 28–38.
Doebley, J. F., and H. H. Iltis. 1980. “Taxonomy of Zea [Gramineae]. I. A Subgeneric Classiﬁcation with Key to
             Taxa.” American Journal of Botany 67:982–993.
Dyson-Hudson, R., and N. Dyson-Hudson. 1980. “Nomadic Pastoralism.” Annual Review of Anthropology
             9:15–61.
Ekholm, G. F. 1964. “Transpaciﬁc Contacts.” In Prehistoric Man in the New World, ed. J. D. Jennings and
             E. Norbeck. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Ellen, R. 1982. Environment, Subsistence and System. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Feldman, M., and E. R. Sears. 1981. “The Wild Gene Resources of Wheat.” Scientiﬁc American 244:102–113.
Fieldel, S. J. 1987. Prehistory of the Americas. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Flannery, K. V. 1968. “Archeological Systems Theory and Early Mesoamerica.” In Anthropological Archeology in
             the Americas, ed. B. J. Meggers. Washington, DC: The Anthropological Society of Washington.

272   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      ———. 1972. “The Origins of the Village as a Settlement Type in Mesoamerica and the Near East: A Comparative
                   Study.” In Man, Settlement and Urbanism, ed. P. J. Ucko, R. Tringham, and G. W. Dimbleby. London:
                   Duckworth.
      ———. 1973. “The Origins of Agriculture.” Annual Review of Anthropology 2:271–310.
      ———. 1997. “In Defense of the Tehuacán Project.” Current Anthropology 38(4):660 – 672.
      Flannery, K. V., and M. D. Coe. 1968. “Social and Economic Systems in Formative Mesoamerica.” In New
                   Perspectives in Archeology, ed. S. R. Binford and L. R. Binford. Chicago: Aldine.
      Friedman, J. 1974. “Marxism, Structuralism, and Vulgar Materialism.” Man 9:444 – 469.
      Frisch, R., and J. McArthur. 1974. “Menstrual Cycles: Fatness as a Determinant of Minimum Weight for Height
                   Necessary for Their Maintenance or Onset.” Science 185:949 –951.
      Frison, G. C. 1978. Prehistoric Hunters on the High Plains. New York: Academic Press.
      Fritz, G. J. 1994. “Are the First American Farmers Getting Younger?” Current Anthropology 35(3):305 –309.
      Galinat, W. C. 1971. “The Origin of Maize.” Annual Review of Genetics 5:447– 478.
      ———. 1985. “The Missing Links Between Teosinte and Maize: A Review.” Maydica 30:137–160.
      Garrod, D. 1957. “The Natuﬁan Culture. The Life and Economy of a Mesolithic People in the Near East.”
                   Proceedings of the British Academy 43:211–217.
      Gebauer, A., and T. D. Price, eds. 1992. Transitions to Agriculture in Prehistory. Madison, WI: Prehistory Press.
      Gould, S. J. 1985. The Flamingo’s Smile. New York: W. W. Norton.
      Grigson, C. 1993. “The Earliest Domestic Horses in the Levant.” Journal of Archaeological Science 20(6):645 – 655.
      Grun, P. 1990. “The Evolution of Cultivated Potatoes.” In New Perspectives on the Origin and Evolution of New
                   World Domesticated Plants, ed. P. K. Bretting. Economic Botany 44 (Supplement): 28 –38.
      Haaland, R. 1987. Socio-Economic Differentiation in Neolithic Sudan. Oxford, England: British Archaeological
                   Reports, International Series 350.
      Halperin, R. 1980. “Ecology and Mode of Production: Seasonal Variation and the Division of Labor by Sex among
                   Hunter-Gatherers.” Journal of Anthropological Research 36:379 –399.
      Harlan, J. R. 1967. “A Wild Wheat Harvest in Turkey.” Archaeology 20:197–201.
      ———. 1989. “The Tropical African Cereals.” In Foraging and Farming: The Evolution of Plant Exploitation, ed.
                   D. R. Harris and G. C. Hillman. London: Unwin Hyman.
      ———. 1992. “Indigenous African Agriculture.” In The Origins of Agriculture: An International Perspective, ed.
                   C. Cowan and P. Watson. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
      Harlan, J., and D. Zohary. 1966. “Distribution of Wild Wheats and Barley.” Science 153:1074 –1080.
      Harner, M. 1970. “Population Pressure and the Social Evolution of Agriculturalists.” Southwestern Journal of
                   Anthropology 26:67– 86.
      Harpending, H., and H. Davis. 1976. “Some Implications for Hunter-Gatherer Ecology Derived from the Spatial
                   Structure of Resources.” World Archaeology 8:275 –286.
      Harris, D., and G. Hillman, eds. 1989. Farming and Foraging. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
      Harris, M. 1974. Cows, Pigs, Wars, and Witches. New York: Random House.
      ———. 1977. Cannibals and Kings. New York: Random House.
      Hassan, F. A. 1980. Demographic Archaeology. New York: Academic Press.
      Hayden, B. 1981. “Research and Development in the Stone Age: Technological Transitions Among Hunter-
                   Gatherers.” Current Anthropology 22:519 –548.
      ———. 1990. “Nimrods, Piscators, Pluckers, and Planters: The Emergence of Food Production.” Journal of
                   Anthropological Archaeology 9:31– 69.
      ———. 2001. “Fabulous Feasts: A Prolegomenon to the Importance of Feasting.” In Feasts: Archaeological and
                   Ethnographic Perspectives on Food, Politics, and Power, ed. M. Dietler and B. Hayden, pp. 23 – 64.
                   Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
      ———. 2004. “Sociopolitical Organization in the Natuﬁan: A View from the Northwest.” In The Last Hunter-
                   Gatherers in the Near East, ed. C. Delage, pp. 263 –308. Oxford: Archaeopress, British Archaeological
                   Reports International Series 1320.
      Helback, H. 1964. “First Impressions of the Çatal Huyuk Plant Husbandry.” Anatolian Studies 14:121–123.
      Henry, D. 1989. From Foraging to Agriculture: The Levant at the End of the Ice Age. Philadelphia: University of
                   Pennsylvania Press.
      Higham, C., and T. L.-D. Lu. 1998. “The Origins and Dispersal of Rice Cultivation.” Antiquity 72:867 – 877.
      Hillman, G., and M. S. Davies. 1990. “Measured Domestication Rates in Wild Wheats and Barley Under Primitive
                   Cultivation, and Their Archaeological Implications.” Journal of World Prehistory 4:157–222.
      Ho, P. 1969. “The Loess and the Origin of Chinese Agriculture.” American Historical Review 75:1–36.
      Hodder, I. 1990. The Domestication of Europe: Structure and Contingency in Neolithic Societies. Cambridge, MA:
                   Blackwell.
      Hole, F. 1971. “Comment on ‘Origins of Food Production in Southwestern Asia’ by G. Wright.” Current
                   Anthropology 12:472 – 473.
      ———. 1984. “A Reassessment of the Neolithic Revolution.” Paléorient 10:49 – 60.

                                                                               THE ORIGINS OF AGRICULTURE             273


Hole, F., K. V. Flannery, and J. A. Neely. 1969. Prehistory and Human Ecology of the Deh Luran Plain. Ann Arbor:
             Memoirs of the Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan, No. 1.
Iltis, H. 1983. “From Teosinte to Maize: The Catastrophic Sexual Mutation.” Science 222:886 – 894.
———. 1987. “Maize Evolution and Agricultural Origins.” In Grass Systematics and Evolution, ed. T. R.
             Soderstrom, K. W. Hilu, C. S. Campbell, and M. E. Barkworth. Washington, DC: Smithsonian
             Institution Press.
Johannessen, C. L. 1988. “Indian Maize in the Twelfth Century B.C.” Nature 332:587.
Johnson, F., ed. 1972. The Prehistory of the Tehuacan Valley, Vol. 4. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Just, P. 1980. “Time and Leisure in the Elaboration of Culture.” Journal of Anthropological Research 36:105 –115.
Kaufman, D. 1986. “A Reconsideration of Adaptive Change in the Levantine Epipaleolithic.” In The End of the
             Paleolithic in the Old World, ed. L. G. Straus. Oxford: British Archaeological Reports International
             Series 284.
Keene, A. S. 1981. “Optimal Foraging in a Nonmarginal Environment: A Model of Prehistoric Subsistence
             Strategies in Michigan.” In Hunter-Gatherer Foraging Strategies, ed. B. Winterhalder and E. A. Smith.
             Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Kelly, R. L. 1992. “Mobility/Sedentism: Concepts, Archaeological Measures, and Effects.” Annual Review of
             Anthropology 21:43 – 66.
Kirkbride, D. 1968. “Beidha: Early Neolithic Village Life South of the Dead Sea.” Antiquity 42:263–274.
Kirkby, A. 1973. The Use of Land and Water Resources in the Past and Present Valley of Oaxaca, Mexico. Memoirs
             of the Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan, No. 5.
Kislev, M. E., and O. Bar-Yosef. 1988. “The Legumes: The Earliest Domesticated Plants in the Near East?” Current
             Anthropology 29(1):175 –178.
Kislev, M. E., D. Nadel, and I. Carmi. 1992. “Epipalaeolithic (19,000 bp) Cereal and Fruit Diet at Ohalo II, Sea of
             Galilee, Israel.” Review of Palaeobotany and Palynology 73:161–166.
Köhler-Rollefson, I. 1989. “Changes in Goat Exploitation at ’Ain Ghazal between the Early and Late Neolithic: A
             Metrical Analysis.” Paléorient 15(1):141–146.
Kuijt, I., ed. 2000. Life in Neolithic Farming Communities: Social Organization, Identity, and Differentiation. New
             York: Plenum.
Lange, F. W. 1971. “Marine Resources: A Viable Subsistence Alternative for the Prehistoric Lowland Maya.”
             American Antiquity 73:619 – 639.
Legge, A. J., and P. A. Rowley-Conwy. 1987. “Gazelle Hunting in Stone Age Syria.” Scientiﬁc American (August):
             88–95.
Lippe, R. N., R. M. Bird, and D. M. Stemper. 1984. “Maize Recovered at La Ponga, an Early Ecuadorian Site.”
             American Antiquity 49(1):118 –124.
Lynch, T. F. 1980. Guitarrero Cave: Early Man in the Andes. New York: Academic Press.
MacNeish, R. S. 1983. “Mesoamerica.” In Early Man in the New World, ed. R. Shutler, Jr. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage
             Publications.
———. gen. ed. 1970. The Prehistory of the Tehuacan Valley: Chronology and Irrigation, Vol. 4. Austin: University
             of Texas Press.
Mangelsdorf, P. 1974. Corn: Its Origin, Evolution, and Improvement. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
———. 1983. “The Mystery of Corn: New Perspectives.” Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society
             127(4):215 –247.
Martin, L. 2000. “Gazelle (Gazella spp.) Behavioural Ecology: Predicting Animal Behaviour for Prehistoric
             Environments in South-West Asia.” Journal of Zoology London 250:13 –30.
McClung de Tapia, E. 1992. “Origins of Agriculture in Mesoamerica and Central America.” In Origins of
             Agriculture: An International Perspective, ed. C. W. Cowan and P. J. Watson, pp. 143 –171. Washington,
             DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
McCorriston, J., and F. Hole. 1991. “The Ecology of Seasonal Stress and the Origins of Agriculture in the Near
             East.” American Anthropologist 93:46 – 69.
Meggers, B. 1975. “The Transpaciﬁc Origins of Mesoamerican Civilization: A Preliminary Review of the Evidence
             and Its Theoretical Implications.” American Anthropologist 77:1–27.
Mellaart, J. 1975. The Neolithic of the Near East. London: Thames and Hudson.
Milisauskas, S., and J. Kruk. 1989. “Neolithic Economy in Central Europe.” Journal of World Prehistory
             2(3):403–446.
Miller, N. 1996. “Seed Eaters of the Ancient Near East: Human or Herbivore?” Current Anthropology
             37(3):521–528.
Molleson, T. 1989. “Seed Preparation in the Neolithic: The Osteological Evidence.” Antiquity 63(239):356 –362.
Moore, A. M. T., and G. C. Hillman. 1992. “The Pleistocene to Holocene Transition and Human Economy in
             Southwest Asia: The Impact of the Younger Dryas.” American Antiquity 57(3):482– 494.
Moore, A. M. T., G. C. Hillman, and A. J. Legge. 2000. Village on the Eyphrates: From Foraging to Farming at Abu
             Hureyra. New York: Oxford University Press.

274   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      Mortensen, P. 1972. “Seasonal Camps and Early Villages in the Zagros.” In Man, Settlement and Urbanism, ed.
                  P. Ucko, R. Tringham, and G. W. Dimbleby. London: Duckworth.
      Munchaev, R. M., and N. Y. Merpert. 1971. New Studies of Early Agricultural Settlements in the Sinjar Valley.
                  Belgrade: VIII Congress International des Sciences Prehistoriques et Protohistoriques.
      Nadel, D. 1995. “The Organization of Space in a Fisher-Hunter-Gatherers Camp at Ohalo II, Israel.” In Nature et
                  Culture, ed. M. Otte, pp. 373 –388. Liège: E.R.A.U.L. 68.
      Nesbitt, M. 2002. “When and Where Did Domesticated Cereals First Occur in Southwest Asia?” In The Dawn of
                  Farming in the Near East, ed. R. Cappers and S. Bottema, pp. 113 –132. Studies in Early Near Eastern
                  Production, Subsistence, and Environment 6. Berlin: ex oriente.
      Olsen, S. 1985. Origins of the Domestic Dog. Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
      Olszewski, D. I. 1993. “Subsistence Ecology in the Mediterranean Forest; Implications for the Origins of
                  Cultivation in the Epipaleolithic Southern Levant. American Anthropologist 95(2):420 – 435.
      ———. 2004. “Plant Food Subsistence Issues and Scientiﬁc Inquiry in the Early Natuﬁan.” In The Last Hunter-
                  Gatherers in the Near East, ed. C. Delage, pp. 189 –209. Oxford: British Archaeological Reports
                  International Series 1320, Archaeopress.
      Pearsall, D. M. 1992. “The Origins of Plant Cultivation in South America.” In The Origins of Agriculture, ed.
                  C. W. Cowan and P. J. Watson. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
      Pearsall, D. M., and D. R. Piperno. 1990. “Antiquity of Maize Cultivation in Ecuador: Summary and Reevaluation
                  of the Evidence.” American Antiquity 55:324 –337.
      Perkins, D., Jr., and P. Daly. 1968. “A Hunter’s Village in Neolithic Turkey.” Scientiﬁc American 210:94 –105.
      Piperno, D. R. and D. M. Pearsall. 1998. The Origins of Agriculture in the Lowland Neotropics. New York: Academic
                  Press.
      Price, T. D. 1987. “The Mesolithic of Western Europe.” Journal of World Prehistory 1(3):225 –305.
      Price, T. D., and A. B. Gebauer, eds. 1995. Last Hunters First Farmers. Santa Fe, NM: School of American Research.
      Pryor, F. L. 1986. “The Adoption of Agriculture: Some Theoretical and Empirical Evidence.” American
                  Anthropologist 88(4):879 – 897.
      Pumpelly, R. 1908. Explorations in Turkey, the Expedition of 1904: Prehistoric Civilization of Anau. Vol. 1.
                  Washington, DC: Publications of the Carnegie Institution, No. 73.
      Redding, R. W. 1988. “A General Explanation of Subsistence Change: From Hunting and Gathering to Food
                  Production.” Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 7:59 –97.
      Renfrew, C. 1987. Archaeology and Language. London: Jonathan Cape.
      Reynolds, R. G. 1986. “An Adaptive Computer Model for the Evolution of Plant Collecting and Early Agriculture
                  in the Eastern Valley of Oaxaca.” In Guilá Naquitz: Archaic Foraging and Early Agriculture in Oaxaca,
                  Mexico, ed. K. Flannery. New York: Academic Press.
      Richards, M. 2003. “The Neolithic Invasion of Europe.” Annual Review of Anthropology 32:135 –162.
      Richerson, P. J., R. Boyd, and R. L. Bettinger. 2001. “Was Agriculture Impossible During the Pleistocene but
                  Mandatory During the Holocene? A Climate Change Hypothesis.” American Antiquity 66(3):387–
                  411.
      Rick, J. W. 1980. Prehistoric Hunters of the High Andes. New York: Academic Press.
      Rindos, D. 1980. “Symbiosis, Instability, and the Origins and Spread of Agriculture: A New Model.” Current
                  Anthropology 21:751–772.
      ———. 1984. The Origins of Agriculture: An Evolutionary Perspective. New York: Academic Press.
      Rollefson, G. O. 1983. “Ritual and Ceremony at Neolithic Ain Ghazal (Jordan).” Paléorient 9(2):29 –38.
      ———. 1986. “Neolithic Ain Ghazal (Jordan): Ritual and Ceremony II.” Paléorient 12(1):45 –52.
      Roosevelt, A. 1980. Parmana. Prehistoric Maize and Manioc Subsistence along the Amazon and Orinoco. New York:
                  Academic Press.
      Rosen, S. A. 1988. “Notes on the Origins of Pastoral Nomadism: A Case Study from the Negev and Sinai.” Current
                  Anthropology 29(3):498 –506.
      Rosenberg, M. 1990. “The Mother of Invention: Evolutionary Theory, Territoriality, and the Origins of
                  Agriculture.” American Anthropologist 92(2):498 –506.
      Rosenberg, M., and M. K. Davis. 1992. “Hallan Çemi Tepesi, An Early Aceramic Neolithic Site in Eastern
                  Anatolia.” Anatolica VXIII:1–18.
      Sahlins, M. 1976. Culture and Practical Reason. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
      Simmons, A. H., I. Köhler-Rollefson, G. O. Rollefson, R. Mandel, and Z. Kafaﬁ. 1988. “’Ain Ghazal: A Major
                  Neolithic Settlement in Central Jordan.” Science 240:35 –39.
      Smith, B. D. 1994. “The Origins of Agriculture in the Americas.” Evolutionary Anthropology 3(5):174 –184.
      ———. 1997. “Reconsidering the Ocampo Caves and the Era of Incipient Cultivation in Mesoamerica.” Latin
                  American Antiquity 8(4):342–383.
      Smith, P. E. L. 1967. “New Investigations in the Late Pleistocene Archaeology of the Kom Ombo Plain (Upper
                  Egypt).” Quaternaria 9:141–152.
      ———. 1972. “Ganj Dareh Tepe.” Iran 10:165 –168.

                                                                              THE ORIGINS OF AGRICULTURE             275


———. 1976. “Early Food Productions in Northern Africa as Seen from Southwestern Asia.” In Origins of African
             Plant Domestication, ed. J. R. Harlan, J. M. J. de Wet, and A. Stemler. The Hague: Mouton.
Solecki, R. L. 1981. “An Early Village Site at Zawi Chemi Shanidar.” Bibliotheca Mesopotamica. Vol. 13.
Solecki, R. S., and R. L. Solecki. 1980. “Paleoecology of the Negev.” Quarterly Review of Archaeology 1:8, 12.
Spuhler, J. 1985. “Anthropology, Evolution, and ‘Scientiﬁc Creationism.’ ” Annual Review of Anthropology
             14:103–133.
Stark, B., and B. Voorhies, eds. 1978. Prehistoric Coastal Adaptations: The Economy and Ecology of Maritime Middle
             America. New York: Academic Press.
Stothert, K. E. 1985. “The Preceramic Las Vegas Culture of Coastal Ecuador.” American Antiquity 50(3):613 – 637.
Takamiya, H. 2001. “Introductory Routes of Rice to Japan: An Examination of the Southern Route Hypothesis.”
             Asian Perspectives 40(2):209 –226.
Tauber, H. 1981. “13C Evidence for Dietary Habits of Prehistoric Man in Denmark.” Nature 292:332 –333.
Testart, A. 1982. “The Signiﬁcance of Food Storage Among Hunter-Gatherers: Residence Patterns, Population
             Densities, and Social Inequalities.” Current Anthropology 23(5):523 –527.
Thorpe, I. J. 1996. The Origins of Agriculture in Europe. New York: Routledge.
Tringham, R., D. Drstić, T. Kaiser, and B. Voytek. 1980. “The Early Agricultural Site of Selevac, Yugoslavia.”
             Archaeology 33(2):24 –32.
Turnball, P. F., and C. A. Reed. 1974. “The Fauna from the Terminal Pleistocene of Palegawra Cave.” Fieldiana
             (Chicago Field Museum of Natural History) 63(3):81–146.
Ugent, D., S. Pozorski, and T. Pozorski. 1984. “New Evidence for Ancient Cultivation of Canna edulis in Peru.”
             Economic Botany 38(4):417– 432.
Unger-Hamilton, R. 1989. “The Epi-Palaeolithic Southern Levant and the Origins of Cultivation.” Current
             Anthropology 30:88 –103.
Upham, S., et al. 1987. “Evidence Concerning the Origin of Maize de Ocho.” American Anthropologist
             89(3):410– 419.
Valla, F. 1988. “Les premiers sédentaires de Palestine.” La Recherché 19:576 –584.
Van Zeist, W., and J. A. H. Bakker Heeres. 1986. “Archaeobotanical Studies in the Levant. Late Paleolitic
             Mureybit.” Palaeohistoria 26:171–199.
Webster, G. S. 1986. “Optimization Theory and Pre-Columbian Hunting in the Tehuacan Valley.” Human Ecology
             14(4):415– 435.
Wenke, R. J., J. E. Long, and P. E. Buck. 1988. “Epipaleolithic and Neolithic Subsistence and Settlement in the
             Fayyum Oasis of Egypt.” Journal of Field Archaeology 15(1):29 –51.
Wilcox, G. 2002. “Geographical Variation in Major Cereal Components and Evidence for Independent
             Domestication Events in Western Asia.” In The Dawn of Farming in the Near East, ed. R. Cappers and
             S. Bottema, pp. 133 –140. Studies in Early Near Eastern Production, Subsistence, and Environment 6.
             Berlin: ex oriente.
Wills, W. T. 1992. “Plant Cultivation and the Evolution of Risk-Prone Economies in the Prehistoric American
             Southwest.” In Transitions to Agriculture in Prehistory, ed. A. B. Gebauer and T. D. Price. Madison:
             Prehistory Press.
Winterhalder, B., and E. A. Smith, eds. 1981. Hunter-Gatherer Foraging Strategies. Chicago: University of Chicago
             Press.
Wright, G. 1971. “Origins of Food Production in Southwestern Asia: A Survey of Ideas.” Current Anthropology
             12:447–477.
Wright, H. T. 1993. “Environmental Determinism in Near Eastern Prehistory.” Current Anthropology 12:447– 478.
Zeder, M., and B. Hesse. 2000. “The Initial Domestication of Goats (Capra hircus) in the Zagros Mountains 10,000
             Years Ago.” Science 287:2254 –2257.
Zevallos, M. C., W. C. Galinat, D. W. Lathrup, E. R. Leng, J. G. Marcos, and K. M. Klumpp. 1977. “The San Pablo
             Corn Kernel and Its Friends.” Science 196:385 –389.
Zohary, D. 1989. “Pulse Domestication and Cereal Domestication: How Different Are They?” Economic Botany
             43:31–34.
Zohary, D., and M. Hopf. 1988. Domestication of Plants in the Old World. Oxford: Oxford University Press.



NOTES
  1. Kelly, “Mobility/Sedentism: Concepts, Archaeological Measures, and Effects,” p. 60.
  2. For detailed recent reviews of agricultural origins around the world, see Cowan and Watson, eds., The
     Origins of Agriculture: An International Perspective.
  3. Blumler and Byrne, “The Ecological Genetics of Domestication and the Origins of Agriculture,” p. 24.
  4. Price, “The Mesolithic of Western Europe.”

276   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


        5. R. C. Dunnell is among the ﬁrst we know to use this deﬁnition.
        6. Blumler and Byrne, “The Ecological Genetics of Domestication and the Origins of Agriculture,” p. 24.
        7. Rindos, The Origins of Agriculture, p. 143.
        8. Blumler and Byrne, “The Ecological Genetics of Domestication and the Origins of Agriculture,” p. 24.
        9. Rindos, “Symbiosis, Instability, and the Origins and Spread of Agriculture: A New Model,” p. 754.
       10. Cohen and Armelagos, eds., Paleopathology at the Origins of Agriculture.
       11. Blumler and Byrne, “The Ecological Genetics of Domestication and the Origins of Agriculture.”
       12. Rindos, The Origins of Agriculture.
       13. Others, e.g., Blumler and Byrne, “The Ecological Genetics of Domestication and the Origins of Agriculture,”
           disagree; Rosenberg, “The Mother of Invention: Evolutionary Theory, Territoriality, and the Origins of
           Agriculture.”
       14. Tauber, “13C Evidence for Dietary Habits of Prehistoric Man in Denmark.”
       15. See, e.g., Price and Gebauer, eds., Last Hunters First Farmers; Harris and Hillman, Farming and Foraging.
       16. Childe, New Light on the Most Ancient East.
       17. Pumpelly, Explorations in Turkey, the Expedition of 1904: Prehistoric Civilization of Anau, pp. 65–66; Childe,
           New Light on the Most Ancient East.
       18. McCorriston and Hole, “The Ecology of Seasonal Stress and the Origins of Agriculture in the Near East”;
           Moore and Hillman, “The Pleistocene to Holocene Transition and Human Economy in Southwest Asia: The
           Impact of the Younger Dryas.”
       19. Braidwood, “The Agriculture Revolution.”
       20. See Hole, Flannery, and Neely, Prehistory and Human Ecology of the Deh Luran Plain; see also Hole,
           “Comment on ‘Origins of Food Production in Southwestern Asia’ by G. Wright.”
       21. Harlan and Zohary, “Distribution of Wild Wheats and Barley.”
       22. Cohen, The Food Crisis in Prehistory, p. 279.
       23. Harris, Cannibals and Kings; Harris, Cultural Materialism.
       24. Harris, Cows, Pigs, Wars, and Witches.
       25. See, for example, Friedman, “Marxism, Structuralism, and Vulgar Materialism”; Sahlins, Culture and
           Practical Reason.
       26. Hayden, “Research and Development in the Stone Age: Technological Transitions Among Hunter-
           Gatherers.”
       27. Ibid., p. 530.
       28. McCorriston and Hole, “The Ecology of Seasonal Stress and the Origins of Agriculture in the Near East.”
       29. Moore and Hillman, “The Pleistocene to Holocene Transition and Human Economy in Southwest Asia:
           The Impact of the Younger Dryas.”
       30. Henry, From Foraging to Agriculture: The Levant at the End of the Ice Age; McCorriston and Hole, “The
           Ecology of Seasonal Stress and the Origins of Agriculture in the Near East”; Moore and Hillman, “The
           Pleistocene to Holocene Transition and Human Economy in Southwest Asia: The Impact of the Younger
           Dryas.”
       31. Byrd, “The Natuﬁan: Settlement Variability and Economic Adaptations in the Levant at the End of the
           Pleistocene,” p. 170; McCorriston and Hole, “The Ecology of Seasonal Stress and the Origins of Agriculture
           in the Near East”; Moore and Hillman, “The Pleistocene to Holocene Transition and Human Economy in
           Southwest Asia: The Impact of the Younger Dryas.”
       32. Spuhler, “Anthropology, Evolution, and ‘Scientiﬁc Creationalism,’ ” p. 115.
       33. McCorriston and Hole, “The Ecology of Seasonal Stress and the Origins of Agriculture in the Near East.”
       34. Moore and Hillman, “The Pleistocene to Holocene Transition and Human Economy in Southwest Asia: The
           Impact of the Younger Dryas.”
       35. “Was Agriculture Impossible During the Pleistocene but Mandatory During the Holocene? A Climate
           Change Hypothesis.”
       36. Ibid., p. 387.
       37. There are a few well-known exceptions, such as the “Little Ice Age” that occurred between a.d. 1300 and
           1850.
       38. “Was Agriculture Impossible During the Pleistocene but Mandatory During the Holocene? A Climate
           Change Hypothesis,” p. 404.
       39. Ibid.
       40. Bender, “Emergent Tribal Formations in the American Midcontinent.”
       41. See, for example, “Sociopolitical Organization in the Natuﬁan: A View from the Northwest”; “Fabulous
           Feasts: A Prolegomenon to the Importance of Feasting”; “Nimrods, Piscators, Pluckers, and Planters: The
           Emergence of Food Production.”
       42. Hodder, The Domestication of Europe.
       43. As Boyd points out, however, this opposition of nature and culture is a Western concept that comes from
           the Renaissance (“Agency and Landscape: Abandoning the ‘Nature/Culture’ Dichotomy in Interpretations

                                                                               THE ORIGINS OF AGRICULTURE             277


    of the Natuﬁan and the Transition to the Neolithic,” p. 119). How valid is it to apply a modern Western
    idea to ancient people’s ways of conceptualizing the world around them?
44. Hodder, The Domestication of Europe, p. 41.
45. Ibid.
46. Frison, Prehistoric Hunters on the High Plains.
47. Barnard, “Contemporary Hunter-Gatherers.”
48. Ellen, Environment, Subsistence and System.
49. Testart, “The Signiﬁcance of Food Storage Among Hunter-Gatherers,” p. 530.
50. Flannery, “The Origins of Agriculture,” p. 307.
51. See, for example, Frisch and McArthur, “Menstrual Cycles: Fatness as a Determinant of Minimum Weight
    for Height Necessary for Their Maintenance or Onset.”
52. Harris, Cannibals and Kings.
53. Kislev and Bar-Yosef, “The Legumes: The Earliest Domesticated Plants in the Near East?”
54. Henry, From Foraging to Agriculture. The Levant at the End of the Ice Age; Bar-Yosef and Belfer-Cohen, “From
    Foraging to Farming in the Mediterranean Levant”; Aurenche et al., “Proto-Neolithic and Neolithic Cultures
    in the Middle East—The Birth of Agriculture, Livestock Raising, and Ceramics: A Calibrated 14C Chronology
    12,500–5500 cal bc.”
55. Nadel, “The Organization of Space in a Fisher-Hunter-Gatherers Camp at Ohalo II, Israel”; Kislev et al.,
    “Epipalaeolithic (19,000 bp) Cereal and Fruit Diet at Ohalo II, Sea of Galilee, Israel.”
56. Kislev et al., “Epipalaeolithic (19,000 bp) Cereal and Fruit Diet at Ohalo II, Sea of Galilee, Israel,” p. 162.
57. Binford, “Post-Pleistocene Adaptations”; Flannery, “The Origins of Agriculture”; Hayden, “Research and
    Development in the Stone Age: Technological Transitions Among Hunter-Gatherers.”
58. Henry, From Foraging to Agriculture: The Levant at the End of the Ice Age, pp. 29 –30.
59. Legge and Rowley-Conwy, “Gazelle Hunting in Stone Age Syria,” although it should be noted that not all
    researchers agree with this perspective; see, for example, Martin, “Gazelle (Gazella spp.) Behavioural
    Ecology: Predicting Animal Behaviour for Prehistoric Environments in South-West Asia.”
60. Belfer-Cohen, “The Natuﬁan in the Levant,” p. 169.
61. Whether Natuﬁans specialized in wild cereals is a matter of some debate. There is growing evidence that the
    cost-beneﬁt ratio is higher for gathering/processing acorns, a wild food resource widely available in the
    Mediterranean forest, compared with wild cereals. See, for example, Barlow and Heck, “More on Acorn
    Eating During the Natuﬁan: Expected Patterning in Diet and the Archaeological Record of Subsistence”;
    Olszewski, “Plant Food Subsistence Issues and Scientiﬁc Inquiry in the Early Natuﬁan.”
62. Belfer-Cohen, “The Natuﬁan in the Levant,” p. 171.
63. Valla, “Les premiers sédentaires de Palestine,” p. 583.
64. Hillman and Davies, “Measured Domestication Rates in Wild Wheats and Barley Under Primitive
    Cultivation, and Their Archaeological Implications.”
65. Olsen, Origins of the Domestic Dog.
66. Perkins and Daly, “A Hunter’s Village in Neolithic Turkey.”
67. Wright, “Origins of Food Production in Southwestern Asia: A Survey of Ideas,” p. 463; see also Solecki, “An
    Early Village Site at Zawi Chemi Shanidar.”
68. Zeder and Hesse, “The Initial Domestication of Goats (Capra hircus) in the Zagros Mountains 10,000 Years
    Ago,” p. 2256.
69. Hillman in Moore et al., Village on the Euphrates, pp. 349–398.
70. Rosen, “Notes on the Origins of Pastoral Nomadism: A Case Study from the Negev and Sinai,” p. 504; see
    also Köhler-Rollefson, “Changes in Goat Exploitation at ’Ain Ghazal Between the Early and Late Neolithic:
    A Metrical Analysis.”
71. Flannery, “The Origins of the Village as a Settlement Type in Mesoamerica and the Near East: A Comparative
    Study.”
72. Ibid., p. 48.
73. Byrd, “Public and Private, Domestic and Corporate; The Emergence of the Southwest Asian Village.”
74. Ibid., p. 658.
75. Hole, “Comment on ‘Origins of Food Production in Southwestern Asia’ by G. Wright,” p. 473.
76. Simmons et al., “’Ain Ghazal: A Major Neolithic Settlement in Central Jordan.”
77. Grigson, “The Earliest Domestic Horses in the Levant.”
78. Ammerman and Cavalli-Sforza, The Neolithic Transition and the Genetics of Population in Europe.
79. Renfrew, Archaeology and Language.
80. Harlan, “Indigenous African Agriculture”; Wenke et al., “Epipaleolithic and Neolithic Subsistence and
    Settlement in the Fayyum Oasis of Egypt.”
81. Haaland, Socio-Economic Differentiation in Neolithic Sudan.
82. Crawford and Shen, “The Origins of Rice Agriculture: Recent Progress in East Asia”; Higham and Lu, “The
    Origins and Dispersal of Rice Cultivation.”

278   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


       83. Higham and Lu, “The Origins and Dispersal of Rice Cultivation,” p. 870.
       84. Bellwood, The Prehistory of the Indo-Malaysian Archipelago.
       85. Akazawa and Aikens, Prehistoric Hunter-Gatherers in Japan; Takamiya, “Introductory Routes of Rice to
           Japan: An Examination of the Southern Route Hypothesis.”
       86. Flannery, “Archeological Systems Theory and Early Mesoamerica.”
       87. Webster, “Optimization Theory and Pre-Columbian Hunting in the Tehuacan Valley.”
       88. Reynolds, “An Adaptive Computer Model for the Evolution of Plant Collecting and Early Agriculture in the
           Eastern Valley of Oaxaca.”
       89. Johannessen, “Indian Maize in the Twelfth Century b.c.”
       90. Recent radiocarbon dates for the Ocampo caves in Tamaulipas show that this area—compared to the
           evidence from Tehuacan and Oaxaca—was peripheral to the development of agriculture in Mexico.
           The Ocampo caves are relatively late, dating to between 5,500 to 5,200 years ago. See Smith, “Reconsidering
           the Ocampo Caves and the Era of Incipient Cultivation in Mesoamerica.”
       91. Fritz, “Are the First American Farmers Getting Younger?” see, however, Flannery, “In Defense of the
           Tehuacán Project,” who states that the only dates for maize that are getting younger are AMS dates for
           samples contaminated with a preservative. Flannery purposes that original estimates for early maize are
           correct.
       92. Ibid.
       93. Mangelsdorf, Corn: Its Origin, Evolution, and Improvement.
       94. Fritz, “Are the First American Farmers Getting Younger?” p. 306.
       95. See MacNeish, The Prehistory of the Tehuacan Valley: Chronology and Irrigation; McClung de Tapia, The
           Origins of Agriculture in Mesoamerica and Central America, pp. 157–158.
       96. All of these period dates are now somewhat suspect because of recent AMS dates on these materials
           (see Fritz, “Are the First American Farmers Getting Younger?”), but additional research will be required to
           determine if just the botanical remains are mixed or if other occupational debris are mixed as well.
       97. Beadle, “The Mystery of Maize”; Beadle, “The Ancestry of Corn.”
       98. Flannery, “The Origins of Agriculture.”
       99. See, for example, Galinat, “The Origin of Maize”; but cf. Mangelsdorf, “The Mystery of Corn: New
           Perspectives.”
      100. McClung de Tapia, The Origins of Agriculture in Mesoamerica and Central America, pp. 148 –149.
      101. Gould, The Flamingo’s Smile.
      102. Iltis, “From Teosinte to Maize: The Catastrophic Sexual Mutation.”
      103. Flannery, “The Origins of Agriculture,” p. 300.
      104. McClung de Tapia, The Origins of Agriculture in Mesoamerica and Central America, p. 154.
      105. Flannery and Coe, “Social and Economic Systems in Formative Mesoamerica”; Stark and Voorhies,
           Prehistorical Coastal Adaptations: The Economy and Ecology of Maritime Middle America.
      106. Stark and Voorhies, Prehistoric Coastal Adaptations: The Economy and Ecology of Maritime Middle America;
           Fiedel, Prehistory of the Americas, pp. 160 –184.
      107. Stothert, “The Preceramic Las Vegas Culture of Coastal Ecuador”; Lippi, Bird, and Stemper, “Maize
           Recovered at La Ponga, an Early Ecuadorian Site”; Pearsall and Piperno, “Antiquity of Maize Cultivation in
           Ecuador: Summary and Reevaluation of the Evidence.” There are also arguments that the Peruvian evidence
           is “not good” due to disturbed contexts, shallow deposits, and other factors (see Bird, “What Are the Chances
           of Finding Maize in Peru Dating Before 1000 b.c.?: Reply to Bonavia and Grobman”).
      108. Pearsall, “The Origins of Plant Cultivation in South America,” p. 192.
      109. Lynch, Guitarrero Cave: Early Man in the Andes; Flannery, “The Origins of Agriculture,” p. 303.
      110. Ugent et al., “New Evidence for Ancient Cultivation of Canna edulis in Peru.”
      111. Reviewed in Pearsall, “The Origins of Plant Cultivation in South America,” p. 190.
      112. Rick, Prehistoric Hunters of the High Andes.
      113. Pearsall, “The Origins of Plant Cultivation in South America.”
      114. “The Worst Mistake in the History of the Human Race,” p. 75.

