7
The Evolution of Complex Societies

I should like to see, and this will be the last and
most ardent of my desires, I should like to see
the last king strangled with the guts of the last
priest.
J. Messelier (clause in a will, Paris, 1733)




M           esselier’s vengeful wish was prompted by his feelings of exploitation as a citizen
            of France during the last period of its monarchy, when France was dominated
by oppressive elites and a venal clergy. Societies ruled and exploited by kings and priests
have existed for thousands of years, and many of their citizens have echoed Messelier’s
complaints. In today’s world, billions of people subsist on a tiny fraction of the goods and
services that the most industrialized countries enjoy, and even within the richest states there
are great inequalities.
      Why have societies for thousands of years been organized in terms of social classes
and economic inequalities? Are these inequities somehow the “natural” order of things?
Will they ever be replaced by truly just and equitable societies? What has determined who
was rich and powerful and who was poor and weak throughout history?
     To answer such questions it is important to recognize that although exploitative
political and religious elites have formed the very warp and woof of our concept of
“civilization,” they are just one of many elements in our sense of “civilization,” or what
anthropologists call “complex” societies. Scholars, predictably, disagree on exactly what
social or cultural “complexity,” or a “civilization,” or a “state,” is, particularly when these
terms are applied to the bones, stones, and bricks of the archaeological record. When
archaeologists speak of the ﬁrst “complex” societies, however, most have in mind the
kinds of changes we think happened ﬁrst long ago, for example, in Mesopotamia, on the
broad Tigris-Euphrates alluvial plains of what is now Iraq, Syria, and Iran. The evidence
suggests that if you were a member of an ordinary community here at about 6000 b.c.,
you would have lived in a village of a few hundred people, most of whom were your
blood relatives. You and almost everyone else in your community would have worked in
the ﬁelds to produce the grain held in common stores for large extended families and the
community as a whole. And if you were an older adult male you would have made most
of the decisions for you and your family about every aspect of your life. People much like
you and communities very like yours would be found in all directions from your home,

                                                  279

280   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      but your only contacts with them would have been minor trade in obsidian, ﬂint, semi-
      precious stone, and a few other commodities, as well as the exchange of young men and
      women in marriage, and—probably—the occasional ﬁght. For all practical purposes, you
      and your fellow villagers were on your own in terms of religion, manufacturing tools,
      defense, and food production; probably you and every other adult in town would know
      most of the skills necessary for survival; and your extended family—and every other
      extended family—probably could muster all the technological and social skills necessary
      for survival.
           But if you lived in this same area—perhaps the same town—3,000 years later, at about
      3000 b.c., you would have led a very different life. You could have been a slave or a king,
      depending on accidents of birth. Unlike your ancestors, who were almost all full-time
      farmers, you may have been a ﬁsherman, potter, weaver, priest, or some other specialist.
      Unless you were among the elite, however, many of the decisions you made about your job
      and your life would have been out of your hands—the prerogative of royal administrators.
      You would have been taxed and expected to ﬁght with the army in any of the numerous
      wars and revolutions you would have seen in your lifetime. As a farmer or any other semi-
      skilled or skilled worker, you would have been dependent for your continued existence
      and way of life on people with skills you yourself did not possess, such as potters, warriors,
      herdsmen, scribes, doctors, metalsmiths, sailors, and priests. Instead of a village of a few
      hundred people, you might have lived in a city of thousands, perhaps tens of thousands;
      you would probably have been a fervent believer in the national religion, and you would
      probably have been acutely aware of your social class, whether high or low. In these and
      many other ways, your society would have been “complex,” at least in comparison to the
      simple, cooperative, communistic peasants of your ancient ancestry.
           In summary then, when anthropologists speak of sociocultural complexity, they are
      generally ranking particular societies on a single scale but on the basis of several primary
      variables. For any given society these variables include (1) the degree of differential access
      to wealth, power, and prestige; (2) the extent to which differential access to wealth, power,
      and prestige are inherited, as opposed to earned; (3) the degree to which individuals in a
      community are specialized in their occupations, and the extent to which these different
      occupations are integrated and organized in the economy as a whole; and (4) the degree to
      which political power is centralized in a government.
           The same kinds of changes in these variables that we have described here for
      Mesopotamia also happened—largely independently—in various other areas of the ancient
      world, in Egypt, the Indus Valley, China, Peru, Mesoamerica, and a few other places. Later
      they also occurred in many other times and places, especially in societies that were in
      contact with the earliest civilizations. By now the reader will not be at all surprised to learn
      that the question that has fascinated archaeologists for centuries is, why? Why did simple
      agriculturalists give way to socially more complex forms in these speciﬁc areas, and not
      in other areas? Why did our ancestors not remain simple farmers or revert to the ancient
      security of the hunting-foraging way of life? Why were these early civilizations so much
      alike in socioeconomic structures and political systems? Moreover, why was this transition
      so rapid and pervasive? Although complex societies have existed for only the last ﬁve or six
      millennia, they have almost completely replaced the simpler cultural forms in which our
      ancestors had lived for a million years or more. Today, in the Amazon Valley, the Kalahari
      Desert, and a few other places, hunting-and-gathering groups still follow some of their

                                                               THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES       281


ancient ways, but if current trends continue, soon there will be no groups left in the world
that resemble our Pleistocene ancestors in society and economy.
     To answer all these various questions about the evolution of complex societies, and to
understand why today almost all people of the world live in them, we must appeal to a wide
range of evidence. Since all largely independent cases of the evolution of cultural complexity
happened before any written languages had been developed, much of this analysis must be
based on archaeological data. But in many areas of the world written languages were used
later in these developmental sequences and these provide fascinating information about the
early civilizations.
     The fact that complex societies, like agricultural economies, evolved independently
in the Old and New Worlds gives us the opportunity for comparative analyses. As we shall
see, ancient Egypt, for example, had a language completely incomprehensible to the
Aztecs, worshipped Gods unknown to the Aztecs, and lived in a riverine ecological system
unimaginable to the Aztecs. Egyptian and Aztec culture histories were unique, different,
unconnected. But for a century, the idea of a science of history has been based on the idea
that the ancient Egyptians and Aztecs were fundamentally alike—that they can both be
considered members of the same class of political entities, and that they could be analyzed
and understood in the same terms.
     Perhaps the most inﬂuential general attempt to categorize all cultures and explain their
similarities and differences was that by Karl Marx (see later). But there have been scores of
other attempts to analyze cultural differences and similarities. Bruce Trigger, for example,
compiled a comparative analysis of the ancient civilizations of Egypt, Mesopotamia, China,
Mesoamerica, and South America, as well as the early Yoruba state—all chosen because
they were class-based societies in which power was derived from control of agricultural
production and because there is relatively good archaeological, ethnographic, and textual
data for each. In this context, Trigger has come to an interesting conclusion about the
results of his many years of study of early civilizations:

    I expected to discover that, because of ecological constraints, the differences in economic
    systems [among early states] would be limited, and there would be more variation in
    sociopolitical organization, religious beliefs, and art styles. In fact, I have found that a wide
    variety of economic behavior was associated with early civilizations, the one constant being
    the production of surpluses that the upper classes appropriated through a tributary
    relationship. Yet I have been able to discover only one basic form of class hierarchy, two
    general forms of political organization, and a single basic religious paradigm. . . . I have
    documented signiﬁcant variation from one early civilization to another only in terms of art
    styles and cultural values.1

Trigger’s perceptive conclusion expresses clearly the fundamental issues in analyses of
ancient civilizations. He sees, for example, extremely little variation among them except in
art styles and cultural values. Thus we must ask, why were they so similar? It seems reason-
able to assume, as Trigger does, that there is such little variation in some elements in these
early civilizations because of these elements’ relative “efﬁciency,”2 and great variations in
other elements because they have little effect on the adaptiveness and competitive success
of the social organism of which they are a part. If so, then one aspect of an archaeological
analysis can be an examination of the speciﬁc factors that may have determined the
adaptiveness and efﬁciency of these cultural elements, and changes in these variables over

282   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      time and space. This kind of investigation does not require that one ignore the great extent
      to which the unique and speciﬁc values, ideas, and concepts of these ancient civilizations
      formed the structure of these cultures and, in a sense, determined their history. Trigger
      suggests that we must examine both the similarities and differences in ancient cultures and
      try to understand and explain them using a variety of perspectives and methods (see later).
            Today, however, the premise that a science of history can be developed on the basis of
      comparative analyses of cultures is under sustained attack.3 Some scholars argue that the
      only similarities between, for example, Egypt and Mexico and others of their supposed
      class, such as the Sumerians, the Shang Chinese, and the Harappan of the Indus Valley, are
      simply the products of gross similarities in environments and technologies. They suggest
      that the more important focus of archaeological analysis should be the ways in which the
      people in these different cultures constructed different worlds and realities through the
      use of incommensurable cultural categories. Also, many scholars today are wary of the term
      “evolution” as applied to cultures because it implies that some cultures are “better,” or
      more evolved, than others. For others, the difference in systems of trait-transmission
      between biological entities (sexual and asexual reproduction) and cultural systems (e.g.,
      learning) makes any sense of evolution inapplicable to cultures. But other scholars have
      found Darwinian evolution to be applicable to cultural changes, if one divorces this sense
      of evolution from biological concepts and focuses on trait-transmission, not any particular
      method of trait-transmission.4
            We shall examine this issue in detail later in this chapter, and in the remaining chapters,
      because it is fundamental to all that follows: Do the similarities and differences exhibited
      by various extinct cultures offer the raw material for some kind of “scientiﬁc” analysis of
      history, or do they simply represent gross analogies among societies that were intrinsically
      incommensurate and that can only be analyzed in terms of their unique histories and
      characteristics?
            Another difﬁcult issue here involves the obvious problems of trying to analyze the
      ideologies of extinct human groups on the basis of their material archaeological record.
      Karl Marx is just one of many scholars who over the millennia have tried to explain the rise
      of civilization in terms of environments, technologies, economies, and so forth. But can we
      understand the course of history from this perspective? The rise of Islam, for example,
      might seem to be a case where a powerful ideology spurred people, who previously had
      lived in simple tribal groups, to conquer huge areas of Asia and Europe. Is the spread of
      Islam to be understood as a result of the appearance of this unique inexplicable ideology,
      or is the ideology just a reﬂection of powerful underlying historical and economic forces?
      Similarly, the ancient Egyptian state seems to be something that we can only understand
      in terms of its national ideology: As we shall see in chapter 9, all the temples, tombs, and
      pyramids of Egypt are reﬂections of their principle of “divine kingship.” Ancient Egyptian
      civilization was to a certain extent a product of the rich Nile Valley environment, but it was
      also a sociopolitical construct, an idea. But how does one analyze the power of ideas from
      the archaeological record, especially since most of Egyptian civilization formed long before
      the written language began recording its development?
            Based on inferences from the archaeological record, ancient texts, and ethnography,
      one of the fundamental things that apparently all early complex societies evolved was a
      coercive sociopolitical elite—that is, a class of people who took most of the society’s power,
      prestige, and wealth. And they apparently did so without regularly resorting to armed

                                                          THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES        283


robbery or direct conﬁscation by their personal militias. These societies evolved ideologies
that sanctioned this conﬁscatory behavior and monopolization of power.5 In ancient
Egypt, for example, the pharaoh was considered a manifestation of God, and therefore duly
entitled to monopolize political power and much of the country’s wealth. Ancient Egyptians
might have whined about taxes, but they rarely if ever managed a revolution to dispossess
the elites (nor did the Victorian British or many other modern peoples, for that matter).
But how are we to study the origins and dynamics of the evolution of these all-important
belief systems? We have some traces of this evolution in such things as differences in the
wealth of individual burials, but these only indicate (possibly) that coercive sociopolitical
elites existed, not how they came about or the ideological basis of their status.
     Another issue in analyzing these early civilizations involves our assumptions about
how similar they all were in terms of power relationships. It is important to recognize that
not every society in history can be placed at some point on a continuum between a simple
band of hunter-foragers and the dimensions of complexity described earlier and applied
to, for example, ancient Mesopotamia. The term “heterarchy” has been applied by Carol
Crumley 6 to aspects of social relationships in early states, particularly those, like ancient
Greece, for example, where economic control by elites and many other social interactions
were not entirely set within the context of rigid, bureaucratic, hierarchical, administrative
institutions. In such cases the activities and interests of the elites do not entirely correspond
to the activities and interests of the state. She suggests that states can include social struc-
tures that are heterarchical in the sense that elements in these structures are either unranked
relative to other elements or possess the potential for being ranked in a number of different
ways. In such situations she suggests that power is not ranked, it is “counterpoised.”
      The concept of heterarchy is linked to ideas about dialectical social relationships that
are beyond the scope of this book, but we must assume that the social relationships of
ancient societies cannot be ﬁt exactly and simply into traditional notions about dominance
and hierarchy.
     Many scholars have explored these issues.7 The development of evolutionary theory
as applied to archaeological data remains, however, at a relatively primitive level. Major
questions remain about how one can use concepts such as “scale of selection” in cultural
analyses. One interesting current trend in these forms of evolutionary analyses involves
non-systems analyses and the “emergent” properties of complex systems. The recent book
Complexity 8 popularizes research done by physicists, biologists, anthropologists, and others
on the processes whereby simple systems grow in complexity in an apparently Lamarckian
way—able to direct the generation of variety that is then selected. Lansing and Kremer9
have published one of the ﬁrst applications of these ideas to an anthropological problem,
the evolution of Balinese economic systems.
     In part because of the limitations of functionalist explanations, in part because of the
great power of modern evolutionary theory, there has been a revival of interest in applying
the principles of biological evolution to cultural phenomena.10 Many scholars argue that
the modern theory of evolution has never really been applied to archaeological data. A key
difﬁculty has always been that the objects of the archaeological record do not reproduce in
the same way that people do, and thus the rules of genetics cannot be applied; also, whereas
change in the biological world is through the relatively slow processes of genetic mutation,
drift, selection, and so on, cultural changes can be conveyed quickly and pervasively from
one group to another (as in the spread of agriculture).

284   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


           So how might we apply evolutionary principles to archaeological problems? The answer
      is not at all clear, but there are a few interesting ideas. As Robert Dunnell has observed,
      what matters in evolutionary theory is not so much how a characteristic is transmitted—
      whether by genes or culture—as it is the mechanisms by which traits are perpetuated in an
      individual.11 Thus, whether a person gets the allele for sickle cell anemia through genetic
      inheritance or gets religious beliefs through parental instruction is irrelevant in the sense
      that both traits have been transmitted. In short, we do not have to concern ourselves
      overmuch with the fact that the behaviors at the base of cultural complexity are not
      transmitted genetically.



      SOCIAL COMPLEXITY AND HUMAN VALUES

      Before considering how societies evolved into different forms, it is worthwhile to muse on
      the fact that over the centuries people have had a very difﬁcult time coming to terms with
      their perceptions of the relative virtues of types of societies. One of the oldest and com-
      monest human errors has been to confuse cultural complexity and cultural worth. Already
      by the time of city-states, a haughty citizen of a city-state in Iraq disparagingly described
      his nomadic neighbors as “[barbarians], who know no house or town, the boor of the
      mountains . . . who does not bend his knees [to cultivate the land] . . . who is not buried
      after his death.”12 Even in our own age, it is difﬁcult to avoid the notions that civilizations
      have emerged because of the special gifts and vitality of their populaces, that simpler
      societies are incompletely developed, and that all the world’s cultures are at various points
      along a gradient whose apex is the modern Western industrial community. This attitude
      was a great advantage in the age of European colonialism because it allowed the Europeans
      to treat other peoples as hardly human, and therefore undeserving of the full protection of
      laws and morality. Immanuel Kant said that the essence of immorality is to treat other people
      as objects, and in a way this is the Original Sin of cultural complexity. Europeans are routinely
      used as examples of colonialism, but it must be recognized that all cultures that have
      achieved dominance by virtue of time and circumstance have been equally colonialism.
           To classify, as archaeologists do, history’s thousands of societies in terms of their
      inferred social stratiﬁcation, size, and the complexity of information, matter, and energy
      exchanges is a research tactic that has as its goal the elucidation of the processes that
      produced these forms of complexity; but we should not consider these measures as ultimate
      criteria. If we categorized human societies in terms of piety, social cohesiveness, “justice,”
      or other abstract but important concepts, we would see an ordering of societies very
      different from the earlier discussion about Trigger’s analysis, concerned as it was with
      “cultural complexity.”
           Because of the nature of archaeological data, we must limit ourselves primarily to the
      artifacts of these extinct civilizations, the bones and stones and debris that have survived
      them. But it is worth reﬂecting on the tremendous impact the evolution of cultural com-
      plexity has had on the way people view themselves and the world. If recent band societies
      resemble Pleistocene band societies, most Pleistocene individuals were deeply embedded
      in social and family relationships and had a clear role in society. Marshall Sahlins observed
      that our hunting-and-gathering ancestors took the “Zen road to afﬂuence”: People living

                                                          THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES           285


in complex sedentary communities
seem to live in the eternal economic
dilemma of unlimited wants and
limited means, but simpler societies
have adjusted to their limited means
by having few wants.13 Because they
are frequently moving, hunters and
gatherers cannot accumulate large
quantities of material objects and
therefore do not covet air conditioners
and trash compactors, and they live in
such small and scattered groups that
social hierarchies are of little use or
relevance. Ethnologist Richard Lee
described how one Christmas he
supplied a group of Kalahari Bushmen
with a 1,200-pound ox for a great feast
(Figure 7.1)—the ox represented far
more meat than the group could eat.14
Everyone in the group complained,
however, about how scrawny the
animal was and how poor his gift was.
Lee realized eventually that the cool
reception to his generosity was the
Bushmen’s way of maintaining an
egalitarian spirit: Any particularly
valuable or productive act or service
met the same response because group
dynamics worked best if no one could         FIGURE 7.1 Richard Lee at a Christmas ox roast for a group of Kalahari
take great personal and public prestige      Bushmen, southern Africa (see text for discussion of egalitarian principles
                                             of band organization demonstrated at this event).
from his accomplishments.
     Hunter-gatherers of the recent and
contemporary world are probably uncertain guides to what life was like during the
millennia when all of our ancestors lived this way. But any romantic visions one might have
of this ancient world may well be illusions. We might want to think of our ancestors as
generous and sharing, and perhaps they were, but not necessarily. Nicolas Peterson reports,
for example, that one aboriginal Australian in the group he was studying said to him, “I
want to owe you ﬁve dollars.” Peterson labels this kind of behavior “demand sharing,” in
which exchange of resources is stripped of all pretense that people do it because they want
to or feel generous.15 Sharing is to everyone’s advantage in some social organizations,
particularly band societies, but there is no necessary reason that it has to be cloaked in an
aura of generosity and altruism. We will never know how our Pleistocene forebears
organized their patterns of sharing and cooperation, but they were probably not the “noble
savages” that we sometimes imagine.
     All forms of social organization, of course, have their human costs, as well as beneﬁts.
In complex societies, from ancient times to the present, people often have felt themselves

286   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      to be minor replaceable cogs in a machine that operates mainly for the beneﬁt of others.
      From some of the earliest written documents, those from Mesopotamia in the third
      millennium b.c., we hear the age-old complaints about poverty, taxes, oppressive rulers,
      governmental harassment, and other ills of cultural complexity. Little wonder that from
      these early records we also see the beginnings of Utopian movements, made up of those
      who yearn for a return to a hypothetical simpler place and time, when political, religious,
      and economic hierarchies did not exist, when all people were considered of equal worth,
      where all had an equal share, and where no one had power over anyone else.
           Many of the perceived pathologies in modern societies are attributed to greed, but one
      must at least consider the premise that human selﬁshness and greed are “engines” that have
      propelled humanity to ever-more-complex socioeconomic and political forms. The biblical
      sentiment that “the love of money is the root of all evil” is no doubt true, but the love of
      money also has had some beneﬁcial side effects. Novelist John LeCarré explores this theme
      in one of his books16 in the form of an argument between two characters, one who is sickened
      by the excesses of greed, waste, and inequity in capitalistic “pigs in clover” societies, and
      another character who defends the West on the premise that capitalism uses human greed
      and acquisitiveness to produce goods and services that, ultimately, enhance human life,
      dignity, and liberty.
           In the last couple of decades, eastern Europe has begun a painful transition, from
      centralized quasi-socialist systems to more capitalistic market-oriented economies—or at
      least that is the intention of the politicians and planners. The impetus for this change appears
      to be the simple fact that economies based on self-interest have been far more productive
      than other forms in terms of goods and services. The last great bastion of communism,
      China, too has found that it can sustain impressive growth rates by allowing individuals to
      proﬁt from their own labor and initiative, with the result that barely 20 years after the
      Maoist Red Guards terrorized any individual not totally subservient to the idea of a pure
      theoretical communism, Chinese “millionaires” are emerging in ever-greater numbers.
           Only the future will reveal if the great complexity and integration that seems to make
      societies highly productive and “efﬁcient” can be achieved without the stimulus of
      individual and corporate competitiveness, and without socioeconomic inequalities.



      TRADITIONAL SOCIOCULTURAL TYPOLOGIES

      Analyzing different kinds of societies and comparing them implies that one can put them
      into categories that have some analytical signiﬁcance and then use their similarities and
      differences to focus on the determinants of cultural variation. Such studies are, for obvious
      reasons, almost exclusively the products of highly complex societies.
           The basic issues here are the concepts of “cross-cultural comparisons” and “ethnographic
      analogy.” To what extent can we extrapolate from recent and present societies to the past?
      Archaeologists have been heavily inﬂuenced in their conceptions of ancient cultural complex-
      ity by ethnographers who have studied not just hunter-foragers, but other people who live
      in social organizations and with economies that may resemble those of our extinct ancestors.
           Although the ethnographic categories formulated by anthropologists such as Elman
      Service and Morton Fried were devised principally to classify the diversity of extant and recent

                                                        THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES       287


cultures, their ideas have been widely applied by archaeologists to prehistoric societies. The
use of ethnographic data to categorize ancient societies that exist only as rubble and
discarded artifacts can, of course, be misleading, particularly since “it . . . seems possible
that every hunter-gatherer or tribal society in the world was inﬂuenced to some degree by
contact with technologically more advanced societies prior to ethnographic study.”17
     In some ways social typologies and taxonomies are a hindrance to good archaeological
analysis because they inexactly lump together societies on the basis of unstated and sometimes
irrelevant criteria.18 But almost all archaeologists continue to think of the archaeological
record in terms of three or four basic types of societies. These types are abstractions that
may ﬁt precisely no particular case, especially with regard to extinct societies, but they are
convenient summaries of the kinds of social differences archaeologists think were involved
in the evolution of complex societies.


Egalitarian Societies: Bands and Tribes
As we noted in chapters 3 and 4, the archaeological evidence is undeniable that for the ﬁrst
three million years of our history, we lived in what anthropologists generally—if inexactly
—call band societies. There is great variation19 in these societies, and all have been
inﬂuenced to some extent by industrial cultures. Eskimos who use snowmobiles to hunt
bears and Kalahari Bushmen who steal their neighbors’ cows, for example, are often seen
as distorted remnants of band societies because when ﬁrst described by explorers and
anthropologists, they exhibited far fewer signs of “contamination” by industrial societies.
     Archaeologists have developed a sense of what a “band” society is mainly by distilling
and combining ethnographic studies of societies in many different parts of the world. The
Copper Eskimo, African Pygmies, Kalahari Bushmen, and Australian Aborigines are
usually cited as examples of this social form. In contemporary and recent band societies,
the most salient characteristic seems to be that there are only minor differences among
members of the group in terms of prestige; in these societies no one has any greater claims
to material resources than anyone else. In most of these societies, older males who are good
providers gain the most respect, but they have little or no power to coerce other band
members. This lack of social differentiation is tied to their economy: Band members spend
most of their lives in groups of 15–40 people, moving often as they exploit wild plants
and animals. Julian Steward concluded that most, perhaps all, bands were patrilineal and
patrilocal—that is, people reckoned their descent primarily through their father and
newlyweds lived with the husband’s band.20 Whether or not this is true is still a major issue
in ethnography, and many ethnologists think that band societies can be extremely ﬂexible
in where newlyweds live, for example, based on available resources and other factors.21 In
any case, this is the kind of thing archaeologists can never be sure about when applying the
model of a band society to a scatter of stones and bones. The division of labor in bands is
generally along basic age and sex lines, and the economic structure is a sort of practical
communism: Money is not used, and exchange usually takes place between people who
consider themselves friends or relatives. This gift-giving is usually done very casually, and
relationships are frequently cemented by offers of reciprocal hospitality.
     In the context of the topic of this chapter, the origins of cultural complexity, one of
the most important things about bands is that they appear to be largely functionally
redundant. That is, these individual bands are very much alike in their social organization

288   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      and economy, and each individual is able to do almost everything needed for the group to
      survive and reproduce itself. Each band contains, in the form of its members’ skills, all of
      the expertise it needs to function and persist. As we shall see, it is the change from this kind
      of functional redundancy to functional interdependence that seems to be at the heart of the
      origins of complex societies.
           And, in any case, the question remains: How similar are (or were) these ethnographi-
      cally described groups to our hunter-forager ancestors—whose lives constitute 99 percent
      of our human past?
           Tribe is the rather ambiguous term that anthropologists have used to label social
      groupings that are larger than band societies but generally not particularly complex in
      terms of economy, social hierarchies, law, and so forth. People living in tribes are often
      subsistence farmers, such as the Pueblo Indian maize farmers of the American Southwest
      or New Guinea yam cultivators. Tribes often have a nominal leader—usually male—who
      acts to redistribute food and perform a few minor ceremonial activities, but, as in band
      societies, he has no privileged access to wealth or power. He leads only by example and
      serves at the pleasure of the tribe. Exchange in such societies is still usually accomplished
      through reciprocal trading within a kinship structure. Typically, tribal societies are larger
      and more territorial, have more elaborate ceremonialism and kinship systems, and make
      more distinctions in terms of prestige than band societies.22
           In many cases, tribes may have been transitional forms, appearing where farmers were
      in the transition to more complex forms of social organization, and in some cases tribal socie-
      ties may have been direct outgrowths of the inﬂuences of or contacts with state societies.23


      Stratiﬁed Societies: Chiefdoms
      Timothy Earle deﬁnes chiefdoms as “regionally organized societies with a centralized decision-
      making hierarchy coordinating activities among several village communities.”24 For many
      authorities, “chiefdoms” are different from bands and tribes both in degree and in kind.
      Chiefdoms are based on the concept of hereditary inequality: In a chiefdom, if you are the son
      of a chief, chances are you will become chief no matter how unsuitable you may be; and if
      you are able but born a “commoner,” your options in life will be narrowly circumscribed.
           These differences in prestige usually correlate with preferential access to wealth; chiefs
      and their families can claim the best farmlands or ﬁshing places as well as more food and
      more exotic and expensive items than “commoners.” They are often regarded as divine and
      typically marry within noble families. The economies of these societies often show a greater
      degree of specialization and diversiﬁcation than those of tribes or bands. Craftsmen exist, but
      they are usually also farmers, and there is no permanent class of artisans as there is in states.
      Chiefdoms are much larger than tribes, often involving thousands of people. Examples of
      chiefdoms include the pre-contact Nootka of British Columbia and early Hawaiian societies.
           Earle stresses the ideological bases of chiefdoms. He notes that chiefs typically create
      sacred places, such as ceremonial areas; they also use symbols of individual power and
      position in burial cults, and their mortuary symbolism often includes expressions of military
      might. To some extent, recent archaeological research on chiefdoms has focused on the
      political and ideological activities of chiefs, rather than just the simple deterministic factors
      of agriculture and economy that permit the evolution of chiefdoms.25 In fact, the literature
      on chiefdoms clearly mirrors a major conceptual trend in contemporary archaeology:
      Traditional analyses of chiefdoms have concentrated on the functionalist and adaptive

                                                         THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES        289


aspects of these societies, such as how chiefs may have been responsive to the problem of
redistributing resources in rapidly growing societies; but contemporary approaches26 stress
the varieties of ways in which chiefs gain and maintain control.
     The archaeology of chiefdoms is a particularly valuable endeavor, as Dick Drennan
points out, because in some cases they seem to have been a transitional phase leading to
states, and elsewhere they were “terminal,” in the sense that the indigenous developmental
factors seem to have produced chiefdoms but not states. Drennan defends the use of the
concept of chiefdoms on various grounds. He notes that “Their story is, in one respect, the
story of the emergence of substantial inequality, but it has a number of other aspects as
well, such as spatial and demographic scale, centralization, economic specialization,
exchange, supralocal political organization. . . . Very broadly speaking, these aspects are
known to be correlated with each other.”27


Stratiﬁed Societies: States
What a state is depends to some extent on what an analyst sees as the causal factors in
producing cultural complexity. The term “stratiﬁed” refers to the division of the society
into hierarchically arranged socioeconomic classes and political elites. Generally, states are
assumed to have centralized governments composed of political and religious elites who
exercise economic and political control. In addition to being larger in population and
territory than other societal forms, states are characterized by having full-time craftsmen
and other specialists, whose products are distributed in part through an integrated national
economy. The state codiﬁes and enforces laws, drafts soldiers, levies taxes, and exacts tribute.
States have powerful economic structures, often centered on market systems, and they have
a diversity of settlement sizes, such as villages, towns, and sometimes cities.
     Wright and Johnson, for example, deﬁne the state in terms of a political polity that has
at least three levels in the decision-making hierarchy, such as village headmen, provincial
governor, and national leader.28
     Early states formed essentially independently in at least six areas of the ancient world:
Mesopotamia, Egypt, the Indus Valley, China, Mesoamerica, and Peru; ethnographic and
historical accounts of state formation include cases in Africa, Madagascar, and various
other places (Figure 7.2).
     Scholars use the same term, “state,” to refer both to ancient Egypt and to the United
States, for example, despite their gross differences in complexity. Yet in a sense the
differences between ancient Egypt and the modern United States are matters of degree. The
level of occupational specialization in the contemporary United States is much greater than
in ancient Egypt, of course, but it is mainly an elaboration of the same basic economic
principle. Some scholars, however, use the term “preindustrial state” to distinguish ancient
states from those of the industrial era.
     Many of the early states seem to have been involved in competitive relationships with
other, adjacent states, and for long periods this apparently limited their size and power. Even-
tually, however, in all the early centers of state formation these competitive relationships
broke down and one state was able to increase its size and inﬂuence drastically—usually so
rapidly that it had few competitors. In fact, its ultimate size seems to have been limited only
by the level of its communications technology and its administrative efﬁciency.
     States of this type ﬁrst appeared in Mesopotamia, Egypt, and the Indus Valley toward
the end of the fourth millennium b.c. and within a thousand years thereafter in China. The

           290       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


 THE WORLD




                                                                        1                        4
                                                                  2               3
                           6
                               5




                                   7




                                                                            0         2,000 mi
                                                                            0   2,000 km




                                             1 = Mesopotamia    4 = China              6 = Teotihuacan and the Aztec
                                             2 = Egypt          5 = Olmec and Maya     7 = Wari, Tiwanaku, and the Inka
                                             3 = Indus Valley

FIGURE 7.2 Locations of some of the world’s ﬁrst highly complex civilizations and states.

                     Inka state of Peru and the Aztec state of Mexico also seem to have achieved imperial
                     dimensions just before the arrival of the Europeans, in the sixteenth century a.d.


                     CONTEMPORARY APPROACHES TO SOCIOCULTURAL
                     TYPOLOGY

                     Rather than think of the archaeological record primarily in terms of bands, tribes, chiefdoms,
                     and states, it is probably more accurate to see the record as a great continuum of variability,
                     reﬂecting the unique ﬂexibility that humans bring to any situation. We can be certain the
                     australopiths had no academic conferences on mathematics or international labor federa-
                     tions, and no great ancient state was founded principally on caribou hunting. But most
                     other generalizations about these social typologies are likely to be imprecise.
                          The important point here is that simple categories such as “bands,” “tribes,” “chiefdoms,”
                     and “states” are static descriptive types that are not of much use in analyzing the origins
                     and functions of the phenomena these labels loosely describe. Labeling ancient Egypt a
                     “state,” for example, based on the inferred appearance of characteristics such as centralized
                     government or a class-structured society, is more a description than an analysis. To many
                     scholars such typologies are inexact, atheoretical categorizations of a continuous and
                     multidimensional underlying variability. McGuire argues that such “an approach inevit-
                     ably degenerates into taxonomic arguments: What is a simple society? What is a state?”29

                                                          THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES         291


     How do we decide where to draw a boundary line that deﬁnes a “state” in such a
pattern of continuous variability? The critical problem with these archaeological analyses
of cultural variability is that there is no powerful theory that tells us what the proper units
of analysis are and what principles explain their functions. Compare this situation to
biology: Darwinian theory and modern genetics give biology a powerful explanatory theory
that reveals much about the history and operations of the biological universe. Darwinian
theory and modern genetics tell the researcher what units to use (genes, cells, populations,
etc.) and explain change over time and space in the biological universe. Archaeology has
no comparable theories and thus has no comparably effective units or principles of analysis.
Some scholars argue that because archaeology deals with people (even if they are dead) and
unique cultures (even if they are extinct), it will never be possible to have comparably
powerful theories. Others argue that we already have the beginnings of powerful theories—
a position discussed later in terms of Marxism and Cultural Evolutionary theory.
     In the face of these ambiguities, many archaeologists have resorted to trying to break
down typologies as exempliﬁed by the “bands,” “tribes,” “chiefdoms,” and “states” paradigm
and to examine the underlying variability in selected aspects of societies. Numerous
archaeologists, for example, have focused on the concepts of specialization and exchange.
Cathy Costin,30 for example, has developed a complex categorization of how societies
produce and distribute goods and services. Similarly, Elizabeth Brumﬁel and Timothy Earle
break down the concept of occupational specialization into at least four dimensions:
(1) specialists can be independent or attached, in the sense that a potter, for example, can
supply pots for an unspeciﬁed, changing market, perhaps just for members of his or her
own village, or for the larger region; or the potter can be attached to a particular patron
and make ceramics only for a given noble family or governing institution; (2) specialists
differ in the nature of their products, in that they can produce subsistence items, such as grain;
wealth, such as ritual feather headdresses or gold bracelets; or services, such as military duty
or religious ceremonies; (3) specialists differ in the intensity of production, in that they could
be part-time hunters, who contribute an occasional deer to the village economy, or full-
time weavers, who do little else but produce textiles for trade; (4) specialists also differ in
the scale of production, in the sense that in some economies a large group of people, or a
village, or even a region may specialize in something, such as salt production, while in other
cases, one or two people may produce a particular good or service.31 Brumﬁel and Earle also
note that there are many different kinds of exchange: between an elite and its supporting
citizenry, among different elites, and in the wide variety of political and social arrangements
in which subsistence goods and nonsubsistence “wealth” can be circulated within and
among communities, regions, and larger political entities.
     Another aspect of contemporary rethinking of typologies of ancient societies has to
do with the notion of the “collapse” of civilizations. Many scholars over the centuries have
thought of civilizations almost as if these societies were organisms, with a birth, life span,
and death, or collapse. And there certainly are some examples in the past of cultures that
appear to have quickly and pervasively lost some of their unique, fundamental cultural
expressions, such as the Maya civilization of Mesoamerica (see chapter 13). But in most
cases the collapse of civilizations seems to involve not a collapse and mass extinction of
people and their cultural ideas, but rather adaptation, sometimes in the form of a process—
to use Mark Kenoyer’s terms32—of decentralization and localization, in which political
authorities lose their ability to control people and economies. These periods of
decentralization can in fact involve periods of population growth, rather than decline, and

292   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      in many cases decentralization was followed by a larger, more politically potent polity in
      the same area. We will return to this point in later chapters.
           Recently, archaeologists have also moved beyond the typology of “bands,” “tribes,”
      “chiefdoms,” and “states” by developing models that feature the actions of people—thereby
      offering interpretations that cross-cut the static categories of “bands,” “tribes,” “chiefdoms,”
      and “states.” One example is the work of Gary Feinman and his colleagues in the American
      Southwest.33 They use the concepts of corporate and network strategies of political action,
      which allow for the concurrent presence of equality and hierarchy in any society, regardless
      of whether it is classiﬁed as complex or simple in terms of social organization. A network
      strategy is characterized by a centralized leadership and access to wealth is held by only a
      few people in the society. These individuals use their networks to maintain and increase
      their authority and power and may hold ostentatious displays or adorn themselves
      ostentatiously with prestige items. A corporate strategy, on the other hand, is typiﬁed by
      much wider access to wealth among the people of that society and power and authority
      tends to be shared among many individuals. Societies with a corporate strategy have
      communal projects such as rituals—fertility, rainfall, successful hunts—focused on beneﬁts
      to all members of society, as well as the construction of public works. Corporate societies
      are integrated through the use of ideology. But such societies are not necessarily egalitarian;
      hierarchies do exist, such as differences in inﬂuence and authority between various social
      groups.
           Analyses such as that of Feinman and his colleagues demonstrate the potential for
      considering the highly variable nature of how human societies are organized. We will
      undoubtedly see additional examples of these cross-cutting sociocultural typologies as
      archaeologists continue to focus on the issues involved in the origins of and explanations
      for complex societies.



      THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES

      Archaeologists regularly talk about the band societies of the Middle Pleistocene and the
      early chiefdoms of prehistoric Mesopotamia, but we do not have these societies trapped
      in amber; we have only their artifacts, and we use the words “bands,” “tribes,” “chiefdoms,”
      and “states” to describe them only with some license. To deal with this problem,
      archaeologists typically equate these terms with speciﬁc categories of physical evidence.
           At the heart of many conceptions of cultural complexity is the idea of changing forms
      and levels of matter, energy, and information exchange. Each person and each society exists
      because it is able to divert energy from the natural world, through food sources and
      technology, and some of these changes are selective advantages. The greater the amount
      of energy a culture can capture and efﬁciently utilize, the better its competitive chances.
      And we can measure this in part by measuring such variables as population density and
      agricultural and commodity productivity.
           Leslie White’s equation of cultural evolution, with the amount of energy captured per
      person per year, has been widely criticized, but it remains of interest.34 The fundamental
      data of archaeology are usually the stones and pots and other implements with which
      people converted energy to their purposes—the very appliances of energy use, in other

                                                        THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES         293


words, that White stressed. And
every early state left a record of its
economic basis in the form of such
things as irrigation canals, stone
tools, and agricultural ﬁelds. Yet
in essence every ancient state was
also an idea. The Egyptians viewed
their state and culture metaphoric-
ally as a living organism, an organ-
ism of which they were all a part,
from the pharaoh himself to the
lowliest slave. As Egyptologist
Barry Kemp has noted, for example,
the ancient Egyptians’ vision of
their state as an organism is vividly
portrayed on the throne base
of Pharaoh Senusret I (1971–
1928 b.c.) (Figure 7.3). Here, two
potent competing Egyptian deities,
Seth and Horus, are shown tying
together the plants symbolic of
Upper (southern) and Lower
(northern) Egypt, the lotus and
the papyrus, respectively, recon-
ciling their conﬂicting powers and
thereby forming the Egyptian                FIGURE 7.3 Two potent competing Egyptian deities, Seth and Horus, shown
state. Note that the plants and the         tying together the plants symbolic of Upper and Lower Egypt.
column supporting the name of
the king (in the “cartouche,” or
the oval inscribed around the letters in the king’s name) form a vivid representation of a
human windpipe and lungs—a person, for all intents and purposes.
      All other early states had a similar intellectual foundation—an ideology that embraced
the people and elements of the state. For all early states, the process of analyzing them
archaeologically requires that the material remains of these cultures be interpreted in the
context of their ideologies.


Architecture
Perhaps the most obvious differences between the archaeological record of the Pleistocene
and that of the last ﬁve or six millennia is the presence in the latter period of massive
amounts of residential and public architecture. All early states built palaces and tombs
(Figure 7.4); hunter-gatherers occasionally built permanent structures but rarely on the
same scale as agriculturalists.
    The appearance of substantial houses and other forms of residential architecture is
mainly a reﬂection of economic productivity: If a group produces or gathers sufﬁcient
resources within a small enough area, it can become sedentary, and in most climates shelter

           294       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                   from rain, sun, heat, cold, and
                                                                                   other elements is worth the cost
                                                                                   and effort required to build it.
                                                                                         Soon after permanent
                                                                                   communities appeared in both
                                                                                   the Old and New Worlds, the
                                                                                   architecture of these settle-
                                                                                   ments began to reﬂect changing
                                                                                   levels of cultural and social
                                                                                   complexity. Whereas the ﬁrst
                                                                                   houses in all communities
                                                                                   were probably built very much
                                                                                   alike and had the same con-
                                                                                   tents, later communities incor-
                                                                                   porated residences that varied
                                                                                   considerably in expense of
                                                                                   construction and furnishing.
FIGURE 7.4 The mudbrick wall of the Early Dynastic Shunet al-Zebib (the funer-     Ethnographic evidence leaves
ary enclosure of King Khasekhemwy) at Abydos, Egypt.                               little doubt that this architec-
                                                                                   tural variability reﬂects eco-
                                                                                   nomic, social, and political
                      differentiation within the community, but the essential point is that, relative to earlier
                      societies, there was a change in patterns of investment of societal energy and resources.
                           Similarly, once residential architectural variability appeared in many of these early
                      communities, “monumental” architecture also appeared. Pyramids, earthen or brick
                      platforms, “temples,” “palaces,” and other constructions protrude from the ruins of ancient
                      settlements from North China to the high mountain valleys of Peru. Here, too, the
                      important thing is that the ability and incentive to make these investments are radically
                      different from the capacities of Pleistocene bands, in that they imply the ability of some
                      members of the society to control and organize others.


                     Mortuary Evidence
                     For much of its early history archaeology was almost synonymous with grave-robbing. Its
                     early practitioners were primarily concerned with ﬁnding ancient burials so that they could
                     loot the beautiful goods that people so often have lavished on their departed.
                           Objects carefully enclosed in burials are often much better preserved than those found
                     in houses or tool-making sites. Also, death for our ancestors, as for ourselves, was invested
                     with more ritual than any other cultural aspect. In many burials we have, so to speak, the
                     crystallization of complex religious and social forces, as well as reﬂections of social status.
                     It is in their great variability that mortuary customs are so informative: Corpses can be
                     buried, burned, ritually exposed, or entombed; they can be laid out ﬂat, on their sides, or
                     ﬂexed; they can be oriented to the cardinal points of the compass or to a geographical
                     feature; they can be placed in earth, in caves, in crypts, in trees, or on refuse heaps. Burial
                     contents can range from nothing to enormous quantities of jewelry and furnishings and
                     scores of sacriﬁced human attendants and animals (Figure 7.5).

                                                         THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES          295


     It is a fundamental archaeological assumption that a
correlation exists between the level of social complexity of a
people and the way they treat their dead.35 Ethnographic
studies show that the correlation between subsistence strategy,
social organization, and mortuary practices is strong: Bands
and tribes differed comparatively little in mortuary practices,
while sedentary agriculturalists varied their practices accord-
ing to a wide range of age, sex, and status distinctions.36 These
correlations are strong but not perfect: In some cultures,
including our own, some of the most important and wealthiest
people are cremated and leave no material record of their
passing, their status, or their wealth.
     The presence of juveniles buried with rich grave goods has
been given considerable importance in deﬁning the cultural
complexity of ancient societies because such burials are
considered indications of ascribed status: We assume that
young individuals could not have earned these goods on their
own. Similarly, some ancient cemeteries have three or four            FIGURE 7.5 Excavations at Ur in Mesopotamia
distinct classes of burials. Some types are well constructed of       by Sir Leonard Woolley revealed the “death pit”
stone, have rich grave goods, and are centrally located, while        in the tomb of Queen Pu-abi, which contained
others are simple graves with little in them except the corpse.       the bodies of dozens of her retainers.
And it is a reasonable inference that these divisions correspond
to different economic and social classes.37


Functional Differentiation and Integration
In chapter 15 we will see that the aboriginal Americans of the Mississippian culture who
built the huge mounds that dot the eastern North American river valleys had great trade
systems, intensive maize agriculture, thousands of inhabitants, and a mortuary cult that
involved human sacriﬁce and great expenditures of wealth on dead leaders—yet most
archaeologists do not consider that these societies constituted “states” because these Native
Americans were almost all full-time maize farmers, with only a few specialists: in religion,
hunting, warfare, and other areas. In some deﬁnitions of cultural complexity, the essential
component is the division of a community into functionally interdependent entities of such
complexity that no small group of people can maintain all that community’s activities. This
is important because it produces a situation in which societies survive or die out as societies,
as groups; in contrast, among hunter-gatherers the focus of selection is usually the
individual, or at most the 12 or 15 people with whom each individual spends most of the
year. In other words, the unit of “selection” changes with cultural complexity. Contempor-
ary North Americans, for example, are extremely interdependent, in the sense that we are
all reliant for our continued existence as both physical individuals and social organizations
on the 3 or 4 percent of the population that produces nearly all our food.
      To translate this sense of functional interdependence into archaeological terms, we
must look for concentrations and distributions of artifacts indicating a certain level of
activity specialization. In early agricultural villages, each house and each group of houses
had approximately the same contents in terms of numbers and types of ceramics, stone

296   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      tools, ﬁgurines, and garbage. But in later, more complex societies we ﬁnd concentrations
      of artifacts that clearly represent such things as pottery or stone-tool manufacturing
      workshops, indicating that people specialized in these activities. Again, we infer that they
      were specialized, but the signiﬁcant point archaeologically is that certain classes of artifacts
      are found in places, volumes, and diversities far different from what would be produced by,
      say, a hunting-and-gathering group. Certain differences will also be evident if we compare
      the contents of settlements. Some settlements might specialize in salt-making, or barley
      agriculture, or pottery manufacture. This variability in the artifacts found within discrete
      but contemporary sites is a key element in our identiﬁcation of cultural complexity.


      Settlement Patterns
      In addition to measuring social complexity by looking at objects excavated at speciﬁc sites,
      we can also look at how settlements are distributed spatially. First, we can examine
      variability in settlement size and conﬁguration. Early Southwest Asian agricultural villages
      were almost all approximately the same size, but settlements there several thousand years
      later were of many different sizes, ranging from a few hundred square meters to several
      square kilometers. Similarly, the basic shape of the settlements changed; some were
      apparently fortiﬁed rectangular compounds, while others were just ﬁve or six mudbrick
      houses. Thus, any archaeological analysis of cultural complexity will involve measuring the
      variability in site size and shape in a large sample of contemporary sites.
           Second, we can look at the placement of settlements relative to the environment and
      to each other. A major part of the cost of exploiting any resource is the distance it must be
      transported. This applies equally to the deer hunted by Paleolithic bands and the irrigated
      rice of ancient China. It also applies to the cost of making decisions about resource pro-
      duction, movement, and storage. With primitive communications systems, for example, an
      ofﬁcial in one settlement cannot make many timely decisions about the agriculture or craft
      production of 30 or 40 other settlements many kilometers away because the cost of
      gathering the relevant information and accurately and rapidly acting on it is too high: He
      would need teams of observers and relay runners.
           As a consequence, some arrangements of settlements are more common than others
      under certain conditions, and we can tell something about the relationships between
      settlements by analyzing their respective locations. On a relatively broad agricultural plain,
      towns and villages that exchange goods and services tend to be placed so as to form a pattern
      of interlocking hexagons (Figure 7.6) because this arrangement is especially efﬁcient if there
      is a high level of movement of goods and people among the various settlements.38 In our
      discussion of archaeological evidence relevant to the origins of cultural complexity, we will
      see several instances where ancient settlements are arranged in a hexagonal pattern or some
      other form. Here too it is relatively unimportant whether or not the distribution of ancient
      settlements corresponds exactly to the patterns observed among present ones. What is
      important is that we know a major change in settlement patterning has occurred over time.
      Paleolithic hunters and gatherers and early agriculturalists lived in locations determined
      largely by the availability of material resources. But later, in some areas of the ancient world,
      settlements began to be located with less regard for natural resources and more concern for
      trade routes, political frontiers, and administrative networks. Again, these changes
      occurred in settlements that were also building monumental structures, achieving denser

                                                              THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES          297


population concentrations, and evolving some or all of the
other elements of cultural complexity.
     For these reasons, archaeological settlement pattern
analyses have provided signiﬁcant insights into the nature of
ancient social, political, and economic changes.39
     One of the continuing debates in archaeology is the rela-
tionship of urbanism and state societies. Some civilizations,
such as those in Mesopotamia, seemed to have been formed
out of cities, while others, such as Egypt, remained largely
non-urban for much of their history. Trigger evaluates the
attempts to place examples of the pre-industrial city on a
single continuum and concludes that, while we can identify
key variables that link these examples, the variables combine            FIGURE 7.6 One of the initial archaeological
“to shape an indeﬁnite number of trajectories or paths of pre-           signs of changing levels of complexity in regional
industrial urban development, any one of which may be                    economic and political systems is the appearance
associated with a particular civilization.”40 He identiﬁes three         of settlement patterns in which settlements are
variables of particular importance:                                      arranged spatially in recognizable patterns. The
                                                                         Central Place model suggests that on a ﬂat plain
    (1) The degree of economic complexity of the society in              where all resources are uniformly distributed, the
    which the city is found, as measured in terms of the degree          settlements will be arranged in different patterns
    of division of labour in craft production, the increasing            depending on the strength of marketing, transport,
    number of people divorced from food production . . . , and           administrative, and other factors. No perfectly
    the increasingly large areas and numbers of people that are          uniformly endowed plains exist, of course, but
    effectively linked by routine economic interaction . . . ; (2)       actual maps of archaeological settlements can
    the different strategies by which urban dwellers obtain food         be matched against the theoretical ideal and
    from their hinterland . . . ; (3) The political context within       similarities noted to these ideal models. The
    which cities occur.41                                                hexagonal areas surrounding the settlements in
It may seem as if the elements of cultural complexity we have            the models here are produced by assuming that
sketched here are mainly found in the urban centers and                  on a featureless plain each settlement would have
                                                                         a circular area around it, the inhabitants of which
ceremonial centers of early states, but this is not so. In Egypt,
                                                                         would go to the center for goods and services. But
for example, the remains of tiny provincial villages appear to           since a plain packed with such circular “demand
reﬂect a simple agrarian life, undisturbed by the events and             zones” would leave some areas outside these
forces emanating from the center of the Egyptian state; but a            circles, the theoretical model assumes that the
closer look at the remains of these provincial communities               circles are slightly overlapped and that the over-
reveals many reﬂections of the state as a whole. Artifact styles         lapping areas are bisected. The resulting ﬁgures
are those of every other community in the state, inscribed               are hexagons. Modern settlement maps as well as
clay commodity sealings bespeak a commercial connection to               archaeological site maps for a given area often
the royal court, and trade items reﬂect standardization and              roughly approximate the variations of hexagonal
integration into the national and international economy.                 distributions illustrated here. Here some of the
Similar patterns are observed in most early states.42                    major settlements of the Maya in lowland Mexico
                                                                         were spaced in an hexagonal arrangement.
     To summarize archaeological approaches to determining
cultural complexity, we have several speciﬁc lines of evidence:
We can look for changes in architecture, technology, mortuary complexes, and settlement
size and location; and we can attempt to link these changes to different levels and forms of
energy and information usage and overall thermodynamic capture.
     Most of the rest of this book is a summary of how different cultures in various parts
of the world made the transition to complexity, and this summary is based on these forms

298   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      of evidence of evolving complexity. But before considering the speciﬁcs, let us look ﬁrst at
      the general problem of explaining these evolutionary patterns. As in the case of the origins
      of cultural behavior itself, and the appearance of agricultural economies, we would like to
      have some kind of theoretical constructs that will help tie all these separate early states
      together as members of a class and then will account for the time and location of their
      appearance.



      EXPLAINING THE EVOLUTION OF CIVILIZATIONS:
      THE SEARCH FOR CAUSES

      The earliest scholars believed the rise of cities and states and other elements of evolving
      cultural complexity required no explanation because they assumed these developments to
      be mainly or entirely the work of the gods. The scholars of the Enlightenment and
      subsequent centuries usually explained the origins of cultural complexity in evolutionary
      terms. Drawing a parallel with the biological world, Europeans felt that competition
      between human societies was inevitable and that to a large extent they had already “won.”
           Darwin thought that “civilized nations are everywhere supplanting barbarous nations,
      excepting where the climate opposes a deadly barrier; and they succeed mainly, though not
      exclusively, through their arts, which are the products of the intellect. It is, therefore, highly
      probable that with mankind the intellectual facilities have been gradually perfected through
      natural selection.”43 John Locke saw the cultures of North America as exemplifying a moral
      and philosophical lesson:

          There cannot be a clearer demonstration of [European cultural superiority] than . . . [the]
          several nations of the Americans . . . , who are rich in land and poor in all the comforts of
          life; whom nature having furnished as liberally as any other people, with the materials of
          plenty, i.e. a fruitful soil, apt to produce in abundance, what might serve for food, raiment,
          and delight; yet for want of improving it by labor, have not one hundredth part of the
          conveniences we enjoy; and a king of a large and fruitful territory there, feeds, lodges, and
          is clad worse than a day-labourer in England.44

      Even in the early part of the twentieth century, many scholars believed that the process of
      cultural evolution of the whole world was to some extent a result of the rise of the West.
      The ancient states of China, India, and even the Americas were thought to have been
      prodded to higher achievements by contact with the European/Middle Eastern core areas.
      Thor Heyerdahl’s expeditions, for example, perpetuate this notion that all civilizations are
      derived from a Middle Eastern, or at least Old World, source.
           The coincidence of the village farming way of life with the rise of cultural complexity
      represented to some scholars a sufﬁcient explanation of the evolution of cultural
      complexity. People then ﬁnally had enough leisure time and sedentary habits, it was argued,
      to develop architecture, art, writing, cities, and the rest of “civilization.” The problems with
      this explanation are apparent even with a superﬁcial examination. Many agricultural groups
      apparently never developed into “states,” while at least one early complex culture (in Peru)
      may have evolved without a primary agricultural economy. In any case, many hunters and
      gatherers have more leisure time than did primitive agriculturalists.

                                                       THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES       299


Techno-Ecological Hypotheses About the Origins of
Civilizations
For many analysts of early civilizations, the search for an explanation of how these cultures
evolved in highly similar yet distinctive ways logically should begin with a consideration of
these similarities and differences. What, in other words, did these early civilizations share
in the way of, for example, climate, ecology, demographics, or any other factors, that might
explain why it was Mesopotamia, Egypt, the Indus Valley, China, Mesoamerica, and
Andean South America that gave rise to the ﬁrst great states and civilizations, and not
Australia, Polynesia, Scandinavia, California, Japan, or Scotland?
     If you knew nothing about the archaeology of early complex cultures and began to
compare them, chances are you would be struck by the same facts that so forcefully
impressed Julian Steward, V. G. Childe, and other early scholars who studied the problem
of cultural complexity origins: Most of these cultures developed in similar physical
environments and were based on similar economies.45 The earliest states and empires arose
for the most part in arid or semi-arid environments where crops like wheat and barley could
be grown without having to turn over thick grasslands or ﬁght back lots of competing
vegetation and where agricultural production could be easily intensiﬁed, either by canals,
terracing, building up ﬁelds in lake beds, or some other method.
     Thus, you might look for one or two key factors that had operated in each of these early
societies to cause civilization in a rather mechanical fashion, in which these civilizations
were the outcome of the proper mix of population growth, agricultural intensiﬁcation,
trade, and the peculiarities of the human mind.
     In some ways it is easy to imagine societies becoming more complex once the ﬁrst
elements of complexity are in place. A powerful chief, for example, could become a national
king if he were successful in battle and conquered a large, exploitable hinterland like the
Mesopotamian Alluvium. And once a city had organized its production and distribution
of pottery and grain, it seems an easy step to extend these administrative institutions to
ﬁsh, beer, plows, and tax revenues; and once the ﬁrst royal tombs ﬁlled with grave gifts are
constructed, the building of great mortuary pyramids seems a fairly simple extension of
the basic idea.
     But what could produce the ﬁrst irrevocable breaks with the strong traditions of
practical communism and social equality of the ﬁrst agricultural communities?
     To begin with the most obvious factor, as noted earlier, even though intensive
agriculture is the foundation of almost all early complex cultures, it is not a sufﬁcient
explanation in and of itself. Therefore most attempts to understand the origins of com-
plexity try to link speciﬁc agricultural patterns with other factors. Anthropologist Stephen
Athens notes that agriculture is an effort to maintain an artiﬁcial ecosystem, and in some
climates, such as arid or temperate environments, the plowing, irrigating, and other efforts
needed to maintain agricultural ecosystems are so great that it is doubtful that “the more
intense forms of agricultural production would be developed or become adopted unless
there was a compelling reason to do so.”46 Athens maintains (as does Ester Boserup)47 that
the only reason sufﬁcient to account for the enormous efforts required to maintain agri-
cultural systems would be an imbalance between the population and available food supply.
     In both arid and temperate environments, annual agricultural production can vary
greatly because of crop disease, weather, and other factors, and there is some incentive to

300   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      try to stabilize production in these areas by intensive weeding, land leveling, augmenting
      the irrigation system, and other tasks that require a great deal of labor. In arid, semi-arid,
      and temperate regions, the growing season is often sharply restricted by the weather, and
      thus “cultivation . . . does not permit cycling of plantings in such a way as to equalize the
      labor requirement throughout the year.”48 Each spring, for example, many different
      activities might have to be performed to avoid poor harvests, and under these conditions,
      according to Athens, there is a strong selection for certain kinds of cultural complexity.
      Increasing the territorial size of the cultural system would help meet crises brought on by
      a ﬂood or some other disaster striking a single village; individuals and villages might also
      become specialized in trades and crafts to make production more efﬁcient; and, perhaps
      most important, it would be advantageous to have a hierarchical administrative
      organization, so that work and production could be closely and efﬁciently administered.
            Many explanations of the evolution of complex societies combine certain forms of
      agricultural intensiﬁcation with population growth. But what causes human population
      growth? The immediate cause of population growth is well-known, but the more important
      question is: What are the causes and effects of the gradual rise in population densities and
      total population that all early civilizations experienced? George Cowgill remarked that
      many analysts of cultural evolution have assumed that a pervasive and powerful factor in
      human history has been the strong tendency of human populations to increase up to the
      point where serious shortages of important resources are in the ofﬁng and that experience
      or anticipation of such shortages has been a major factor, or even the dominant factor, in
      stimulating intensiﬁcation of agricultural production and other technical and social
      innovations. In extreme versions, the entire history of complex societies and civilizations
      is seen as hardly more than the outcome of measures that began as ways of coping with
      problems posed by relentless human fertility—what might be called the “strictly from
      hunger” point of view of developmental processes.49
            It is easy to see the attractiveness of these ideas, for if one examines history, a strong
      positive statistical correlation between population growth and cultural complexity is
      evident. The relationship between human population growth and cultural complexity
      may not be one of direct cause and effect, however, for correlation does not necessarily
      demonstrate causation. Moreover, even if the relationship is in some sense causal, it may
      be that the evolution of cultural complexity leads to rising population densities, rather than
      the reverse. Empirically, too, there seem to be some problems with the idea that human
      population growth somehow caused the evolution of cultural complexity. All societies have
      evolved mechanisms like migration, abortion, infanticide, marriage rules, and contracep-
      tive techniques to control population growth, and thus we might expect people faced with
      stresses because of overpopulation to impose population controls rather than “invent”
      cultural complexity.50
            It is worth noting that the greatest recent falls in fertility rates come not as the result
      of food shortages or technical advances in contraception, but as correlates of increasing
      educational levels for women, greater social mobility, increasing urbanization, the
      expanding role of women in the work force—in sum, the lessening of women’s dependence
      on husbands and children for support.
            The actual causal mechanisms by which these factors are translated into reduced
      fertility are not clear, however. In any case, there is no evidence human populations have
      ever increased at anything approaching the biologically feasible rate. If the world’s

                                                          THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES          301


population 5,570 years ago were only 1,000 people and their annual rate of increase since
then were 4 per 1,000 people—a relatively moderate growth rate—the world’s present
population would be between seven and eight trillion. Obviously, human populations in
the past have been under fairly stringent natural and cultural controls, and if we are to link
population growth to increasing cultural complexity, we must specify additional factors or
principles in causal “models” of how these variables were related.
     It should be stressed, however, that most of the following “models” of cultural
evolution are relatively simple, and many current scholars consider them incomplete or
ﬂawed as explanations of early complexity.

IRRIGATION AGRICULTURE AND THE EVOLUTION OF CULTURAL
COMPLEXITY
Perhaps the most obvious common denominator of ancient complex societies was extensive
irrigation systems. Even today aerial photographs of Mesopotamia, Peru, and most other
areas of early state formation clearly show the massive remnants of these ancient structures,
and similar constructions were built by early “chiefdoms” in such places as Hawaii and
southwestern North America (Figure 7.7). This led some scholars to conclude that the
construction and operation of extensive irrigation systems were at the heart of the origins
of complex societies. A particularly inﬂuential proponent of this view was Karl Wittfogel,
whose Oriental Despotism is a detailed excursion into comparative history and sociological
analysis.51
     Wittfogel notes that the limiting factors on agriculture are soil conditions, tempera-
ture, and the availability of water. Of these, water is the most easily manipulated, but its
weight and physical characteristics impose limitations on this manipulation. To divert
water to agricultural ﬁelds requires canal systems, dams, and drainage constructions that
can only be built efﬁciently with
organized mass labor; and,
once built, irrigation systems
require continued enormous
investments of labor and
resources to operate, clean, and
maintain them. In addition,
these systems necessitate com-
plex administration and com-
munication because crucial
decisions have to be made
about construction and repairs,
water allocation, and crop
harvesting and storage. Thus, a
complex irrigation system under
ancient conditions required
cooperation and centralized
hierarchical decision-making
institutions.                         FIGURE 7.7 The Hohokam of Arizona built an extensive canal system to carry
     Irrigation systems also          water to their agricultural ﬁelds. Some of these can still be seen today as large
have the intrinsic capacity to        “ditches,” only partially ﬁlled in after hundreds of years of abandonment.

302   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      create another element in the process of the evolution of complex societies: wealth and
      status differentials. Fields closer to main rivers are better drained and more easily irrigated
      and possess a higher natural fertility; thus control of such lands would create immediate
      wealth differentials. Correspondingly, wealth and status would most likely accrue to the
      elites of the decision-making hierarchies. Wittfogel concludes that irrigation-based
      agriculture has many other effects on a society. It encourages the development of writing
      and calendrical systems, so that records can be kept of periods of annual ﬂooding,
      agricultural production statistics, the amounts of products in storage, and the allocation of
      water. Construction of roads, palaces, and temples would also be encouraged because the
      mobilization of labor for the canal works could be generalized to these other endeavors very
      easily, and roads would contribute to the movement of agricultural produce and to the
      communication required for efﬁcient operation of the systems. The construction of
      temples and palaces would also serve to reinforce the position of the hierarchy. The creation
      of standing armies and defensive works would also likely follow because irrigation systems
      are extremely valuable but not very portable, and they are easily damaged by neglect or
      intentional destruction.
           Wittfogel’s hydraulic hypothesis still has some currency, but there seem to be logical
      and empirical problems with his ideas as a general model of the origins of cultural
      complexity. Simple societies in several parts of the world have been observed operating
      extensive irrigation works with no perceptible despotic administrative systems or rapid
      increases in social complexity.52 More damaging to Wittfogel’s hypothesis is the scarcity of
      archaeological evidence of complex irrigation systems dating to before, or to the same time
      as, the appearance of monumental architecture, urbanism, and other reﬂections of
      increasing cultural complexity, in Southwest Asia and perhaps other areas where complex
      societies appeared independently and early.
           Nonetheless, the difﬁculties of dating irrigation canals, inadequate archaeological
      samples, and other deﬁciencies of evidence are such that we cannot conclude that irrigation
      was unimportant in virtually any case of early cultural complexity.


      WARFARE, POPULATION GROWTH, AND ENVIRONMENTAL
      CIRCUMSCRIPTION
      “War is the father of all things,” said Heraclitus, and, given its frequency in human affairs,
      we should not be surprised that many scholars see warfare as a natural adjunct of
      population growth in driving cultural evolution. In the ﬁlm The Third Man, Orson
      Welles—justifying his proﬁteering in postwar Vienna to Joseph Cotton—says, “in Italy
      for 30 years under the Borgias they had warfare, terror, murder, bloodshed, but they
      produced Michelangelo, Leonardo da Vinci, and the Renaissance. In Switzerland, they had
      brotherly love, they had 500 years of democracy and peace. And what did that produce?
      The cuckoo-clock.”
          Welles’s character was stating what for many is an uncomfortable truth: Human
      competition seems to be a powerful engine of cultural evolution. No early state—not Mexico,
      or China, or Sumer, or Peru—was without a background level of organized violence that
      occasionally erupted into great wars spanning decades.
          Why should this be so? Why doesn’t “natural selection” favor those cultures that
      develop institutions to resolve conﬂicts? Why doesn’t cultural selection seem to give the

                                                          THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES         303


edge to communities that pool their resources to build irrigation canals, establish
universities, and work for world peace?
     Most scholars consider warfare simply a cultural behavior that is elicited by environ-
mental and cultural conditions. Anthropologist Robert Carneiro argues that warfare was the
primary mechanism for the evolution of social complexity in ancient Peru, Mesopotamia,
Egypt, Rome, northern Europe, central Africa, Polynesia, Mesoamerica, Colombia, and else-
where. He believes, however, that “warfare cannot be the only factor. After all, wars have
been fought in many parts of the world where the state never emerged. Thus while warfare
may be a necessary condition for the rise of the state, it is not a sufﬁcient one. Or, to put it
another way, while we can identify war as the mechanism of state formation, we need also
to specify the conditions under which it gave rise to the state.”53 Carneiro sees two such
conditions as essential to the formation of complex societies in concert with warfare:
population growth and environmental circumscription. He notes that human population
densities have been increasing in many areas for millennia, but that only in certain
environmental zones can population growth join with warfare to produce highly complex
early civilizations. These environmental zones are exceptionally fertile areas “circumscribed,”
or surrounded, by areas of lesser productivity such as deserts, mountains, or oceans. As
an example, Carneiro points to the coast of Peru, where approximately 78 rivers run from
the Andes to the ocean through an 80-km stretch of some of the driest deserts on earth
(Figure 7.8). Here, he says, are fertile, easily irrigated strips of land along the rivers, but in
any direction one soon encounters desert, mountains, or the ocean. Similar conditions, he
asserts, prevailed in Mesopotamia, Egypt, and the other centers of early civilizations.
     Again using Peru as an example, Carneiro suggests that shortly after the appearance of
the village farming way of life, these fertile riverine areas were sparsely occupied by small
autonomous villages. He assumes that in such conditions populations grew, and, as these
populations increased, villages tended to divide because of internal conﬂicts and pressure
on agricultural lands. Some of the inhabitants would then establish a new community some
distance away. Such movements were easily accomplished in this early period because there
was no shortage of land and little investment in terracing or irrigation systems. As a
consequence, the number of villages increased faster than village size, and all communities
remained essentially the same in political and social organization.
     Eventually, however, given this constant population growth and the proliferation of
villages, all the land that could be irrigated and exploited easily became occupied, and the
expanding population rapidly began to outrun the available food supplies. Since they could
not move into the sea or deserts or easily colonize the mountains, early Peruvian farmers
chose agricultural intensiﬁcation. They built terraces and irrigation canals and tried to keep
pace with their population growth rates, but they were caught in the classic Malthusian
dilemma: Food supplies can be increased, but not nearly as quickly as population increases.
At this point, Carneiro concludes, people turned to warfare as the only alternative. The
village under the most stress would attack the weakest adjacent village, and the victor would
expropriate the land and harvests of the loser. The conquered people not killed in the
ﬁghting could not simply move away and reestablish their villages, and they could not
emigrate to the highlands because their whole culture was based on the village farming
way of life. They were either taken back to the victors’ village, where they became slaves or
artisans, or they were left as serfs who were taxed so heavily that they had to reduce their
own consumption and intensify their production still further.

304   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY




                                                                                                          Ti
                                                                                                           gr                     Amazon
                                                                                                               e
                                                                               a
                                                                           ron
                                                                         Mo                                                       lquitos
                                     r
                                 ve
                               Ri                              añ on
                                                           Mar                                            ñon
                         ira                                                                        Mar
                                                                                                       a
                       Ch

                                                                                                                ali
         Piura River                            er          er                                              ay
                                              iv         iv                                               Uc
                                           eR         eR
                                         ch        equ
                                    Le        bay
                            La
                                         Lam
                Zaña River
         Jequetepeque River
               Chicama River
                    Moche River
                         Viru River
                         Chao River                           Cal                       Hu
                         Santa River                             lejo                    alla
                                                                                          ga
                        Nepena´ River                               nd
                                         Casma River                   oH
                                                                        uay
                                     Huarmey River
                                                                            las
                                      Fortaleza River                                                  er
                                         Patavilca River                                            Riv r
                                              Supe River                                   i f fon Rive
                                                                                         Ch ima   c
                                             Huaura River                                 R                                                 M
                                              Chancay River                                     M                                            ad
                                                                                                an                                              re
                                                                                                    ta                                               de
                                                              Lima                                   ro                                                   Di
                                                                                                                                                            os
                                                           Lurin River
                                                              ´
                                                            Canete River
                                                              Chincha River                                                     Nou
                  Paciﬁc Ocean
                                                                                                                                   nim
                                                                                                                                      a     Cuzco
                                                                    Pisco River
                                                                                                                           de
                                                                                                                        an
                                                                                                                      Gr iver
                                                                                                                        R
                                                                                   Ica River

                            0                            200 km                                                                              Laka Titicaca


                                                                                                           Acari River
                                              Elevation above 3000 meters



                                                                                                                            Moquegua River
                                                                                                                                   Sama River



      FIGURE 7.8 Numerous semi-permanent rivers run from the Peruvian highlands through the arid
      coastal zone to the sea. These rivers allowed people to establish agricultural centers in an otherwise
      inhospitable desert.

                                                         THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES        305


     These developments encouraged the formation of an institutionalized bureaucracy to
administer the taxes and slaves, and the establishment of the bureaucracy in turn intensiﬁed
wealth and status differentials, as the most successful military leaders were given the
administrative posts. In addition, the defeated peoples came to constitute a lower class, and
thus the stratiﬁcation of society increased as the level of warfare rose. Carneiro believes
that warfare continued in Peru until all of each river valley was under the control of one
integrated authority, a development he terms a “state.” Subsequently, again because of the
never-ending pressure of population, these states contended with each other until a whole
series of river valleys was controlled by a single dominant center. Carneiro’s ideas are
diagrammed in Figure 7.9.
     Since many primitive societies had remarkably precise control of their population-
to-resources balance, population growth cannot be regarded as automatic. There is no
demonstrated and inevitable reason why these populations could not have maintained their
size below the stress level rather than resorting to agricultural intensiﬁcation or warfare.
Thus, to strengthen Carneiro’s hypotheses we must stipulate other factors that encouraged
or allowed these presumed growth rates.
     In a reconsideration of Carneiro’s model, David Webster maintains that warfare’s
principal importance in the evolution of the ﬁrst states was the role it played in breaking
down the kinship ties that organized early chiefdoms.54 He notes that chiefdoms apparently
are kept from evolving into states partially because the chief’s power and prestige are tied
to his role as a redistributive head, and if the chief begins to hoard wealth or exploit people,
he begins to lose the support of his kinsmen and deputy rulers. Webster proposes that
warfare produces a potent environment for the evolutionary change to state-level societies
by rendering ineffective many of the internal constraints that keep chiefdoms in a stable
sociopolitical status. Continued warfare between chiefdoms would place great adaptive value
on a stable military leadership, thereby dampening the constant petty squabbles between
rival rulers. A chief who is successful in warfare can also claim more wealth in the form of
booty than he could on the basis of his redistribution of his own society’s production.
     Carneiro’s ideas have stimulated much research55 and seem to have broad applicability
to various cultures.56 But in contemporary archaeology there is a widespread sense that
the key points of analysis in understanding the origins of early states must be at a
socioeconomic and political level, not just demographics, physical environments, and the
assumption of warfare.


EARLY MARXIST AND MATERIALIST EXPLANATIONS OF EARLY CULTURAL
COMPLEXITY
For much of the twentieth century, Marxist social scientists had few doubts about the
proper explanation of the origins of civilization. Friedrich Engels’s remarks at Karl Marx’s
grave expressed this certainty: “As Darwin discovered the law of evolution in organic nature
so Marx discovered the law of evolution in human history.”57
    Despite the collapse of Marxist states all over the world, and despite the interweaving
of Marx’s economic analysis with dubious political polemic, there is no denying the
tremendous inﬂuence Marx’s contributions have had on the analysis of social systems.
    Almost any attempt to sum up Marx’s theories about the origins of cultural complexity
and the dynamics of history necessarily involves great oversimpliﬁcation and arguable

306   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY




      FIGURE 7.9 Several models of the evolution of cultural complexity. In these diagrams Henry
      Wright (1977) has depicted the most important hypothetical cause-and-effect relationships in
      several models of the origins of states and urbanism.

                                                              THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES      307


interpretations. Marx’s famous statement of his basic ideas is worth quoting at length and
studying carefully because it is still one of the most astute and revolutionary observations
on the nature of cultural evolutionary history:
    In the social production of their subsistence men enter into determined and necessary
    relations with each other which are independent of their wills—production-relations which
    correspond to a deﬁnite stage of development of their material productive forces. The sum
    total of these production-relations forms the economic structure of society, the real basis,
    upon which a juridical and political superstructure arises, and to which deﬁnite forms of
    social consciousness correspond. The mode of production of material subsistence
    conditions the social, political and spiritual life-process in general. It is not the con-
    sciousness of men which determines their existence but on the contrary it is their social
    existence that determines their consciousness. At a certain stage of their development, the
    material productive forces of society come in conﬂict with the existing production
    relations, or what is merely a juridical expression for the same thing, the property relations
    within which they operated before. From being forms of development of the productive
    forces, these relations turn into fetters upon their development. Then comes an epoch of
    social revolution. With the change in the economic foundation the whole immense
    superstructure is slowly or rapidly transformed. In studying such a transformation one
    must always distinguish between the material transformation in the economic conditions
    essential to production—which can be established with the precision of the natural
    science—and the juridical, political, religious, artistic, or philosophic, in short ideological
    forms, in which men become conscious of this conﬂict and ﬁght it out. As little as one
    judges what an individual is by what he thinks of himself, so little can one judge such an
    epoch of transformation by its consciousness; one must rather explain this consciousness
    by the contradictions in the material life, the conﬂict at hand between the social forces of
    production and the relations in which production is carried on.58
What all this means in terms of the whole history of complex societies is the point of enough
books to ﬁll a large library, and Marx’s basic premises are being constantly reinterpreted.
Still, many accept as valid the basic tenets of Marxian analyses of history, and there is cer-
tainly great power to some of his ideas.59
      Marx himself, however, had very little to say speciﬁcally about the origins of complex
societies. Much more attention was paid to the problem by later followers of Marx,
particularly Engels and Lenin, and, more recently, V. V. Streuve and I. M. Diakonoff.60
      Until the origins of agriculture, these scholars suggest, all societies were classless, all
goods were shared, no one really owned anything, and all were treated equally. But
gradually, after the achievement of domestication and the agricultural way of life, some
people managed to control more than their fair share of the land, which is of course the
basic source of wealth in an agricultural community. By controlling land, these elites were
able to enslave others and force these people to work the land for them. In time the ruling
classes developed the state, the laws, and the church to justify, protect, and perpetuate their
economic and political privileges. The state is then seen as an exploitative mechanism
created by the elites to control and oppress the workers. Marx promulgated a “labor theory
of value,” according to which capitalists steal much of the value that a worker produces by
paying the worker only a fraction of the value his labor confers on goods and produce and
appropriating the rest.
      According to Marxian theory, every economic system based on the division of society
into socioeconomic classes and on exploitation carries within itself the seeds of its own

308   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      destruction because generally the means of producing wealth constantly improve,
      technologically and otherwise, and at a certain stage outgrow the social system constructed
      on them. Thus, slave societies would eventually give way to feudal societies and, eventually,
      Communist societies will replace capitalist societies.
           I. M. Diakonoff has been the most prominent but traditional Marxist. His model of
      early Mesopotamian state formation rests on the assumption that if wealth differentials can
      arise, they will, and that once these differentials exist, antagonism between socioeconomic
      classes will follow and eventually the state will form to promote and protect the vested
      interests of the ruling class.61
           Economists and others have challenged many of Marx’s ideas, but evidence from early
      Mesopotamian and Egyptian societies does support some aspects of the Marxian recon-
      struction: Wealth differentials developed early and were impressive, and slavery existed, as
      did communal labor pools, warfare, irrigation systems, trade networks, and other elements
      integral to the Marxian scheme. But that is not to say that this scheme is correct or
      complete. Much of it was constructed on the basis of evidence from early documents, and
      some forms of the Mesopotamian state evolved several hundred years prior to writing;
      thus the textual evidence is most likely of only limited relevance to the origins of social
      complexity. More important, it is very difﬁcult to test the Marxian reconstruction with
      archaeological data. Without written records, we cannot conclusively demonstrate class
      conﬂict or slavery, and many of the crucial elements of the Marxian paradigm, such as the
      labor theory of value and the contradictions between economies and their social correlates,
      seem utterly beyond the reach of archaeological research per se. Zagarell uses documents
      from Mesopotamia, however, to show that by the time the ﬁrst extensive texts were written,
      some correspondences do exist between Marxian ideas and what we know from these texts
      about property, the rights of women, and so on.62
           Other scholars have focused on the importance of trade in a Marxian context. Kipp
      and Schortman, for example, argue that an important factor in some cases of early state
      formation was the destabilizing effects markets in luxury goods had on early chiefdoms. In
      chiefdoms personal relationships between elites and the populace are important, but, as
      market economies evolved, chiefs and other elites had an increasingly difﬁcult time trying
      to control these markets: “When leadership is undermined by a market blind to everything
      except proﬁts, policies of systematic impoverishment are as essential to leaders as armies.
      Economic exploitation joins tyranny, and so states are born.”63
           Marvin Harris has tried to combine some of Marx’s ideas with those of Wittfogel,
      Carneiro, and others to formulate a model that, although many reject it, at least has the
      advantages of being stipulated and partially testable with the archaeological data.64
           The big step in Harris’s view is the rise of chiefdoms, which he ties to the appearance
      of “big men,” particularly inﬂuential older men whose advice and guidance the community
      seeks. Village big men act as the “nodes” of three important institutional complexes: They
      intensify production, carry out redistribution of harvest surpluses and trade goods, and use
      their prestige and position to lead the way in ﬁghting or trading with neighboring villages.
           Harris says that simple
          chiefdoms come into being with the ﬁrst intensiﬁer-redistributor-warrior complexes. The
          more production is intensiﬁed, the more there is to redistribute and to trade, the larger the
          population, the more intense the warfare, the more complex and powerful the chieﬂy
          sector. Other things being equal, all such systems tend to move from symmetric forms of

                                                           THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES      309


     redistribution (in which the primary producers get back everything they produce) to
     asymmetric forms (in which the redistributor gets more of what is produced for longer and
     longer periods). Eventually the retained portion of the harvest surplus provides the chief
     with the material means for coercing his followers into further intensiﬁcation.65

If all this is a standard developmental trajectory, why did chiefdoms never appear among
the Eskimo, while they appeared in Melanesia but stabilized at that level of development,
and while they quickly became interregional states in Mesopotamia and many other
areas?
      Harris turns to basic factors of demography, economy, environment, and technology
to answer this question. He suggests that for chiefdoms to appear and then to become states
and empires, the appropriate “energy gates” had to be available: Yams and tubers are poor
energy gates because they do not store well and have no clearly deﬁned harvest period, so
a big man or chief cannot easily shut off the ﬂow of proteins and calories produced by the
farmers; but grains store well and have deﬁned periods of harvest, so a chief with command
of community grain stores absolutely controls the lives of his associates.66
      Harris expects the ﬁrst “pristine” states to arise in areas of sharp ecotones, where there
is good potential for intensifying agriculture, but where away from the agricultural lands
the environment is such that a family would suffer a sharp drop in standard of living if
they moved away.67 Drawing on the work of Robert Carneiro (see earlier), Harris identiﬁes
the sharply circumscribed farmlands of Egypt, Mesopotamia, northern India, the Yellow
River Basin, central highland Mexico, the Peruvian coast, and the Andes highlands as areas
where pristine states could be expected.68 And once pristine states form in an area, their
expansionist tendencies and economic impact act as a “single gigantic ampliﬁer,” as the
whole region is caught in cycles of agricultural intensiﬁcation, population growth, warfare,
and so on.
      Harris’s version of Marxist analysis is rejected by many as being too “vulgar” and
“mechanical,” in that it focuses on demographic and ecological variables and appeals to
these as the primary explanations of differences and similarities in early states.


Contemporary Approaches to the Explanation of the
Evolution of Civilizations
It is better to know some of the questions than
all of the answers.
James Thurber (1894–1961)

Attempts by Childe, Wittfogel, Harris,69 and others to formulate general models of cultural
evolution, on the basis of correlations between techno-environmental and demographic
variables and social and political patterns and processes, stimulated a great deal of creative
research, and there is still much of value about these ideas. But many contemporary
scholars70 argue that identifying correlations between these variables, patterns, and
processes does not and cannot “explain” all the important aspects of the evolution of
ancient civilizations. With the growing appreciation of the limits of techno-ecological
analyses and traditional Marxist approaches, contemporary archaeologists have gone in
many different directions in their approaches to the problem of the origins of civilizations.

310   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      CONTEMPORARY MARXIST PERSPECTIVES
      Many contemporary archaeologists continue to draw inspiration from Marx and his
      theoretical successors. Friedman and Rowlands,71 for example, have interpreted Marx in
      such a way that the focus of the analysis is the social relations of production that economies
      embody, rather than just the blunt forces of technology, environment, and agriculture. Their
      study deﬁes easy translation and summary, but contains at least the following elements.
      Friedman and Rowlands assert that we must “reconstruct the structures of reproduction
      of particular social forms,” which they deﬁne as the “social structures that dominate the
      process of production and circulation and which therefore constitute the socially
      determined form by which populations reproduce themselves as economic entities.”72
            Although Friedman and Rowlands’s complex approach includes much of interest, it
      involves various problems. The primary one is that so much of it seems untestable with the
      archaeological record. Testability with archaeological data cannot, of course, be taken as
      the ultimate criterion of social theory, but archaeologists must try to measure the “ﬁt” of their
      ideas against the reality of the bones and stones they excavate. In Friedman and Rowlands’s
      approach, as in so many Marxist and Structuralist endeavors, causation is expressed in
      terms of dominances and constraints. Friedman and Rowlands say that the physical
      environment, technology, and general economic forces impose a system of constraints
      that make certain kinds of things unlikely to evolve (like a drive-through bank set up and
      frequented by hunter-gatherers); but, working in the opposite direction, the relations of
      production dominate the entire functioning of the system, determining its characteristics
      and developmental pattern. To ﬁnd “relations of production” archaeologically, however,
      and then to demonstrate how they were the causes of other cultural phenomena is difﬁcult.
      In Friedman and Rowlands’s approach, something like an organized system of ancestor
      worship can—in a given society and instance—be the result of a complex of economic
      factors, and in another society and time organized ancestor worship can be a cause of
      economic behavior.
            In general, many contemporary Marxist archaeologists are bound together by several
      basic ideas. One of these involves the rejection of “functionalist” ideas about adaptation.
      We might conclude, for example, that all early civilizations were rigidly stratiﬁed by
      socioeconomic classes because, in the absence of modern communications technology, an
      industrial base, and other means of economic production and social integration like those
      of contemporary societies, ancient civilizations could only organize themselves and
      function efﬁciently if their citizens were born into classes that automatically determined
      what occupational specialty they would perform and what access to wealth, power, and
      prestige they would have. Many Marxists reject this kind of functionalism and adapta-
      tionism on various grounds but particularly because such interpretations are descriptions,
      not explanations, and because they tend to emphasize the stability of these adaptations—
      and in so doing, justify them to some extent. Most forms of Marxism are about the necessity
      and social desirability of radical social change arising out of social conﬂict and inequities.
      It is not surprising, thus, that they see any attempt to interpret the appearance of such
      phenomena as social classes, legal systems, administrative bureaucracies, and so on as
      adaptive responses to problems societies faced as interpretations that obscure the conﬂicts
      and contradictions that are the true forces behind social changes. But contemporary
      Marxist critiques of traditional archaeology go much deeper than this. Marxists reject the

                                                          THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES         311


notion that people in any society are just passive players whose actions and ideas are entirely
the result of external forces. They focus on the social relationships that are the nexus of
interactions among individuals and groups.
     Marxism continues to have a strong inﬂuence on contemporary archaeology, although
Marx himself might not recognize, or might reject, many contemporary applications of his
ideas to the archaeological record. A continuing issue for Marxist archaeologists is the
testability of their ideas in terms of the material remains of the archaeological record. In
the absence of a written language, how are we to know if, for example, overt or institution-
alized class conﬂict, or the subordination of women, or other social behaviors and concepts
were part of the origins of the ﬁrst states in the northern Andes—or anywhere else? If one
rejects the notion that the archaeological record offers the possibility of a scientiﬁc and
empirical test of the validity of any theory of history, however, as some archaeologists do,
then the apparent difﬁculties of relating Marxian ideas to the material record of the past
disappear.
     The details of contemporary Marxist approaches are beyond the scope of this book,
but the interested reader is referred to the bibliography of this chapter for additional
sources on this topic.

THE THEORY OF CULTURAL EVOLUTION
The term theory of cultural evolution is heavily encrusted with past misuse and inappro-
priate applications, and for many scholars it immediately suggests that the analysis will be
based on a false analogy with biology, will invoke sterile social typologies, will rearrange all
human history in a sequence leading to the apex of Western civilization, and will apply
capitalist and colonialist misperceptions to the analysis of history.
     S. Gould summed up this view as follows: “Cultural evolution is not even a good
analogue for biological evolution because it proceeds so much more rapidly and, especially,
because it works by amalgamation and coalescence across lineages—the very topology
precluded on the Darwinian tree of continuous divergence.”73
     The kind of evolutionary theory that some archaeologists now are applying to cultures,
however, is different from the Spencerian forms of traditional neo-evolutionism that was,
in fact, guilty of many of these sins. Evolutionary theory basically concerns the transmission
of traits through time and space, and there is no necessary linkage with biology. As Robert
Dunnell (see earlier) has observed, what matters in evolutionary theory is the mechanisms
by which traits are perpetuated in an individual.74 Nonetheless, the objects that comprise
the archaeological record do not reproduce in the same way that people do, and thus the
rules of genetics cannot be applied; also, whereas change in the biological world is through
the relatively slow processes of genetic mutation, drift, selection, and so on (see chapter 3),
cultural changes can be conveyed quickly and pervasively from one group to another (as
in the spread of agriculture).
     One issue in evolutionary models of cultural complexity involves the scale of selection.
In the biological universe, the transmission of traits takes place at the level of the individual.
The individual genes of the plant or animal do or do not get perpetuated, not the species
as a whole. Therefore, the most productive point at which to analyze a given evolutionary
problem is the transmission of traits from individual to individual. But in cultural situations,
many individual traits, speciﬁcally behavioral ones, are the products of instruction by the

312   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      complete community of parents, teachers, and friends. And people act in corporate groups
      in ways that make these the functional units of the society. For example, in the next chapter
      we will see that religions appeared75 early in all great civilizations and that these formed
      effective ways to get people to act in concert for the corporate good—such as in ﬁghting
      wars, clearing irrigation canals, and building pyramids. To summarize, in the production
      and transmission of cultural characteristics, cultural selection can act on groups as well as
      individuals.
           So, to apply evolutionary theory to archaeological data will require analyzing a great
      diversity of concepts of trait transmission.
           It is also important to note that the cases of cultural evolution detailed in the following
      chapters repeatedly show that cultural evolution is not a continuous, cumulative, gradual
      change, in most places. “Fits and starts” better describes it. In Mesopotamia, the Indus
      Valley, and elsewhere, there is clear evidence of communities that seem on the verge of
      cultural complexity—either to die out without further development or to be overtaken by
      developments in some core area to which they became the periphery.
           The supposed “uniﬁcation” of the Nile Delta and Valley cultures at about 3200 b.c.
      provides a useful example here. This pivotal event in Egyptian history apparently involved
      a process in which the cultural repertoire of the Valley cultures—in terms of artifact styles,
      political ideology, and so forth—was imposed upon, or was integrated into, or largely
      replaced those of the Delta cultures.
           How are we to understand such a process of trait-transmission? And, at a higher level,
      how are we to understand similar processes in other early civilizations? Consider again
      Trigger’s conclusion, quoted earlier, concerning the extremely limited variations in what
      he observed in early states in their most important elements. In trying to account for this
      lack of variation, Trigger appeals to the apparent “efﬁciency” that these basic social and
      political forms must have conferred on their individual cultures. If we accept that
      supposition, the analytical problem then becomes one of understanding and measuring the
      relative efﬁciency of various mechanisms of social forms and phenomena—and the kinds
      of selection that operate on variability, and how that variability is generated in the ﬁrst
      place. If evolutionary theory has any application to the analysis of ancient and modern
      cultures, it would seem to be precisely with regard to these questions of cultural change.
           Most early complex societies, for example, underwent a transition in which labor-
      intensive, highly decorated pottery was replaced by mass-produced forms of much less
      aesthetic appeal. Various scholars have seen cultural collapse and dissolution in such
      changes, but as Trigger notes, this replacement does “not indicate a decline in cultural or
      aesthetic standards. Instead it suggests that pottery no longer served as a medium of artistic
      expression.”76 In fact, the appearance of these mass-produced forms of pottery seems to be
      a prime indicator of increasing complexity in the institutions administering and controlling
      craft production. G. Johnson, R. McC. Adams,77 and others have concluded that the rapid
      development of Southwest Asian states occurred during the period when the beautiful
      painted wares of the early fourth millennium were largely replaced by the unimpressive,
      mass-produced unpainted pottery. Egyptian pottery seems to have made a parallel
      transition in the Early Dynastic and Old Kingdom periods, when various low-ﬁred wares
      including “bread molds” were the dominant ceramic types.
           Several factors may explain these dramatic changes in pottery manufacture. The
      individual and corporate social groups identiﬁed by regional pottery styles, for example,

                                                         THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES        313


are, in a sense, dangerous expressions of individualism and group distinctiveness that
detract from the unity of the larger state, and it is possible that these states suppressed some
expressions of group identity not derived from the state structures. The greater efﬁciency,
too, of producing massive quantities of cheap and nearly identical pottery vessels would be
best realized in a state organization.
     The formulation of a powerful evolutionary theory will require that we avoid the naive
“functionalism” of early versions of cultural evolutionism: that is, that evolutionary theory
must supply some explanation for cultural change other than that a given cultural
characteristic made a positive contribution to a culture’s efﬁciency of adaptation.

CRITIQUES OF COMPARATIVE APPROACHES
Shanks and Tilley, for example, suggest that cross-cultural generalizations are not only
misguided but also result from conscious or unconscious attempts to further the cause of
Western imperialism.78 In contrast to materialist deterministic models, Giddens79 and
many others have emphasized the power of sociopolitical factors over economic factors as
determinants of the character and histories of pre-industrial class-based societies. “Post-
processualists” and “post-modernists,” in general, argue that “positivist” scientiﬁc
epistemologies are fundamentally inappropriate for understanding the past.80
     Critiques of the methodology of comparative studies have come from a wide variety
of sources. Philip Kohl, for example, himself an advocate of a form of materialist theory,
suggests that “[l]inear models of class and state formation, which decontextualize social
and historical processes, make meaningful comparative studies impossible.”81 Even some
traditional Marxists82 now emphasize how different cultures construct unique and—at
some levels—incommensurable social forms and histories.
     And it is not just the post-processualists and post-modernists who have challenged the
validity of traditional anthropological comparative studies. Contemporary thought in
evolutionary theory, as applied to both cultural and biological systems, emphasizes the
uniqueness and essential unpredictability of evolutionary trajectories.83
     If even evolutionists conclude that evolutionary sequences are unpredictable and
unique, what is the importance of comparative analyses as applied to, for example, Old
Kingdom Egypt and the Inka state?

HOLISTIC AND SYNTHETIC APPROACHES
A holistic perspective, to use Bruce Trigger’s term, is a multifaceted one in which any and
every form of inquiry that seems to expand one’s knowledge of the past is used. Trigger
argues84 that the future of analyses of the origins of civilizations must include combining
all our ideas, perspectives, and methods in order to examine all the factors that “constrain”
human behavior, in the present and the past. He notes that these constraints can be
ecological, such as the great river valleys that were the homes of many of the ﬁrst great civi-
lizations and which directly determined the kinds of agriculture and settlement patterns
that could be effective in this kind of environment, but he notes that these constraining and
shaping factors can also be ideologies and cultural traditions.
     Trigger dismisses the simplistic materialist determinism of, for example, Wittfogel,85
and acknowledges the research importance of the unique aspects of early states. But in his
concluding essay, he writes:

314   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


          [My] ﬁndings indicate that practical reason plays a greater role in shaping cultural change
          than many postprocessual archaeologists and postmodernist anthropologists are prepared
          to admit. This encourages me to accord greater importance to an evolutionist analysis and
          less importance to a cultural particularist one than I would have done when I began my
          study. A particularlist approach is necessary to understand many aspects of early
          civilizations. But it is clearly a mistake to ignore, or even to underestimate, the importance
          of evolutionism, as those who would privilege cultural reason would have us do.86

      Trigger acknowledges the power and primacy of cultures to construct their own realities,
      but he also sees extremely limited worldwide variation in some of the core structures and
      processes of early civilizations.87 One can, therefore, usefully study what factors contribute
      to the “efﬁciency” of these rather invariant elements of early civilizations, perhaps from the
      “evolutionist” perspective Trigger suggests. But the baroque variability of “art styles and
      cultural values” provides ample material for particularistic studies that need not appeal
      to cross-cultural and comparative analyses for intellectual justiﬁcation.
           Trigger thus provides a justiﬁcation and rationale for a wide variety of theoretical
      perspectives in archaeology, embracing both particularist studies and cross-cultural
      comparative analyses aimed at understanding the selective forces that so greatly constrained
      variation in some elements of these early civilizations.
           Moreover, even in those elements that seem relatively invariant in early civilizations,
      there is considerable interesting variety in speciﬁc expression. Trigger suggests that
      many archaeologists have assumed “that aspects of civilizations that were shaped most
      directly by the constraints of environment and technology would display the greatest
      degree of cross-cultural uniformity.”88 He notes, however, that this is not the case. Metal-
      working, for example, was a core industry in Mesopotamia, where it was used to produce
      tools as well as ornaments, whereas in Egypt it was used to make weapons but not often to
      make agricultural tools, and in the New World it was used extensively to produce
      ornaments.
           There may well be good functional reasons for these patterns (e.g., the scarcity of stone
      for implements such as hoes in Mesopotamia), but cultural constructs may be equally
      determinative even in such basic technologies as metallurgy.
           In his chapter on religion, Trigger states he initially assumed that, given the ﬂexibility
      of the human intellect, religious behavior would vary much more greatly in early
      civilizations than economic behavior, but he concluded that this was not the case. He
      identiﬁes strong recurrent patterns in many religious systems. Kings, for example, tend to
      trace their descent to strangers, probably in order to minimize their kinship obligations to
      the people they dominate. He suggests that all early civilizations had religious systems based
      on establishing social relationships with unseen forces in the natural world in order to
      manipulate it. The early civilizations Trigger surveys are all ones, he notes, that existed prior
      to the appearance of “transcendent religions”—those that make strict distinctions between
      the social, the natural, and the supernatural.
           Some of the commonalties in ideology that Trigger ﬁnds in early civilizations seem
      obviously understandable in functional terms. Most placed their own civilization in the
      center of a world that had four quarters corresponding to the cardinal directions, political
      competition was cast in terms of religious struggles, and the universe was once or regularly
      threatened with extinction and could only be saved by the intercession of gods, who had to
      be placated by human activities and earthly wealth.

                                                        THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES        315


     In summary, Trigger’s basic goal and strategy is to use many different ideas and
techniques to analyze early civilizations—not in a simplistic positivist sense but, still, in a
sense that does not admit the possibility that any “reading” of the record of the past is
equally valid, equally “true.” He stresses that cultural differences are as important in this
context as are cultural similarities, and he admits particularistic studies as useful adjuncts
in a synthetic approach to the past. But his basic goal is to understand why these similarities
and differences appeared, and he invokes materialist and evolutionist ideas in this regard.
     All explanations of cultural complexity focus on the similarities and differences that
the various forms of cultural evolution exhibit. But what is the signiﬁcance of these
similarities and differences?
     Stephen Jay Gould, in his book Wonderful Life,89 emphasizes how every evolutionary
sequence is unique; and the state of uniqueness, like that of pregnancy, permits no
qualiﬁcations or degrees. But if every sequence is unique, what is the signiﬁcance of the
similarities of cultural systems unconnected by genetics or history? The Aztecs and the
Egyptians—who knew nothing of each other and lived thousands of years separated in
time—did many of the same things, from building pyramids to establishing state religions;
but what is the signiﬁcance of these similarities? Scholarly opinion, of course, remains
divided on this point.
     Brumﬁel and Earle have categorized some of the variability they see in early economic
exchange in terms of three “models”: (1) commercial development models, in which
increasing occupational specialization and exchange are seen as the “natural” outgrowth of
economic growth; (2) adaptationist models, in which political leaders are assumed to have
intervened directly in the economy, to redistribute goods, for example, or to manage
irrigation systems; and (3) political models, in which local rulers intervene in economies
but, unlike their role in adaptationist models, these leaders are assumed to be the primary
beneﬁciaries of their efforts.90 Brumﬁel and Earle propose that “political elites consciously
and strategically employ specialization and exchange to create and maintain social inequity,
strengthen political coalitions, and fund new institutions of control, often in the face of
substantial opposition from those whose well-being is reduced by such actions.”91
     It is worth noting here that most of these many kinds of explanations of cultural
complexity are functional arguments. The basic idea of a functionalist explanation was
introduced earlier in the context of contemporary Marxist perspectives on archaeology.
Functional arguments attempt to explain the origins of something (e.g., the human heart)
in terms of the functions it performs (e.g., blood circulation). To the question, “Why do
people have hearts?” the answer that some device is needed to circulate blood is an
explanation of sorts, but it does not explain why some other kind of life-support system
did not evolve, nor does it explain the evolutionary history of the heart or the selective
pressures that shaped this history.
     Similarly, to assert that complex societies developed because a leader was needed to
coordinate irrigation and redistribute agricultural production is a functional explanation
and does not explain why the society did not remain egalitarian, or develop a capitalist
economic system, or go off in some other developmental direction.
     Yet functional explanations seem to work so well for certain phenomena. The national
religious cults that all early states developed, for example, seem so transparently a device
for social control. Montaigne said, “Man is certainly stark mad. He cannot make a worm,
and yet he will be making gods by the dozen.” But for an early state few things are as useful

316   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      as gods in whom everyone believes. Then one can despise and kill (and take possession of
      the property of ) all nonbelievers, foreign and domestic, without qualms; one is willing to
      sacriﬁce oneself in battles, or participate in pyramid building, or accept a social hierarchy,
      simply because the gods have so decreed. And the best part is that one does all these things
      without much cost to the state—people ﬁght in wars, work for the common good, or accept
      life as a disenfranchised slave often on the premise that in the afterlife things will be greatly
      improved.
            Thus, functionalist arguments have the strong heuristic value of suggesting hypotheses
      about a speciﬁc development and indicating crucial variable relationships. Marxist and
      other scholars see such functionalist interpretations as adequate descriptions, perhaps, but
      not explanations, which must involve, in their opinion, an analysis of the social relations
      out of which arise social changes.


      SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

      In the rest of this book we will review numerous cases of the evolution of complex societies,
      but in all these analyses of cultural and social complexity, archaeologists must come to
      terms with a fundamental problem: Most of the origins and development of ancient
      societies cannot be fully explained on the basis of the archaeologically retrievable facts of
      climate, technology, economy, and demography. Cultural evolution instead must be
      analyzed at some level above these basic conditions—at the higher level of the social,
      economic, and political relationships of peoples and social entities. But how do we get at
      these higher-level interactions through the data and methods of archaeology? Some
      archaeologists have concluded that we cannot do so in any scientiﬁc way, and thus
      archaeology cannot be a science; others argue that only the principles of evolutionary
      theory will help us understand these patterns of cultural change, but that we can never get
      at the speciﬁcs of the changes in social relations at the heart of the origins of civilizations;
      still other archaeologists believe that we can make inferences about these kinds of social
      changes and in various ways incorporate them in a holistic discipline of archaeological
      analysis.
            The following chapters of this book, thus, should be seen as more of a description of
      the problems of analyzing the evolution of civilizations than an explanation of these
      evolutionary processes, for we are still very far from any powerful comprehensive
      explanation of them—and there is little agreement about how we might analyze these
      processes or even about the usefulness of trying to analyze them. If that summary sounds
      somewhat nilhilistic, it is well to recall that there is much about the pyramids of Egypt, the
      ﬁrst written texts of Mesopotamian civilization, the glory that was Greece and the grandeur
      that was Rome, and so on, that is interesting and rewarding to consider, even if we can’t
      ultimately and utterly explain their origins.


      BIBLIOGRAPHY
      Adams, R. McC. 1966. The Evolution of Urban Society. Chicago: Aldine.
      ———. 1981. Heartland of Cities. Chicago: Aldine.
      Adams, R. N. 1981. “Natural Selection, Energetics, and Cultural Materialism.” Current Anthropology 22:603–624.

                                                                      THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES                317


———. 1988. The Eighth Day. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Alexander, R. D. 1975. “The Search for a General Theory of Behavior.” Behavioral Science 220:77–100.
———. 1979. “Evolution and Culture.” In Evolutionary Biology and Human Social Behavior: An Anthropological
            Perspective, ed. N. Chagnon and W. Irons. North Scituate, MA: Duxbury Press.
———. 1987. The Biology of Moral Systems. Hawthorne, NY: Aldine de Gruyter.
Algaze, G. 1989. “The Uruk Expansion.” Current Anthropology 30(5):571–608.
Ammerman, A. J., and L. L. Cavalli-Sforza. 1973. “A Population Model for the Diffusion of Early Farming in Europe.”
            In The Explanation of Culture Change, ed. C. Renfrew. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Appadurai, A., ed. 1986. The Social Life of Things. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Athens, J. S. 1977. “Theory Building and the Study of Evolutionary Process in Complex Societies.” In For Theory
            Building in Archaeology, ed. L. S. Binford. New York: Academic Press.
Bard, K. 1994. From Farmers to Pharaohs. Monographs in Mediterranean Archaeology 2. Shefﬁeld, UK: Shefﬁeld
            Academic Press.
Barnard, A. 1983. “Contemporary Hunter-Gatherers: Current Theoretical Issues in Ecology and Social
            Organization.” Annual Review of Anthropology 12:193 –214.
Bartel, B. 1982. “A Historical Review of Ethnological and Archaeological Analyses of Mortuary Practice.” Journal
            of Anthropological Archaeology 1(1):32–58.
Bass, G. F. 1987. “Splendors of the Bronze Age.” National Geographic, 172(6): 693–732.
Beck, L. A., ed. 1995. Regional Approaches to Mortuary Analysis. New York: Plenum Press.
Bender, B. 1985. “Emergent Tribal Formations in the American Midcontinent.” American Antiquity 50(1):52 – 62.
Berlinski, D. 1976. On Systems Analysis. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bernal, M. 1987. The Afroasiatic Roots of Classical Civilization. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
Berry, B. 1967. Geography of Market Centers and Retail Distribution. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Betzig, L. L. 1986. Despotism and Differential Reproduction: A Darwinian View of History. Hawthorne, NY: Aldine
            de Gruyter.
Binford, L. R. 1971. “Mortuary Practices: Their Study and Their Potential.” In Approaches to the Social Dimensions
            of Mortuary Practices, ed. J. A. Brown. Memoirs of the Society for American Archaeology 25:6 –29.
            Washington, D.C.: Society for American Archaeology.
Blanton, R. E. 1995. Houses and Households: A Comparative Study. New York: Plenum Press.
Boserup, E. 1965. The Conditions of Agricultural Growth. Chicago: Aldine.
Boyd, R., and P. J. Richerson. 1985. Culture and the Evolutionary Process. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Braun, D. P. 1986. “Midwestern Hopewellian Exchange and Supralocal Interaction.” In Peer Polity Interaction and
            Socio-Political Change, ed. C. Renfrew and J. F. Cherry. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bronson, B. 1980. “South-east Asia: Civilizations of the Tropical Forest.” Cambridge Encyclopedia of Archaeology.
            pp. 202–266.
Brumﬁel, E. M., and T. K. Earle, eds. 1987. Specialization, Exchange, and Complex Societies. Cambridge, England:
            Cambridge University Press.
———. 1987. “Specialization, Exchange, and Complex Societies: An Introduction.” In Specialization, Exchange,
            and Complex Societies, ed. E. M. Brumﬁel and T. K. Earle. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University
            Press.
Buck, R. C. 1956. “On the Logic of General Behavior Systems Theory.” In The Foundations of Science and the
            Concept of Psychology and Psychoanalysis, ed. H. Feigl and M. Scriven. Minnesota Studies in the
            Philosophy of Science 1:223–128. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Carniero, R. 1970. “A Theory of the Origin of the State.” Science 169:733–738.
Carr, C. 1995. “Mortuary Practices: Their Social, Philosophical-Religious, Circumstantial, and Physical
            Determinants.” Journal of Archaeological Method and Theory 2:105–200.
Carr, C., and J. E. Neitzel, eds. 1995. Style, Society, and Person: Archaeological and Ethnological Perspectives. New
            York: Plenum Press.
Cavalli-Sforza, L. L., and M. W. Feldman. 1981. Culture Transmission and Evolution. A Quantitative Approach.
            Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Childe, V. G. 1934. New Light on the Most Ancient East. London: Kegan Paul.
Clark, J. G. D. 1986. Symbols of Excellence: Precious Materials as Expressions of Status. Cambridge: Cambridge
            University Press.
Cohen, G. A. 1978. Karl Marx’s Theory of History: A Defense. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Cohen, R. 1981. “Evolutionary Epistemology and Human Values.” Current Anthropology 22:201–218.
Costin, C. L. 1991. “Craft Specialization: Issues in Deﬁning, Documenting, and Explaining the Organization of
            Production.” In Archaeological Method and Theory, Vol. 3, ed. M. B. Schiffer. Tucson: University of
            Arizona Press.
———. 1996. “Ceramic Production and Distribution.” In Empire and Domestic Economy: Transformation in
            Household Economics of Xauxa Soceity Under the Inkas, ed. T. D’Altroy and C. Hastorf. Washington,
            DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.

318   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      Costin, C. L., and T. Earle. 1989. “Status Distinction and Legitimation of Power as Reﬂected in Changing Patterns
                  of Consumption in Late Prehispanic Peru.” American Antiquity 54(4):691–714.
      Cowgill, G. 1975. “On the Causes and Consequences of Ancient and Modern Population Changes.” American
                  Anthropologist 77:505 –525.
      Crumley, C. L. 1979. “Three Locational Models. An Epistemological Assessment for Anthropology and
                  Archaeology.” In Advances in Archaeological Method and Theory, Vol. 2, ed. M. B. Schiffer. New York:
                  Academic Press.
      ———. 1992. “A Dialectical Critique of Hierarchy.” In Power Relations and State Formation, ed. T. Patterson and
                  C. Gailey. Salem, WI: Shefﬁeld Publishing Company.
      Crumley, C. L., and W. H. Marquardt, eds. 1987. Regional Dynamics: Burgundian Landscapes in Historical
                  Perspective. Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
      Darwin, C. 1871. The Descent of Man and Selection in Relation to Sex. New York: Appleton.
      Demarest, A. A., and G. W. Conrad, eds. 1992. Ideology and Pre-columbian Civilizations. Santa Fe, NM: School of
                  American Research.
      Diakonoff, I. M., ed. 1969. Ancient Mesopotamia. Moscow: Nauka.
      ———. 1991. Early Antiquity. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
      Drennan, R. D. 1995. “Chiefdoms in Northern South America.” Journal of World Prehistory 9(3):301–340.
      Drennan, R. D., and C. A. Uribe, eds. 1987. Chiefdoms in the Americas. Lanham, MD: University Press of America.
      Dunnell, R. C. 1978. “Style and Function: A Fundamental Dichotomy.” American Antiquity 43:192–202.
      ———. 1980. “Evolutionary Theory and Archaeology.” In Advances in Archaeological Method and Theory, Vol. 3,
                  ed. M. B. Schiffer. New York: Academic Press.
      ———. 1982. ““Science, Social Science, and Common Sense: The Agonizing Dilemma of Modern Archaeology.”
                  Journal of Anthropological Research 38:1–25.
      Dunnell, R. C., and R. J. Wenke. 1980. “An Evolutionary Model of the Development of Complex Societies.” Paper
                  presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, San
                  Francisco.
      Durham, W. H. 1990. “Advances in Evolutionary Culture Theory.” Annual Review of Anthropology 19:187–242.
      Earle, T. K. 1987. “Chiefdoms in Archaeological and Ethnohistorical Perspective.” Annual Review of Anthropology
                  16:279 –308.
      ———, ed. 1991. Chiefdoms: Power, Economy, Ideology. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
      Earle, T., and R. W. Preucel. 1987. “Processual Archaeology and the Radical Critique.” Current Anthropology
                  28(4):501–538.
      Eisenstadt, S. N. 1963. The Political System of Empires. New York: Free Press of Glencoe.
      Ember, C. R. 1975. “Residential Variation Among Hunter-Gatherers.” Behavioral Science Research 10:199 –227.
      Evans, S. “Settlement Models in Archaeology.” Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 1:275 –304.
      Feinman, G. M., K. G. Lightfoot, and S. Upham. 2000. “Political Hierarchies and Organizational Strategies in the
                  Puebloan Southwest.” American Antiquity 65(3):449 – 470.
      Feinman, G. M., and J. Neitzel. 1984. “Too Many Types: An Overview of Sedentary Prestate Societies in the
                  Americas.” In Advances in Archaeological Method and Theory Vol. 7, ed. M. Schiffer. New York:
                  Academic Press.
      Flannery, K. V. 1972. “The Cultural Evolution of Civilizations.” Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics
                  3:399 – 426.
      ———. 1973. “Archeology with a Capital S.” In Research and Theory in Current Archeology, ed. C. L. Redman.
                  New York: Wiley.
      Fried, M. H. 1960. “On the Evolution of Social Stratiﬁcation and the State.” In Culture in History, ed. S. Diamond.
                  New York: Columbia University Press.
      ———. 1967. The Evolution of Political Society. New York: Random House.
      Friedman, J., and M. J. Rowlands. 1977. The Evolution of Social Systems. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
      Gellner, E., ed. 1980. Soviet and Western Anthropology. London: Duckworth.
      Giddens, A. 1981. A Contemporary Critique of Historical Materialism, Vol. 1. Power, Property and the State. London:
                  Macmillan.
      ———. 1985. A Contemporary Critique of Historical Materialism, Vol. 2. The Nation-State and Violence.
                  Cambridge: Polity Press.
      Gould, S. J. 1989. Wonderful Life. New York: W.W. Norton.
      ———. 1987. An Urchin in the Storm. New York: W.W. Norton.
      Graber, R. B. 1994. A Scientiﬁc Model of Social and Cultural Evolution. Lanham, MD: University Press of America.
      Harris, M. 1968. The Rise of Anthropological Theory. New York: Crowell.
      ———. 1977. Cannibals and Kings. New York: Random House.
      ———. 1979. Cultural Materialism: The Struggle for a Science of Culture. New York: Vintage Press.
      Harris, M., and E. B. Ross. 1990. Death, Sex and Fertility: Population Regulation in Preindustrial and Developing
                  Societies. Irvington, NY: Columbia University Press.

                                                                 THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES              319


Hassan, F. 1988. “The Predynastic of Egypt.” Journal of World Prehistory 2(2):135 –185.
Hastorf, C. A., and S. Johannessen. 1993. “Pre-Hispanic Political Change and the Role of Maize in the Central
             Andes of Peru.” American Anthropologist 95(1):115 –137.
Hill, J. N. 1977. Explanation of Prehistoric Change. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
Hodder, I., ed., 1982. Symbolic and Structural Archaeology. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Hodder, I. 1986. Reading the Past: Current Approaches to Interpretation in Archaeology. Cambridge, England:
             Cambridge University Press.
Johnson, G. A. 1977. “Aspects of Regional Analysis in Archaeology.” Annual Review of Anthropology 6:479 –508.
———. 1980. “Rank-Size Convexity and System Integration: A View from Archaeology.” Economic Geography
             56:234–247.
———. 1981. “Monitoring Complex System Integration and Boundary Phenomena with Settlement Size Data.”
             In Archaeological Approaches to Complexity, ed. S. E. van der Leeuw. Amsterdam: University of
             Amsterdam.
———. 1982. “Organizational Structure Scalar Stress.” In Theory and Explanation in Archaeology. New York:
             Academic Press.
———. 1987. “The Changing Organization in Uruk Administration on the Susiana Plain.” In The Archaeology of
             Western Iran, ed. F. Hole. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
Kemp, B. J. 1989. Ancient Egypt: Anatomy of a Civilization. London and New York: Routledge.
Kenoyer, J. M. 1991. “The Indus Valley Tradition of Pakistan and Western India.” Journal of World Prehistory
             5(4):331–385.
Kipp, R. S., and E. M. Schortman. 1989. “The Political Impact of Trade in Chiefdoms.” American Anthropologist
             91(2):370–385.
Kirch, P. V. 1988. “Circumscription Theory and Sociopolitical Evolution in Polynesia.” American Behavioral
             Scientist 31(4):416 – 427.
———. 1990. “The Evolution of Sociopolitical Complexity in Prehistoric Hawaii: An Assessment of the
             Archaeological Evidence.” Journal of World Prehistory 4(3):311–346.
Kohl, P. L. 1987. “The Use and Abuse of World Systems Theory.” In Advances in Archaeological Method and
             Theory, Vol. 11, ed. M. B. Schiffer. New York: Academic Press.
Lansing, J. S., and J. N. Kremer. 1993. “Emergent Properties of Balinese Water Temple Networks.” American
             Anthropologist 95(1):97–114.
LeCarré, J. 1974. Tinker, Tailor, Soldier, Spy. New York: Knopf.
Lee, R. E. 1969. “!Kung Bushmen Subsistence: An Input-Output Analysis.” In Environment and Cultural Behavior,
             ed. A. P. Vayda. Garden City, NY: Natural History Press.
Legros, D. 1977. “Chance, Necessity and Mode of Production: A Marxist Critique of Cultural Evolutionism.”
             American Anthropologist 79:26 – 41.
Locke, J. 1980 (orig. a.d. 1690). Second Treatise of Government. Indianapolis: Hackett.
Lumsden, C. J., and E. O. Wilson. 1981. Genes, Mind, and Culture. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Madsen, M., C. Lipo, and M. Cannon. 1999. “Fitness and Reproductive Trade-Offs in Uncertain Environments:
             Explaining the Evolution of Cultural Elaboration.” Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 18:251–
             281.
Madsen, T. 1982. “Settlement Systems of Early Agricultural Societies in East Jutand, Denmark: A Regional Study
             of Change.” Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 1:197–236.
Mann, M. 1986. The Sources of Social Power I: A History of Power from the Beginning to AD 1760. Cambridge:
             Cambridge University Press.
Marx, K. 1932 (orig. 1859). Capital and Other Writings. New York: The Modern Library.
———. 1973 (orig. manuscript 1857–1858). Grundrisse: Foundations of the Critique of Political Economy. New
             York: Vintage Press.
Marx, K., and F. Engels. 1970. Selected Works. 3 Vols. Moscow: Progress Publishers.
May, D. A., and D. M. Heer. 1968. “Son Survivorship, Motivation and Family Size in India: A Computer
             Simulation.” Population Studies 22:199 –210.
McGuire, R. H. 1992. A Marxist Archeology. San Diego: Academic Press.
McGuire, R. H., and R. Paynter, eds. 1991. The Archaeology of Inequality. Cambridge, MA: Basil Blackwell.
Miller, D. 1985. “Ideology and the Harappan Civilization.” Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 4(1):34 –71.
Montmollin, O. de 1989. The Archaeology of Political Structure: Settlement Analysis in a Classic Maya Polity.
             Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Neiman, F. D. 1995. “Stylistic Variation in Evolutionary Perspective: Inferences from Decorative Diversity and
             Interassemblage Distance in Illinois Woodland Ceramic Assemblages.” American Antiquity
             60(1):7–36.
O’Shea, J. M. 1984. Mortuary Variability—An Archaeological Investigation. New York: Academic Press.
Patterson, T. C., and C. W. Gailey, eds. 1987. Power Relations and State Formation. Washington, DC: American
             Anthropological Association.

320   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      Peebles, C. S. 1971. “Moundville and Surrounding Sites: Some Structural Considerations of Mortuary Practices,
                   II.” In Approaches to the Social Dimensions of Mortuary Practices, ed. J. A. Brown. Society for American
                   Archaeology Memoir No. 25. Washington, D.C.: Society for American Archaeology.
      ———. 1987. “Moundville from 1000 –1500 ad.” In Chiefdoms in the Americas, ed. R. D. Drennan and C. A.
                   Uribe. Lanham: University Press of America.
      Peterson, N. 1993. “Demand Sharing: Reciprocity and the Pressure for Generosity Among Foragers.” American
                   Anthropologist 95(4):860 – 874.
      Polyani, K., C. M. Arensberg, and H. W. Pearson. 1957. Trade and Market in the Early Empires. Glencoe, IL: Free
                   Press.
      Price, T. D., and G. M. Feinman, eds. 1995. Foundations of Social Inequality. New York: Plenum Press.
      Redman, C. L. 1978. The Rise of Civilization. San Francisco: Freeman.
      Renfrew, C. 1972. The Emergence of Civilization. London: Methuen.
      ———. 1986. “Varna and the Emergence of Wealth in Prehistoric Europe.” In The Social Life of Things, ed.
                   A. Appaudrai. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
      ———. 1987. Archaeology and Language. London: Jonathan Cape.
      Renfrew, C., and J. F. Cherry, eds. 1986. Peer Polity Interaction and Socio-political Change. Cambridge: Cambridge
                   University Press.
      Rindos, D. 1984. The Origins of Agriculture. New York: Academic Press.
      Roberts, N. 1989. The Holocene: An Environmental History. Oxford: Blackwell.
      Robins, G. 1986. Egyptian Painting and Relief. Aylesbury: Shire.
      Rothschild, N. A. 1979. “Mortuary Behavior and Social Organization at Indian Knoll and Dickson Mounds.”
                   American Antiquity 44(4):658 – 675.
      Roux, G. 1964. Ancient Iraq. Baltimore: Penguin.
      Sabloff, J. A. 1989. The Cities of Ancient Mexico. London and New York: Thames & Hudson.
      Sahlins, M. 1968. “Notes on the Original Afﬂuent Society.” In Man the Hunter, ed. R. Lee and I. DeVore. Chicago:
                   Aldine.
      ———. 1976. Culture and Practical Reason. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
      Saunders, N. 1989. People of the Jaguar. London: Souvenir Press.
      Schacht, R. M. 1988. “Circumscription Theory.” American Behavioral Scientist 31(4):438 – 448.
      Schele, L., and M. E. Miller. 1986. The Blood of Kings: Dynasty and Ritual in Maya Art. Fort Worth: Kimbell Art
                   Museum.
      Schwartz, G. M., and S. E. Falconer, eds. 1994. Archaeological Views from the Countryside: Village Communities in
                   Early Complex Societies. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
      Service, E. 1962. Primitive Social Organization. New York: Random House.
      ———. 1975. Origins of the State and Civilization. New York: Norton.
      Shanks, M., and C. Tilley. 1987a. Re-Constructing Archaeology. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
      ———. 1987b. Social Theory and Archaeology. Oxford: Polity Press.
      ———. 1989. “Archaeology into the 1990s.” Norwegian Archaeological Review 22(1):1–12.
      Shennan, S. J. 1987. “Trends in the Study of Later European Prehistory.” Annual Review of Anthropology
                   16:365 –382.
      ———. 1988. Quantifying Archaeology. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
      Stein, G. J., and M. J. Blackman. 1993. “The Organizational Context of Specialized Craft Production in Early
                   Mesopotamian States.” Research in Economic Anthropology 14:29 –59.
      Steward, J. 1936. “The Economic and Social Basis of Primitive Bands.” In Essays in Anthropology in Honor of Alfred
                   Louis Kroeber. Berkeley: University of California Press.
      ———. 1949. “Cultural Causality and Law: A Trial Formulation of the Development of Early Civilizations.”
                   American Anthropologist 51:1–27.
      Streuve, V. V. 1969. “The Problem of the Genesis, Development and Disintegration of the Slave Societies in the
                   Ancient Orient.” Trans. I. Levit. In Ancient Mesopotamia, ed. I. M. Diakonov. Moscow: Nauka.
      Tainter, J. A. 1987. The Collapse of Complex Societies. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
      Teltser, P. A., ed. 1995. Evolutionary Archaeology: Methodological Issues. Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
      Trigger, B. 1972. “Determinants of Urban Growth in Pre-Industrial Societies.” In Man, Settlement and Urbanism,
                   ed. P. J. Ucko, R. Tringham, and G. W. Dimbleby. London: Duckworth.
      ———. 1983. “The Rise of Egyptian Civilization.” In Ancient Egypt: A Social History, ed. B. Trigger, B. J. Kemp,
                   D. O’Connor, and A. B. Lloyd. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
      ———. 1984. “Archaeology at the Crossroads: What’s New?” Annual Review of Anthropology 13:275 –300.
      ———. 1985. “The Evolution of Pre-industrial Cities: A Multilinear Perspective.” Melanges offerts à Jean
                   Vercoutter. Paris: Editions Recherce sur les Civilisations.
      ———. 1993. Early Civilizations: Ancient Egypt in Context. Cairo: American University in Cairo Press.
      ———. 2003. Understanding Early Civilizations: A Comparative Study. New York: Cambridge University Press.
      Waldrop, M. M. 1992. Complexity. New York. Touchstone.

                                                                   THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES               321


Wallerstein, I. 1974. The Modern World System. New York: Academic Press.
Webb, M. 1975. “The Flag Follows Trade: An Essay on the Necessary Integration of Military and Commercial
            Factors in State Formation.” In Ancient Civilization and Trade, ed. J. Sabloff and C. C. Lamberg-
            Karlovsky. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
Webster, D. 1975. “Warfare and the Evolution of the State: A Reconsideration.” American Antiquity 40:471– 475.
Weiss, R. M. 1976. “Demographic Theory and Anthropological Inference.” Annual Review of Anthropology
            5:351–381.
Wenke, R. J. 1981. “Explaining the Evolution of Cultural Complexity: A Review.” In Advances in Archaeological
            Method and Theory, Vol. 4, ed. M. B. Schiffer. New York: Academic Press.
White, L. 1949. The Science of Culture. New York: Grove Press.
Wittfogel, K. A. 1957. Oriental Despotism: A Comparative Study of Total Power. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Wolf, E. R. 1966. Peasants. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Woodburn, J. 1982. “Egalitarian Societies.” Man (NS) 17:432 – 451.
Woodbury, R. B. 1961. “A Reappraisal of Hohokam Irrigation.” American Anthropologist 63(3):550–560.
Wright, H., and G. A. Johnson. 1975. “Population, Exchange, and Early State Formation in Southwestern Iran.”
            American Anthropologist 77:267–289.
Yellen, J. E. 1976. “Settlement Patterns of the !Kung: An Archaeological Perspective.” In Kalahari Hunter-
            Gatherers: Studies of the !Kung San and Their Neighbors, ed. R. Lee and I. DeVore. Cambridge, MA:
            Harvard University Press.
Yoffee, N. 1979. “The Decline and Rise of Mesopotamian Civilization: An Ethnoarchaeological Perspective on the
            Evolution of Social Complexity.” American Antiquity 44:5–35.
Yoffee, N., and G. Cowgill, eds. 1988. The Collapse of Ancient States and Empires. Tucson: University of Arizona
            Press.
Yoffee, N., and A. Sherratt, eds. 1993. Archaeological Theory: Who Sets the Agenda? Cambridge: Cambridge
            University Press.
Zagarell, A. 1986. “Trade, Women, Class, and Society in Ancient Western Asia.” Current Anthropology
            27(5):415– 430.



NOTES
 1. Trigger, Early Civilizations: Ancient Egypt in Context, p. 110.
 2. Ibid.
 3. See, for example, Shanks and Tilley, Re-Constructing Archaeology.
 4. See, for example, Graber, A Scientiﬁc Model of Social and Cultural Evolution; Neiman, “Stylistic Variation in
    Evolutionary Perspective: Inferences from Decorative Diversity and Interassemblage Distance in Illinois
    Woodland Ceramic Assemblages”; Dunnell, “Science, Social Science, and Common Sense: The Agonizing
    Dilemma of Modern Archaeology.”
 5. See, for example, Demarest and Conrad, eds., Ideology and Pre-columbian Civilizations.
 6. Crumley, “A Dialectical Critique of Hierarchy.”
 7. See, for example, Dunnell, “Science, Social Science, and Common Sense: The Agonizing Dilemma of Modern
    Archaeology”; Rindos, The Origins of Agriculture; Lumsden and Wilson, Genes, Mind, and Culture; Boyd and
    Richerson, Culture and the Evolutionary Process; Wenke, “Explaining the Evolution of Cultural Complexity:
    A Review”; Ammerman and Cavalli-Sforza, “A Population Model for the Diffusion of Early Farming in
    Europe”; Kirch, “The Evolution of Sociopolitical Complexity in Prehistoric Hawaii: An Assessment of the
    Archaeological Evidence”; R. N. Adams, “Natural Selection, Energetics, and Cultural Materialism”; Cavalli-
    Sforza and Feldman, Cultural Transmission and Evolution. A Quantitative Approach; Neiman, “Stylistic
    Variation in Evolutionary Perspective: Inferences from Decorative Diversity and Interassemblage Distance in
    Illinois Woodland Ceramic Assemblages”; Teltser, ed., Evolutionary Archaeology: Methodological Issues.
 8. Waldrop, Complexity.
 9. Lansing and Kremer, “Emergent Properties of Balinese Water Temple Networks.”
10. See, for example, Adams, “Natural Selection, Energetics, and Cultural Materialism”; Alexander, “The Search
    for a General Theory of Behavior”; Alexander, “Evolution and Culture”; Cohen, “Evolutionary Epistemology
    and Human Values”; Dunnell, “Style and Function: A Fundamental Dichotomy”; Dunnell and Wenke, “An
    Evolutionary Model of the Development of Complex Societies”; Kirch, “Circumscription Theory and
    Sociopolitical Evolution in Polynesia”; Boyd and Richerson, Culture and the Evolutionary Process; also see
    Durham, “Advances in Evolutionary Culture Theory”; Betzig, Despotism and Differential Reproduction: A
    Darwinian View of History; Alexander, The Biology of Moral Systems.
11. Dunnell, “Evolutionary Theory and Archaeology.”
12. Roux, Ancient Iraq, p. 161.

322   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      13. Sahlins, “Notes on the Original Afﬂuent Society.”
      14. Lee, “!Kung Bushmen Subsistence.”
      15. Peterson, “Demand Sharing: Reciprocity and the Pressure for Generosity Among Foragers.”
      16. LeCarré, Tinker, Tailor, Soldier, Spy.
      17. Trigger, “Archaeology at the Crossroads: What’s New?” p. 287.
      18. Wenke, “Explaining the Evolution of Cultural Complexity: A Review.”
      19. Recently other typologies have been developed based on food storage and other characteristics.
      20. Steward, “The Economic and Social Basis of Primitive Bands.”
      21. Barnard, “Contemporary Hunter-Gatherers: Current Theoretical Issues in Ecology and Social Organization,”
          pp. 195 –197; Ember, “Residential Variation Among Hunter-Gatherers.”
      22. Flannery, “The Cultural Evolution of Civilizations.”
      23. Service, Origins of the State and Civilization.
      24. Earle, “Chiefdoms in Archaeological and Ethnohistorical Perspective,” p. 288.
      25. Ibid.
      26. See, for example, Earle, ed., Chiefdoms: Power, Economy, Ideology.
      28. Drennan and Uribe, Chiefdoms in the Americas.
      27. Drennan, “Chiefdoms in Northern South America.” Also see Drennan and Uribe, Chiefdoms in the Americas.
      28. Wright and Johnson, “Population, Exchange, and Early State Formation in Southwestern Iran.”
      29. McGuire, A Marxist Archeology; also see Rindos, The Origins of Agriculture; Yoffee, “The Decline and Rise of
          Mesopotamian Civilization: An Ethnoarchaeological Perspective on the Evolution of Social Complexity”;
          Wenke, “Explaining the Evolution of Cultural Complexity: A Review.”
      30. Costin, “Craft Specialization: Issues in Deﬁning, Documenting, and Explaining the Organization of
          Production.”
      31. Brumﬁel and Earle, “Specialization, Exchange, and Complex Societies: An Introduction,” p. 5.
      32. Kenoyer, “The Indus Valley Tradition of Pakistan and Western India.”
      33. Feinman et al., “Political Hierarchies and Organizational Strategies in the Puebloan Southwest.”
      34. White, The Science of Culture.
      35. Binford, “Mortuary Practices: Their Study and Their Potential”; Rothschild, “Mortuary Behavior and Social
          Organization at Indian Knoll and Dickson Mounds”; also see Beck, ed., Regional Approaches to Mortuary
          Analysis. See, however, Carr (“Mortuary Practices: Their Social, Philosophical-Religious, Circumstantial, and
          Physcial Determinants”) for an alternative view. Carr’s extensive use of ethnographic ﬁles (HRAF) appears
          to show that there are many determinants involved in mortuary practices, and that these are highly variable
          from society to society, irrespective of their level of social complexity. As such, one-to-one correspondances
          do not exist between societal type and mortuary behavior.
      36. See also O’Shea, Mortuary Variability—An Archaeological Investigation; Peebles, “Moundville and
          Surrounding Sites”; Bartel, “A Historical Review of Ethnological and Archaeological Analyses of Mortuary
          Practice.”
      37. O’Shea, Mortuary Variability—An Archaeological Investigation.
      38. Berry, Geography of Market Centers and Retail Distribution.
      39. Johnson, “Aspects of Regional Analysis in Archaeology”; Johnson, “Monitoring Complex System Integration
          and Boundary Phenomena with Settlement Size Data”; Evans, “Settlement Models in Archaeology”; Crumley
          and Marquardt, Regional Dynamics; Madsen, “Settlement Systems of Early Agricultural Societies in East
          Jutland, Denmark.”
      40. Trigger, “The Evolution of Pre-industrial Cities: A Multilinear Perspective,” p. 343.
      41. Ibid., pp. 344 –345.
      42. See, for example, Schwartz and Falconer, eds., Archaeological Views from the Countryside: Village Communities
          in Early Complex Societies.
      43. Darwin, The Descent of Man and Selection in Relation to Sex, p. 154.
      44. John Locke, Second Treatise on Government, section 41.
      45. See, for example, Steward, “Cultural Causality and Law: A Trial Formulation of the Development of Early
          Civilizations.”
      46. Athens, “Theory Building and the Study of Evolutionary Process in Complex Societies,” p. 375.
      47. Boserup, The Conditions of Agricultural Growth.
      48. Athens, “Theory Building and the Study of Evolutionary Process in Complex Societies,” p. 366.
      49. Cowgill, “On the Causes and Consequences of Ancient and Modern Population Changes,” p. 505.
      50. Harris and Ross, Death, Sex and Fertility: Population Regulation in Preindustrial and Developing Societies.
      51. Wittfogel, Oriental Despotism.
      52. Woodbury, “A Reappraisal of Hohokam Irrigation.”
      53. Carniero, “A Theory of the Origin of the State,” p. 734.
      54. Webster, “Warfare and the Evolution of the State: A Reconsideration.”
      55. Schacht, “Circumscription Theory.”

                                                                    THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES               323


56. Kirch, “Circumscription Theory and Sociopolitical Evolution in Polynesia.”
57. Quoted in Harris, The Rise of Anthropological Theory, p. 217.
58. Marx, Capital and Other Writings, pp. 10 –11.
59. See, for example, G. A. Cohen’s excellent Karl Marx’s Theory of History: A Defense.
60. See, for example, Streuve, “The Problem of the Genesis, Development and Disintegration of the Slave Societies
    in the Ancient Orient”; or Diakonoff, Early Antiquity.
61. Diakanov, Ancient Mesopotamia.
62. Zagarell, “Trade, Women, Class, and Society in Ancient Western Asia.”
63. For example, Kipp and Schortman, “The Political Impact of Trade in Chiefdoms.”
64. Harris, Cannibals and Kings; idem., Cultural Materialism.
65. Harris, Cultural Materialism, p. 92.
66. Ibid., p. 94.
67. Webster, “Warfare and the Evolution of the State: A Reconsideration”; Webb, “The Flag Follows Trade.”
68. See Carniero, “A Theory of the Origin of the State.”
69. Childe, New Light on the Most Ancient East; Wittfogel, Oriental Despotism: A Comparative Study of Total Power;
    Harris, Cultural Materialism.
70. For example, Hassan, “The Predynastic of Egypt,” p. 166; Trigger, “The Rise of Egyptian Civilization”; Bard,
    From Farmers to Pharaohs; Kohl, “The Use and Abuse of World Systems Theory.”
71. Friedman and Rowlands, The Evolution of Social Systems; also see Patterson and Gailey, Power Relations and
    State Formation.
72. Friedman and Rowlands, The Evolution of Social Systems.
73. An Urchin the Storm, pp. 33 –34.
74. Dunnell, “Evolutionary Theory and Archaeology.”
75. See, for example, Adams, “Natural Selection, Energetics, and Cultural Materialism”; Alexander, “The Search
    for a General Theory of Behavior”; Alexander, “Evolution and Culture”; Cohen, “Evolutionary Epistemology
    and Human Values”; Dunnell, “Style and Function: A Fundamental Dichotomy”; Dunnell and Wenke, “An
    Evolutionary Model of the Development of Complex Societies”; Kirch, “Circumscription Theory and
    Sociopolitical Evolution in Polynesia”; Boyd and Richerson, Culture and the Evolutionary Process; also see
    Durham, “Advances in Evolutionary Culture Theory”; Betzig, Despotism and Differential Reproduction: A
    Darwinian View of History; Alexander, The Biology of Moral Systems.
76. Trigger, “The Rise of Egyptian Civilization,” p. 64.
77. Johnson, “The Changing Organization in Uruk Administration on the Susiana Plain”; R. McC. Adams,
    Heartland of Cities.
78. See, for example, Shanks and Tilley, “Archaeology into the 1990s.”
79. Giddens, A Contemporary Critique of Historical Materialism, Vol 1. Power, Property and the State.
80. See, for example, Shanks and Tilley, Re-Constructing Archaeology, Social Theory and Archaeology,
    “Archaeology into the 1990s”; Hodder, Symbolic and Structural Archaeology.
81. Kohl, “The Use and Abuse of World Systems Theory,” pp. 10 –11.
82. See, for example, Diakonov, ed., Early Antiquity.
83. See, for example, Gould, Wonderful Life.
84. Ibid., p. 563.
85. Wittfogel, Oriental Despotism.
86. Trigger, Early Civilizations: Ancient Egypt in Context, p. 112.
87. Ibid., p. 110.
88. Ibid., p. 8.
89. Gould, Wonderful Life.
90. Brumﬁel and Earle, “Specialization, Exchange, and Complex Societies: An Introduction.”
91. Ibid., p. 3.

8
Origins of Complex Societies in
Southwest Asia

        And Babylon, the glory of kingdoms, the beauty of the Chaldees excellency, shall be
        as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah.
             It shall never be inhabited, neither shall it be dwelt in from generation to
        generation: neither shall the Arabian pitch tent there; neither shall the shepherds
        make their fold there.
             But wild beasts of the desert shall lie there; and their houses shall be full of
        doleful creatures; and owls shall dwell there, and satyrs shall dance there.
             And the wild beasts of the islands cry in their desolate houses, and dragons in
        their pleasant places: and her time is near to come, and her days shall not be
        prolonged.
                                                                                  Isaiah 13:19–22




    T         he Old Testament presents Isaiah as a dreary, complaining alarmist, but in the case
              of Babylon he was right. Babylon—once the brightest star in a galaxy of brilliant
    ancient cities—has for many centuries been a great rubbish heap.
         Five thousand years ago, however, when many of the world’s people were illiterate
    marginal farmers, and most were still hunters and gatherers, and when the peoples of the
    New World were still many centuries from village life, Babylon and its surroundings were
    a cosmopolitan world of cities, libraries, schools, international trade, roads, taxes, temples,
    and many of the other elements we collectively call “civilization.” Indeed, much of the
    world’s population today is still living the urban way of life that ﬁrst evolved in these ancient
    Southwest Asian cities.
         Southwest Asian cultural history is so rich, so ancient, that even short journeys here
    take one through complex histories (Figure 8.1). Before recent wars it was possible to
    drive from the eastern outskirts of Babylon, near Baghdad, Iraq—the heartland of the oldest
    cities in the world—east to Susa, in Iran, one of the world’s ﬁrst true metropolises at about
    3400 b.c. One could then continue north through the area of some of the world’s ﬁrst farms,
    distributed along the margins of the Zagros Mountains in Iran and Syria, and the foothills
    of the Taurus Mountains in Turkey. North from Syria through Turkey one crosses the same
    terrain that Xenophon1 tells us ancient Greek soldiers traversed as—homesick for Greece
    —they fought their way to the Black Sea to sail home. South from Turkey through Syria

                                                  324

                                               ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN SOUTHWEST ASIA                  325


and along the Mediterranean coast one
follows a route very close to that taken by
European crusaders a millennium later,                        1792 B.C.    Babylonian Empire begins
to effect the fateful collision of Chris-
                                                        2100–2004 B.C.     Ur III period
tianity and Islam.
     Amidst the ruins of these millennia                      2350 B.C.    Sargon of Akkad and the beginning of the
of civilization, scholars have tried to sort                               Akkadian period
out much about the human condition.                           3000 B.C.    Development of cuneiform writing
This, after all, was the homeland of
several of the world’s great religions and              3000–2350 B.C.     Early Dynastic period (Sumerians)
the place where writing, cities, metallurgy,
                                                              3000 B.C.    Fortiﬁcation of most major settlements begins
and many other aspects of civilization
ﬁrst appeared. And all the obvious ques-                3300–2800 B.C.     Proto-Elamites
tions apply: Why here? Why in the parti-
cular period of about 5000 to 3000 b.c.?                      4000 B.C.    Early monumental construction of temples begins
And—perhaps the most intriguing and
revealing question—why in forms so                      4100–3000 B.C.     Uruk and Jemdat Nasr periods; development
                                                                           of city-states
strikingly similar to later developments
                                                        6000–3700 B.C.     ‘Ubaid period
in China, Egypt, Mesoamerica, and
elsewhere?                                                    5500 B.C.    Samarran and Halaﬁan style pottery appear


                                                              6500 B.C.    Ceramic technology appears
THE ECOLOGICAL
                                                              8500 B.C.    Neolithic food-producing economies appear
SETTING                                             (10,500 years ago)


Two ecological elements are particularly
important to analyses of Southwest Asian
cultural history: First is the great pro-
ductivity of agriculture in this area, and
second is its role as a nexus, a cross-
roads, of many cultural inﬂuences. As Nicholas Postgate noted, Mesopotamia is quite
different from its near neighboring civilization in Egypt (see chapter 9):

    Egypt, physically constrained within the narrow strip of the Nile Valley and isolated from
    western Asia, retained its highly idiosyncratic identity with little infusion from elsewhere,
    and did not export its language or script or other artistic forms, except upstream to Nubia.
    Mesopotamia was open along both ﬂanks to intrusion from the desert and mountain, and
    its cuneiform script was exported across thousands of miles.2

The ﬁrst states and cities appeared in a relatively small area of southern Iraq and Iran, but
the factors that produced them involved most of the Fertile Crescent and the surrounding
lowlands it encompasses, or Greater Mesopotamia, as it is known (see Figure 8.1).
     The lower elevations of the great arc of mountains of the Fertile Crescent were the
natural habitats of wild wheat, barley, sheep, and goats (Figure 8.2). In ancient times this
area was covered with vast grasslands and oak and pistachio forests, and, even as late as the
nineteenth century, sheep grazing these verdant uplands were brought to lowland markets

          326       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY




                    FIGURE 8.1 Southwest Asia. The world’s ﬁrst complex societies evolved in the alluvial plains of the
                    Tigris and Euphrates rivers and their tributaries, but they had their origins in these early agricultural
                    communities.




                 with their wool stained scarlet by wildﬂowers in their range. Today the forests are almost
                 entirely gone, and the whole area is severely overgrazed.
                                                                                  From the very beginnings
                                                                            of life on the alluvial lowlands,
                                                                            people there fought and traded
                                                                            for the gold, silver, copper,
                                                                            stone, wheat, sheep, and goats
                                                                            of the mountain areas. Today
                                                                            there is still no better way to
                                                                            integrate the highlands and
                                                                            lowlands economically than
                                                                            this same ancient pattern in
                                                                            which nomads and herders
                                                                            take sheep and goats to these
                                                                            highlands in the lush summer
                                                                            months, using the animals to
                                                                            convert mountain vegetation
                                                                            into milk, meat, and hides,
                                                                            which can then be exchanged
                                                                            for lowland products.
                                                                                  Below the high ridges of
FIGURE 8.2 The Zagros Mountains and foothills region of Iran.               the Zagros and Taurus moun-

                                           ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN SOUTHWEST ASIA        327


tains, the foothills and rolling plains of the piedmont saw some of the world’s earliest
agricultural villages. Neolithic settlements are found here almost every place rainfall is
sufﬁcient to grow wheat and barley with a reasonable reliability.
     Coming down from the piedmont, one ﬁnds north and northwest of Baghdad the dry,
undulating northern Mesopotamian Plains. The Tigris and Euphrates have cut deeply into
the land surface, so that irrigation here requires sophisticated damming and canalization.
But with irrigation, the high productivity of this area made these northern plains the
“breadbasket” of some of the greatest empires of antiquity.
     For the very ﬁrst cities, however, the heartland is the lower alluvial plains of
Mesopotamia. Historian Arnold Toynbee argued that civilizations ﬁrst evolved in physical
circumstances that challenged the inhabitants to overcome severe problems of climate and
resources, and he was thinking in part about southern Mesopotamia. Nothing in this region
appears to account for its pivotal role in human history. The unprepossessing hot plains
have no usable stone or metal, few trees, and a climate whose extremes of heat have been
a main topic of conversation for generations of archaeologists.
     But most early civilizations are the “gift” of some great river system, and this is
particularly true of Mesopotamian cultures (“Mesopotamia” means “between the rivers”
in Greek). The Tigris and Euphrates rivers created the alluvial plain—mainly in the area
south of Bagdad—with annual deposits of ﬂood-borne fertile silt and clay, and they provide
the irrigation water that has made productive farming possible here for many thousands of
years. The swamps and wetlands formed by the rivers support a variety of usable wild
plants, such as ﬂax for textiles and rushes for basketry, but in addition to these plants and
water for irrigation, the major gift of the rivers is ﬁsh. The scrub forests along the rivers
cannot support many game animals, and thus ﬁsh—and later, domestic cattle—furnished
the protein indispensable to survival on the alluvial plain. Vegetarianism was not an option
for ancient Mesopotamians because the blend of vegetable proteins necessary to substitute
for animal protein was not always available. Fish ﬁll this lack admirably, however, and many
clues point to their importance for the early inhabitants: “Altars” in buildings dating to the
ﬁfth millennium b.c. have been found covered with layer upon layer of ﬁsh bones.
Mesopotamia’s rivers also provided a vital transportation artery. None of these rivers was
as navigable as the Nile, for example, but with the proper boats one could move goods,
armies, and so forth from ports along the Turkish and Syrian foothills, south through the
heart of Mesopotamia.
     From May to October, the average daily high temperature is over 40°C (104°F), and
hot winds dry the soil to the depth of a meter and darken the sky with choking clouds of
dust. Anyone who has spent a summer in Mesopotamia understands why several Middle
Eastern religions have envisioned heaven’s primary recreation to be sitting by shaded
streams in cool palm groves, eating fruit, in complaisant sexual company. The ﬁery sum-
mers, however, are balanced by temperate, lovely, warm autumns, winters, and springs.
And with adequate irrigation, the Mesopotamian alluvial plain richly rewards those who
farm it, so that throughout history this region has been celebrated for its melons, oranges,
pomegranates, dates, wheat, barley, lentils, onions, and other crops.
     Part of Mesopotamia’s rich agricultural heartland is enclosed in large deserts, from
Syria far into the Arabian peninsula. Nomads and pastoralists eventually occupied some of
these areas, and trade routes crossed them, but even in our own age some of these desert
areas are only sparsely inhabited.

          328       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                         As we saw in chapter 4, Southwest Asia in the Pleistocene can be thought of as an exten-
                    sion of Africa, in terms of its climates, ﬂora, and fauna, and even as late as a few hundred
                    to a thousand years ago such African animals as ostriches, cheetahs, lions, and hartebeest
                    were common in large areas of Southwest Asia.
                         The climates and physical geography of Southwest Asia have been much the same for
                    the past 9,000 years, with some variations. At times tectonic movements have raised or
                    lowered Mesopotamia, and these movements, in combination with ﬂuctuations in the
                    water level of the Persian Gulf and the deposition of massive amounts of alluvial silts and
                    clays in some areas, have made it difﬁcult to determine where the coastline was during the
                    past 10,000 years. Some areas, for example, that were farmed a millennium ago are now
                    underwater, and it is possible that some important parts of the ancient archaeological
                    record are under the Gulf, too. Human alterations of river courses, deforestation, and
                    climate changes have so greatly altered the landscape (and probably even microclimates)
                    that we may never have an entirely clear picture of what Southwest Asia was like as a natural
                    landscape when its ﬁrst civilizations began forming.3


                    FUNDAMENTALS OF THE SOUTHWEST ASIAN
                    ARCHAEOLOGICAL RECORD

                  Southwest Asian peoples have lived in villages for nine millennia, and there is hardly a
                  square meter there that does not contain a few sherds, stone tools, bones, or old irrigation
                  canal banks. Nevertheless, the most common unit of analysis in Southwest Asian
                                              archaeology is still the “site,” which usually takes the form of a
                                              mound, referred to as a tell (Arabic) or teppeh (Persian). These
                                              tells are a result of the construction and continual reconstruc-
                                              tion of villages or towns on the same spot (Figure 8.3). For
                                              thousands of years, people here have used mudbricks as their
                                              basic building material, and their settlements have numerous
                                              closely packed, small, rectangular structures. Although ideally
                                              suited to the climate and resources of the area, such buildings
                                              become so dilapidated after 50 or 100 years that it is easier to
                                              rebuild than to repair them, and because there are incentives
                                              to rebuild on the same spot (less land is lost to cultivation and
                                              higher elevation gives better drainage and protection against
                                              ﬂoods and attack), settlements become mound-shaped as they
                                              are constantly reconstructed on the debris of the previous
                                              ones.
                                                    Hundreds of thousands of such mounds dot the South-
                                              west Asian landscape, some of them rising 50 m or more above
                                              plain level, while others—occupied for only a few decades or
                                              so—are only imperceptibly higher than the surrounding
FIGURE 8.3 Millennia of rebuilding at Jericho plains or are buried beneath the alluvial plain. The mounds are
formed many superimposed layers containing    littered with stone tools, bones, broken pottery, broken clay
stone walls.                                  bricks, collapsed walls, eroding ovens and pottery kilns, and

                                            ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN SOUTHWEST ASIA        329


corroding metal. Burrowing animals, well and terrace construction, and erosion often mix
the layers of these mounds so that usually one ﬁnds the remnants of every phase of a site’s
occupation on its surface. This allows archaeologists to estimate a site’s periods of occupa-
tion simply by inspecting the surface artifacts. At some sites bones and ﬂoral remains are
well preserved, but at other sites, such as those in areas with a high level of salty ground-
water, even ceramics do not preserve well.
     Besides mounds, the most obvious archaeological features of Southwest Asia are
irrigation canals. Seven millennia of irrigation agriculture have resulted in a landscape
criss-crossed with canals, and it is not unusual to ﬁnd abandoned irrigation canals several
thousand years old with banks still 2 or 3 m high. Aerial photographs are particularly useful
in charting these ancient waterworks.
     Because of the time and expense of archaeological excavation and the destruction
of sites, far less than 5 percent of all sites dating from 8000 to 2350 b.c., for example, have
been, or will ever be, properly excavated, and thus our interpretations must be tempered
with some tentativeness. On the other hand, the rich archaeological remains provide an
opportunity to use sampling procedures and to test hypotheses; and by using aerial
reconnaissance, surface surveys, and regional analyses, archaeologists can determine
when and for how long unexcavated sites were occupied. In the case of Mesopotamia, a
generation of archaeologists has followed Robert McC. Adams in performing regional
surveys.4 In many of these surveys, archaeologists have used aerial photographs and maps
to locate ancient sites, and then made maps of these individual sites and collected ceramics
from them to infer their cultural histories. But Southwest Asia’s archaeological record is so
vast that many hundreds of thousands of ancient towns and villages will probably never be
excavated—and many hundreds of thousands more have already been destroyed by
agricultural expansion, industrialization, and looting.


THE NEOLITHIC ORIGINS OF SOUTHWEST ASIAN
CIVILIZATION (C. 8500–6000 B.C.)

When we left the ﬁrst farmers of Southwest Asia in chapter 6, they were living in
thousands of small villages, from Afghanistan to western Turkey, occupying in small
numbers those areas with sufﬁcient rainfall to support wheat and barley without exten-
sive irrigation. In most areas the simple village farming way of life continued largely
unchanged into the last few millennia b.c., but in other areas changes were underway by
8500 b.c.
     We saw in chapter 6 that people at Jericho, in the West Bank, for example, began
building stone walls and other buildings that indicate that they were beginning to direct
their energies in a way quite different from that of most hunters and gatherers. Also, the
apparent ancestor cult at Jericho and many Levantine sites—in which human skulls were
plastered with clay and ﬁtted with eyes made from seashells or otherwise accentuated—and
the plaster ﬁgures of people and clay animals at sites such as ‘Ain Ghazal, in Jordan, suggest
a changing social context of village life.
     Analogous developments were also underway in Turkey. Recently in the Urfa region
(the area in southeastern Turkey just north of the Syrian border) impressive evidence from

           330        PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                       about 8400 b.c. for ritual activ-
                                                                                       ities at sites such as Nevali Çori,
                                                                                       Göbekli Tepe, and Gürcütepe
                                                                                       has been found. 5 In many
                                                                                       respects, these sites are farming
                                                                                       villages similar to many others
                                                                                       from this time period. What
                                                                                       makes them unusual, however,
                                                                                       is the presence of cult buildings
                                                                                       —with unusual construction
                                                                                       and decoration—and various
                                                                                       sculptures.
                                                                                             These cult buildings are
                                                                                       nearly square in shape—ranging
                                                                                       in size from 13.9-by-13.5 m
                                                                                       to 12.1-by-12.8 m at Nevali
                                                                                       Çori—and have terrazzo ﬂoors
FIGURE 8.4 A Neolithic cult building at Göbekli Tepe, Turkey. Note the unusual         as well as benches along the
T-shaped pillars that may have served as roof supports.                                walls covered in stone slabs. All
                                                                                       of these building incorporate
                                                        large “T-shaped” limestone pillars—likely to support the
                                                        roof of the structure (Figure 8.4)—and, quite remarkably,
                                                        these pillars are engraved with images of animals such as
                                                        birds, cattle, lions, and fox (Figure 8.5). Other sculptures—
                                                        frequently found buried in the these cult buildings—
                                                        include human and animal heads, birds, and lions.
                                                              This dramatic evidence of profound social social
                                                        changes in Neolithic societies in Turkey continues into
                                                        later times at sites such as Çatalhöyök (pronounced rather
                                                        like Chatal Huooyook). James Mellaart, who originally
                                                        excavated much of this site, suggested that “It may be said
                                                        without undue exaggeration that Anatolia, long regarded
                                                        as the barbarous fringe to the fertile crescent, has now been
                                                        established as the most advanced center of neolithic culture
                                                        in the Near East. The neolithic civilization revealed at
                                                        Çatalhöyök shines like a supernova among the rather dim
                                                        galaxies of contemporary peasant culture.”6 Çatalhöyök
                                                        may not merit all the superlatives its excavators have
                                                        showered on it, but it is one of the most interesting sites in
                                                        Southwest Asia. Located in south central Anatolia (Turkey)
                                                        and ﬁrst occupied at about 6250 b.c., Çatalhöyök was
                                                        probably inhabited continuously until its abandonment at
FIGURE 8.5 Many of the T-shaped pillars at the          about 5400 b.c. During some of this time it may have
Urfa region Neolithic cult sites are engraved with      extended over 13 hectares and had a population of about
images of animals. This one shows a cattle (top),       4,000 to 6,000—several times larger than any other known
canine (middle), and bird (bottom).                     site in this period.

                                            ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN SOUTHWEST ASIA           331


     A great ﬁre swept through
Çatalhöyök in the middle of its
history, nicely preserving the
earliest levels, but unfortun-
ately only less than a hectare of
the site was excavated before
the project was ended by polit-
ical disputes and other prob-
lems several decades ago. Since
1993, Ian Hodder and his
colleagues have been able to
open new excavations at this
site and offer multiple ways of
examining and interpreting
the information that has been
recovered.7
     Located not far from the
ﬁrst ranges of the Taurus            FIGURE 8.6 The volcanic areas of Cappadoccia in Turkey are a source of obsidian.
Mountains, Çatalhöyök is near        Workshop debris from making stone artifacts litters the surface, as seen in this
a critical resource: the obsidian    photograph of a Neolithic period site.
sources at the Hasan Dag
volcano (Figure 8.6). Because
each obsidian source is chemically distinctive, we can track the great quantities of obsidian
from this area that were distributed throughout Anatolia, the Levant, and Cyprus (Figure
8.7) after 7000 b.c. Beautiful obsidian artifacts were found in Çatalhöyök itself, but so far




FIGURE 8.7 The circulation of obsidian throughout Southwest Asia was an important economic
process that may have contributed to the evolution of political and economic institutions.

           332       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                       no obsidian storage or workshop areas have been discovered in the small fraction of the site
                       that has been excavated. It is possible that most of the workshop activity occurred at the
                       obsidian sources themselves rather than in the village.
                            Most of the 158 structures uncovered at Çatalhöyök are little different from their
                       contemporaries elsewhere in Southwest Asia: Each is built of shaped mud and composed
                       of rectangular rooms with plastered walls and ﬂoors, and most houses are about 25 m
                       square, one story high, and abut one another, except where occasionally separated by an
                       open courtyard. Inside most rooms are two raised platforms, probably for sleeping, and an
                       occasional rectangular bench. Unlike any other community of this period and area, access
                       to the rooms of Çatalhöyök was only by ladder through the roof—there are no front
                       doors—and the close packing of structures is such that much of the movement among the
                       houses must have been on the roofs. The roof access may reﬂect a need for defense, for once
                       the inhabitants had pulled up the ladders on the outside walls, the settlement would have
                       been difﬁcult to attack. Other Southwest Asian sites had walls at this time, but most
                       settlements were small unfortiﬁed hamlets.
                            The 40 or so shrines at Çatalhöyök have essentially the same ﬂoor plan as the other
                       structures, but their walls are richly decorated with paintings, reliefs, and engravings
                                                                                  expressing many naturalistic
                                                                                  themes, most concentrating on
                                                                                  the two favorites of ancient
                                                                                  art—fertility and death. Vul-
                                                                                  tures are portrayed ripping
                                                                                  apart headless human corpses,
                                                                                  women give birth to bulls
                                                                                  and ride leopards, and other
                                                                                  symbols such as breasts, vul-
                                                                                  tures, bulls, and rams abound.
                                                                                  Some of the rooms have
                                                                                  intricate arrangements of cattle
                                                                                  skulls and horns (Figure 8.8).
                                                                                  Walls were plastered and then
                                                                                  painted, and periodically the
                                                                                  walls were replastered and
                                                                                  new designs were painted or
                                                                                  engraved on them. One wall
                                                                                  was plastered and painted 40
                                                                                  times. These shrines do not
                                                                                  seem to have required the
                                                                                  expenditure of vast amounts of
                                                                                  labor and resources for essen-
                                                                                  tially non-economic purposes,
                                                                                  as did the monumental con-
                                                                                  structions of later periods. Nor
FIGURE 8.8 These reconstructions of “cult-centers” at Çatalhöyök show the         do they enclose radically dif-
importance of the cattle motif. All early complex societies evolved rituals and   ferent amounts of expensive
religions that functioned as organizing and controlling institutions.             goods, indicating great wealth

                                          ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN SOUTHWEST ASIA      333


disparities. Little about them, in fact, conﬂicts with the interpretation that they were
kinship-cult centers in a simple ranked society.8
     Such a conclusion would be strengthened if we found only minor variability in
mortuary practices, and indeed this seems to be the case. Many corpses appear to have been
taken outside the settlement and exposed to the vultures and the elements until the ﬂesh
was gone, after which the bones were interred in the house ﬂoors. Men, women, and
children were buried in much the same way, either in baskets or simply in holes. Most of
the graves contained no goods, but some women and children were accompanied by shell
and stone necklaces, armlets and anklets, and, occasionally, obsidian mirrors and bone
cosmetic implements. Some men were buried with mace heads, ﬂint daggers, obsidian
projectile points, clay seals, and other items.
     In one complex of rooms, the so-called Vulture Shrine, six individuals were buried in
the ﬂoor with signiﬁcantly richer grave goods than were found in the residential burials.9
However, we do not ﬁnd any infants at Çatalhöyök buried with disproportionately rich
or numerous grave goods, nor is there any signiﬁcant variation in construction expense
of the graves themselves; there are no stone cofﬁns, tombs, or the like.
     The people of Çatalhöyök subsisted on the typical late Neolithic combination of
agriculture, hunting, and gathering. Emmer, another kind of wheat known as “einkorn,”
barley, pea vetch, and other crops were grown in quantity, but with simple techniques.
Domestic cattle supplied meat, hides, milk, and perhaps traction: Even simple cattle-drawn
wood plows that do no more than scratch the surface greatly increase agricultural
productivity by suppressing weeds and increasing soil permeability. We do not know when
the ﬁrst plows were used in the Middle East, but the domestication of cattle probably did
not precede the development of the plow by more than a millennium or two.
     Trade at Çatalhöyök was considerable, but mainly in small quantities of exotic items.
Shells from the Mediterranean (160 km distant) and Syrian ﬂint were found here, perhaps
taken in trade for obsidian artifacts. But there is no evidence of voluminous trade in
agricultural products, or even in large amounts of obsidian, and there are no obvious
workshops for goods, no stores of obsidian, and no complex technologies.
     Jarmo, in Iraqi Kurdistan, is an example of the drab peasant culture that Mellaart
invidiously compared to Çatalhöyök. Jarmo was ﬁrst settled sometime before 6750 b.c.
and was occupied intermittently to 5000 b.c., and thus it overlaps with Çatalhöyök for
perhaps as much as 1,000 years. But unlike Çatalhöyök, Jarmo was probably home to no
more than 200 people, and for most of its existence it consisted of only about 20 small mud
houses. Burials at Jarmo are quite uniform, as are the contents of the houses. There is not
nearly the diversity of aesthetic expression found at Çatalhöyök in wall paintings, ﬁnely
worked obsidian, or the like; there are just a few clay ﬁgurines of pregnant women and
animals. Jarmo has no fortiﬁed walls or large, nonresidential buildings, and the technology
seems to have been mainly devoted to the processing of plant foods. Perhaps the most
signiﬁcant difference between the two sites is that Çatalhöyök controlled a localized and
important resource (obsidian), whereas Jarmo did not.
     Elsewhere in the Zagros, northern Mesopotamia, and the Iranian Plateau, most
communities established between 8000 and 6000 b.c. were also farming villages, with little
public architecture, elaborate mortuary cults, or occupational specialization.
     Charles Redman has pointed out that “Çatal Hüyük exempliﬁes those communities
that may have made many of the crucial advances leading to civilization, but for one reason

334   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      or another did not become urban societies. In some ways, the town of Çatal Hüyük and its
      inhabitants should be considered a premature ﬂash of brilliance and complexity that was a
      thousand years before its time.”10 The various excavations at Jericho, Çatalhöyök, Jarmo,
      and other sites provide a picture of the kinds of communities that immediately preceded
      civilization in Southwest Asia, but we still lack many elements of this picture. In a rightly
      ordered world, the combined international archaeology faculties and their students—
      funded by the United Nations—would begin surveys in western Anatolia and work their
      way east into Afghanistan and south into Iraq, mapping and excavating sites along the way.
      Instead, our evidence for the world’s ﬁrst socially complex societies is gathered mainly from
      fewer than a hundred well-excavated settlements and perhaps 20 or 30 regional site surveys
      in this huge area.


      INITIAL CULTURAL COMPLEXITY (C. 6000–4000 B.C.)

      An early indication of social change in Southwest Asia is evident in the distribution of
      pottery styles. As with agriculture, the invention of pottery seems to have occurred
      independently in many areas of Southwest Asia, where clay had been used for centuries
      for ﬁgurines and storage pits. The multiple origins and rapid spread of pottery after about
      6500 b.c. no doubt reﬂect the increasing importance of containers in these agricultural
      economies—probably for carrying water and for storing, cooking, and serving food.
           Soon after ceramic vessels came into general use in Southwest Asia, the ﬁrst
      sophisticated pottery styles appeared, and by about 5500 b.c. two distinctive styles, the
      Samarran and the Halaﬁan, are present (Figures 8.9 and 8.10).11 Samarran pottery tends to
      be in simpler shapes than the Halaﬁan and is painted in matte colors, whereas the Halaﬁan
      colors are glossy. Halaﬁan ceramics are important beyond their aesthetics: They are the ﬁrst
      complex style of artifacts to be so widely distributed. These highly stylized ceramics were
      ﬁrst made with a tournette, a wooden slab afﬁxed to a peg that could be set in a hole in the
      ground and act as a pivot around which the slab could be turned by hand. Simple as this
      sounds, it was a major advance over simply hand-molding a pot; the tournette allowed the
      potter to turn the pot so as to shape and paint it.12 So intricate and delicate are the designs
      that one might assume that specialists produced them. But Frank Hole cautions us not to
      underestimate the skill of villagers—Persian carpets being just one example of an
      extraordinarily complex and beautiful product made by simple villagers.13 And despite the
      wide geographical distribution of the Halaﬁan designs, there is little evidence that ceramic
      production was centrally organized and administered.
           Exactly what kinds of social changes the spread of these styles may reﬂect remain
      obscure. Their distributions tend to overlap and there is no convincing proof that they
      belong to different time periods or social groups. 14 Yet people of the Halaﬁan era
      transported decorated pottery over distances of almost 1,000 km, and it is difﬁcult to believe
      that this was a simple utilitarian and cost-effective adaptation to the growing need for
      containers in agricultural economies. Pottery is heavy, breaks easily, and can be made from
      local materials in nearly every part of Southwest Asia, so why transport it in massive
      quantities? The expanding zones of distribution of Halaﬁan and other decorated ceramics
      would seem to make the most sense as expressions of a growing sense of social status and
      political allegiance. At some point in every ancient civilization, elites were able to begin

                                           ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN SOUTHWEST ASIA        335




FIGURE 8.9 Halaﬁan and Samarran (bottom two vessels) pottery styles spread over large areas of
sixth millennium b.c. Mesopotamia.

336   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY




      FIGURE 8.10 Distribution of Samarran and Halaﬁan pottery. One of the ﬁrst steps in the evolution
      of complex societies seems to be a rapid expansion of an art style over a large area.



      appropriating elaborate and exotic goods and use them to indicate their status and power.
      Perhaps these early pottery styles are early indications of this process of the emergence of
      elites.
           The distribution of Halaﬁan and Samarran ceramics coincides with the extension
      of cultivation to the arid areas of Mesopotamia, and this involved what may have been
      the world’s ﬁrst systematic artiﬁcial irrigation systems. At sites such as Choga Mami, in the
      areas just east of Baghdad, for example, people used irrigation canals to grow cereals,
      linseed (for oil), and other crops. Another signiﬁcant site of this period is Tell as-Sawwan,
      located in north central Iraq at the juncture of the northern arid steppe country and the
      alluvial plains.15
           Preliminary excavations indicate that from 6000 to 5000 b.c. Tell as-Sawwan was
      home to a few hundred people, most of whom were engaged in simple irrigation farming
      of wheat, barley, and linseed. They also kept domestic goats, sheep, and cattle; hunted
      onagers, antelopes, and other animals; and gathered ﬁsh and mussels from the Tigris, which
      ran close to the site.
           In most ways, this settlement resembled other early agricultural villages: Granaries,
      kilns, ovens, and small mudbrick houses were arranged around open courtyards. In
      addition, a large ditch or moat was constructed around the site by cutting into the natural
      conglomerate rock on which the site was located. The discovery of many hardened clay balls
      (sling missiles) in the ditch led its excavators to conclude it was a defensive structure,
      reminiscent of the fortiﬁcations at Jericho.

                                              ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN SOUTHWEST ASIA       337


     The residential architecture of Tell as-Sawwan contrasts somewhat with that of other
settlements of the period, consisting mainly of huts with stone foundations and the more
common rectangular clay structures, although there is still little variability in building size
or apparent construction cost.
     At least 128 burials at Tell as-Sawwan date to approximately 5500 b.c., and they contain
one of the richest assortment of grave goods for this period of any site known in Southwest
Asia. Of the classiﬁable skeletons, 55 were infants, 16 were adolescents, and 13 were adults.
The graves differ little in orientation, location, or construction. Most bodies were placed in
a contracted position, facing west, in simple shallow oval pits dug into house ﬂoors. Most
graves had at least one craft item, mainly carved alabaster, beads in exotic stones, or pottery.
Although most rooms had many burials (one had up to 23), one room contained only an
adult male’s burial, whose relatively rich grave goods may reﬂect emerging status ascription.
But the Tell as-Sawwan burials do not seem to reﬂect inherited status and wealth. As we
noted in chapter 7, attempts to draw conclusions about the social systems of extinct
societies from examination of burial characteristics is somewhat speculative, but there does
seem to be a period in all early civilizations where burials begin to reﬂect inherited status.
An infant buried with massive amounts of wealth that he or she could not possibly have
earned personally may reﬂect nothing more than a wealthy and caring family, but in all
known early civilizations wealth and status eventually became largely inherited aspects
of everyone’s life. Although there are some signs of differences of wealth and status at Tell
es-Sawwan, there is nothing to indicate this wealth and status was inherited.
     Tell as-Sawwan is just one of many sites of this period, and soon after Halaﬁan,
Samarran, and other pottery styles spread through the highlands, the developmental focus
shifted to the Mesopotamian alluvial plain.
     The few sites on the alluvial plain that may antedate 5500 b.c. are poorly known—most
are probably covered by much larger and later sites. The earliest known sites on the alluvial
plain are near the estuary of the Persian Gulf, and there is some evidence that with the end
of the Pleistocene, the Gulf shoreline moved inland as much as 180 km.16 Thus, the key settle-
ments in the transition to life on the alluvial plain—and the origins of cultural complexity
here—may now be under sea water. Between about 5500 and 3500 b.c. Mesopotamian
climates were comparatively humid, with a change to cooler and drier conditions after
about 3500 b.c. Subtle changes in climate like this might have had major effects on the
settlement history of the area, because the zones in which dry-ﬁeld rainfall-based grain
cultivation was possible may have shifted. Also, changes in sea levels at this time may have
meant that lands that previously were ﬂooded were opened to settlement.17
     Frank Hole has argued that

    economic necessity, caused by environmental shocks that were induced by climatic
    changes, resulted in major dislocations of local [Mesopotamian] populations as early as the
    second half of the sixth millennium [b.c.], and continued into the fourth, during which
    there was a qualitative reorientation of society around urban places. These natural events
    resulted ﬁrst in the loss of sites and decline of population. Except at a few favorable
    locations, these conditions discouraged nucleation. However, with the steady ﬂow of
    dislocated people who could provide labor, larger and more dependable agricultural
    systems could be built. The ﬁrst urban-sized places may have been composed of disparate
    populations who developed an organic interdependence as they ﬁlled many . . . ecological
    and economic niches.18

338   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      If Hole is correct, then the rise of cities and civilizations was based on ecological factors,
      and once these developments were underway, very complex patterns of socioeconomic
      changes would have developed. Subsistence in most parts of the alluvial plain is more
      complex than in the highlands, requiring many timely decisions in which ﬂoods must be
      anticipated and controlled, land irrigated and drained, and cattle pastured, tended, and
      milked. Fishing adds to this complexity because it is seasonal to some extent and requires
      coordination to be maximally effective. Even getting sufﬁcient stone for simple agricultural
      implements necessitates considerable organization here, for such stone often had to be
      obtained in the mountains, far from lowland settlements.
           If Ali Kosh in Iranian Mesopotamia is typical, the movement onto the alluvial plain
      required a very generalized diet, in which many small plant seeds eventually were discarded
      in favor of the wheat-barley-lentil group augmented by sheep-goat-cattle proteins.19 There
      is some evidence that the cuisine centered on a variant of the one-pot approach, a stone or
      clay vessel ﬁlled with water, cereals, and other plants, and bits of whatever animals were
      about. Like the spartan meals of ancient Sparta (described as consisting of two courses, the
      ﬁrst a kind of porridge, and a second, which was a kind of porridge), the diets of these
      Mesopotamian villagers probably relied on blending as many plant and animal nutrients
      as possible in soups and stews. Breakfasts may have been rather uninspiring, but perhaps
      these early farmers subsisted on something quite like their modern descendants and ate
      porridge, bread, cheese, and dates.


      The ‘Ubaid Period (c. 6000–3700 B.C.)
      In the ancient Sumerian account of the creation of the universe, the city of Eridu was the
      ﬁrst to have emerged from the primeval sea that covered the world before humans. Eridu
      is in fact one of the earliest known settlements on the southern Mesopotamian alluvial
      plain, having been established at about 5700 b.c. The southern Mesopotamian alluvium in
      fact is characterized by many small communities of farmers by 5700 b.c. These earliest
      southern communities belong to the ‘Ubaid period, named after a small town of this period,
      and are associated with a particular and distinctive style of ceramics. These people may be
      identiﬁed with their styles of pottery, but they did something much more important than
      make ceramics: They were the ﬁrst to establish a productive economy on the basis of a
      traditional Mesopotamian farming strategy, based on cereals (in this case, barley) and
      various vegetables and fruits (particularly dates) in combination with the milk and meat of
      cattle, sheep, and goats. Living in communities that ranged in size from fewer than 50 to a
      few thousand, the ‘Ubaid peoples did small-time irrigation of crops, traded for a few
      products, and in general were able to produce the base materials out of which the alchemy
      of cultures produces civilization, namely economic surpluses. Anthropologists have long
      argued about the applicability of the term surplus to pre-monetary economies, such as that
      of the ‘Ubaid farmers, but the most important point is that, once established, the
      agricultural economy of the alluvial lowlands could be intensiﬁed in such a way that ever
      greater populations could be supported and massive amounts of materials and energy could
      be devoted to monumental construction, warfare, and ever more diversiﬁed occupational
      specialization, from kings to foot-soldiers, from scribes to potters.
           Debates continue as to the ethnic origins of the ‘Ubaid people—they may have been
      Iranians who migrated to the river valleys as domesticated wheat, barley, sheep, and goats

                                              ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN SOUTHWEST ASIA      339


became adapted to these environments and as changes in climates and river regimes made
the alluvium more suitable for simple farming.20
     If we look at the ‘Ubaid archaeological record for the ﬁrst signs of these fundamental
changes, we see only a few indirect reﬂections. One of the earliest known ‘Ubaid sites is at
Tell al-Ouell: near Larsa, which dates to at least 5300 b.c., and recent excavations deep into
the great site of Uruk suggest that occupations of the earliest ‘Ubaid sites are probably
deeply buried at many major sites. A major temple dating to after 4000 b.c. at Uruk was
found to have been built on the exact same site as a temple of the ‘Ubaid period, indicating
a great continuity of religious traditions.21 At Eridu, the earliest known structure is thought
to have been a temple. Archaeologists have been accused of bestowing this term on virtually
any structure large enough to stand upright in, but the earliest building at Eridu is very
similar to others known through texts and other evidence to have been temples. A single
small room (3.5-by-4.5 m) with an altar faces the entrance, and a pedestal is in the center;
in these speciﬁcs the building is nearly identical to the temples of later periods. These
temples may reﬂect a low level of social complexity, and some of the larger ‘Ubaid
communities included some fairly impressive mudbrick buildings, but for the most part
the people of the ‘Ubaid period appear to have been small-time farmers; no clear evidence
has been found indicating differential access to wealth, power, or prestige, and their
economy seems only marginally more diversiﬁed and integrated than that of the ﬁrst
Southwest Asian farmers a millennium earlier.
     But by 4500 b.c. some signs of cultural changes toward complexity appeared in a large
region of the lower alluvial plain, in the foothills of the Zagros, and in some of the larger
valleys in the Zagros. Henry Wright notes that, in these areas, “There were large centers
with populations of 1,000 to 3,000, which dominated networks of smaller settlements.
Excavation on some of these larger centers revealed central platforms, supporting ritual
buildings, segregated elite residences with large storage structures, and indications of
socially segregated cemeteries.”22 As Wright notes, there is evidence that there had been a
previous period in which larger centers had emerged, but here too, as in the case described
earlier for Çatalhöyök, we see no uniform gradual pattern of increasing complexity. The
whole history of early complexity, in fact, seems to be a messy boom-or-bust cycle, with
only a very general long-term overall trend toward complexity.
     In addition to the central Mesopotamian plains in Iraq, the Susiana Plain (Figure 8.11)
in southwestern Iran was also a major developmental center for early complexity—
probably because one could do both rainfall agriculture and irrigation farming here and
because trade routes from the Gulf to the Iranian plateau ran across the Susiana. By about
4500 b.c.—perhaps much earlier—several large centers may have dominated surrounding
areas economically and politically. The people of this era made beautiful hand-painted
pottery in such large quantities and with such great similarity that, even given the virtuosity
of peasant artisans, some occupational specialization may be reﬂected.23
     In summarizing this and other evidence from the Susiana, Gregory Johnson observed:
    In sharp contrast to the pervasive smaller villages of the [earlier] periods, Choga Mish on
    the Susiana Plain covered an area of some ﬁfteen hectares by 4300 b.c. Most architecture
    consisted of residences and associated ceramic kilns. The community also contained at least
    one monumental building, perhaps more. This ten-by-ﬁfteen-meter structure had walls of
    between one and two meters thick and contained several interior rooms. One of these was
    stacked with storage jars, while another was apparently used in working ﬂint. A substantial

340   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY




      FIGURE 8.11 The ﬁrst socially complex societies were concentrated in areas of Mesopotamia where
      rivers allowed great agricultural productivity.



          mud-brick platform stood nearby. This period in Susiana and elsewhere saw the
          introduction of formalized closure of containers using clay sealings that carried the
          impression of a decorated seal. This practice is ordinarily associated with problems of
          security in materials storage or shipment.24

      Johnson goes on to note that the high degree of similarity in ceramics across the plain
      indicates that not everyone was making these—that their production might already have
      been somewhat centralized. All this evidence, he says, “[s]trikes me as indicative of a
      hierarchically organized social system with some degree of inﬂuence over labor and
      resource allocation. The fact that the known major architecture at Choga Mish was
      destroyed by ﬁre and the community abandoned . . . suggests that elite inﬂuence over the
      population in general was less than elites might have wished.”25 Frank Hole’s interpretation
      of Susiana culture history differs somewhat from Johnson’s.26 Hole suspects that even
      toward the end of the ﬁfth millennium b.c., the Susiana was loosely tied together by small-
      scale trade and a regional religious cult, centered at Susa, in which priests and people were
      in a voluntary mutually supportive relationship dedicated to the continued success of
      agriculture.27
           To the west of the Susiana, in central Mesopotamia, the later ‘Ubaid period (after about
      c. 4500 b.c.) saw the gradual settlement of the plain by villagers. By 4350 b.c. the ‘Ubaid
      culture was quite uniform over most of the alluvial plain: All the settlements seem to have

                                             ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN SOUTHWEST ASIA          341


been located on reliable water courses, and almost all were less than 10 hectares in size
(most of them only 1 or 2).
     The spread of the ‘Ubaid culture is remarkable for many reasons, particularly its great
extent. ‘Ubaid-style ceramics are found far into central Turkey, to the southwest in the
Arabian Plateau, and in highland Iran—an area much greater than that encompassed
within the Halaﬁan and Samarran stylistic zones. The potter’s wheel was probably invented
by the end of the ‘Ubaid period, when the pivoted working surface, or tournette, was altered
by setting the wheel’s axle in bearings and weighting the wheel in such a way that high
speeds could be produced. This allowed delicate vessels to be made, and painted
decorations like bands could be easily applied simply by holding a paintbrush steady against
a rotating ceramic vessel.28
     Virtually every ‘Ubaid settlement had a large nonresidential building, probably a
temple, built of mudbrick on platforms of clay or imported stone. Access typically was by
a ﬂight of stairs, to a room about 10 m in length, with a broad platform at one end and a
table or small altar at the other. Smaller rooms were built on both sides of the main room,
and ladders in these would sometimes give access to a second story. The exteriors of the
buildings were often decorated with projections and recesses, where light and shadows
created pleasing effects. In later periods, mosaics of colored ceramic cones and bitumen
were used as decorations. At Eridu, 17 such temples were found superimposed, giving the
later ones considerable elevation. Such structures are found all over Greater Mesopotamia
soon after their appearance on the southern alluvial plain.
     Until about 5000 b.c., settlements seem to have been located primarily with regard to
the availability of resources and the land’s agricultural potential, not on the basis of political
and economic relationships. People tend to organize their territories in patterns reﬂecting
changing social and economic conditions; thus when the movement of people and goods
between settlements becomes important, and the area is agricultural and relatively ﬂat,
these settlements often are quite regularly spaced, as is evident in both the Warka area and
the Susiana Plain.
     By 4000 b.c., the number of small settlements had increased dramatically in many
areas, and there was increasing variability in their arrangement and composition.


EARLY STATES: THE URUK AND JEMDET NASR PERIODS
(C. 4100– 3000 B.C.)

The Uruk period is regarded as the era of primary state formation in Southwest Asia.
Cultural forces and processes probably in operation for thousands of years culminated in
this interval in the appearance of the complete checklist of civilization: cities, warfare,
writing, social hierarchies, advanced arts and crafts, and other elements.
     Recently, Guillermo Algaze has proposed a model to explain why complex societies
developed ﬁrst in southern Mesopotamia.29 He suggests that it is the ecological context
of southern Mesopotamia that makes it unusual compared to neighboring regions. The
alluvial lowlands are well watered by the Tigris and Euphrates rivers and thus create
the potential for enormous agricultural productivity as well as for extensive trade using the
rivers for transportation. In Algaze’s model, trade is the most signiﬁcant mechanism that

342   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      early elite people or groups used as a method to expand their control of resources and
      power. They also used trade as a way to legitimize unequal access to resources that favor
      themselves. During the course of the Uruk period, further disparities in resource access,
      power, and trade arose between regions—including those outside of Mesopotamia—and
      these disparities favored cities in southern Mesopotamia. Trade thus accentuated
      differences in localized ecologies and their attendant resources as well as differences in
      ability to control river transportation routes.
           Algaze’s model receives some support from the geological work of Galina Morozova.30
      She points out that natural avulsions—changes in the courses of rivers—in the delta area
      of Tigris and Euphrates rivers were the result of a low-gradient ﬂoodplain, ﬂoods with high
      water levels, and deposition of sediments within channels. Rivers such as the Euphrates had
      many channels and networks of channels, and it is along these networks that the earliest
      southern Mesopotamian cities were built—a situation favorable to control of ﬂoodplain
      agriculture and control of transportation routes. Natural shifts in river channel courses
      away from the cities could, of course, affect these ecological advantages. 31
           The central Mesopotamian alluvial plain and the Susiana Plain offer our earliest and
      best known examples of the changes that occurred in Greater Mesopotamia in the Uruk
      period.


      Warka: An Uruk City-State
      The ancient settlement of Uruk (known as Warka in Arabic and Erech in the Bible), located
      in the heart of the southern alluvial plain, is one of the oldest cities in the world and may
      have been the center of one of the earliest states.
           As many as 10,000 people may have lived in the city of Uruk by 3800 b.c., and around
      the town were many smaller villages and towns whose sizes and distribution suggest they
      may not have been tightly integrated into Uruk’s political and economic systems (Figure
      8.12).32 Then, at about 3000 b.c., the city of Uruk apparently grew rapidly to about 50,000
      people, who lived behind substantial defensive walls. There is also evidence of the beginning
      of abandonment of rural settlements surrounding Uruk—leaving little doubt, Robert McC.
      Adams suggests, that the growth of the city was a result of the immigration or forcible
      transference of the population from the hinterlands into the city.33
           The residential architecture of Uruk reﬂects a diversity of occupational, economic, and
      social classes. All the buildings were mudbrick, but some were larger, better built, and more
      elaborately decorated. Many of the people lived in small rectangular buildings along narrow
      winding streets through which ran both above- and below-ground drainage canals.
      Apparently, houses were one story high for the poor and two stories tall for the wealthier,
      but both types were similar. Built of mudbrick and whitewashed, they represent an ideal
      architectural adaptation to the climate. Similar houses today are comfortable and attractive,
      with their whitewashed walls contrasting effectively with beautiful dyed rugs and textiles.
           Archaeologists who have excavated Uruk occupations usually have found themselves
      ankle deep in the remains of millions of bevel-rimmed bowls, surely one of the ugliest
      ceramic types ever made outside a kindergarten, but also one of the most signiﬁcant.
      Gregory Johnson has shown that various measurements of these bowls change over time,
      so that the Late, Middle, and Early Uruk periods can be deﬁned in part by changes in their
      form.34 Hans Nissen has also argued that these bowls, which an associated with temples,

                                                ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN SOUTHWEST ASIA            343




FIGURE 8.12 In simple societies the location of settlements with respect to each other is dictated
mainly by ecological factors like water availability. But as societies become more complex, political
and economic relationships begin to inﬂuence where settlements are located and how large they
become. In Gregory Johnson’s reconstruction (1975) of exchange networks among Late Uruk period
(c. 3200 b.c.) settlements in southern Iraq, the spatial arrangement of the settlements with respect to
one another is quite regular (the wall cones were used to decorate administrative centers, and their
distribution here may indicate lines of political authority).

344   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      probably were ration bowls and were used to pay workers in grain for their labors.35 Most
      have a capacity that corresponds to what a laborer’s daily ration was asserted to be in
      ancient texts, and the symbol for to eat in early Mesopotamian writing seems to be that of
      a person eating from a bevel-rimmed bowl. Others have suggested that these bowls were
      used to bake bread. The prevailing theory, however, is that they were votives for temple
      ceremonies. The bowls were mass-produced, probably by simply molding, and they
      represent one of the ﬁrst craft items for which the temple administrators organized some
      aspects of the production and distribution system. But these simple features of mass
      production and, perhaps, government administration of commodity production and
      distribution were fateful steps in the evolution of states. To most modern people, few things
      are more natural than governmental forms of organization and control, but our ancestors
      lived as farmers for many centuries without government in this sense; these ﬁrst few steps
      in the direction of government in Mesopotamia were a long, slow process in these initial
      stages; later, the process of ancient state-formation was largely one in which the govern-
      ment increasingly intruded on socioeconomic and political life.
           By the middle of the fourth millennium b.c., the population of Uruk included
      specialists in scores of arts and crafts. Potters, using molds and mass-production techniques,
      turned out enormous quantities of pottery. In earlier periods great numbers of beautifully
      painted vessels were made at most larger settlements, but by the middle and late fourth
      millennium, pottery manufacture had become a centralized, administered activity at Uruk
      and many other settlements. Other specialists included stonecutters, metalsmiths,
      bricklayers, farmers, ﬁshermen, shepherds, and sailors. Writing did not come into general
      use in Mesopotamia until the ﬁrst half of the third millennium b.c., but at Uruk and other
      sites, in levels dating from the ﬁfth millennium onward, archaeologists ﬁnd clay tablets and
      cylinder seals—a distinctive Mesopotamian tradition for 3000 years—which were used to
      impress clay sealings for containers, bales of commodities, and documents. Some of these
      seals convey in picture form the economic specialization of the community. Boats,
      domestic animals, grain, deities, and many other motifs are portrayed.
           By the late fourth millennium b.c., Uruk was already an impressive settlement of resi-
      dences and several large temples. Between about 3200 and 3100 b.c., the “White Temple”
      at Uruk was built on a platform some 12 m above ground level. Constructed of whitewashed
      mudbrick and decorated with elaborate recesses, columns, and buttresses, it must have
      been an impressive sight—especially to peasants coming into the city on market days.
      Inside the temple were tables and altars, all arranged according to the same ritual plan
      evident at Eridu some 2,500 years earlier.
           The temple architecture and ziggurats of Mesopotamian antiquity raise an important
      point. As we will see in surveying other early complex cultures around the world, one of the
      most consistent signs of evolving cultural complexity is the diversion of enormous amounts
      of energy and materials into pyramids, ziggurats, palaces, platforms, and other huge
      constructions. Why would people who could just as easily—and certainly more proﬁtably
      —build irrigation canals or terrace slopes, weave wool, or do other productive tasks instead
      “waste” their labors on these mammoth construction projects?
           The answer to this question may lie precisely in the fact that these constructions are,
      in a limited sense, “wasteful.” They may, for example, have helped prevent high and
      unstable rates of population growth, perhaps by deﬂecting investments in food production.
      As Leslie White suggested: “It would appear that the ruling class was frequently confronted

                                               ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN SOUTHWEST ASIA         345


with the problems of over-production and the threat of technological unemployment or
a surplus of population among the lower classes. Their great public works programs, the
wholesale disposition of wealth in mortuary customs, etc., enabled them to solve both these
problems with one stroke.”36
     Just as important, monumental construction programs could reinforce social and
political hierarchies. Frankfort speculates:
    The huge building, raised to establish a bond with the power on which the city depended,
    proclaimed not only the ineffable majesty of the gods but also the might of the community
    which had been capable of such an effort. The great temples were witnesses to piety, but
    also objects of civic pride. Built to ensure divine protection for the city, they also enhanced
    the signiﬁcance of citizenship. Outlasting the generation of their builders, they were true
    monuments of the cities’ greatness.37

SUSIANA PLAIN DURING THE URUK PERIOD
The sequence of Uruk culture history on the Susiana Plain parallels in many ways
developments on the central alluvium. Gregory Johnson and Henry Wright have analyzed
Susiana cultural history by focusing on the evolution of administrative institutions.38 They
have been principally concerned with the origins of the state, which they deﬁne as a society
with at least three levels of hierarchically arranged, specialized administrators. For example,
in a simple agricultural village, many of the decisions about what crops to plant, how much
of the harvest is to be stored, who gets what share of the land, who marries whom, and so
forth are made by individuals. Some of those decisions—particularly those that directly affect
the whole community—are made by a village headman. We might say that this individual
represents the ﬁrst level of the decision-making hierarchy—he directs the activities of
others who do the work. A second level of administrative hierarchy would exist if there were
people who coordinate the activities of these village headmen and correct or approve their
decisions—perhaps government agents charged with taxing and administering local affairs.
Such agents would be under a third administrative level, and additional levels may exist
above this.
     In addition to suggesting that the ancient Mesopotamian state can be deﬁned as a
society with at least three such levels of specialized administrators, Wright and Johnson
contend that the effectiveness of such societies and their dominance over other societal
forms are tied to their ability to store and process information and make correct decisions
at speciﬁc points within the control hierarchy.
     Wright and Johnson examined several areas where the ﬁrst Mesopotamian states
developed, looking for evidence of this change. One type of evidence was the actual admin-
istrative documents themselves. In most of Mesopotamia at this time, the administration
of people and goods was facilitated by using pieces of inscribed stone to impress clay with
signs of authorization. These stones were usually either in the form of stamps, used like the
rubber stamps of today, or cylinders that were rolled across the clay to make an impression,
and they varied in size and in the complexity of the symbols incised on them. Fortunately,
the clay impressed with these seals and the seals themselves are often preserved in
archaeological sites, and they can be used to infer the levels of administration in these
extinct societies.
     The impressed clay can be divided into two classes. Some were used to certify the con-
tents of a container such as a vessel, basket, bale, or storeroom. They were made by placing

346   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      a lump of clay over a knot that had to be untied to gain access to the container, so that
      unauthorized entry could be detected. Discarded sealings of this type indicate the receipt
      of stored or redistributed goods. Other seals convey or store facts about goods or people.
      Some are plain counters whose shape indicates a numerical unit, while others (bullae) are
      small spheroidal jackets that were once wrapped around sets of counters, and still others
      are ﬂat, rectangular tablets stamped with numerical symbols. Writing, as we know it, did
      not exist until after the state—as deﬁned by Wright and Johnson—emerged, but these
      stamps and seals obviously conveyed a great deal of information. Clay tokens have also been
      found in about 10 geometric shapes at many early Mesopotamian sites, and Denise
      Schmandt-Besserat argues that these tokens, which were usually enclosed in clay envelopes,
      represented such commodities as pots of grain, numbers of animals, and areas of land and
      are the direct precursors of later written scripts.39
           Wright and Johnson used commodity and message sealings found at sites on the
      Susiana to reconstruct some aspects of the production, transport, and administration of
      goods. They concluded that they could determine when the change was made from one-
      and two-level decision-making institutions to the three levels that deﬁne the state.
           Wright and Johnson also analyzed the locational arrangement of the settlements in
      southwestern Iran and found that after about 3600 b.c. there were trends toward more
      regular spacing of settlements and the emergence of distinctive site size groupings—both
      consistent with the change from a two-level to a three-level control hierarchy. This pattern
      of developing settlement arrangements that correlate with changes in the technology of
      administration is apparently not unique to southwestern Iran: “The transition seems to
      occur in several adjacent regions in Iraq between [2700 b.c. and 3250 b.c.] around the
      ancient centers of Nippur, Nineveh, and Uruk. . . . Thus rather than one case of state
      emergence, there was a series of emergences of individual states in a network of politics.”40
      Wright and Johnson suggest that decisions involving problems posed by drought,
      overpopulation, conﬂict, or some other single factor could probably be handled by a two-
      level hierarchy—something on the order of a chiefdom, perhaps—but a combination of
      problems would require additional decision-making capacity. They suspect that one
      important factor in early Southwest Asian state formation may have been the economic
      interactions between nomadic pastoralists and lowland farmers, probably in the form of
      the exchange of cheese, rugs, meat, minerals, and other highland resources for pottery,
      grain, and other lowland commodities. Economic models suggest that ﬂuctuating demand
      for certain craft products in relatively simple economies often stimulates the centralization
      of workshops and economic administration, and Wright and Johnson suggest that in
      prehistoric Mesopotamia the economic demands of nomads on lowland economies may
      have ﬂuctuated sufﬁciently to produce a similar effect, with the eventual emergence of a
      three-level hierarchy.
           Johnson has applied various concepts from what is known as hierarchy theory and the
      so-called rank-size rule to the Susiana data.41 Hierarchy theory is essentially a search for
      explanations of how everything, from molecular structures to world governments, seems
      to involve hierarchical orderings. The assumption here is that there are principles common
      to all these forms of hierarchies and that the processes by which hierarchies change and
      appear can be mathematically analyzed.
           The rank-size rule is an empirical observation that many settlement patterns are
      similar in terms of the relative sizes of their component settlements. Thus, in any region,

                                             ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN SOUTHWEST ASIA         347


state, or country, one can expect that the distribution of people will be somewhere between
the extreme distributions in which everyone lives in one settlement, or those in which the
populace is divided into settlements of exactly equal population size. A rank-size plot is
produced by ranking each settlement in terms of its population, assigning the number one
to the largest, two to the second largest, and so on, and then graphing the actual popula-
tion of each settlement against the rank of that settlement on a full logarithmic scale.
Geographers have noted that for many developing countries, such as Egypt, the rank-size
plot will be a primate one. For example, Cairo is much larger than any other settlement and
forms such a large proportion of the total Egyptian population that a rank-size plot of Egypt
is sharply concave, in contrast to a linear distribution in which the second-ranked city is
only slightly smaller than the largest, the third is slightly smaller than the second, and so
on. It is sufﬁcient here to note that major shifts in the political and economic organization
of an area are usually reﬂected in its rank-size plot. To use Egypt as an example again, the
great growth of Cairo’s population to nearly 15 million people recently has correlated with
the growing power of the national government and the rapidly industrializing economy.
Prior to 1965, a much greater percentage of Egyptians lived in smaller towns and villages
than do now.
     The archaeological applications of this are obvious. If we know when a site was
occupied and how big it was, we can then estimate population sizes, construct rank-size
plots, and perhaps detect when great political and economic changes were taking place. The
application of this idea to various areas of Mesopotamia yields mixed results. Clearly there
were different rank-size patterns at different times, which might signal the origins of state-
level societies. This would not explain their appearance, but it would help identify them.
But it is difﬁcult to estimate the populations of sites in different time periods with precision.
Also, no one really knows what the different kinds of rank-size plots mean. They are
essentially empirical generalizations without any theory to explain them.
     Nonetheless, a fundamental problem of archaeology is to deﬁne and interpret patterns
in the distribution of artifacts through space and time, and these rank-size plots at least
have the virtue of showing us some possible patterns.
     Various other archaeologists have proposed alternative models of how the Uruk states
formed. Guillermo Algaze,42 for example, has argued that this development was essentially
a process in which the peoples of the resource-deﬁcient Mesopotamian lowlands expanded
their state through trade and warfare in order to incorporate resource-rich areas on the
periphery and to establish secure trade routes extending far beyond the Uruk heartland.
We see, for example, communities in which Uruk styles of architecture and ceramics were
used in western Iran, north into Syria, and even as far away as the Nile Delta.43
     In evaluating the many models of the development of the Uruk and Jemdet Nasr
periods, Susan Pollock notes that these models present these ancient people as rather
passive elements in these developments and tend to focus on the adaptations large groups
made over time and large areas. She suggests that archaeological analyses should attempt
to make our appreciation of the Uruk peoples more human and that “archaeological
analyses . . . must also highlight internal conﬂicts generated from acts of daily social life, as
well as those deriving from major sociocultural transformations.”44 In making these and
other points, Pollock joins numerous other contemporary archaeologists in trying to see
the peoples of the Uruk period, and of all other cultures and eras, as individuals—real, live
people.

348   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


           In a sense, the rise of Mesopotamian states is the rise of urbanism. As the centuries of
      the fourth millennium b.c. passed, towns that had once been home to hundreds became
      cities of thousands of inhabitants. Urbanism does not just increase the size of communities,
      however: A key element of Mesopotamian urbanism was that proportionately greater
      numbers of people lived in larger settlements, and the people in these settlements became
      increasingly specialized in their occupations. All of these people—kings, priests, scribes,
      farmers, soldiers, farmers, slaves, and so on—became functionally integrated in the sense
      that they all depended on each other to perpetuate the community, and all derived beneﬁts
      from the greater efﬁciency of functional differentiation and integration. Toward the end of
      the Uruk period, almost all major settlements were fortiﬁed, and documents written much
      later, at circa 2600 b.c., speak at length of conﬂict between the people of Ur, Uruk, Umma,
      and the other city-states. In subsequent chapters, we will see that the initial stimulus for
      urbanization in other parts of the world also seems to be related to defensive needs: Egypt,
      which was protected from hostile outside forces by the deserts and the sea, developed urban
      societies only comparatively late; while in the Indus Valley, which was much more of a
      crossroads for nomadic and other groups, urbanism was present almost from the very ﬁrst.
      In this context, Adams argues that early Mesopotamian urbanization may have been
      imposed on a rural populace by a small, politically conscious superstratum that was
      motivated principally by military and economic interests.45
           Because of defensive considerations and the cost of transporting labor and products,
      agricultural land nearest the urban areas would have been the most intensively exploited,
      and this may have stimulated the construction of large irrigation systems. Another
      important possible effect of urbanism is that it might have created—and to some extent
      have been created by—the large nomadic populations thought to have been present in
      Southwest Asia as early as 6000 b.c. Most of these people were probably similar to the
      present-day Bakhtiari of western Iran, who herd sheep and goats in the uplands during
      much of the year but come down to the lowlands in the winter to sell their animals wool,
      meat, and milk products and to buy craft items, food, and other products. The relationships
      between these upland nomadic and lowland sedentary groups are varied and complex.46
      Historically, when central governments have weakened in Southwest Asia, some marginal
      cultivators revert to nomadic pastoralism in times of war or poor harvests, while other
      pastoralists become laborers or marginal farmers if they lose too many sheep. One of the
      effects of urbanism suggested by the archaeological record—the depopulation of the
      countryside—may have given nomads a new niche. By working the mountain areas and
      highlands for most of the year, the nomads could have come down and exploited the
      marginal areas between urban centers—peacefully most of the time, but other times with
      hostility—and then traded with the townspeople.
           Toward the end of the fourth millennium b.c., the Mesopotamian alluvium and
      adjacent regions were the heartland of a developed sociopolitical and economic organiza-
      tion that most would call a civilization. Writing had been developed, great temples soared
      up from the centers of large cities, and the economy was both productive and complexly
      interdependent. Also, the Uruk polity spread far beyond the central alluvial plain. At
      Habuba Kabira South, in Syria, a large later Uruk settlement is so similar to the great Uruk
      cities to the south in styles of ceramics and architecture that it may well have been built by
      people who came directly from the south to found this city.47

                                           ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN SOUTHWEST ASIA        349


     As noted earlier, this expansion and intensiﬁcation of the Uruk sphere of cultural
interaction undoubtedly involved extension of commercial links between and within
communities, but there was also probably a strong element of conﬂict as well.


THE EARLY DYNASTIC PERIOD (C. 3000–2350 B.C.)

To the modern urbanite, it may seem inappropriate to label as a “state” a collection of
12 or 14 cities with a combined population of perhaps 100,000 and an area of only a few
thousand square kilometers, but, as someone once observed, it is the small states, like
ﬁfth–century b.c. Athens, Renaissance Florence, and Elizabethan England, that have put
posterity most in their debt. To this list can be added Early Dynastic Sumer.


Sumerian Civilization
Approximately 13 city-states made up Sumerian “civilization” between about 3000 and
2350 b.c. Through most of their history, these city-states were politically autonomous,
but they belonged to the same cultural tradition, and by 3000 b.c. they had collectively
developed many of the classical elements of Southwest Asian civilization, including
ziggurats, brick platforms, the potter’s wheel, wheeled carts, metal-working, sailboats, and
writing.
     The fact that the Sumerian language was essentially unlike those of the contemporary
but less-developed Semitic cultures that surrounded the Sumerian has led some to place
Sumerian origins in Turkey or Bahrain. Sumerian myths speak of origins in some distant
land; but we will probably never determine their ethnic origins, and in a sense this is an
unimportant question. The achievements of cultures cannot be explained in terms of the
special characteristics and mental gifts of the people of these cultures: People are constants
in the equations of cultural evolution, and it is their circumstances and position in place
and time that determine their cultural “achievements.”

SUMERIAN WRITING
We have a detailed picture of life in these Sumerian city-states because shortly before 3000
b.c. they began to develop a written language. What we know about the Sumerian language
is derived from the thousands of clay tablets on which they wrote (Figure 8.13). Their script
is known as cuneiform, from the Latin for “wedge-shaped,” a reference to the fact that
Sumerian was written by impressing wet clay with the end of a reed, leaving wedge-shaped
marks.
      The earliest known written documents may be clay tablets and sealings from early
occupations at Uruk (c. 3400 b.c.)—although we can’t identify their language as written by
Sumerians. These documents include signs for carpenter, donkey, boat, copper, and many
other things, totaling 1,500 symbols in all (Figure 8.14). Some signs seem to mean “to buy,”
while others refer to en, the title of a lord, and to unken, which may have been a people’s
assembly.48 The hierarchical nature of Mesopotamian society by the end of the Uruk period
is vividly illustrated by one of the oldest documents known, the “Standard Professions List,”

           350      PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                 which gives the titles of ofﬁcials and names of professions, all
                                                 arranged according to what is apparently a composite sense
                                                 of power and prestige.49
                                                      The ability of this cumbersome writing to convey
                                                 abstract concepts or the spoken language was initially quite
                                                 limited, but in the centuries after 2900 b.c. the Sumerians
                                                 improved it. Phoneticization, by which some signs came to
                                                 represent distinct words and syllables of the spoken language,
                                                 was a most important development.50 Eventually, much of
                                                 spoken Sumerian was represented by written symbols, and
                                                 the pictographic elements slowly lost their representational
                                                 character as the scribes stylized them and reduced the num-
                                                 ber of directions in which the stylus had to move to write
                                                 them.51 Signs were developed for most Sumerian vowels and
                                                 syllables, but the language was never reduced to an alphabetic
                                                 system where every distinct sound is represented by a unique
                                                 sign. Instead, it remained a welter of signs that represented
                                                 pictographs of concrete objects, signs that represented
                                                 syllables of speech, and signs that categorized (determinatives).
                                                 This made reading the script somewhat complicated, requir-
                                                 ing the memorization of hundreds of different characters.
                                                 One sign, for example, which ultimately derived from a
FIGURE 8.13 A cuneiform text on clay.            pictograph representing a mountain, acquired a total of 10
                                                 possible phonetic values and 4 ideographic values as well.52
                                                 To aid in reading the meaning of the word the Sumerians
                 devised a system of determinatives—signs placed before or after a word to indicate the
                 general category to which the word belonged, such as birds, male proper nouns, or deities.
                      Over the centuries the Sumerians’ successors reduced the complexity of the written
                 language, but even as late as about 1900 b.c., it had between 600 and 700 unique elements.
                 At this stage it was similar to Chinese and a few other modern languages, which faithfully
                 represent the spoken language and are adequate for most purposes, but which, compared
                 to alphabetic systems, are very cumbersome. It is difﬁcult to construct typewriters or
                 computers for languages with hundreds of unique elements, and even minimal literacy in
                 such languages is the product of long and arduous training. (To become literate in modern
                 Chinese, for example, one must memorize several thousand characters.)
                      The role of writing in early Mesopotamian societies seems largely economic. Simple
                 pictographs and the spoken language cannot efﬁciently meet the requirements of a society
                 that has surpluses to be stored and redistributed, water to be allocated, land rights to be
                 assigned and adjudicated, ritual prayers to be said, and all the other tasks we ﬁnd in complex
                 cultures. In fact, only the Inka of Peru managed to develop states and empires without a
                 written language, but they had a fairly efﬁcient substitute in the form of a vast bureaucracy
                 and the quipu, a system of knotted strings in which the length of strings and placement of
                 knots was used as a device to assist the memory of the recordkeeper.
                      The economic element in ancient Mesopotamian scripts is evident in their mathemat-
                 ical notations. Georges Ifrah notes that the Sumerians used a counting system with a base
                 of 60, as well as the base-10 system we have.53 Different commodities were counted using

                                              ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN SOUTHWEST ASIA           351




FIGURE 8.14 The evolution of Sumerian writing. Fourth millennium b.c. tablets were inscribed
vertically with pictographs, but in the early third millennium, the direction of the writing and the
pictographs were rotated to the horizontal. In succeeding millennia the symbols were stylized and
given phonetic meanings.



different systems. It is difﬁcult for most people to accept that there is nothing inherently
necessary about a base-10 numbering system. But modern computers employ a base-2
system, for example, using just 1s and 0s to represent all numbers. Whatever base is used,
people usually have given a unique name to each of the numbers, so a base-2 system is the
simplest and a base-60 system is rather unwieldy.54 The Sumerians got around the problem
of having to learn and use a unique name for each number between 0 and 60 by giving a
name to each multiple of 10 lower than or equal to 60. As H. W. F. Saggs notes, the ancient
Sumerians and their successors used their mathematical systems not only for economic
accounting but also for land surveying, calendrical calculations, and astronomical science.55
By about 1800 b.c. the people of Mesopotamia (1) had calculated the square root of 2 to a
value correct to 1 in 2,000,000; (2) had formulated massive tables of reciprocals of
sexagesimal numbers; (3) knew how to calculate the length of a hypotenuse from the

352   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      lengths of the sides of right-angled triangles (1,200 years before Pythagoras); (4) could
      calculate cube roots; and (5) knew some algebraic operations.56
           The way of life described by the Sumerian texts, and by texts of other Southwest Asian
      cultures of the third millennium b.c., is still recognizable to anyone who has traveled in
      these areas. Sheep, goats, and cattle are tabulated, taxed, and exchanged; children are
      shepherded to school—as always, much against their will; a council of elders meets to
      consider grievances against the inhabitants of an adjoining town; and Sumerian proverbs
      express ideas recognizable in many societies:
          Upon my escaping from the wild ox,
          The wild cow confronted me.
          When a poor man dies,
          do not try to revive him.57
      But when they turn to mythological and eschatological themes, the ancient Mesopotamians
      are less accessible—perhaps even a bit bizarre—by our standards, as in this section of the
      myth of the revival of the goddess Inanna:
          Go to the underworld.
          Enter the door like ﬂies.
          Ereshkigal, the Queen of the Underworld, is moaning
          With the cries of a woman about to give birth.
          No linen is spread over her body.
          Her breasts are uncovered.
          Her hair swirls about her head like leeks.

          When she cries, “Oh! Oh! My inside!”
          Cry also, “Oh! Oh! Your Inside!”
          When she cries, “Oh! Oh! My outside!”
          Cry also, “Oh! Oh! Your outside!”
          The queen will be pleased.
          She will offer you a gift.
          Ask her only for the corpse that hangs from the hook on the wall.
          One of you will sprinkle the food of life on it.
          The other will sprinkle the water of life.
          Inanna will arise.58
      Western philosophy and theology are deeply inﬂuenced by the philosophies ﬁrst pro-
      pounded in ancient Greece, philosophies very different from those of ancient Sumer. Thus,
      most Westerners see the world in terms of beginnings and ends, causes and effects, and the
      importance and “will” of the individual. We cannot completely reconstruct Sumerian
      philosophy on the basis of fragmentary texts, but it seems evident that the Sumerians saw
      a much more static and magical world than we do. Although their technology and complex
      organizations demonstrate that they were shrewd, rational people, there seems to have been
      little emphasis or analysis of human motivation or the physical world. They viewed the
      earth as a ﬂat disk under a vaulted heaven and believed that various gods guided history
      according to well-laid-out plans and that the world continues without end and with little

                                                  ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN SOUTHWEST ASIA           353


Table 8.1 Similarities Between Sumerian Stories and the Noachian Flood Story

Babylonian Cuneiform                                   Genesis

1. The gods decide to make a ﬂood.                     1. The Lord decides to destroy wicked mankind.
2. The God Ea warns Artarhasis to build a ship.        2. The Lord warns Noah to build an ark.
3. Artarhasis is to take his family and animals        3. Noah is to take his family and animals aboard.
   aboard.
4. The ﬂood turns mankind into clay.                   4. The ﬂood destroys all ﬂesh.
5. The ship grounds on Mount Nisir.                    5. The ark comes to rest on the Ararat
                                                          Mountains.
6. Artarhasis learns when the waters have subsided     6. Noah learns when the waters have subsided by
   by sending out a dove, a swallow, and a raven.         sending out a dove, a swallow, and a raven.
7. He offers sacriﬁce to the gods.                     7. He offers sacriﬁce to the Lord.
8. The gods smell the sweet savor.                     8. The Lord smells the pleasing odor.
9. The god Enlil blesses Artarhasis and his wife.      9. God blesses Noah and his sons.



change. Each god was in charge of something—the movements of the planets, irrigation,
or brick-making, for example—and each was immortal and inﬂexible. As with humans, the
deities were hierarchically arranged in power and authority and were given to power
struggles and many vices.
     Like most people, the Sumerians thought that the gods had a special interest in
them. Just as every American dollar bill has on the back of it the assertion that annuit coeptis
(“[God] has favored our undertaking”), almost every ofﬁcial Sumerian pronouncement
and inscription invoked the favor of the gods who, it was assumed, favored the city’s
fortunes.
     One way in which Sumerian religion and ideology has inﬂuenced modern cultures is
in its inﬂuence on Judeo-Christian religious traditions. The biblical account of the
Noachian ﬂood, for example, is clearly related to Sumerian stories that predated the Old
Testament by thousands of years. Finegan has identiﬁed some of the similarities59 (see
Table 8.1).
     In 1929 S. Langdon, excavating the Sumerian city of Kish, and Sir L. Woolley,
excavating at Ur, both announced that they had found thick levels of clean sand that they
presumed was evidence of the biblical Flood.60 Some members of these expeditions are
even said to have sold vials of sand labeled “Samples from the Great Flood.”
     But Spuhler notes that many layers thought to be ﬂood deposits are really sand dunes
produced by winds, while others are ordinary river deposits.61 In any case, radiocarbon
dates for levels thought to be of the biblical Flood range from 4500 b.c. to 2700 b.c., and
the absence of sand strata at many other nearby sites, and the evidence of life as usual all
over Mesopotamia at this time, rule out fairly conclusively any scientiﬁc evidence for the
biblical Flood—except in the opinion of the people who keep climbing Mount Ararat
looking for pieces of the ark. Popular press reports of a Russian pilot who saw the outline
of a boat far above the tree line on this mountain have fueled several expeditions to recover
the ark, but so far only a few questionable bits of wood have been found. Only the drearily
unimaginative archaeologist would be impressed by the fact that all the samples of wood
were radiocarbon-dated to about 3,500 years ago—a time for which there is no evidence
that the rest of the world was ﬂooded.62

354   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      SUMERIAN INSTITUTIONS AND ECONOMY
      Tantalizing clues in documents suggest that many Sumerian city-states had a public
      assembly in which, perhaps, people formulated policy and made decisions through
      consensus and even a form of simple democracy.63 Cities appear to have been divided into
      something like modern “wards,” but we really don’t know the organizing principles. There
      is some evidence64 that people were organized in clans, and kinship ties probably remained
      the connective tissue of Sumerian civilization through most of its history. Yet one of the things
      that all states do is complement kinship ties with links among and within socioeconomic
      classes in order to provide effective methods of getting people to operate in useful corporate
      groups (e.g., serving in military units tied together by kinship and place of origins, as in units
      in the American Civil War). In the long run, state societies seem to wear away at kinship
      ties, replacing them with socioeconomic class ties and other kinds of corporate groups.
            The Sumerian extended family appears to have been a strong and durable unit,
      protected by laws governing rights of inheritance, recompense for injuries, and so forth. As
      Nicholas Postgate notes, women were reasonably well treated both by law and custom in
      Sumerian society, but there seems little doubt that this was a strongly patriarchal culture,
      as evidenced by divorce law: “If a wife rejects her husband and says ‘You are not my husband’,
      they shall cast her into the river. If a husband says to his wife ‘You are not my wife’, he shall
      pay 1/2 mina of silver.”65
            In Sumer, wheat, barley, vegetables, and dates were the major crops, while cattle-
      raising and ﬁshing were of almost equal importance. Cattle were raised for draft power,
      hides, and milk and meat. Fish was a staple, as were mutton, goat, and pork. It is interesting
      in view of their later status as a taboo food in much of the Middle East that pigs were a
      common sight on Sumerian farms, prized for their fat and grease (although rarely if ever
      depicted in art, except in ﬁgures and ceramics66).
            Out of each measure of wheat or barley harvested, the Mesopotamian farmer probably
      fed about 16 percent to his animals, reserved about 10 percent for the next year’s sowing,
      lost about 25 percent in storage, and ate the rest.67 If ethnographic studies are to be believed,
      in the absence of modern transport, people did not cultivate ﬁelds much more than 4 km
      from their houses. At any given time, much of the land around a village in ancient times
      would have been fallow, while other land would have been unirrigatable or of marginal
      productivity. Adams estimates that each person would need for subsistence about 1 hectare
      of barley and wheat ﬁelds, along with at least some pastures and orchards.
            One of the less desirable “ﬁrsts” of Sumerian civilization was probably in the ﬁeld of
      epidemic diseases. Just as there are certain disastrous things a hunter and gatherer can do
      (e.g., to presume on too slight evidence that a cave bear is not at home), one of the worst
      things a villager can do is contaminate drinking water with sewage, and this is hard to avoid
      in a primitive town. Typhoid, cholera, and many other diseases require certain levels of
      population density to evolve, to maintain a reservoir of infected individuals, and to
      perpetuate themselves. These levels were probably reached for the ﬁrst time in Sumer. Once
      people started digging wells and irrigation canals in areas with many people and animals,
      disease and epidemics quickly followed.
            Few economies in history or prehistory have been as organized as the Sumerian. Tablet
      after tablet records endless lists of commodities produced, stored, and allotted. Ration lists,
      work forces, guild members—all are recorded in numbing detail. Even the city’s snake-
      charmers were organized.

                                              ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN SOUTHWEST ASIA   355


     The state and church controlled economic matters
through much of Mesopotamian history, but individual
merchants and capitalist elements also seem to have
been signiﬁcant fairly early on. This is important for the
Marxian scholar because once you have individual wealth
and capital, the possibilities for class conﬂict and the rest
of the Marxian paradigm exist. Although Sumerian
society was organized on the basis of kinship, people also
belonged to and acted through occupational and social
classes. In the event of war, for example, members of
different “guilds,” such as silversmiths or potters, would
be under the command of their “guild president.” At the
pinnacle of Sumerian society was a god-king, assumed to
be a descendant of the gods who was also in contact with
the gods. Beneath him was a leisure class of nobles. There
was also a class of wealthy businessmen who lived in the
larger, better houses of the city; of lesser wealth and
prestige were the many artisans and farmers, including
smiths, leather-workers, ﬁshermen, bricklayers, weavers,
and potters. Scribes apparently held fairly important
positions, and literacy was an admired accomplish-
ment. At the bottom of society were the slaves, often war
captives or dispossessed farmers.
     Money, as we know it, did not exist in ancient Sumer;
most exchange was “in kind,” the trading of products for
other products. Local and long-distance trade was
voluminous, however, and ships sailed up the rivers from
the gulf carrying shell, carnelian, lapis lazuli, silver, gold,
onyx, alabaster, textiles, and food and other produce.
     One of the most spectacular differences between
Sumerian societies after 3000 b.c. and their predecessors
is in mortuary practices. At the end of the ‘Ubaid period
(3800 b.c.), graves varied little, even at the largest settle-
ments; but after 3000 b.c. a radical shift occurred. The
famous death pit at Ur is an impressive display of wealth
and pomp (Figure 8.15). Excavating here in 1927–1928,
Sir Leonard Woolley came upon ﬁve bodies lying side
by side, each with a copper dagger and other items.68
Beneath them was a layer of matting on which he
encountered the bodies of 10 women, lying in two rows,


FIGURE 8.15 (Right) Crushed skull of a female attendant in
the death pit at Ur (above). Note the gold jewelry and precious
stones. This Sumerian model of a goat and a tree (below) is
made of wood, lapis, and gold, and is about 51 cm high. It was
found at Ur and dates to about 2600 b.c.

           356        PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                        each richly ornamented with gold, lapis lazuli, and carnelian
                                                        jewelry. Nearby was a gold- and jewel-encrusted harp, across
                                                        which were the bones of the gold-crowned harpist. The bodies
                                                        were lying on a ramp, and as the excavators continued down
                                                        the platform they encountered a heavily jeweled chariot,
                                                        complete with the remains of oxen and grooms. Then the
                                                        investigators began unearthing masses of gold, silver, stone,
                                                        and copper vessels, as well as additional human bodies,
                                                        weapons, and other items. Nearby, another set of six male
                                                        skeletons equipped with copper knives and helmets was
                                                        found, as well as the remains of two four-wheeled wooden
                                                        wagons—also decorated with harnesses of gold and silver and
                                                        accompanied by the skeletons of grooms and drivers. Other
                                                        arrangements of human skeletons, harps, wagons, and model
                                                        boats appeared as the excavations continued. At the end of the
                                                        tomb was a wooden bier containing the remains of the queen.
                                                        The entire upper part of her body was hidden by a mass of
                                                        beads of gold, silver, lapis lazuli, carnelian, agate, and
                                                        chalcedony. Her headdress and other furnishings were lavishly
FIGURE 8.16 Gypsum statuettes of an aged                ornamented with gold, silver, and precious jewels. Liberally
couple, residents at about 2500 b.c. of Nippur,         strewn about the chamber were human bodies, jewelry, vessels
one of the largest cities in southern Mesopotamia       of precious metals, silver ﬁgurines, silver tables, cosmetics,
during this period.                                     seashell ornaments, and a number of other treasures.
                                                              All together some 16 “royal” burials were found at Ur, all
                                                        of them distinguished from the myriad common graves by the
                         fact that each was not merely a cofﬁn but rather a structure of stone, or stone and mudbrick,
                         and by the inclusion of human sacriﬁces—up to 80 in one case. At least three categories of
                         burials seemed evident, ranging from the 16 royal graves to less elaborate but still richly
                         furnished graves in which the common people were presumably placed.
                               As brilliant as Sumerian civilization was, one must realize that it was just one of the
                         states of this era (Figure 8.16). In the southwestern highlands of Iran, for example, between
                         3300 and 2800 b.c. a great Proto-Elamite trading state arose, perhaps on the basis of its
                         ability to dominate trade over the rich routes between Mesopotamia and the Iranian
                         Plateau.69



                      SOUTHWEST ASIA AFTER 2350 B.C.

                      For centuries after 3000 b.c., the Sumerian city-states engaged in almost constant warfare,
                      with ﬁrst one and then another gaining temporary ascendancy. With the rise to power of
                      Sargon of Akkad at about 2350 b.c., however, the political fabric of ancient Southwest Asia
                      was forever changed. Sargon and his several immediate successors used the city of Akkad
                      as a military base from which they mounted spectacularly successful attacks in all
                      directions. Akkadian historical documents recount 34 battles fought by Sargon against the
                      southern city-states, during which he moved down the alluvial plain, capturing many kings,
                      smashing city walls, and ﬁnally “cleansing his weapons in the sea.” Sargon appointed

                                           ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN SOUTHWEST ASIA       357


Akkadians to administrative posts in the conquered city-states and then began expanding
his other frontiers, invading Syria, Lebanon, and western Iran.
     After 2250 b.c. quarrels arose among rival claimants to the Akkadian throne, and the
state fragmented under the onslaught of peoples moving in from the highlands on its
margins. This “dark age” lasted until about 2100 b.c., when one or more Sumerian kings
were able to evict the invaders and reestablish political control over much of the southern
alluvial plain under what is known as the Ur III dynasty. One ruler, Ur-Nammu, based at
the ancient city of Ur, aggressively extended his inﬂuence into much of the area formally
encompassed by the Akkadians. Great volumes of obsidian, lapis lazuli, and copper are
thought to have passed into central Mesopotamia from as far away as Afghanistan, Anatolia,
and even Cyprus. Legal texts of the late third millennium describe in detail problems of
land use, irrigation rights, compensation for bodily injury, penalties for adultery, and many
other elements of daily life.
     Despite its apparent stability, the Ur III political system of the late third millennium
was constantly under pressure from internal political rivalries, as well as from the
incursions of semi-nomads and rival groups along the state’s frontiers. The coup de grace
was administered at about 2004 b.c. with the invasion from western Iran of the Elamites,
who led the king of Ur away in captivity.
     From about 2000 to 1800 b.c., Greater Mesopotamia was politically fragmented
as kings at Isin, Larsa, Susa, and elsewhere established contending states.70 Eventually, the
ancient city of Babylon became the most powerful political entity, and by 1792 b.c.
Hammurabi established the Babylonian Empire, based mainly on the southern alluvial
plain. The many documents of his reign that have survived reﬂect a skillful politician adept
at bureaucratic, military, and political uses of power: his famous law code, although harsh
by modern standards, reﬂects efﬁcient administration. Both Hammurabi and his successors
encountered opposition from southern city-states and from a rival state in Assyria, to the
north. As always, the nomads and other peoples on the empire’s periphery—in this case
the Kassites and Hurrians—made inroads as soon as the central government weakened, and
eventually they overran much of the Babylonian Empire.
     After about 1600 b.c., the political history of Southwest Asia becomes extremely
complicated, with frequent political realignments and, ultimately, the gradual development
and extension of imperial power (Figure 8.17). Assyrians, Elamites, Achaemenids, and




FIGURE 8.17 The extent of the Assyrian and Persian (Achaemenid) empires.

           358       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                    other cultural groups estab-
                                                                                    lished empires, and eventually
                                                                                    the political and military scale
                                                                                    became distinctly internal as
                                                                                    empires centered in Egypt,
                                                                                    Anatolia, and Iran met and,
                                                                                    more often than not, came into
                                                                                    conﬂict (Figure 8.18).


                                                                                    SUMMARY AND
                                                                                    CONCLUSIONS

                                                                                     It is possible that some
                                                                                     archaeologist will, while sweat-
FIGURE 8.18 At about 500 b.c. the capital of the Achaemenid Empire was               ing over a Mesopotamian
Persepolis, in central Iran. This grand stairway ascends to the Palace, and along it mudbrick building foundation
are reliefs that illustrate real-life processions to pay homage to the king. Some of one day, discover a library of
these sculpted ﬁgures carry ﬂowers and other gifts for the ruler.                    cuneiform tablets that record
                                                                                     in great detail a history of the
                                                                                     origins of the Mesopotamian
                                                                                     state, complete with popula-
                                                                                     tion statistics, war casualties,
                                                                                     changes in the weather, average
                                                                                     fertility rates, and a demo-
                                                                                     graphic analysis of the whole
                                                                                     critical two millennia of state
                                                                                     origins.
                                                                                          In fact, discoveries from
                                                                                     Syria, dated to the late third
                                                                                     millennium b.c., of previously
                                                                                     unknown archives of thousands
                                                                                     of texts do provide some
                                                                                     information of this kind
                                                                                     (Figure 8.19). But for the most
                                                                                     part, only archaeological data
                                                                                     can provide evidence of the
                                                                                     long-term and broad-scale
FIGURE 8.19 Important records written on clay tablets were preserved in burnt        factors that form the frame-
rooms at Ebla, Syria.                                                                work of Southwest Asian
                                                                                     cultural history. We have some
                                                                                     sense of such factors as the
                         rates of population growth, evolution of trade networks, changing settlement patterns
                         (Figure 8.20), and so on, but excavations are slow and expensive, and political problems
                         continue to hinder research.

                                                ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN SOUTHWEST ASIA            359




FIGURE 8.20 Settlement rank-size plots produced by Robert McC. Adams (1981) for two areas of
Mesopotamia during the early Middle Uruk period (c. 3400 b.c.) and the Late Uruk period (c. 3200
b.c.), the periods when the ﬁrst “states” were appearing in this part of Mesopotamia. Rank-size plots
like these are formed by ranking the settlements from largest to smallest and then plotting a
settlement’s rank against its size on a log-log scale. Geographers have found that different shapes of
such plots correlate with certain kinds of economic and political situations. The “ﬂat-top” plot of the
Early Uruk in the Nippur-Adab region (B) often is associated with very loose economic integration,
whereas a log-normal distribution (the dotted lines in the graphs) is associated with considerable
political and economic integration. The fact that both the plots for the Late Uruk period—when the
ﬁrst developed complex societies here were in operation—changed over time in the same direction
from markedly different original plots may reﬂect the growing economic and political
interdependence of settlements in the Late Uruk “state.”

     With the information now available, however, the evolution of complex societies in
Mesopotamia seems to have been the result of multiple factors, operating in complex
patterns that differed from place to place. The alluvial plain has the potential to produce
tremendous quantities of food, more than is required in most years to sustain millions of
people and their domestic animals. Such surpluses do not necessarily create great differ-
ences in wealth, but they certainly allow the formation of rich and poor social classes, and

360   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      it seems to be a pattern that wherever one ﬁnds economic systems that produce great
      surpluses, one also discovers elaborate social hierarchies of administrators to organize,
      store, distribute, and exploit these surpluses.
           What factors stimulate the production of surpluses and thus create the conditions for
      the establishment of social classes and administrative hierarchies? Our review of the evidence
      from Southwest Asia suggests that irrigation cannot be said to be the “primary cause” of
      early Southwest Asian cultural complexity. Occupational specialization, monumental
      architecture, changes in settlement spacing and size hierarchies, architectural variability,
      mortuary stratiﬁcation—in short, the whole range of physical evidence of cultural complexity
      —appear before evidence of signiﬁcant extension of irrigation systems. This is true for both
      the heartland of Sumer and for the Susiana Plain in southwestern Iran—the two areas for
      which we have the best archaeological data. In much of Southwest Asia, in fact, increased
      investments in irrigation systems appear to be the result of urbanism, not its cause.71
           For large cities to form and persist, the areas surrounding them must be particularly
      productive because it was not feasible for these ancient city-dwellers to farm areas more
      than a 5 or 10 km from the city. Irrigation was absolutely necessary for any sedentary
      existence on the alluvial plain, but if the spread, integration, and construction of irrigation
      systems were the mechanisms whereby complex societies ﬁrst evolved and developed, we
      would expect to see a direct and positive correlation between the size and complexity of
      irrigation systems and the complexity of cultures based on them.
           Instead, we ﬁnd that ‘Ubaid, Uruk, and Early Dynastic settlements subsisted on the
      produce of ﬁelds that could be irrigated by relatively simple, autonomous canal works. Only
      many centuries after the appearance of the ﬁrst complex societies were complex, integrated
      irrigation systems in place.
           Some scholars have tried to explain the origins of cultural complexity in Southwest
      Asia and elsewhere as mainly the result of human population growth. The persistence of
      this view must be seen in large part as a result of the fact that if one graphs the approximate
      population of Greater Mesopotamia from about 8000 b.c. to about 3000 b.c. against
      evidence of activity specialization, monumental architecture, agricultural productivity, and
      other indications of cultural complexity, then an impressively close correlation is apparent.
      Also, it is difﬁcult not to be impressed by the evidence that warfare was a potent factor in
      Mesopotamian cultural evolution. Great brick walls ring cities and villages alike in some
      periods, and there are caches of weapons, chariots, documents, and representational art to
      tell us that warfare formed the very weft and warp of Mesopotamian history. Nor is this
      sustained level of warfare merely a historical curiosity: If some adult male citizen in ancient
      Mesopotamia of almost any century were transported through time to our own age, the
      thing he would ﬁnd most familiar, perhaps, is the battle that raged through the 1980s
      between Iran and Iraq, or the 1990 Gulf War, or the recent Iraq war in 2003. Armies have
      met here in this same general area in almost every century for more than 5,000 years.
           If we apply the principles of evolutionary biology, warfare is simply an expression of
      competition, which is common to all life-forms. To give it a name, however, is not to
      explain it, nor is the importance of warfare in initial Mesopotamian cultural complexity
      manifestly evident. One might expect that, with the cheapness of clay construction, there
      would be many more walled settlements in the early civilizations if warfare were a frequent
      curse. The walling of towns does occur very soon after the emergence of urbanism, and
      warfare may have played a signiﬁcant role in the major increases of cultural complexity that

                                              ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN SOUTHWEST ASIA       361


followed the earliest “states,” but extensive circumvallation of sites is common on the
southern alluvial plain mainly after about 2900 b.c.—some centuries after the appearance
of other evidence of cultural complexity. After 2900 b.c. the historical records leave no
doubt that warfare was almost continuous throughout Southwest Asia. But can population
growth and warfare be shown to have been antecedent conditions to the rise of
Mesopotamian states? Robert McC. Adams concludes:
    Possibly the attainment of some minimal population level was necessary to set the process
    [for urbanization] into motion. But such evidence as there is suggests that appreciable
    population increases generally followed, rather than preceded, the core processes of the
    Urban Revolution. Particularly in Mesopotamia, where the sedentary village pattern seems
    to have been stabilized for several millennia between the establishment of effective food
    production and the “take-off ” into urbanism, it may be noted that there is simply no
    evidence for gradual population increases that might have helped to precipitate the Urban
    Revolution.72
Adams here is principally concerned with the phenomenon of urbanism rather than
complex societies in general, but his “Urban Revolution” includes many of the essential
transitions we have deﬁned as the basis for the evolution of complex societies. What about
agricultural intensiﬁcation? In Carneiro’s scheme this is a direct result of population
pressure; thus we should ﬁnd evidence of increasingly intensive irrigation and of farming
of marginal lands just before, and along with, the evolution of cultural complexity. But
major investments in irrigation and land reclamation seem to have occurred after the
emergence of urbanism and other evidences of cultural complexity. In addition, as Adams
notes, urbanization appears to have involved the widespread abandonment of large areas
of formerly intensively farmed lands. Furthermore, there is no evidence that any of the areas
of early state formation ever approached their agricultural limits; that is, with only minor
investments in additional irrigation systems, they could have enormously increased the
numbers of people who could be supported, yet the population size remained quite stable.
In short, agricultural intensiﬁcation seems to have been more a result than a cause of the
emergence of complex societies.
     Adams nonetheless attributes considerable importance to environment and agri-
culture in the evolution of Southwest Asian civilization:
    In the largest sense, Mesopotamian cities can be viewed as an adaptation to [the] perennial
    problem of periodic, unpredictable shortages. They provided concentration points for the
    storage of surpluses, necessarily soon walled to assure their defensibility. The initial
    distribution of smaller communities around them suggests primarily localized exploitation
    of land, with much of the producing population being persuaded or compelled to take up
    residence within individual walled centers rather than remaining in villages closer to their
    ﬁelds. Tending to contradict a narrowly determinist view of urban genesis as merely the
    formation of walled storage depots, the drawing together of signiﬁcantly larger settlements
    than had existed previously not only created an essentially new basis for cultural and
    organizational growth but could hardly have been brought about without the development
    of powerful new means for unifying what originally were socially and culturally
    heterogeneous groups.73
Adams argues “that the primary basis for [political-economic] organization was religious
allegiance to deities or cults identiﬁed with particular localities, political superordination
resting ultimately on the possibility of military coercion, or a ﬂuid mixture of both.”74

362   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


           So, as with other areas of early civilization, when we examine the basic factors of
      environment, ecology, technology, demography, and agriculture, we see strong correlations
      between these factors and the shape and history of Southwest Asian history. Yet, these
      correlations do not constitute a powerful explanation or comprehensive understanding of
      Southwest Asian cultures. At a fundamental level these civilizations were a set of ideas and
      social relations. The ideology that legitimized the strict hierarchies of power, prestige and
      wealth and the social relationships among the many peoples in these hierarchies are a
      crucial focus of analysis in trying to understand why Southwest Asian civilizations evolved
      and how they functioned. Ancient texts, in combination with other archaeological data,
      help us understand much about these social relationships, but there is much we still do not
      understand.


      BIBLIOGRAPHY
      Abu es-Soof, B. 1968. “Tell Es-Sawwan: Excavations of the Fourth Season (Spring 1967) Interim Report.” Sumer
                  24:3–16.
      Adams, R. McC. 1965. Land Behind Baghdad. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
      ———. 1966. The Evolution of Urban Society: Early Mesopotamia and Prehispanic Mexico. Chicago: Aldine.
      ———. 1972. “Patterns of Urbanization in Early Southern Mesopotamia.” In Man, Settlement and Urbanism, ed.
                  P. G. Ucko, R. Tringham, and G. Dimbleby. London: Duckworth.
      ———. 1981. Heartland of Cities. Chicago: Aldine.
      Adams, R. McC., and H. Nissen. 1972. The Uruk Countryside. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
      Akkermans, P. P. M. G. 1989. “Tradition and Social Change in Northern Mesopotamia During the Later Fifth and
                  Fourth Millenium b.c.” In Upon This Foundation—The Ubaid Reconsidered, ed. E. F. Henrickson and
                  I. Thuesen. Copenhagen: Museum Tusculanum Press.
      Alden, J. R. 1982. “Trade and Politics in Proto-Elamite Iran.” Current Anthropology 23(6):613–640.
      Algaze, G. 1989. “The Uruk Expansion, Cross-Cultural Exchange in Early Mesopotamian Civilization.” Current
                  Anthropology 30(5):571–608.
      ———. 1993. The Uruk World System. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
      ———. 2001. “Initial Social Complexity in Southwestern Asia: The Mesopotamian Advantage.” Current
                  Anthropology 42(2):199–233.
      Algaze, G., M. E. Evins, M. L. Ingraham, L. Marfoe, and K. A. Yener. 1990. Town and Country in Southeastern
                  Anatolia. Vol. 2: The Stratigraphic Sequence at Kurban Höyük. Oriental Institute Publications 110.
                  Chicago: Oriental Institute.
      Areshian, G. E. 1990. “Further Thoughts on the Uruk Expansion.” Current Anthropology 31:396 –398.
      Ball, W., D. Tucker, and T. J. Wilkinson. 1989. “The Tell Al-Hawa Project: Archaeological Investigations in the
                  North Jazira, 1986–87.” Iraq 41:1– 66.
      Ballard, R. D. 2001. “Deep Black Sea.” National Geographic 199(5):52–69.
      Behm-Blancke, M. R. 1989. “Mosaiksifte am oberen Euphrat—Wandschmuck aus Uruk-Zeit.” Istanbuler
                  Mitteilungen 39:73–83.
      Boehmer, R. M. 1991. “Uruk 1980 –1990: A Progress Report.” Antiquity 65:465 – 478.
      Breniquet, C. 1989. “Les origines de la culture d’Obeid en Mésopotamie du nord.” In Upon This Foundation—The
                  Ubaid Reconsidered , ed. E. F. Henrickson and I. Thuesen. Copenhagen: Museum Tusculanum Press.
      Byrd, B. F. 1994. “Public and Private, Domestic and Corporate: The Emergence of the Southwest Asian Village.”
                  American Antiquity 59(4):639– 666.
      Chase-Dunn, C., and T. D. Hall. 1991. “Conceptualizing Core/Periphery Hierarchies for Comparative Study.” In
                  Core/Periphery Relations in Pre-capitalist Worlds, ed. C. Chase-Dunn and T. D. Hall. Boulder, CO:
                  Westview Press.
      Childe, V. G. 1952. New Light on the Most Ancient East. 4th ed. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
      Cowgill, G. 1975. “On Causes and Consequences of Ancient and Modern Population Changes.” American
                  Anthropologist 77:505–525.
      Crawford, H. 1991. Sumer and the Sumerians. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
      Cribb, R. 1991. Nomads in Archaeology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
      Crumley, C. L. 1979. “Three Locational Models: An Epistemological Assessment for Anthropology and
                  Archaeology.” In Advances in Archaeological Method and Theory, Vol. 2, ed. M. B. Schiffer. New York:
                  Academic Press.

                                                      ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN SOUTHWEST ASIA                     363


Diakonoff, I. M., ed. 1969. Ancient Mesopotamia. Moscow: Nauka.
Diringer, D. 1962. Writing. New York: Praeger.
Evins, M. A. 1989. “The Late Chalcolithic/Uruk Period in the Karababa Casin, Southeastern Turkey.” In “Out of
             the Heartland: The Evolution of Complexity in Peripheral Mesopotamia During the Uruk Period,
             Workshop Summary,” ed. M. Rothman. Paléorient 14:270 –271.
Falconer, S. E., and S. H. Savage. 1995. “Heartlands and Hinterlands: Alternative Trajectories of Early
             Urbanization in Mesopotamia and the Southern Levant.” American Antiquity 60(1):37–58.
Finegan, J. 1964. Handbook of Biblical Chronology: Principles of Time Reckoning in the Ancient World and Problems
             of Chronology in the Bible. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Flannery, K. V. 1972. “The Cultural Evolution of Civilizations.” Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics
             3:399–426.
Frangipane, M., and A. Palmieri. 1987. “Urbanization in Perimesopotamian Areas: The Case of Eastern Anatolia.”
             In Studies in the Neolithic and Urban Revolutions, ed. L. Manzanilla, pp. 295–318. Oxford: British
             Archaeological Reports International Series 349.
Frankfort, H. 1956. The Birth of Civilization in the Near East. Garden City, NY: Doubleday.
Friedman, J., and M. J. Rowlands. 1977. The Evolution of Social Systems. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Gelb, I. J. 1952. A Study of Writing: The Foundations of Grammatology. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
———. 1969. “On the Alleged Temple and State Economics in Ancient Mesopotamia.” Estratto da studi in onore
             di Edouard Vtoltera 4:139–154.
Gibson, M. 1972. “Population Shift and the Rise of Mesopotamian Civilization.” In The Explanation of Cultural
             Change: Models in Prehistory, ed. C. Renfrew. London: Duckworth.
Goldstein, P. S. 1989. “The Tiwanaco Occupation of Moquegua.” In Ecology, Settlement, and History in the Osmore
             Drainage, Peru. ed. D. S. Rice, C. Stanish, and P. R. Scarr. Oxford: British Archaeological Review,
             International Series 545.
Hamblin, D. J., and the Editors of Time-Life Books. 1973. The First Cities. New York: Time-Life.
Hauptmann, H. 1999. “The Urfa Region.” In Neolithic in Turkey: The Cradle of Civilization: New Discoveries, ed.
             M. Özdoǧan and N. Başgelen, pp. 65–86. Istanbul: Arkeoloji Sanat Yayinlari.
Hodder, I. 1999. “Renewed Work at Çatalhöyük.” In Neolithic in Turkey: The Cradle of Civilization: New
             Discoveries, ed. M. Özdoǧan and N. Başgelen, pp. 157–164. Istanbul: Arkeoloji Sanat Yayinlari.
———, ed. 2000. Towards Reﬂexive Method in Archaeology: The Example at Çatalhöyük. Cambridge, UK:
             McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research.
Hodder, I., and C. Cessford. 2004. “Daily Practice and Social Memory at Çatalhöyük.” American Antiquity
             69(1):17–40.
Hole, F. 1978. “The Prehistory of Herding: Some Suggestions from Ethnography.” In L’Archéologie de l’Iraq du
             début de l’époque Néolitique à 333 avant notre ère, ed. M. T. Barrelet pp. 119–130. Paris: Éditions de la
             Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque.
———. 1987. “Settlement and Society in the Village Period.” In The Archaeology of Western Iran, ed. F. Hole.
             Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
———. 1994. “Environmental Instabilities and Urban Origins.” In Chiefdoms and Early States in the Near East:
             The Organizational Dynamics of Complexity. Monographs in World Archaeology 18, pp. 121–151.
             Madison: Prehistory Press.
Hole, F., K. V. Flannery, and J. A. Neely. 1969. Prehistory and Human Ecology of the Deh Luran Plain. Ann Arbor:
             Memoirs of the Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan, No. 1.
Hout, J.-L. 1979: “Ubaidian Villages of Lower Mesopotamia.” In Upon This Foundation—The Ubaid Reconsidered,
             ed. E. F. Henrickson and I. Thuesen. Copenhagen: Museum Tusculanum Press.
Ifrah, G. 1985. From One to Zero. Trans. L. Bair. New York: Viking Penguin.
Jacobsen, T., and R. Adams. 1958. “Salt and Silt in Mesopotamian Agriculture.” Science 128:1251–1258.
Jawad, A. J. 1965. The Advent of the Era of Townships of Northern Mesopotamia. Leiden: Brill.
Johnson, G. A. 1973. Local Exchange and Early State Development in Southwestern Iran. Ann Arbor: Museum of
             Anthropology, Anthropological Papers, University of Michigan, No. 51.
———. 1977. “Aspects of Regional Analysis in Archaeology.” Annual Review of Anthropology 6:479–508.
———. 1981. “Monitoring Complex System Integration and Boundary Phenomena with Settlement Size Data.”
             In Archaeological Approaches to the Study of Complexity, ed. S. E. van der Leeuw. Amsterdam: University
             of Amsterdam.
———. 1982. “Organizational Structure Scalar Stress.” In Theory and Explanation in Archaeology. New York:
             Academic Press.
———. 1987a. “The Changing Organization in Uruk Administration on the Susiana Plain.” In The Archaeology
             of Western Iran, ed. F. Hole. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
———. 1987b. “Nine Thousand Years of Social Change in Western Iran.” In The Archaeology of Western Iran, ed.
             F. Hole. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
———. 1988–1989. “Late Uruk in Greater Mesopotamia: Expansion or Collapse?” Origini 14:595–613.

364   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      Kipp, R. S., and E. M. Schortman. 1989. “The Political Impact of Trade in Chiefdoms.” American Anthropologist
                  91:370–385.
      Kramer, S. N. 1959. History Begins at Sumer. Garden City, NY: Doubleday.
      Larsen, C. E. 1975. “The Mesopotamian Delta Region: A Reconsideration of Lees and Falcon.” Journal of the
                  American Oriental Society 95:43–57.
      Larsen, C. E., and G. Evans. 1978. “The Holocene History of the Tigris-Euphrates-Karun Delta.” In The
                  Environmental History of the Near and Middle East Since the Last Ice Age, ed. W. C. Brice. London:
                  Academic Press.
      Lees, S. H., and D. G. Bates. 1974. “The Origins of Specialized Nomadic Pastoralism: A Systematic Model.”
                  American Antiquity 30:187–193.
      Loding, D. 1976. Ur Excavations: Economic Texts from the Third Dynasty. Philadelphia: Publication of the Joint
                  Expedition of the British Museum and the University Museum, University of Pennsylvania.
      Maisels, C. K. 1993a. The Emergence of Civilization: From Hunting and Gathering to Agriculture, Cities and the State
                  in the Near East. New York: Routledge.
      ———. 1993b. The Near East: Archaeology in the “Cradle of Civilization.” New York: Routledge.
      Mallowan, Sir M. E. L. 1965. Early Mesopotamia and Iran. London: Thames and Hudson.
      Margueron, J-Cl. 1992. “Le bois dans l’architecture.” Bulletin on Summerian Agriculture 6:79–96.
      Mellaart, J. 1965. Earliest Civilizations of the Near East. London: Thames and Hudson.
      ———. 1975. The Neolithic of the Near East. London: Thames and Hudson.
      Mellink, M. 1989. “Archaeology in Asia Minor, Samsat.” American Journal of Archaeology 93:114.
      Mitchell, W. 1973. “The Hydraulic Hypothesis: A Reappraisal.” Current Anthropology 4:532–534.
      Moghaddam, A., and N. Miri. 2003. “Archaeological Research in the Mianab Plain of Lowland Susiana,
                  Southwestern Iran.” Iran 41:99–137.
      Morozova, G. S. 2005. “A Review of Holocene Avulsions of the Tigris and Euphrates Rivers and Possible Effects
                  on the Evolution of Civilizations in Lower Mesopotamia.” Geoarchaeology 20(4):401– 423.
      Nissen, H. 1988. The Early History of the Ancient Near East, 9000 –2000 b.c. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
      Nutzel, W. 1976. “The Climatic Changes of Mesopotamia and Bordering Areas.” Sumer 32. pp. 11–24.
      Oates, J. 1980. “The Emergence of Cities in the Near East.” In The Cambridge Encyclopedia of Archaeology. New
                  York: Crown Publishers/Cambridge University Press.
      Oppenheim, A. L. 1964. Ancient Mesopotamia: Portrait of a Dead Civilization. Chicago: University of Chicago
                  Press.
      Özdoǧan, M., and N. Başgelen, eds., 1999. Neolithic in Turkey: The Cradle of Civilization: New Discoveries. Istanbul:
                  Arkeoloji Sanat Yayinlari.
      Palmieri, A. 1989. “Storage and Dsitribution at Arslantepe-Malatya in the Late Uruk Period.” In Anatolia and the
                  Ancient Near East: Studies in Honor of Tahsin Özgüç, ed. K. Emre et al. Anakara: Türk Tarih Kurumu.
      Pattee, H. H. 1973. Hierarchy Theory. The Challenge of Complex Systems. New York: Braziller.
      Pitman, W., and W. Ryan. 1998. Noah’s Flood. New York: Simon & Schuster.
      Pollock, S. 1983. “Style and Information: An Analysis of Susiana Ceramics.” Journal of Anthropological Archaeology
                  2(4):354 –390.
      ———. 1992. “Bureaucrats and Managers, Peasants and Pastoralists, Imperialists and Traders: Research on the
                  Uruk and Jemdet Nasr Periods in Mesopotamia.” Journal of World Prehistory 6(3):297–336.
      Postgate, N. 1994. Early Mesopotamia: Economy and Society at the Dawn of History. New York: Routledge.
      Redman, C. L. 1978. The Rise of Civilization. San Francisco: W. H. Freeman.
      Reimer, S. 1989. “Tell Qraya on the Middle Eurphrates.” In “Out of the Heartland: The Evolution of Complexity
                  in Peripheral Mesopotamia During the Uruk Period, Workshop Summary,” ed. M. Rothman.
                  Paléorient 15:273.
      Rothman, M. 2004. “Studying the Development of Complex Society: Mesopotamia in the Late Fifth and Fourth
                  Millennia B.C.” Journal of Archaeological Research 12(1):75–119.
      Roux, G. 1976. Ancient Iraq. Baltimore: Penguin.
      Saggs, H. W. F. 1989. Civilization Before Greece and Rome. New Haven: Yale University Press.
      Scammell, G. V. 1989. The First Imperial Age. London: Unwin Hyman.
      Schacht, R. 1987. “Early Historic Cultures.” In The Archaeology of Western Iran, ed. F. Hole. Washington, DC:
                  Smithsonian Institution Press.
      Schmandt-Besserat, D. 1981. “Decipherment of the Earliest Tablets.” Science 211:283–284.
      ———. 1992. Before Writing. Austin: University of Texas Press.
      Simmons, A. H., I. Kohler-Rollefson, G. O. Rollefson, R. Mandel, and Z. Kafaﬁ. 1988. “ ‘Ain Ghazal: A Major
                  Neolithic Settlement in Central Jordan.” Science 240:35–39.
      Smith, P. E. L., and T. C. Young, Jr. 1972. “The Evolution of Early Agriculture and Culture in Greater
                  Mesopotamia. A Trial Model.” In Population Growth: Anthropological Implications, ed. B. Spooner.
                  Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

                                                      ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN SOUTHWEST ASIA                    365


Spuhler, J. 1985. “Anthropology, Evolution, and ‘Scientiﬁc Creationism.’ ” Annual Review of Anthropology
            14:103–133.
Stager, L. 1992. “The Periodization of Palestine from Neolithic to Early Bronze Times.” In Chronologies in Old
            World Archaeology, 3d ed., ed. R. Ehrich. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Stein, G. J., and M. J. Blackman. 1993. “The Organizational Context of Specialized Craft Production in Early
            Mesopotamian States.” Research in Economic Anthropology 14:29–59.
Steward, J. H. 1949. “Cultural Causality and Law: A Trial Formulation of the Development of Early Civilizations.”
            American Anthropologist 51:1–27.
Taylor, R. E., and R. Berger. 1980. “The Date of Noah’s Ark.” Antiquity 54:35–36.
Tosi, M. 1984. “The Notion of Craft Specialization and Its Representation in the Archaeological Record of Early
            States in the Turanian Basin.” In Marxist Perspectives in Archaeology, ed. M. Spriggs. Cambridge:
            Cambridge University Press.
Wattanmaker, P. 1990. “On the Uruk Expansion.” Current Anthropology 31:67–68.
Wattanmaker, P., and G. Stein. 1989. “Leilan 1987 Survey: Uruk Summary.” In “Out of the Heartland: The
            Evolution of Complexity in Peripheral Mesopotamia During the Uruk Period, Workshop Summary,”
            ed. M. Rothman. Paléorient 15:273.
Webb, M. 1975. “The Flag Follows Trade: An Essay on the Necessary Integration of Military and Commercial
            Factors in State Formation.” In Ancient Civilization and Trade, ed. J. Sabloff and C. C. Lamberg-
            Karlovsky. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
Weiss, H. 1977. “Periodization, Population, and Early State Formation in Khuzestan.” In Mountains and
            Lowlands: Essays in the Archaeology of Greater Mesopotamia, ed. L. D. Levine and T. C. Young, Jr.
            Malibu: Undena.
———, ed. 1986. The Origins of Cities in Dry-farming Syria and Mesopotamia in the Third Millennium b.c.
            Guildford, CT: Four Quarters Publishers.
Wenke, R. J. 1975–1974. “Imperial Investments and Agricultural Developments in Parthian and Sasanian
            Khuzestan: 150 b.c. to A.D. 640.” Mesopotamia 10–11:31–217.
———. 1981. “Explaining the Evolution of Cultural Complexity. A Review.” In Advances in Archaeological Method
            and Theory, Vol. 4, ed. M. B. Schiffer. New York: Academic Press.
———. 1987. “Western Iran in the Partho-Sasanian Period: The Imperial Transformation.” In The Archaeology
            of Western Iran, ed. F. Hole. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
White, L. 1949. The Science of Culture. New York: Grove Press.
Wilkinson, T. J. 1990a. Town and Country in Early Southeastern Anatolia. Vol. 1: Settlement and Land Use in the
            Lower Karababa Basin. Oriental Institute Publications 109. Chicago: Oriental Institute.
———. 1990b. “The Development of Settlement in the North Jazira Region Between the Seventh and First
            Millennia b.c.” Iraq 52:49–62.
———. 2000. “Regional Approaches to Mesopotamian Archaeology: The Contribution of Archaeological
            Surveys.” Journal of Archaeological Research 8(3):219–267.
Willcox, G. H. 1992. “Timber and Trees.” Bulletin on Sumerian Agriculture 6:1–31.
Wittfogel, K. A. 1957. Oriental Despotism: A Comparative Study of Total Power. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Wolkstein, D., and S. N. Kramer. 1983. Inanna, Queen of Heaven and Earth. New York: Harper & Row.
Woolley, Sir L. 1965. Excavations at Ur. New York: Crowell.
Wright, H. T. 1969. The Administration of Rural Production in an Early Mesopotamian Town. Ann Arbor: Museum
            of Anthropology, Anthropological Papers, University of Michigan, No. 38.
———. 1986. “The Evolution of Civilizations.” In American Archaeology. Past and Future, ed. D. Meltzer,
            D. Fowler, and J. Sabloff. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
———. 1987. “The Susiana Hinterlands During the Era of Primary State Formation.” In The Archaeology of
            Western Iran, ed. F. Hole. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Instution Press.
Wright, H. T., and G. A. Johnson. 1975. “Population, Exchange, and Early State Formation in Southwestern Iran.”
            American Anthropologist 77:267–289.
Yasin, W. 1970. “Excavation at Tell Es-Sawwan, 1969 (6th Season).” Sumer 26:4 –11.
Yener, A. K., H. Ozbal, A. Minzoni-Deroche, and B. Alsoy. 1989. “Bokardag: Archaeo-metallurgy Surveys in the
            Taurus Mountains, Turkey.” National Geographic Research 5:477– 494.
Yener, A. K., E. V. Sayre, E. C. Joel, H. Ozbal, et al. 1991. “Stable Lead Isotope Studies of Central Taurus Ore
            Sources and Related Artifacts from Eastern Mediterranean Chalcolithic and Bronze Age Sites.” Journal
            of Archaeological Science 18:541–577.
Yoffee, N. 1995. “Political Economy in Early Mesopotamian States.” Annual Review of Anthropology 24:281–311.
Young, C. T., Jr., P. E. L. Smith, and P. Mortensen, eds. 1983. The Hilly Flanks and Beyond: Essays on the Prehistory
            of Southwestern Asia. Chicago: Studies in Ancient Oriental Civilization, No. 36, University of Chicago.
Zagarell, A. 1986. “Trade, Women, Class, and Society in Ancient Western Asia.” Current Anthropology
            27(5):415– 430.

366   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      NOTES
       1. Xenephon, Anabasis.
       2. Postgate, Early Mesopotamia: Economy and Society at the Dawn of History, p. xxi.
       3. Reviewed in Postgate, Early Mesopotamia: Economy and Society at the Dawn of History.
       4. See, for example, Adams, Land Behind Baghdad, or Adams and Nissen, The Uruk Countryside.
       5. Hauptmann, “The Urfa Region.”
       6. Mellaart, Earliest Civilizations of the Near East, p. 77.
       7. Hodder, “Renewed Work at Çatalhöyük”; Hodder, Towards Reﬂexive Method in Archaeology: The Example at
          Çatalhöyük.
       8. In Building 1 in the North Area, Hodder’s excavations suggest that some of these “shrines” can be linked to
          the cycle of family life, as a young family (extended family) grows up in the structure and ages. For example,
          early phases of occupation have an association of the wall paintings with burial of young individuals (deaths
          of children). This pattern shifts as the family ages and there are less children, so that burials of older indi-
          viduals are the most common. Eventually the building is abandoned (see Hodder, “Renewed Work
          at Çatalhöyük”).
       9. Mellaart, The Neolithic of the Near East, pp. 101–105.
      10. Redman, The Rise of Civilization, p. 187.
      11. Wilkinson, “Regional Approaches to Mesopotamian Archaeology: The Contribution of Archaeological
          Surveys.”
      12. Mellaart, Earliest Civilizations of the Near East, p. 77.
      13. Hole, Settlement and Society in the Village Period, p. 95, citing Childe, New Light on the Most Ancient East,
          p. 111.
      14. Nissen, The Early History of the Ancient Near East, 9000 –2000 b.c., p. 57.
      15. Abu es-Soof, “Tell Es-Sawwan: Excavations of the Fourth Season (Spring 1967) Interim Report”; Yasin,
          “Excavation at Tell Es-Sawwan, 1969 (6th Season).”
      16. Larsen and Evans, “The Holocene History of the Tigris-Euphrates-Karun Delta.”
      17. Nutzel, “The Climatic Changes of Mesopotamia and Bordering Areas.”
      18. Hole, “Environmental Instabilities and Urban Origins,” p. 140.
      19. Hole, Flannery, and Neely, Prehistory and Human Ecology of the Deh Luran Plain.
      20. Nissen, The Early History of the Ancient Near East, 9000–2000 b.c.
      21. Postgate, Early Mesopotamia: Economy and Society at the Dawn of History, p. 24.
      22. Wright, “The Evolution of Civilizations.”
      23. Cf. Hole, “Settlement and Society in the Village Period,” p. 95.
      24. Johnson, “Nine Thousand Years of Social Change in Western Iran,” p. 284.
      25. Ibid., p. 285.
      26. Hole, “Settlement and Society in the Village Period.”
      27. Ibid., p. 96.
      28. Nissen, The Early History of the Ancient Near East, 9000 –2000 b.c., pp. 47–48.
      29. Algaze, “Initial Social Complexity in Southwestern Asia: The Mesopotamia Advantage.”
      30. Morozova, “A Review of Holocene Avulsions of the Tigris and Euphrates Rivers and Possible Effects on the
          Evolution of Civilizations in Lower Mesopotamia.”
      31. Following Morozova’s analysis to its conclusion indicates that avulsions could be “created” by cities upstream
          from others through channel diversion and blockage. This essentially acts as a way to control cities located
          downstream (ibid., p. 419) and to shift power balances from one city to another.
      32. Adams, “Patterns of Urbanization in Early Southern Mesopotamia.”
      33. Ibid., p. 739.
      34. Johnson, Local Exchange and Early State Development in Southwestern Iran; Johnson, “Organizational
          Structure Scalar Stress.”
      35. Nissen, The Early History of the Ancient Near East, 9000 –2000 b.c., pp. 84–85.
      36. White, The Science of Culture, p. 383.
      37. Frankfort, The Birth of Civilization in the Near East, pp. 56–58.
      38. Johnson, Local Exchange and Early State Development in Southwestern Iran; Johnson, “The Changing
          Organization of Uruk Administration on the Susiana Plain”; Wright, “The Evolution of Civilizations”;
          Wright, “The Susiana Hinterlands During the Era of Primary State Formation”; Wright and Johnson,
          “Population, Exchange, and Early State Formation in Southwestern Iran.”
      39. Schmandt-Besserat, “Decipherment of the Earliest Tablets.”
      40. Wright and Johnson, “Population, Exchange, and Early State Formation in Southwestern Iran,” pp. 273–274.
      41. Johnson, “Aspects of Regional Analysis in Archaeology”; Johnson, “Organizational Structure Scalar Stress.”
          For a description of hierarchy theory, see Pattee, Hierarchy Theory: The Challenge of Complex Systems.
      42. Algaze, “The Uruk Expansion”; also see Algaze, The Uruk World System.

                                                       ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN SOUTHWEST ASIA                     367


43. Algaze, “The Uruk Expansion, Cross-Cultural Exchange in Early Mesopotamian Civilization”; Algaze, The
    Uruk World System; Frangipane and Palmieri, “Ubranization in Perimesopotamian Areas: The Case of Eastern
    Anatolia”; Johnson, “Late Uruk in Greater Mesopotamia: Expansion or Collapse?”
44. Pollock, “Bureaucrats and Managers, Peasants and Pastoralists, Imperialists and Traders: Research on the
    Uruk and Jemdet Nasr Periods in Mesopotamia,” p. 330.
45. Adams, “Patterns of Urbanization in Early Southern Mesopotamia,” p. 743.
46. Cribb, Nomads in Archaeology.
47. Nissen, The Early History of the Ancient Near East, 9000 – 2000 b.c., pp. 120 –121.
48. Oates, “The Emergence of Cities in the Near East.”
49. Nissen, The Early History of the Ancient Near East, 9000 – 2000 b.c., p. 81.
50. Diringer, Writings.
51. Nissen, The Early History of the Ancient Near East, 9000 – 2000 b.c., p. 136.
52. Ibid., p. 40.
53. Ifrah, From One to Zero.
54. Ibid., p. 35.
55. Saggs, Civilization Before Greece and Rome.
56. Ibid., pp. 225–227.
57. Hamblin et al., The First Cities, pp. 103–104.
58. Wolkstein and Kramer, Inanna, Queen of Heaven and Earth.
59. Finegan, Handbook of Biblical Chronology: Principles of Time Reckoning in the Ancient World and Problems of
    Chronology in the Bible, pp. 42–43; quoted in Spuhler, “Anthropology, Evolution, and ‘Scientiﬁc Creationism,’ ”
    p. 116.
60. One theory says that Noah’s Flood occurred when rising sea levels caused the Mediterranean Sea to breach
    the Bosporus Valley and ﬂow into the Black Sea (then a freshwater lake) about 7,500 years ago. If this is true,
    it is not hard to imagine how such a profound event, even though it did not occur in Mesopotamia, might
    have been preserved initially in oral traditions of the region, later to be recorded in writing (see Ballard, “Deep
    Black Sea”; Pitman and Ryan, Noah’s Flood).
61. Spuhler, “Anthropology, Evolution, and ‘Scientiﬁc Creationism.’”
62. Taylor and Berger, “The Date of Noah’s Ark.”
63. See Postgate, Early Mesopotamia: Economy and Society at the Dawn of History, for an excellent review of
    Sumerian civlization.
64. Ibid., pp. 82–83.
65. Ibid., p. 105.
66. Ibid., p. 166.
67. Adams, Heartland of Cities, pp. 252–254.
68. Woolley, Excavations at Ur.
69. Alden, “Trade and Politics in Proto-Elamite Iran.”
70. Schacht, “Early Historic Cultures.”
71. Adams, “Patterns of Urbanization in Early Southern Mesopotamia.”
72. Adams, Heartland of Cities, pp. 252–254.
73. Ibid., p. 244.
74. Ibid., p. 78.

