3
The Origins of Culture

What a book a Devil’s Chaplain might write on
the clumsy, wasteful, blundering low & horridly
cruel works of nature!
Charles Darwin




D         arwin, somewhat ambivalently, concluded that a close study of nature and
          evolution argued powerfully for the nonexistence, or noninvolvement in human
affairs, of a supreme deity. Darwin’s analysis convinced him that the origins of the human
species, like that of all other species, are to be found in blind and “cruel” competition at all
levels—that is, in countless millennia of nature “red in tooth and claw” (a phrase coined
by Alfred Lord Tennyson). Darwin was acutely aware of the impact of his ideas on revealed
religions, and even today the reverberations of the conﬂict between evolutionary theory and
some religious doctrines echo in some cultures, including the United States.1
     In this chapter we consider our origins in the competitive world of Pleistocene Africa—
how our genus, Homo, evolved out of more ancient primates in a complex mosaic of
environments. In contemporary paleoanthropology one of the most interesting recent
developments is the growing consensus that many of the hominins who lived before about
300,000 years ago were not the direct ancestors of us, Homo sapiens, genetically. Yet there
are still many unresolved issues in these debates and analyses, and it is entirely possible that
our current understanding of our pre–Homo sapiens past will be radically altered as new
evidence is discovered.


THE PROBLEM OF CULTURAL ORIGINS

In the ﬁlm 2001: A Space Odyssey our chimpanzee-like African ancestors of some millions
of years ago awake one morning to ﬁnd themselves at the foot of a huge, black, perfectly
smooth, monolith. Jabbering in fright and wonder, they contemplate its meaning. In a later
scene, a descendant of these creatures, but still an ape-like primate, “discovers” tools—and
murder—by using an animal leg bone to smash the skull of another ape. He throws the
bone skyward in bloody triumph, where, spinning, it is transformed into a rotating twenty-
ﬁrst-century space station—carrying a man on his way to examine another—or perhaps
the same—monolith, which has been found in an excavation on the moon.

                                              83

       84        PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                 Stanley Kubrick’s powerful ﬁlm
                                                                            of this classic Arthur Clarke story
  1.8 million years ago      Appearance of hand-axes (bifaces) of the       effectively uses the monolith as a
                             Lower Paleolithic                              symbol, perhaps of human evolution
  1.8 million years ago      Appearance of Homo erectus grade of            and enlightenment or of some cosmic
                             hominins
                                                                            intelligence. It leaves the viewer to muse
  2.5 million years ago      Appearance of Homo habilis hominins
                                                                            on the nature of the possible driving
  2.6 million years ago      Appearance of first stone tools in Africa      force of human evolution: natural
                                                                            processes, God, extraterrestrial beings,
 5–4 million years ago       Appearance of australopith hominins            or something else.
                                                                                 Anthropological analyses of the
 8–7 million years ago       First fossil evidence for bipedalism in Africa beginnings of tool-use and the nature
                                                                            and signiﬁcance of our past and future
10–8 millionyears ago        Period of the last common ancestor for
                             lineages eading to hominins (humans and        have, perhaps, much less mythic power
                             their ancestors) and panins (common            than 2001, but the fundamental ques-
                             chimpanzees and bonobos)                       tions addressed are similar: What factors
                                                                            transformed us from just one kind of
                                                                            genera of African ape into space travelers,
                                                                            and what, if anything, does this trans-
                                                                            formation “mean”?
                                                                                 Long ago a Greek philosopher
                   suggested we are the progeny of spores blown here millions of years ago through the
                   illimitable reaches of space, and, perhaps, the answers to our questions of origins are, thus,
                   truly, in the stars. Even today some scientists, impressed by the relatively short time between
                   the formation of the earth and the complexity of contemporary human civilizations,
                   consider it possible that life on earth derives ultimately from the accidental intersection of
                   the earth’s orbit with a cloud of complex chemicals brewed in some ancient stellar
                   explosion.
                        Alternatively, people in every age have found great comfort in their sure and certain
                   knowledge that we and the world are the result of Divine Creation and that there is
                   Someone in Charge.
                        Whatever the value of such speculations, the major premise of anthropology is that
                   one should begin any inquiry into our origins, history, and destiny with a consideration of
                   real-world factors of climate, genetics, culture, and so on. The anthropological assumption
                   is that with the careful sifting and analysis of the shattered fragments of our ancestors, their
                   tools, and other material evidence, we can “know,” in a scientiﬁc sense, at least something
                   about our nature and our past. Indeed, in their search for human origins, anthropologists
                   have concentrated on such embarrassingly ordinary subjects as chimpanzee sexual behavior
                   and the cuisine of African hunter-gatherers.


                 THE NATURE OF CULTURE

                 Intelligence . . . is the faculty of making artiﬁcial
                 objects, especially tools to make tools.
                 Henri Bergson2

                                                                       THE ORIGINS OF CULTURE       85


If we take Bergson’s deﬁnition literally, we might conclude that the earliest evidence for
human “intelligence” dates to some time before 2.6 million years ago, in Ethiopia, where
stone tools have been found under volcanic ash layers dated to that time.3 But what are
we trying to explain when we speak of the origins of culture? Anthropologists restrict the
term “cultural” to human beings (although chimpanzees are sometimes called “proto-
cultural”); thus the origins of culture are essentially the origins of those human qualities
that make us a unique animal.4 But it is more difﬁcult than it might seem to reduce
humanity to this or that constellation of attributes, to capture the essence of being human.
In most religions, for example, a human fetus, whether six seconds or six months after
conception, is human in the only way that really matters, being imbued with an immortal
soul. But what observable, measurable qualities can we use to distinguish ourselves from
other life-forms?
      Most who address this question turn instinctively, as it were, to attributes of the human
mind, and particularly to the unique qualities of human thought. Descartes’s famous
phrase Cogito, ergo sum (“I think, therefore I am”) is a classic expression of this idea.
      A traditional view is that humans are unique in their ability to manipulate symbols and
that the evolution of this ability underlies all human achievements. Anyone who has
seriously studied chimpanzees at play can feel a sense of kinship with these primates; the
term proto-cultural seems hardly an exaggeration. But in analyzing the origins of culture,
it is how we are different from other primates that is important, and in large part this
difference resides in our mentality— our creativity, intuition, logic, aesthetics — all the
powers of the human mind. Anthropologist Leslie White argued,5 for example, that
although chimpanzees are clever animals who can use tools and even can be taught to use
plastic counters, computers, and sign languages to express emotions and desires, they are
fundamentally different from us in two ways: First, they can never use symbols at an
abstract level that would give them any understanding of concepts like “holy water” or the
casting of a vote; second, even the smartest of nonhuman animals seem to pass relatively
little new, learned knowledge from generation to generation in such a way that there is an
observable long-term net increase.
      For White these differences amounted to a qualitative difference between ourselves and
all other animals, but one can also view them as quantitative. We simply do not know what
a chimpanzee sees or what he or she “thinks,” and White’s distinction may be less sharp
than it appears. Nonetheless, chimpanzees can smear canvasses with paint in an excellent
imitation of “modern art,” but they seem utterly untalented at more representational
painting; and it seems highly unlikely that even chimpanzees can respond in great depth to
aesthetics—can savor, for example, the vibrancy of a Van Gogh landscape or the sublime
delicacy of a Ming porcelain jar. Their ability to pass new learned knowledge from gener-
ation to generation is a more complex problem. Japanese monkeys, for example, have been
reported to have learned how to wash sand from handfuls of grain (Figure 3.1) and then
instruct younger members of the group how to do this, but there is evidence that even such
simple food-related behavior is partially genetically determined.6 And even if it were not,
such behavior is at a sufﬁciently low scale that it remains true that “the most characteristic
part of being human is the ability to proﬁt from the accumulated and transmitted
experience of other human beings.”7
      Tooby and Devore have expressed this sense of the distinctiveness of human
intelligence and behavior as a set of two kinds of primate characteristics, and have listed those

            86       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                   that are unique to humans and
                                                                                   those that we share with other
                                                                                   primates but to a much differ-
                                                                                   ent degree.
                                                                                        Fifteen features on this list
                                                                                   basically relate to a generalized
                                                                                   sense of “intelligence” in com-
                                                                                   bination with some emotional
                                                                                   capacities, but the unfortunate
                                                                                   reality is that, although we
                                                                                   know that we modern humans
                                                                                   are different from other pri-
                                                                                   mates, we must presume that
                                                                                   our earlier ancestors were
                                                                                   increasingly similar to other pri-
                                                                                   mates as one goes back in time,
                                                                                   and we must also recognize
FIGURE 3.1 Japanese macaque washing sweet potatoes.                                that we will never know directly
                                                                                   the symbolic capacities of our
                                                                                   earliest ancestors: We must
                  relate “intelligence” to material things that we can ﬁnd and measure, and for the ﬁrst several
                  million years of the human clade, this means looking mainly at changes in the size and
                  shape of hominin skulls and bodies, and, after about 2.6 million years ago, at stone tools
                  and the remains of other objects on which our ancestors imposed their intellects. These
                  indirect reﬂections of evolving symbolic abilities constitute “culture” for the anthropologist
                  in an analytical sense.
                       One might question why a “moral” sense is not listed as a deﬁning attribute of human
                  mentality, as that characteristic has been the focus of theological deﬁnitions of humanity.
                  In rural Southern colloquial American English, if one wants to disparage a person’s
                  knowledge of something, a common phrase is that “he knows about as much about it as a
                  pig knows about Sunday.” Even Mark Twain, no sentimentalist, said, “Man is the only
                  animal that blushes—or needs to.” But many scientists8 have considered human moral
                  systems to be learned, not innate, and to have evolved as extensions of the same symbolizing
                  abilities that allow us to categorize “friend” and “foe.”9
                       The paradox that we have only one tool with which to try to understand the origins
                  of the human mind, namely, the human mind, is a bit of cosmic whimsy appreciated
                  by philosophers of all ages. There is an embedded circularity to this form of the analysis
                  that has led some to kick stones, wondering if they are really “there.” Someone observed
                  that “a ﬁsh would be the last creature to discover water,”10 and we may be in similar
                  circumstances—unable to see the reality in which we live because we can see no other
                  reality. Readers interested in such topics and with much time to indulge their interest
                  are referred to volumes 2– 9 of Father Frederick Copleston’s rewarding History of
                  Philosophy.
                       What some researchers assume, however, is that our ancestors of about 8–10 million
                  years ago were not much different from the chimpanzees one can see in any zoo today,11
                  and, yet, today we are very different from all other apes. This knowledge of our deep antiquity

                                                                      THE ORIGINS OF CULTURE         87


and the nature of our physical and cultural evolution—and the search for an explanation
for them—is relatively recent.


Early Studies of Human Origins
As discussed in chapter 1, the impact of the discovery of human antiquity was profound.12
Many scholars lost their comforting faith in a recently created and human-centered world
and were forced to peer instead into an abyss of millions of years, one that saw our slow
emergence from rodents, reptiles, worms, and, ultimately, the same lifeless chemicals that
appear to make up the rest of the universe.
     By the end of the nineteenth century both Darwin’s ideas (see chapter 1) about the
biological evolution of the human species and the discovery of stone tools in association
with the bones of extinct animals in extremely ancient geological strata had convinced
many scholars of the great antiquity of humans. Nevertheless, as long as no bones were
found that were recognized as those of a human ancestor intermediate between ourselves
and other primates in physical form, it was still possible to cling to the idea that humans
were an exception: that we were an extremely old species, older than had previously been
suspected, but that we had not evolved as other species had.
     Those who had studied Darwin and Lyell closely, however, knew it was just a matter
of time before the ﬁrst fossil “missing link” was found—or recognized in the bones that
had already been found. The French scholar (and full-time customs inspector) Boucher de
Perthes, grown old and tired of waiting, offered a 200-franc
reward to the discoverer of the ﬁrst “antediluvian” (meaning
“before the ﬂood”) human in France. His enterprising workers
were soon “ﬁnding” any number of such remains—all of
which they had themselves put there, of course, in hopes of
collecting the money.
     Boucher de Perthes did not know that pre-modern
hominins had already been discovered some years before but
simply had not been recognized. A fragmentary Neandertal
child’s skull was found near Liège, Belgium, in 1829–1830, and
in 1848 work at a quarry on Gibraltar revealed a skull whose
receding chin, heavy brow ridges, and thick bones we now
recognize as that of a Neandertal. Neither the Belgium or
Gibraltar ﬁnds excited much interest at the time. In 1856,
however, a skullcap and some limb bones were found in a cave
in the Neander Valley near Dusseldorf, Germany (Figure 3.2).
Although these remains were dismissed by the great German
anatomist Rudolf Virchow as those of a deformed human,
Johann Karl Fuhlrott, their discoverer, argued from the
                                                                    FIGURE 3.2 The remains of Neandertals were
beginning that the remains were of an early form of human.
                                                                    recovered from the Neander Valley, near
But Virchow’s opinion, and those of others who variously            Dusseldorf, Germany, in 1857. This evidence that
labeled it an ancient Celt, a victim of rickets, an idiot, or a     ancient people were different from modern
Cossack, conspired to deny these bones their proper signiﬁc-        humankind was part of the assault by evolution-
ance for many years. One French savant even suggested that          ary ideas and evidence on traditional ideas about
the huge brow ridges of the Neandertal came about because           our place in the universe.

88   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


     his deformed arm caused him such pain that he continually furrowed his brow, and the
     expression became ossiﬁed.
          In 1886 two partial skeletons similar to the Neandertal specimen were recovered in a
     cave in Spy, Belgium, in direct association with stone tools and the bones of rhinoceroses,
     mammoths, and other animal species known to have been long extinct. Although Virchow
     also refused to accept these as ancient men, the tide of opinion had turned and scientists
     everywhere were soon looking eagerly for additional specimens of early hominins.
          One of these was a young Dutch physician, Eugene Dubois, who spent years wandering
     the wilds of Sumatra without ﬁnding much of interest; only when he arranged a transfer to
     Java did he make his great discovery. In 1890 he unearthed a fragment of a lower jaw, and
     over the next few years he recovered a skullcap and a femur (thigh bone).13
          For the next 30 years, controversy raged over Dubois’s ﬁnd, with some authorities
     again claiming it to be a deformed freak or a giant chimpanzee, while others recognized it
     as an early form of our genus and a direct ancestor of modern humans. Dubois’s fossil had
     an approximate brain volume of 1,040 cm3, about a third less than modern people but far
     more than any living primate. Scholars of the time recognized that if this animal were in
     fact a human ancestor, it was an ancestor considerably different from ourselves and from
     “Neandertal man” (whose cranial capacity was slightly larger than that of most modern
     humans).
          In 1906 the German anatomist Gustav Schwalbe proposed three successive stages of
     hominin evolution: pithecanthropine (as represented by Dubois’s fossils), Neandertal, and
     modern. It was apparent, however, that if this were the correct succession of hominin
     forms, there would have been many intermediate types not yet found.
          The recognition of an earlier stage of hominin evolution did not come until the 1920s,
     when Raymond Dart discovered a nearly complete skull of a strange-looking child. It was
     encased in stone quarried from a mine at Taung, some 300 kilometers from Johannesburg,
     South Africa. The skull’s shape, small volume, and primitive teeth convinced Dart he had
     found one of humankind’s earliest, most primitive ancestors, which he labeled Australopithecus
     africanus (“Southern ape of Africa”). While Dart’s conclusions were being challenged by
     some of the most inﬂuential scientists in Europe, another important ﬁnd was made, this
     time in northeastern China, near Beijing, at a mining installation called Zhoukoudian
     (formerly rendered in English as “Choukoutien”) (Figure 3.3). For centuries, fossilized
     bones from the area had been ground into powder and used, hopefully, as aphrodisiacs,
     and many specimens of great scientiﬁc signiﬁcance have probably long since been
     consumed in the form of impotent aphrodisiacs and medical potions.14
          A somewhat more scientiﬁc interest in these fossils was stimulated in 1921 when a
     single human-looking tooth from Zhoukoudian was given to the English anatomist Henry
     Black. He recognized it as belonging to an ancient form of hominin, and as a consequence,
     excavations at Zhoukoudian were begun. Altogether, the remains of about 40 individuals
     were found, including many skull fragments, and it was obvious that these individuals were
     similar in brain size, facial structure, and other characteristics to the hominin found by
     Dubois on Java. This supported Schwalbe’s proposed pithecanthropine stage, and fossils of
     this type were accorded the name Sinanthropus or Homo erectus (“erect man”).
          Thus, by the 1930s at least some of the scientiﬁc community recognized four categories
     of early hominins: australopiths, Homo erectus, Neandertals, and modern humans. Since
     that time the arguments have focused not on whether humankind evolved from some sort

                                                                  THE ORIGINS OF CULTURE     89




FIGURE 3.3 Excavations at Zhoukoudian, China. The rope enclosures on the right mark areas where
hominin skulls were found.

of nonhuman ancestor, but on what these various ancestral forms are, how they are related
genetically during their evolutionary histories, and what evolutionary mechanisms
produced ourselves, Homo sapiens sapiens, from pre-human primates. It is somewhat ironic
that many scholars today consider the Javanese Homo erectus, the Neandertals, and most
of the australopiths to have been unrelated or only distantly related to our own ancestors
(discussed in chapter 4), but the importance of these early ﬁnds is that they demonstrated
that we had evolved from nonhuman primates.
     We have many sources of evidence about our origins including the study of our
primate relatives, the fossil bones of our ancestors, and the early stone tools and other
physical traces our forebears left. But before we look at the collected evidence, we must
consider the analytical principles we must use to interpret them—speciﬁcally, evolutionary
theory. The basic premise underlying the study of human origins is that about six to eight
million years ago our ancestors were animals something like chimpanzees, and that the
forces of evolution changed us into what we are today. But what were these forces?

90   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


     Evolutionary Theory
     The origins of evolutionary theory in the writings of Darwin and others was reviewed in
     chapter 1, but a more detailed description of evolutionary principles and processes is
     required here in order to understand how they can be applied to the human past—and to
     the entire span of biological life on this planet.15
          Evolutionary theory is a complex, often mathematically expressed discipline, and its
     major elements can only be brieﬂy summarized here.16
          As noted in chapter 1, Charles Darwin made the fundamental observations that still
     serve as the basic paradigm for evolutionary theory. He noted that many more animals and
     plants were bred than actually lived to reproduce themselves; further, he noted that there
     was much variation in the form and physical qualities of individuals in any species. He
     further inferred that there was some connection between these variations and the differing
     rates of success of individuals in living and reproducing. Finally, he concluded that “natural
     selection” was the process in which nature—in the form of different environments—selected
     some individuals to live and reproduce based on the relative “ﬁtness” of individuals in these
     environments. Darwin then attempted to show how this general process had worked on
     innumerable generations to produce the awesome visible biological diversity of the world.
          What Darwin did not know, however, was how variations in individuals arose and how
     they were passed on from generation to generation. The answers to these problems were
     supplied by geneticists, beginning primarily with Gregor Mendel (1822–1884). Mendel
     studied the inheritance of color and shape in peas, and in a series of convincing experiments
     showed that there were predictable patterns to the results of breeding plants of different
     characteristics.17 Mendel and later scholars formulated what we now call the particulate
     theory of inheritance, which says that physical characteristics of individual organisms are
     passed from one generation to the next in the form of discrete particles (informally known
     as “genes”) and that these particles retain their ability to express themselves even when they
     do not express themselves in every generation. The law of segregation stipulates that these
     particles are inherited in pairs, one of each from each of the parents.
          The elixir of life, in the sense of evolutionary theory, is the substance known as DNA.
     Within the nucleus of every animal cell are chromosomes, thread-like structures composed
     of deoxyribonucleic acid, or DNA. DNA in turn is made of four nucleotides: guanine,
     cytosine, adenine, and thymine (Figure 3.4). These nucleotides combine in groups of three
     to form 20 amino acids, which are the building blocks for all protein formation. The
     arrangement, or sequence, of these bases determines the physical structure of all living
     things, from AIDS viruses to elephants (Figure 3.5). Except for the sperm or ova, every
     human cell, whether it be from the eyeball or toenail, contains the complete genetic code
     for that individual. If the DNA strand representing the entire code for a particular person
     were removed from a single cell and straightened, it would be about 6 feet long. The speciﬁc
     sequence of the DNA for any individual reader of this book would be unique and would
     ﬁll about 125 books the size of the Manhattan telephone directory. DNA contains all the
     information required to direct the operation of a cell, in combination with another nucleic
     acid, RNA (ribonucleic acid). DNA has the ability to reproduce itself, and it also offers the
     potential for the main stuff of evolution, genetic change.
          The two main sources of genetic variety are meiosis and mutation. Animal cells are
     constantly splitting (mitosis) and producing genetically identical copies of themselves, and

                                                                          THE ORIGINS OF CULTURE                91


thus growth and maintenance
are accomplished. But in
meiosis, egg and sperm cells
are produced that carry only
half the genetic code of the
parent—in the case of humans,
our 23 pairs of chromosomes
total 46 total chromosomes in
each body cell, but each egg
and sperm cell carries only half
the total, so each new person
receives 23 chromosomes               FIGURE 3.4 The genetic code determining the biological characteristics of species
each from his or her father           lies in the sequence of bases (thymine, guanine, adenine, cytosine) that links two
and mother. These genes are           strands of nucleotides to form the double helix that is DNA. (A) Bases in part of one
                                      strand of nucleotides. (B) Part of one strand twisted. (C) Complementary bases
shufﬂed and then recombined
                                      joined. (D) Two strands joined and twisted.
in sexual reproduction, and
thus the number of genetically
unique offspring possible for any human couple is determined
by the equation 223 × 223 = 246, or about 70,000,000,000,000.18
                                                                               Human    0
Each of us truly has won a lottery featuring odds against
success that dwarf those of the ﬁnancial kind.                                Rhesus
                                                                              monkey
                                                                                        1  0
     Genetic variability is also produced by mutations in
                                                                                Rabbit  9  8 0
chromosomes—errors DNA makes in copying itself. The
origins of mutations are not completely known, but some                           Duck 11 10 6 0
probably arise through the cosmic ray bombardment to which
                                                                           Rattlesnake 14 15 18 17 0
all living organisms are subjected. Early work on DNA
involved exposing hapless populations of fruit-ﬂies to                            Tuna 21 21 17 17 26 0
radiation, producing monstrous combinations of eye colors,
                                                                                 Moth  31 30 26 27 31 32 0
wing size, and other features. And there is reason to believe
that industrial pollution, loss of ozone in the atmosphere, and                  Yeast 45 45 45 46 47 47 47 0
other factors in the modern environment will lead to greater                         Hu ma        ck      ak    na   Mo     ast
                                                                                            n
                                                                                                 Du         e
                                                                                    Rh                          Tu     th   Ye
rates of mutation in all living things.                                            mo esus
                                                                                      nk
                                                                                     Ra
                                                                                         ey
                                                                                        bb            Ra
                                                                                                        esn
                                                                                            it          ttl
     One illustration of the elements of evolutionary theory
and its power to explain change in the natural world involves
                                                                         FIGURE 3.5 Amino acid sequences. Organisms
organisms too small to be seen with the naked eye—disease-               (human, Rhesus monkey, rabbit, duck, rattlesnake,
causing bacteria. We all know of the importance of antibiotic            tuna, moth, yeast) differ in the sequence of amino
medicines in ﬁghting various diseases, such as Staphylococcus            acids in protein cytochrome c, an enzyme used in
and Streptococcus. Strains of these bacteria can cause pneumonia         energy production. The higher the number
or toxic shock, and the development of penicillin to combat              shown, the greater the difference between any
them was considered a “miracle.” During World War II, drug               two.
companies began mass-producing penicillin as part of the war
effort, and by the time of the Korean War the use of this drug proved very effective.
     Initially, bacterial infections were successfully killed off when patients were given
penicillin. But like all organisms, bacteria also have variations in their genetic composition.
Some of these variations are resistant to antibiotics such as penicillin. In evolutionary
context, the use of antibiotics selects against those microbes that have no resistance to the

92   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


     antibiotic, but selects for those variants that have the genetic coding allowing the microbes
     to ﬁght off the effects of the antibiotic. Somewhat quixotically, our societal practices
     actually help increase the reproductive success of antibiotic-resistant bacteria. This is what
     happens, for example, when people indiscriminantely use antibiotics to treat viral
     infections—antibiotics aren’t the solution to viruses, but taking antibiotics allows the
     survival and reproduction of drug-resistant bacteria in our bodies. When we do get a
     bacterial infection, those drug-resistant bacteria are that much more difﬁcult to treat.
           Medical research is thus constantly searching for new types of antibiotics—previous
     efforts have resulted in the development of tetracycline, erythromycin, and cipro, and many
     others—to replace those antibiotics that have become less effective. Other drug-resistant
     diseases most of us have heard about include tuberculosis and gonorrhea.
          This example demonstrates all of the major elements of evolutionary theory. It explains
     biological changes in life-forms over time and space in terms of natural selection, at least in
     the simplistic sense of differential survival over time in organisms on the basis of their
     genetically determined characteristics. For natural selection to operate there must be
     variability, that is, differences between individuals in their physical form and the speciﬁc
     and unique genetic combinations each individual represents, so that over time there can be
     selection of characteristics, such as changes in drug resistance, brain size, instinctive
     migration, and so on.
          It is important to recognize that evolution is not goal directed: These bacteria could
     not intentionally produce drug resistance to solve their problem; evolutionary processes
     simply and blindly sorted the genetic potential for different degrees of drug resistance on
     the basis of the advantage in reproduction and survival. The biological history of life on
     this planet is one of uncountable extinctions of species—which makes it clear that evolution
     does not “solve” all problems of adaptation.
          But the reader should be aware that intense debates continue about the status of
     Darwinism and what is often called “neo-Darwinism.” In general, biologists do not doubt
     the essential validity of Darwin’s ideas, but they dispute heatedly the mechanisms involved.
     For example, a major book, Evolution as Entropy, by Brooks and Wiley, argues that natural
     selection is not the most important factor in directional change. Instead, they suggest that
     existing systems—whether these be organisms, populations, or species—present a
     conﬁguration that constrains the possible “spaces” or directions in which evolution may
     take place. These are highly abstract and fundamentally mathematical arguments that are
     beyond the scope of this book.


     APPLICATIONS OF EVOLUTIONARY THEORY TO THE PROBLEM OF
     HUMAN ORIGINS
     Most genetic mutations seem to be “bad,” in the sense that they reduce the chances of the
     individual carrying them to reproduce successfully. Other mutations are “good,” in that
     they increase reproductive potential, or “ﬁtness.” But what is good or bad in evolution is
     measured entirely by reproductive success—and can be good or bad in different environ-
     ments. For example, sickle-cell anemia—a genetic condition in which red blood cells are
     misshapen—is a common disease in Africa and the Mediterranean Basin. People who are
     born with a certain combination of the genes for this condition often die in childhood; but
     those with another genetic combination appear to have some protection against malaria.

                                                                    THE ORIGINS OF CULTURE      93


Thus the gene for sickle-cell anemia has persisted because its presence in a population—
although it results in the death of some people—helps others to live to reproductive age in
zones of the world where malaria has long been a ferocious killer. “Natural selection,” in
this sense, is obviously no master or beneﬁcent craftsman.
     The spread and perpetuation of genetic mutations through biological populations are
accomplished by various mechanisms. The variations in skin color in contemporary
peoples, for example, seem to be the result of migration into different environments and
subsequent adaptation. Dark skin offers a defense against skin cancers and other maladies
that direct sunlight on human skin can produce, and so we see dark skin tones not just in
Africa, but in the Indian subcontinent and far out into the Paciﬁc Ocean island chains. But
in humans the critical nutrient vitamin D is synthesized in the skin through the action of
sunlight, and in relatively dark and cloudy climates a dark-skinned person with be at a
disadvantage in times of scarcity of dietary sources of vitamin D—in winter months, for
example. Early humans from Africa, whom we assume to have been dark-skinned, invaded
environments where heavy pigmentation interfered with the synthesis of vitamin D, and
eventually natural selection produced the blond, fair-skinned, blue-eyed human physical
type typical of northern Europe: We must assume that small variations in skin pigmenta-
tion over thousands (replacement model) or millions (multiregional model) of years
allowed those with lighter pigmentation to have a slightly greater reproductive “ﬁtness” for
living in more temperate environments
     In this way, the world’s “races” were formed, with natural selection acting on
mutations in hundreds of genetically determined features. Geographical barriers have
been a factor in channeling and constraining these migratory patterns: The Sahara, the
Himalayas, and other natural barriers have restricted the matings between people in
different areas to the point that modern “races” evolved. Most biological scientists reject
the term “race” as imprecise and misleading. Patterns of evolutionary variability in people
seem best understood in terms of clines, or gradients of variation through time and space
that are not easily and discretely compartmentalized. Skin color, for example, varies greatly
if one examines people on a cline from Sweden to South Africa, and these variations are
only crudely described as “black” and “white.” Also, some of the traits commonly used to
identify “race,” such as skin tone, eyelid shape, nose and lip shape, and so on, also show
immense—and often independent—variation along gradients through time and space:
That is, southern Indians, West Africans, some Paciﬁc Islanders, and others share a
relatively dark skin pigmentation but differ greatly in nose and lip shape, hair texture, and
so on.19
     Changes in physical form can also result from sexual selection: Once individuals choose
mates nonrandomly with regard to some characteristics, evolutionary change can result.
Gaudy colors and exaggerated features, such as represented by the male peacock, are
probably the result of sexual selection, in which females choose mates partly on the basis
of elaborateness of the display. Nor are these displays necessarily irrelevant to genetic
“ﬁtness,” for they often correlate with superior health and genetic potential of some kinds.
Some scientists believe that sexual selection was responsible for such features as the
“exaggerated” size (by comparison to other primates) of human penises and female breasts.20
     Modern population genetics is a complex mathematical discipline and is largely
beyond the scope of this book. And many complex debates continue about the application
of evolutionary theory to human evolution.21 But for the study of cultural origins and the

94   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


     other physical changes we will consider here, including plant and animal domestication
     (chapter 6), the important points to remember are: (1) Genetic variability is constantly
     arising through various mechanisms; and (2) changing environments, sexual selection, and
     other factors “select” or act on this variability and differing reproductive success through
     time and space to produce evolutionary change.
           Although modern cultures have erected some barriers to “natural selection” (few
     people in industrialized countries now die of appendicitis, for example), through our long
     evolutionary history we have been no less a product of evolutionary forces than any other
     life-form. Most modern human physical characteristics are the result of complex genetic
     interactions that involve a subtle, long-term balancing of the costs and beneﬁts of genetic
     changes. Consider, for example, the average height of human beings. As professional
     basketball teams and the pygmies of central Africa demonstrate, humans can live perfectly
     normal lives as individuals 7 feet or 3 feet tall. So why, on the average, are people around
     the world between 5 and 6 feet tall? And why do they vary sharply in average height by sex
     and geographical location? Why are we not all about 4 feet tall or 7 feet tall? As it is with
     almost all human characteristics, the “environment”—nutrition, for example—is a factor
     in human height. The high-calorie diets of North America, for example, have produced
     generations of Asian Americans who are signiﬁcantly taller, on average, than their parents.
     But height is also partially genetically controlled. And we must assume that we average
     between 5 and 6 feet and not between 7 and 8 feet or 3 and 4 feet because our average size
     made sense in complex evolutionary equations. With selective breeding and adequate
     nutrition, a group of people could probably have been bred to an average height of 7 feet
     or more, but the costs of maintaining that body mass obviously did not make evolutionary
     “sense.” The pygmies of the African rain forests appear to have evolved in response to the
     very low food resources available in a tropical rain forest, where most of the energy is locked
     in forms of cellulose of no use to humans.
           Consider another aspect of the human diet. There is overwhelming evidence that
     contemporary death rates from cancer and other diseases are directly related to the fact that
     most of us savage our evolutionary heritage with diets that simply do not meet the needs
     of the omnivorous hunter-gatherers that natural selection fashioned us to be. Every one of
     us is the direct descendant of tens of thousands of generations of people who were naturally
     selected to thrive on the omnivorous diets available to hunter-foragers as they radiated
     from Africa across the world. In many areas these diets would have been high in ﬁber and
     fruit, low on fat and salt—diets that involved eating many different species of animals and
     plants. Although our ancestors’ diets varied greatly in different times and places, in most
     cases they would have been very different from the diets of most of us.22
           Since our brief 9,000 years as farmers have had little effect on our basic physiology and
     metabolism, logic might tell us that we should eat as wide-ranging a diet as our hunting-
     foraging ancestors did. But, alas, evolutionary equations are complex. One might, for
     example, vastly increase one’s vitamin C consumption on the grounds that ancient hunter-
     foragers had high concentrations of this vitamin in their diets, but the factors that improve
     an individual’s chances of becoming a successful mother or father many times before age
     40—an all-important accomplishment in evolutionary terms—may not be the same as
     those that produce ﬁt and happy 70 and 80 year olds. Until about 10,000 years ago—or
     just yesterday in evolutionary terms—few people lived past 50. In terms of an individual’s
     success in passing on his or her genes, what probably mattered most was to have children

                                                                     THE ORIGINS OF CULTURE      95


and successfully raise them on a diet of some meat, a lot of plant foods, and an exercise
regime that modern medical science would consider dangerous.
     In general, human physiology appears to have been selected over millions of years to
operate on a diet of almost anything, particularly if there is some variety and moderation.
Even Irish coffee, that perfect end to a ﬁeld archaeologist’s day, containing four basic food
groups—fat, sugar, alcohol, and caffeine—can be tolerated as long as one scavenges widely
among the other food groups the rest of the day. Yet Eskimos are reported to eat, during
the long winter months, a diet consisting mainly of meat, augmented only with a few scraps
of vegetation they ﬁnd in the stomachs of seals and other animals they kill. And poor Hindu
peasants have produced a population explosion on a meatless diet consisting mainly of
vegetables, rice, oils, and sugar.
     Whatever the diet of our ancestors, we must assume that we are walking, talking genetic
packages that reﬂect what “worked” for hunters and gatherers, plus an unknown amount
of “random” genetic change. So although every characteristic of every person cannot be
accounted for in terms of its competitive value in passing on one’s genes, a lot of what we
are must be explained in exactly these terms. Thus, for example, our brain size averages
about 1,450 cm3 because that size is a good balance between the advantages of greater
intelligence and general cerebration and the high costs of large brains in terms of blood
supply and the reduced mobility of the broadened female pelvis, which is needed for
successful live birth of the cerebral monstrosities that we are.
     There are very real problems with the “adaptationist” views of human evolution—the
idea that most or all of what we are is the product of selected accumulated successful
mutations. A lot of what we are, in fact, may be the result of random genetic variation, not
the direct product of selection for a particular quality or trait. And it is almost impossible
to ﬁnd some trait or behavior that cannot be explained as the solution to some kind of
imagined evolutionary problem or opportunity.23 It is also often difﬁcult to identify exactly
what the focus of selection was for complex physiological or anatomical evolution.
Hamilton, for example, suggests that many of the sex differences between men and women
and between humans and other apes are the result of long-term selection for high levels of
sex hormones—not to exaggerate our sexuality but to give us the stamina we needed as
foragers who walked long and often to ﬁnd food.24
     With this simple introduction to evolution, it is easy to see why the Argument from
Design—the theory that the universe had to have been created by a Divine Being because
everything worked together in such harmony—was almost universally rejected by scientists
from the late nineteenth century on, and why few professional research biologists and
geneticists doubt that humans have evolved from single-cell animals and are genetically
related to all other life-forms on this planet. Science has shown that (1) the chemistry of
human genetics operates identically to that of other life-forms and (2) the differences
between humans and other animals in the “spelling” of their DNA sequence is slight—
depending on which aspects of DNA sequences are examined, there is only about a 1
percent difference between a person and a chimp, for example, and only 2 percent between
a person and a mouse. In fact, the human DNA sequence contains bits of the same genetic
code that produces or once produced mice, plants, ants, dinosaurs, and so forth—a
situation that is exactly what one would expect, based on evolutionary theory.
     Biological evolution can shape a world of great complexity and, in a sense, beauty. And
although it is tempting to see “natural selection” as an active, quasi-intelligent force,

96   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


     shaping plants and animals for certain purposes and to meet certain requirements, this
     is a fundamentally ﬂawed perspective. Natural selection does not “know” what will be
     required at some later date. Natural selection in this sense is simply differential rates of
     reproduction and survival.
           If this is so, what is the key to long-term evolutionary success in a lineage? One
     important element seems to be the maintenance of genetic variability. A classic example of
     this is the problem caused by the introduction of rabbits into Australia. Without a natural
     predator, the rabbits multiplied to the point of becoming a major crop pest. Efforts to
     control them by introducing a rabbit disease killed millions of them, but because of genetic
     variability a few individuals were naturally immune. They survived and quickly
     reestablished a population that was more resistant to this disease.
           As the AIDS epidemic demonstrates, Life with a capital L is a constant struggle between
     life-forms for survival. The AIDS virus’s “strategy” involves rapidly changing forms and a
     late onset—afﬂicting many people long after they have already spread the virus to others.
     But some people will be naturally resistant to the virus, and even if the epidemic sweeps the
     world, these resistant individuals would be able to reestablish human populations. There
     is no reason to suspect that the AIDS virus will be the last one to sweep the world; in fact,
     it seems simply another of a long line of human afﬂictions, and there are likely much worse
     ones to come.
           A discussion, such as this, of evolutionary theory as applied to us and our ancestors
     seems to lead inevitably to a consideration of eugenics—attempts to produce individuals
     with selected genetic characteristics, either through selective mating, abortion, or—now—
     direct manipulation of a person’s genes.
           People are understandably ambivalent about the idea of genetically selected traits.
     Based on what we know about genetically determined aspects of anatomy and physiology,
     for example, it seems manifestly evident that not even a lifetime of practice can make one
     another Mozart, that no amount of education will enable many of us to extend the insights
     of a Newton. Even something as seemingly effortless as the high-ﬂoating left-handed lay-
     up of the professional basketball player can never be acquired by most of us, even were we
     to spend a lifetime in practice.
           But eugenics, of a sort, is already here. Every year human fetuses are aborted because
     genetic testing has shown that they would be born afﬂicted with Down’s syndrome, cystic
     ﬁbrosis, Huntington’s disease, or some other malady. In China and India, untold numbers
     of fetuses are aborted because they are female. And there is every indication that these forms
     of “eugenics” will expand greatly. From a fetus’s genetic structure, scientists can now, or
     soon will be able to, propose many other conditions an individual might have in later life,
     such as Alzheimer’s disease, manic depression, breast cancer, some forms of bowel cancer,
     and obesity. Also, the recent mapping of the entire human genome probably will make it
     possible to predict occurrences of alcoholism, homosexuality, and many other conditions
     previously thought to be mainly consequences of choices people made.
           Simply put, is such knowledge about genetics good or bad? Every reader of this book
     can expect to hear increasing debates on this point for the rest of his or her life, for the
     answer is complex and ultimately a matter of values. One might argue, for example, that
     our best “strategy” in long-term evolutionary equations is to maintain as much genetic
     diversity as possible—the antithesis of “eugenics” programs, in effect. For no one can
     predict what new genetic horrors will arise in AIDS-like viruses or some other disease, and

                                                                     THE ORIGINS OF CULTURE      97


it may well be that only a few individuals have natural genetic immunity to them. And it
may be that some yet-to-be mutated natural resistance to skin cancer, to exposure to
asbestos and organic pollutants, or to some newly mutated disease will be the key to our
long-term survival as a species.
    Evolution is in no sense “over” for us just because we currently are doing rather well.


THE ECOLOGICAL CONTEXT OF CULTURAL ORIGINS

    In the bleak mid-winter
    Frosty wind made moan,
    Earth stood hard as iron,
    Water like a stone;
    Snow had fallen, snow on snow,
    Snow on snow,
    In the bleak mid-winter
    Long ago.
     Christina Rossetti (1830–1894)25
One of the central facts of human physical and cultural evolution is that many of the crucial
developments of our species occurred in Africa between about 8 million and 10,000 years
ago, a period in which world climates ﬂuctuated greatly but were, on average, cooler than
today. About 4.2 million years ago, some of our ﬁrst bipedal (i.e., walking upright)
ancestors appeared in Africa. By about 2.5 million years ago massive glaciers had spread
over northern lands, such as Europe, and about 1.8 million years ago, when early forms of
Homo were radiating from Africa, climates began ﬂuctuating, with long periods of intense
cold followed by periods that were nearly as warm as climates of today. This period of
climatic ﬂuctuation during the past 1.8 million years is known as the Pleistocene epoch, or
the Quaternary period. The correspondence between this period of climatic change and our
own development has led scholars for many years to suspect that somehow Pleistocene
climatic changes directly shaped human evolution, perhaps by creating difﬁcult and demand-
ing environments that “selected” larger and more intelligent hominins. But the relationship
between climatic changes and human changes seems to have been a very complex one.
     For the modern individual, sheltered from climate by cities and central heating, the
effects of winter are reduced to minor inconveniences, but for our Pleistocene ancestors,
the brutal winters of hundreds of thousands of years ago made southern France, Italy,
China, and other currently hospitable regions a challenge to hominin resourcefulness and
tenacity. Advancing and retreating glaciers and the weather systems that drove them
operated in slow but powerful pulses, alternately drawing hominin populations into some
areas and evicting them from others, all the while mixing genes, eliciting adaptations, and
shaping our cultural and physical evolution. In Africa, too, the great climatic changes of
the Pleistocene occasionally changed large areas of formerly habitable land into vast deserts,
and then later changed them back to forests and grassland.
     Average worldwide temperatures have ﬂuctuated more rapidly in the last 14 million
years than ever before, and a world as warm as our own has been a rarity during the last
2.5 million years. There have been, however, occasional interglacials—periods often of

98   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


     50,000 years or more when temperatures rose almost to present-day levels. Even during the
     main glacial periods, there were interstadials, short warming phases when the temperature
     rose but did not reach today’s levels. Archaeologists use the term Holocene to refer to the
     last 10,000 years, which likely represents the latest interglacial period.
          During the glacial periods themselves, ice sheets spread from the poles and from higher
     elevations to cover much of the higher latitudes. So much of the seas were locked in ice
     during the coldest periods that the sea level dropped by as much as 150 m, making dry land
     of coastal areas that today are many meters below the sea. Land bridges that facilitated the
     spread of peoples throughout the world formed between North America and Asia, Europe
     and Britain, and Southeast Asia and what are now offshore islands. Unfortunately,
     Pleistocene ice sheets have ground many critical archaeological sites to powder, and the
     rising seas of the post-glacial periods have covered thousands of others.
          The great climatic shifts of the Pleistocene seem to have been caused by a combination
     of factors, including ﬂuctuations in solar radiation, eccentricities in the earth’s orbit,
     mountain-building activity, and changes in the earth’s atmosphere.26 But in the next several
     decades the world may see the invalidation of the cliché, “everyone talks about the weather,
     but nobody does anything about it.” We seem to have been doing something to it since the
     Industrial Revolution. Various scientists have suggested that we are already seeing the
     results of the Greenhouse Effect—a dramatic warming of average world climates as a result
     of industrial pollution. Some meteorologists predict that by the mid-twenty-ﬁrst century,
     and thus within the life span of some readers of this book, such coastal cities as New York
     will be partially ﬂooded by rising sea levels.
          Between about seven and two million years ago, early hominins lived in the tropics of
     Africa. We were all Africans, and we were all Africans much later—late, in any event, in our
     evolutionary story.27 Even with evidence for hominin invasion of Europe and Asia before
     a million years ago (chapter 4), we must still look to the grasslands and forests of Africa for
     the environments of our origins.
          The history of the hominins appears to represent adaptations to a wide variety of
     habitats and environments, including savanna, bushland, open woodland, and riverine
     forest, as well as a mosaic of these contexts.28 Savannas are relatively ﬂat, arid expanses with
     scattered trees and occasional water holes, and their mixed grasses, shrubs, and other plants
     usually support large herds of grazing animals such as zebras, buffaloes, and gazelles.
     Woodlands and forests represent somewhat more closed, but wetter environments
     compared to savannas.


     The Evidence of Cultural Origins
     We have four basic categories of evidence for analyzing human origins: (1) paleontology,
     the study of ancient forms of animal life, including the ancestors of humankind; (2)
     archaeology, the analysis of the archaeological record—the stones and bones and other
     evidence of past cultures used by our ancestors; (3) primatology, the study of our
     contemporary nonhuman relatives, the other primates, whose behavior patterns may give
     us clues to the behavior of our own ancestors and whose genetic composition can be
     compared through molecular biology with our own to address questions of our common
     descent; and (4) ethnology, particularly the study of contemporary or recent hunting-and-
     gathering peoples, whom we assume to be living in environments and patterns similar to

                                                                       THE ORIGINS OF CULTURE        99


those of our Paleolithic ancestors (although any contemporary human societies must be
regarded as fundamentally different from those of our earliest ancestors).
    Anthropologists use these four kinds of evidence to produce “models of cultural
origins”—sets of related hypotheses about the factors that combined to change our
ancestors from unremarkable primates to human beings.

PALEONTOLOGICAL EVIDENCE OF HUMAN ORIGINS
A brain weight of nine hundred grams is
adequate as an optimum for human behavior.
Anything more is employed in the commission
of misdeeds.
Earnest Hooten

One of the most difﬁcult things for the people of the nineteenth century to accept was
the idea that as a species we are the progeny of nonhuman primates. It is perhaps fortunate
that they did not know then that an even earlier ancestor seems to have been a small,
pink-nosed, libidinous, insect-eating animal whose modern form, the shrew, is on a pound-
for-pound basis among the most ferociously effective predators known.
     Taken as an overall sequence, is there any trend in the evolution of animal life on this
planet that would help us understand the appearance of culture and our own physical type?
One possible answer is suggested by the comparison of the ratio of brain size to body size
in successive animal forms during the many millions of years before the ﬁrst culture-
bearing animals appeared. The anatomist Harry Jerison has devised an encephalization
index by dividing the total brain volume of each animal by the two-thirds power of its body
size. This simple index thus represents a scaled ratio of brain volume to overall size.
Jerison’s results give us an answer of sorts to our questions. The increase in average human
brain size—from approximately 500 to approximately 1,450 cm3 in only a few million years
—has been extraordinarily rapid, but, overall, we seem to be a continuation of a process
that began at least 600 million years ago, a process involving, in some animal forms, long-
term natural selection for increased brain-to-body ratios and, presumably, mental capacity.
     But we represent something more than just another species in this long-term
evolutionary process, for we are truly monstrosities in terms of brain size. Jerison lists the
“encephalization quotients” (which take account of the relationship and brain size across
invertebrates) for a variety of primate individuals, including ourselves (Table 3.1), and it is
clear that we are a radical departure from our nearest primate relatives.
     Why should there be this long-term evolution of larger brain-body ratios? We assume
that it must be because of the reproductive advantages conferred by this development. But

Table 3.1 Encephalization Quotients, or Brain-to-Body Ratios

Gorilla (male)                   1.53                  (172.4 kg body weight, 570 g brain weight)
Gorilla (female)                 1.76                  (90.7 kg body weight, 426 g brain weight)
Chimp (male)                     2.48                  (56.7 kg body weight, 440 g brain weight)
Chimp (female)                   2.17                  (44.0 kg body weight, 325 g brain weight)
Human (male)                     7.79                  (55.5 kg body weight, 1,361 g brain weight)
Human (female)                   7.39                  (51.5 kg body weight, 1,228 g brain weight)

100   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      with regard to human brain size, Jerison stresses that the important point to remember is
      that very advanced behavior can be governed by very small amounts of brain tissue. The
      behavioral adaptations of the lower vertebrates are as remarkable as those of mammals in
      many ways. Encephalization in mammals, in primates, and in the human species is not easy
      to explain as a correlate of the reﬁnement of behavior. Information-processing of a kind
      that could be done only by very large amounts of neural tissue must have been evolving in
      the mammals. But the exact nature of that processing is difﬁcult to demonstrate. Moreover,
      “rewiring” of brain tissue through evolutionary processes may result in behavioral changes
      without an increase in total size of brain.
           In many ﬁctional treatments of the future, people are portrayed with enormous heads
      and correspondingly impoverished physiques. Is this likely, given Jerison’s data? Among
      the grimmer medical implements that was found in many delivery rooms in the last century
      was a device for crushing the head of the fetus if it was too large to deliver without killing
      the mother—a situation that, in the absence of medical intervention, may occur as frequently
      as a few times out of every 100 live births, according to some ethnographic accounts. Even
      experienced obstetricians29 dreaded performing this procedure—now no longer necessary
      if the surgical skills to perform a Cesarean section are available. Mismatched fetal head size
      and maternal pelvic dimensions are expressions of the trend Jerison has identiﬁed, but human
      brain size, in fact, seems to have stabilized at about 1,450 cm3 over the last 100,000 years.
      Yet 100,000 years is insigniﬁcant in the span of animal life on our planet, and encephaliza-
      tion ratios may well continue to increase—or decrease—during the next millions of years.
      The cliché “time will tell” still has some cogency in evolutionary studies. We too, no doubt,
      are in a sense “missing links” in the ancient evolutionary experiment that is the history of
      animal life on this planet.
           One question we must address is: Why are people so much smarter than they apparently
      need to be just to survive and reproduce? As discussed in the next section, we have
      conclusive evidence that our ancestors, who had brains two-thirds of our size, successfully
      made stone tools and other implements, competed with a formidable array of other
      animals, and managed to colonize an area from Java to Spain. In the world of a half million
      years ago, or even 100,000 years ago, one needed a brain only a few hundred cm3 bigger
      than that of a chimp to do very well indeed. Why then did we evolve the capacities for
      quantum mechanics, Arabic verb forms, Puccini arias, and the poetry of Ezra Pound?
           Once again it must be stressed that when we ask such questions we must look almost
      exclusively at our lives as hunter-gatherers, that is, before 10,000 years ago. The agriculture
      and urbanization that appeared in the past 10,000 years is far too short a span to have pro-
      duced signiﬁcant differences in our genetically based mentalities, compared to our Pleistocene
      forebears.

      Early Primates and the Australopiths
      I don’t know, but we call him “Bob”
      Sam Ervin, former U.S. Senator (when asked what the
      name of his horse was)30

      To return to the paleontological evidence, bits and pieces of various animals have been
      placed into our family tree as far back as 20 million years ago (Figure 3.6), but there are
      huge gaps and many questions as to what particular primates are on our ancestral line.

                                                                        THE ORIGINS OF CULTURE          101


Classifying extinct animals is even more contentious than
classifying living ones, but in the traditional classiﬁcation,
we are members of the primate order and the anthropoid
suborder, which includes humans, apes, and monkeys; the
other primate suborder is the prosimians, which includes
lemurs, tarsiers, and other similar animals. We are in the
superfamily Hominoidea and the family Hominidae. The
Hominidae are separated into three subfamilies, the Ponginae
(including the orangutan), the Gorillinae (the gorilla), and the
Homininae (common chimpanzees, bonobos, and humans
and their ancestors).31 The Homininae separated from the
Ponginae and Gorillinae at some point in the distant past of
the Miocene era (c. 25 to 10 million years ago), when primates
included at least 16 genera of hominoids, some of which were
forest-dwelling, quadrupedal animals who may have been on                 FIGURE 3.6 This species of Southeast Asia tree
our genetic line. Within the Homininae, there are two tribes,             shrew resembles closely the small insectivorous
the Panini (common chimpanzees and bonobos) and the                       ratlike animals believed to be ancestral to all
Hominini (humans and their ancestors, including the                       primates, including ourselves.
australopiths). These two tribes separated from a common
ancestor probably around 8 million years ago.
     This determination of when the human line split from that of other primates results
from a combination of the fossil evidence with evidence from molecular biology.32 These
age estimates and sequences are based on estimates of rates of change in nuclear genetic
materials and are known to vary widely in the animal kingdom (rates of change are
much faster in rodents than in humans, for example). But several analytical techniques
have produced similar estimates for the human/chimpanzee split. A crucial period in the
evolution of culture appears to be between ﬁve million years ago, when the ﬁrst
australopiths appeared, and a million years ago, by which time all the world’s hominins
belonged to a single genus, Homo.
     Paleoanthropologists recognize various genera and species of early hominins in the
period between about 4.2 and 1 million years ago. These include a sometimes bewildering
array of australopiths and early Homo. The relationship between these species—and which
ones are on the line to modern humans—is not always clear-cut. The australopiths include
Ardipithecus ramidus, Australopithecus anamensis, Australopithecus bahrelghazali,
Australopithecus afarensis, Australopithecus africanus, Australopithecus garhi, Paranthropus
aethiopicus, Paranthropus robustus, and Paranthropus boisei. Early Homo species during this
range of time include Homo rudolfensis, Homo habilis, Homo ergaster, and Homo erectus.33
These species seem to have differed in various anatomical details and the periods in which
they existed, and they are probably most correctly displayed as a “bushy tree” in which
lineage and descent is not yet precisely known (Figure 3.7).
     The factors that identify Australopiths as probable members of the same tribe are: (1)
They all were bipedal, walking upright on two legs all or most of the time—although they
were perhaps not quite as well-suited anatomically for this means of locomotion as
ourselves; (2) they all appear to have brains only slightly larger, if at all, than modern gorillas
and chimps; (3) they all lived in Africa; and (4) they all had teeth that looked somewhat
like ours and differed from those of gorillas and chimps in various details, such as ﬂattened

           102       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                     surface of molars—probably
                                                                                     to facilitate grinding of foods.
                                                                                     Scholars dispute whether or
                                                                                     not any of the australopiths
                                                                                     used stone tools. Their remains
                                                                                     have been found with such
                                                                                     tools but the association is
                                                                                     ambiguous.

                                                                                       Early Australopiths Much of
                                                                                       the story of cultural origins
                                                                                       may have been “over” by 3.8
                                                                                       million years ago. Mary Leakey
                                                                                       found human footprints of this
                                                                                       age at Laetoli, Kenya, indicat-
                                                                                       ing that our ancestors were
                                                                                       walking upright by that time,
                                                                                       and new fossils such as Austra-
                                                                                       lopithecus anamensis suggest
                                                                                       that bipedalism in the hominins
                                                                                       may be at least 4.2 million
FIGURE 3.7 The “bushy tree” appearance of hominin phylogeny shows the                  years old. The tracks of two
existence of several contemporary hominin species and indicates the difﬁculty of
                                                                                       Australopithecus afarensis at
assigning a particular species to the direct line leading to modern humans.
                                                                                       Laetoli indicate that they may
                                                                                       not have had quite the same
                        smooth gait as modern humans do, as they seem to have a somewhat rolling walk in which
                        the hips swiveled side to side more than they do when we walk. But they clearly show two
                        bipedal creatures, both between about 1.4 and 1.5 m tall, who apparently walked across this
                        surface at different times.
                             There is a sort of destiny in bipedalism: The hands are free to manipulate tools, the
                        ﬁeld of vision gives a slice of time and distance that rewards planning, and the arrangement
                        of the limbs and cranium seems to require only additional brain tissue to “convert” a
                        primate into something human.
                             But upright posture in the absence of tools—and there is no evidence for stone tool
                        use until about a million years after the Laetoli footprints—means something else. It means
                        that an animal with roughly our body shape (but about two-thirds our size) and with our
                        approximate powers of vision, smell, locomotion, and so on, could compete in a world
                        teeming with awesome predators. Without speed, claws, signiﬁcant teeth, night vision, or
                        protective coloration, these primates of 3.8 million years ago and earlier ﬂourished.
                        Walking across the same surface as the Australopithecus afarensis at Laetoli were tigers,
                        rhinoceroses, elephants, and other animals that competed with the australopiths on these
                        African plains, and one wonders how such an unprepossessing animal could survive in this
                        environment. Perhaps they already possessed embryonic forms of the critical elements of
                        cultural behavior: intelligence, protective human family relationships, and tool-use
                        capabilities that were slightly better than that of the chimpanzees (who use sticks and
                        unmodiﬁed stones).

                                                                     THE ORIGINS OF CULTURE      103


      If we had only the tracks at Laetoli as evidence of early australopiths, we would know
little about this crucial stage in human evolution, but recent ﬁnds have produced the
skeletal remains of a growing sample of these individuals—and possibly some of their
ancestors. The earliest australopiths are a likely candidate as one of the founding species of
the human line; they are represented by fossils that date to between 4.5 and 3 million years
ago from several areas of north-central and east Africa.
      In the Hadar region of Ethiopia we ﬁnd the most substantial early remains, including
“Lucy” (named after a Beatles song), a female 25- to 35-year-old hominin. About 3.18
million years ago, Lucy strode upright through the river valleys of Ethiopia, as part of a
group of primates who were around 1.2 to 1.5 meters tall, but who varied greatly in size
and morphological characteristics. No tools of any kind have been found associated with
Lucy and her kin, and without tools, we cannot really know much about Lucy and her
group—the “First Family,” to use the name Donald Johanson, one of her discoverers, gave
them. By counting the number of different bones, we know that there were at least 13
people in Lucy’s group, 4 of them children. A few bits of geological evidence and the absence
of other animal bones near the hominins raise the possibility that the First Family was
trapped in a ravine by a ﬂash ﬂood, but we’ll never really know.
      But if “Lucy” and her group were bipedal, how far back in time does bipedalism go?
Several recent ﬁnds have begun to illuminate this great transformation in the human past.
Between 1990 and 1994, parts of 53 other early hominins were found in the Hadar region,
including a particularly well-preserved skull that seems to conﬁrm some of the
interpretations of Lucy but raises other questions.34 The age of the skull, about one million
years before Lucy, was determined by its location between two layers of volcanic rock.
Because the rock contains potassium, the rate at which potassium radioactively decays
could be used to date each layer accurately (see chapter 2). The skull of this individual has
an ape-like jutting jaw, small braincase, and thick protruding ridges above the eyes—a skull,
in other words, that was much more ape-like than human-like.
      Tim White has identiﬁed some of the earliest Ethiopian fossils as a new genus,
Ardipithecus ramidus, on the premise that they are different from other early australopiths.
This Middle Awash fossil suggests that this small-brained, upright-walking, pre-human
species with an ape-like body existed until at least to Lucy’s time without signiﬁcant
anatomical change. Whatever the evolutionary forces were that converted australopiths
into us, at least as far as mentality is concerned, they appear either to have been slow
processes or not in force at this time. Despite their human-like posture, the brain-to-body
ratios of Lucy and her friends were such that it is highly probable they could have led full
mental and spiritual lives in any municipal zoo: Lucy’s brain was probably only slightly
larger than a softball, and there is no evidence that she or her colleagues used tools or were
cultural in signiﬁcant ways. But the fact that these australopiths had brains insigniﬁcantly
larger than apes is not conclusive evidence on this point. The human brain probably
evolved both through getting bigger and by internal “rewiring,” and we know little about
how the latter might have come about.
      Another recent discovery of fossils in Kenya supports the idea that by 4.2 million years
ago, our ancestors already walked upright, on two legs. In August 1995, anthropologist
Meave Leakey35 reported the discovery in northwestern Kenya’s Lake Turkana area of fossil
hominin jaws, teeth, a piece of skull including the ear region, and a lower leg bone, all of
which date to between 3.9 and 4.2 million years ago. The hominin species from which the

           104         PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                       fossils came has been named Australopithecus anamensis. Leakey said primitive features
                       distinguishing the species from other known early human ancestors were in the crania and
                       dentition and included almost parallel mandibular tooth rows set close together, large
                       canines with long strong roots, wide ﬂaring molar teeth, and a small elliptical external
                       opening of the ear.
                             But she notes that in “contrast, the leg and arm bones have relatively modern mor-
                       phology and the shape of the former indicates that at this early date, human ancestors were
                       walking bipedally.” Leakey said the newly found fossils had features consistent with their
                       being a cross between “Lucy” and the earliest Hadar fossils that have been identiﬁed by
                       Tim White as Ardipithecus ramidus.
                             Still another recent ﬁnd provides cogent evidence about early human bipedalism. Few
                       things are more pedestrian, literally or ﬁguratively, than the human foot, but the archaeo-
                       logical record contains only one reasonably well-preserved set of four articulated hominin
                       foot bones for the critical period when people were becoming (or already were) bipedal.
                       These bones, from South Africa’s Sterkfontein Cave, may date to 3.5 million years ago,36 and
                       they have set off another debate about the origins of human bipedalism (Figure 3.8). They
                       appear to be those of an australopith, and they suggest that these hominins may have retained
                       tree-climbing abilities far beyond what later humans had. One of the preserved bones is the
                       beginning of the big toe, and it suggests that this individual had both ape-like and human-
                       like locomotion abilities. There is no question that the basic anatomy is that of an upright-



                                                                                                             ASIA




          Atlantic                                                                                                 Arabian
          Ocean                                                           Hadar (including Gona)                     Sea
                                                                                      Middle Awash


                                                                                             Omo
                                                                            West Turkana
                                                                                             East Turkana (including Koobi Fora)
                                                                                           Olorgesailie
                                                                                                         Indian Ocean
                                                                                       Laetoli
                                                                                                        Olduvai Gorge
                                                                                                   (including DKI and FLKI)


  SOUTH                      AFRICA
 AMERICA



                                                                        Makapansgat
                   0           800 mi
                                                                         Taung          Sterkfontein, Swartkrans, Kromdraai
                   0       800 km


FIGURE 3.8 The distribution of some early hominin sites in Africa.

                                                                     THE ORIGINS OF CULTURE      105


walking individual, but the big toe diverged sharply to the side, in the manner of apes,
providing a highly ﬂexible, opposable-toed foot that would allow the hominin to climb trees.
     In summary of these recent ﬁnds, human bipedalism probably extends back to 4.2
million years ago and some unknown time earlier than that, but we still have only vague
ideas about why this transformation occurred. In any case, the most important point about
these australopiths is that they were bipedal, and whether or not bipedalism is the stimulus
for all later evolution of “culture,” our ancestors appeared soon after bipedalism, and there
is reason to assume that this was not an accidental correlation.
The Appearance of Homo
Monkeys are superior to men in this: when a
monkey looks into a mirror, he sees a monkey.
Malcolm de Chazal

As in the case of most biological classiﬁcations, cutting the continuum of hominins into
several groups and naming them differently, as in the case of Australopithecus and Homo,
necessarily involves some degree of arbitrariness. Unless we have been badly misled by the
data, what we call the ﬁrst Homo arose out of the mix of australopith species and subspecies,
and thus these different genera names are mainly collective descriptions of gradually
accumulating anatomical differences.
     That Homo did succeed the australopiths now seems clear. Major disputes remain
about the relationship of the australopiths and early Homo, but the evidence generally
supports the notion that, whatever the genetic relationship between the australopiths and
early Homo, early Homo (1) appeared after about 2.5 million years ago—long after Lucy
and her colleagues; (2) had a brain somewhat larger than the australopiths (i.e., c. 600 c3 or
larger); (3) made stone tools—or at least some groups of them did; and (4) was the ﬁrst
hominin to leave Africa. Early Homo is usually assigned to Homo habilis, Homo rudolfensis,
Homo ergaster or Homo erectus.
     The earliest stone tools known are only between two and three million years old, and
we might suspect that they are important markers of the transition to Homo. Primates of
all kinds, including Lucy, no doubt, use sticks and unmodiﬁed stones for a variety of
purposes, but making a stone tool requires that a recognition that sharp-edged pieces can
be detached from an unworked lump of stone. Evidence suggests that the manufacture of
stone tools was a rather late part of the whole transition to humanity, since bipedalism and
even increasing brain size were well underway by the time the ﬁrst stone tools apparently
were made. Toth has suggested that “tool use in apes was not directly selected for in
evolution but rather was a by-product of a general increase in problem-solving abilities
through time.” 37 But once humans could make stone tools, that ability became an
important factor in the rate at which we evolved and spread throughout the world. The
importance of tools to our ancestors can perhaps best be appreciated if one imagines oneself
standing about 4 feet tall on the Serengeti Plain of two million years ago, trying to resolve
into its component nutritious parts a small antelope one has just killed or scavenged from
a temporarily napping lion. Already harried by vultures and other scavengers, one tries to
rip into the body with one’s teeth and nails. Even with Lucy’s relatively stout dentition, it
would have been difﬁcult. The most nutritious parts—the liver, brain, and other internal
organs—are protected by thick layers of skin, ﬂesh, and bone that resist the puny tearing
motions to which our ancestors would have been limited. But just a chip off one of the

106   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      quartz pebbles abundantly scattered over this area would instantly have opened up life-
      saving rations for several individuals.
           The ﬁrst hominin to make and use stone tools was probably one of the australopith
      species (simple stone tools made by hitting one lava chunk with another have been found
      in Ethiopia under layers of volcanic ash that date to 2.5 million years ago38) or early Homo,
      but the species of the ﬁrst tool-makers remains a matter of doubt and dispute. Some of
      these disputes could be resolved if we had many full skeletons of the earliest Homo, but we
      may never have adequate samples of this hominin. Most anthropologists have used the
      category Homo habilis to refer to the species from which Homo ergaster and thereby
      ourselves have descended, and the KNM-ER 1470 skull, dated to about 1.88 million years
      ago, is perhaps the best example of this category. Homo habilis is generally thought to have
      had a cranial capacity of about 600–650 cm3, halfway between some of the smaller
      australopiths and Homo ergaster/Homo erectus, but its taxonomic position will likely change
      on the basis of future ﬁnds.39 A skull and some limb bones of Homo habilis recently dis-
      covered at Olduvai (a specimen known as OH 62) have been dated to about 1.8 million
      years ago, and raise some interesting questions about Homo habilis in general. First, this
      apparently female adult was only about 1 m tall (3 feet, 4 inches). Thus, she was up to a
      foot shorter than “Lucy,” an australopith who lived about 1.3 million years before her, and
      whose height appears to have been somewhere between 3.5 and 4 feet. We might expect
      that human height had been increasing gradually but continuously, as we know that the
      general trend in hominins was certainly toward greater height. But OH 62 suggests this
      trend may not have been constant. Here, too, possible sample biases intrude. OH 62 may
      simply have been an exceptionally short person. But OH 62’s skeletal anatomy looks very
      much like Lucy’s, and in general she suggests that the australopiths and early Homo were
      only slightly different until after 1.8 million years ago.
           In 1984 a group headed by Richard Leakey found a Homo ergaster/Homo erectus
      (known as KNM-WT 15000) near Lake Turkana,40 Kenya, that seems well-dated to about
      1.6 million years ago and is virtually complete. Such a modern and “brainy” hominin at
      this time is somewhat surprising, given the other known fossils (this ﬁnd is discussed in
      more detail in chapter 4).
           These many arguments about human lineage will doubtless continue for many more
      years, and all that really seems clear at this point is that from 3 to 1.5 million years ago,
      bipedal primates of about 1.25 to 1.75 m in height roamed the grasslands and forests, and
      that at least some of these animals made tools.


      ARCHAEOLOGICAL EVIDENCE OF THE ORIGINS OF CULTURE
      We can begin to look at the archeological record to determine how our ancestors actually
      lived and changed over time. As always, the problem here is one of poor evidence. Perhaps
      the only way in which we will understand the details of our origins would be if we found
      several Pompeii-like sites where volcanic eruptions had trapped early humans some two to
      three million years ago, toward evening, say, around a water hole on the East African savanna.
      Such a catastrophe might have killed thousands of animals, including some hominins.
      Without wishing any disaster to even these, our most distant hominin ancestors, such a
      volcanic event would be most scientiﬁcally useful if it happened just after these hominins
      had scavenged or hunted their food, butchered it with stone tools, and then dispersed into

                                                                      THE ORIGINS OF CULTURE       107


social groups to sleep off the meal. At present, however, our direct archaeological evidence
about the initial period of the evolution of culture is extremely meager; we have only a few
small sites, almost all of which are in southern and eastern Africa.
     About ﬁve million years ago, a large lake covered about 130 km2 of what today is the
Serengeti Plain, in central East Africa. Countless generations of animals, including, no
doubt, our hominin ancestors, lived near this lake, and today their fossilized bones are
thickly distributed through the black clay of the ancient shoreline and lake bed. About a
half million years before the appearance of culture-bearing animals in this part of the world,
the lake and the adjacent areas were the scene of dramatic geological activity. Volcanoes
near the lake had been erupting for millions of years, and in a particularly violent episode
about a million and a half years ago, a volcano to the south of the lake covered it with a
layer of ash and molten rock some 5 m thick. Similar eruptions occurred in succeeding
millennia, and today we can measure the intensity of each volcanic episode by gauging the
thickness of each superimposed ash level. Sometime during and after these volcanic
eruptions, the climate of the area began a cycle of alternating dry and wet periods. These
millions of years of volcanic activity and climatic change eventually covered the original
lake and adjacent lands with a 100-m-thick deposit of sand, ash, and lake sediments, the
surface of which is the present Serengeti Plain. Ancient ﬂoods cut down through this plain
at several points, creating Olduvai Gorge and revealing in its cliffs and ﬂoor many
concentrations of stone tools and animal bones. These sites represent by far our best
archaeological record of human activities at the time of the emergence of the genus
Homo.41
     One such concentration, Site DK I, has been radiometrically dated to about 1.75 million
years ago, making it one of the oldest in Olduvai Gorge. The site is composed of a layer several
meters thick of bones, worked and unworked stone, and other debris. Because of the
complex stratigraphy, it is difﬁcult to separate this accumulation into different levels with
any assurance that the divisions represent discrete hominin occupations.
     The most prominent archaeological feature at DK I is a semicircle of stones (Figure 3.9)
lying within a concentration of stone tools and animal bones. Measuring approximately
3 m in diameter and made of chunks of vesicular basalt, this feature was originally inter-
preted by some as a foundation for a windbreak or some other temporary structure, but
the evidence is inconclusive. The tools found here are similar to the other materials from
Beds I and II at Olduvai: hundreds of crudely ﬂaked stones, some of them showing evidence
of use, others simply by-products of the manufacturing process. Although it is tempting to
see Site DK I as a “home-base” for hominins, the evidence suggests that natural processes
played a major role in site formation.42
     Another Olduvai site, FLK I, is particularly important because several hominin bone
fragments were found in its various levels, including the remains of an early hominin that
Louis Leakey named Zinjanthropus, which most now assign to Parathropus boisei and
presumed by many anthropologists not to be a maker of stone tools. This “Zinjanthropus
ﬂoor” covers an area of more than 1,036 m2 and contains several thousand pieces of worked
stone and about 3,500 identiﬁable mammal bones. Many stone artifacts and pieces of
shattered bone are concentrated in a “working area” some 5 m in diameter, and a relatively
clear arc-shaped area in the midst of all this debris suggests to some the remains of a
temporary shelter. But just as with Site DK I, the FLK I site is likely the result of cultural
and natural processes rather than a pristine living surface.

108   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY




      FIGURE 3.9 Site DK I. Plan of the stone circle and the remains on the occupation surface. Stones,
      including artifacts, are shown in gray. Fossil bones are shown in outline. A consideration of tapho-
      nomic processes makes the interpretation of this as a home base or a windbreak unlikely.


           A few other sites in Africa have been shown to have stone tools that date to about
      2 million years ago, including Koobi Fora, where crude stone tools appear to be at least
      2.3 million years old.
           These early stone tools from Olduvai, Koobi Fora, and a few other sites provide some
      indications about the nature of our ancestors. Studies of the Olduwan tools by Nicholas
      Toth indicate that already by 1.7 million years ago our ancestors at Olduvai had developed
      a preference for right-handedness.43 Based on the marks left that indicate how they held
      the stone cores when they hit them to produce stone ﬂakes, the Olduvai hominins seem to
      have the same proportions of right-handers—90 percent—as do modern populations. Toth
      also suggests that archaeologists may have been fundamentally wrong about the Olduvai
      tools in assuming that the big “core-tools” were the object of the tool-making: He studied
      wear patterns on the putative “hand-axes” from Olduvai and concluded that they rarely
      show any wear indicative of use—rather, it was the ﬂakes that were the point of the tool-
      making, and the “hand-axes” and the core-tools were in many cases the by-products of tool
      manufacture.

                                                                     THE ORIGINS OF CULTURE      109


     The question of what these tools were used for is a central element in debates about
the nature of our early evolution.

COMPARATIVE PRIMATOLOGY AND THE ORIGINS OF CULTURE
Many researchers view human evolution as a
long corridor, where chimpanzees enter at one
end and modern hunter-gatherers exit at the
other.
J. Tooby and I. Devore44

To use primate studies to investigate our origins, we must deﬁne clearly the ways in which
we are different from them. Tooby and DeVore list six major areas in which we differ funda-
mentally from other contemporary primates: (1) bipedalism; (2) situation-appropriate,
intensive male parental investment and an increase in female parental investment; (3) an
unparalleled degree of hunting and meat consumption; (4) a change in life-history
correlates: an extension of life span, an increase in the period of investment in offspring, a
marked increase in the altriciality (i.e., the length of time the young remain in the direct
care and physically with the parents) of human young; (5) an expansion of ecozones
occupied, from tropical woodland and forest into savanna areas, but eventually including
every other terrestrial ecozone; (6) concealed ovulation with continuous sexual receptivity.
     Given that chimpanzees and ourselves share a common ancestor, perhaps as recently
as six to eight million years ago, how did these differences arise?
     While some scholars think studying contemporary primates will tell us little about our
origins, others see in them prototypical behavior for everything that is human. McGrew,45
for example, notes that culture in other species is studied by disciplines other than
anthropology, such as psychology and zoology. These lend different views to how we deﬁne
culture and how we recognize culture in nonhuman primates.
     A major problem in applying primatological studies to the question of human origins,
aside from the fact that poachers are killing off the last remaining wild groups of these
animals, is that observing them is not a purely scientiﬁc procedure. Observers see aggression,
dominance, and so on, partly as a projection of their own personalities, and thus models
of cultural origins based on primate studies are inherently suspect.
     To begin with the basic physical changes, to make a human out of a chimpanzee-like
ancestor, the legs had to be lengthened greatly in relation to body size, the hip and knee
joints had to be repositioned to allow bipedalism, and the spine had to develop an S-shaped
curvature to cushion the brain against the shocks of bipedal locomotion. The face, jaw, and
teeth had to be changed from the straight-row, prominent canines-and-incisors conﬁgura-
tion of early primates to the curved human dental arch with reduced canines and incisors,
and adapted to grinding rather than puncturing (Figure 3.10). In the long course of our
evolution from apes, we lost most of our body hair, our sexual organs and behavior changed
greatly, and our brains were greatly expanded and probably “rewired.”
     Consider ﬁrst the simple matter of body size. A survey of numerous primate species
indicates that a pronounced size difference between the sexes is relatively uncommon,46 and
thus “marked morphological and behavioral dimorphism is not a primitive characteristic
of primates but has evolved in certain genera in relation to particular patterns of living.”47
One clue as to what patterns of living these might have been can be seen in the size

           110        PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                        differences of the sexes in living
                                                                                        nonhuman primates. Male and
                                                                                        female gibbons, who spend
                                                                                        most of their lives in trees, are
                                                                                        almost identical in size; among
                                                                                        chimpanzees, who spend some
                                                                                        of their time on the ground,
                                                                                        males are usually larger than
                                                                                        females; and among gorillas,
                                                                                        who are almost completely
                                                                                        terrestrial, males average almost
                                                                                        twice the size of females. Why
                                                                                        should the physical size of the
                                                                                        sexes show this association
                                                                                        with terrain?
                                                                                             A probable factor in
                                                                                        the evolution of both sexual
                                                                                        dimorphisms and the overall
                                                                                        increase in size of Homo
                                                                                        sapiens sapiens of both sexes
FIGURE 3.10 Teeth preserve best of all body parts. Note the difference between
                                                                                        was the need for defense against
chimpanzees and hominins in the shape of the dental arcade. Other distinctive fea-
tures include the presence or absence of a canine diastema and the size of the molars.  predators. Our ancestors appar-
                                                                                        ently evolved in environments
                                                                                        where competition and pre-
                       dation by large cats and other carnivores would have been signiﬁcant, and thus it is not at
                       all surprising that part of our evolution in these environments would have been in the
                       direction of greater physical size. A human with a riﬂe, or even a crude spear, would have
                       some reasonable defenses, but until tool-use reached this point there would no doubt have
                       been strong direct selection for increasing physical size. Our earliest tool-using ancestors
                       were only about 3 or 4 feet tall, weighing perhaps 60 or 70 pounds—not really a formidable
                       competitor, given the other animals in its range. Today, on the African savannas, baboon
                       populations are able to survive, despite occasional predation by leopards and lions, partly
                       because they have retained impressive canine and incisor teeth and great physical strength.
                       By 10 million years ago, however, our ancestors had probably lost these dental defenses.
                       Another factor may have been females’ preference for mating with larger individuals—who
                       may have had greater ability to provide food and protection and to produce offspring with
                       these same qualities.
                            But drawing conclusions about a primate’s physical characteristics and, especially,
                       social behavior on the basis of the characteristics of its physical environment is plagued with
                       ambiguities and difﬁculties. In some animal species, sexual dimorphisms seem to be linked
                       to differences in feeding strategies of males and females. While this may have been of some
                       importance to our early primate ancestors, the kinds of food eaten by males and females
                       probably overlapped considerably soon after tool-use began.48 Nonetheless, early hominin
                       males and females would probably have been under increasingly different selective
                       pressures as soon as males began specializing in hunting and females in gathering—
                       specializations that may have appeared only comparatively late and sporadically.

                                                                             THE ORIGINS OF CULTURE    111


     Another aspect of sexual dimorphism among humans is particularly intriguing when
seen in comparison with nonhuman primates: namely, the secondary sexual characteristics
that differentiate human males and females. Among human females, breasts are signiﬁc-
antly larger than among males—in fact, the size, shape, and other differences distinguishing
male and female breasts are much more pronounced than in any other mammal species,
and only in humans do breasts ﬁrst enlarge at puberty rather than at the ﬁrst pregnancy.49
Selection for increased breast size appears to have involved a complex set of factors,
including the erotic role; Rose Frisch has even suggested that the disproportionate size of
the human female breast may have evolved because of its role “as a cooling ﬁn to get rid of
body heat.”50 Breast size cannot be explained simply in terms of milk production, since size
seems to have almost no relationship to effective functioning in human beings. Similarly,
the human penis is far larger, relatively and absolutely, than that of any other primate,
including the gorilla. In addition, human females have softer skin and higher voices than
males and have lost more of their body hair—although compared to the other species of
primates, males also have remarkably little body hair.
     Many explanations have been offered for the origins of these characteristics. A primary
difference, for example, between humans and other primates, and one that many people
link directly to human origins, is that human females do not exhibit estrus; that is, women’s
receptivity to sexual intercourse does not seem to increase to any large extent with the rise
in estrogen levels that precedes ovulation. How can we account for this? One suggestion
is that
    in all probability the evolutionary development of hair reduction, increased skin sensitivity
    and tactile changes involving skin tension were [sic] all associated with increasing the tactile
    sensations of coital body contact, especially in the frontal presentation. Likewise the breasts
    of young women taken together with other features (limb contour, complexion, and the
    like) seem to represent the main visual sexual releasers for the male. While the latter features
    may have been due to straight-forward intersexual selection by ancient males the former
    features have probably been selected in both sexes for their effect in improving sexual
    rewards, in inducing sexual love, and in maintaining pair bonds. The same is also likely to
    be true for the presence of orgasm in women and the absence of the more typical
    mammalian estrus.51
     Our loss of the body hair that our primate relatives retained is a more radical develop-
ment than it might seem. Naked skins may increase sexual sensitivity, and hair loss even
seems to have helped, paradoxically, in water conservation; but naked skins increase the
risks of skin cancers and other diseases, and they also open the body to vermin in a way
that no chimpanzee must live with.
     Other basic differences between ourselves and other primates, and possible reasons for
them, are evident if we compare baboons and chimpanzees. Baboons inhabit a diversity of
environments, but our most reliable and complete information comes from savanna-
adapted populations in central and east Africa. Within the baboon troop, the eldest males
have almost unimpeded access to food and sex, and they protect their privileges with
aggressive behavior. Younger males are allowed access to females only on the sufferance of
more dominant males, although they are constantly testing this dominance by attempting
to strike up meaningful relationships with concupiscent females. Often this will incite a
dominant male to charge and make threatening gestures. Similarly, when desirable but
limited food is available, such as fruit or a clutch of eggs, the dominant males and females

112   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      take what they want ﬁrst. A mother and child may share food, but there is no systematic
      food sharing between adult members of the group.
           When baboon troops move across savanna or open environments, they typically position
      members according to age and sex. Adolescent males are on the periphery, dominant adult
      males are in the front-center, adult females are behind the adult males, and dependent
      young are stationed near the adult females. This is of course an excellent defensive forma-
      tion, offering the best protection to the young and females, on whom the perpetuation of
      the group depends. There are many more adolescent males than necessary for reproduction,
      so although they would endure the most losses to predators, the stability of the group would
      not suffer much. Signiﬁcantly, when the baboon troop moves into more forested areas,
      the positioning becomes much more ﬂuid and dispersed, indicating, not too surprisingly,
      that terrain is an important determinant of behavior for baboons, and that savanna
      environments seem to put a premium on group cohesiveness and dominance hierarchies—
      although forest-dwelling chimpanzees, counterintuitively, perhaps, seem to exhibit more
      group hunting, tool-use, and forms of cooperation than savanna-dwelling chimpanzees.52
           Some baboon groups seem to construct dominance hierarchies on the basis of length
      of residence in the troop, and in general baboons seem somewhat more variable and
      adaptable in dominance hierarchies and aggression than previously thought.
           Thus, in trying to explain how culture-bearing individuals developed from our primate
      ancestors, we must look for factors or conditions that would work against these dominance
      hierarchies and promote the distinctive human family structure, with its food sharing,
      division of labor, and pair bonding.
           The relevance of baboons to our own ancestry may be somewhat limited because we
      are much more closely related to chimpanzees. Chimpanzees also inhabit diverse
      environments, and generalizations about their behavior are as dangerous as in the case of
      baboons. The most studied chimpanzees are those of the Tanzanian forests, especially those
      of the Gombe Stream area.53 In Gombe, many of these chimpanzee groups have been
      regularly fed by the people observing them, and since most groups are cut off by modern
      development from their complete range and interactions with more distant groups, we
      cannot expect these primates to be perfect reﬂections of chimpanzee behavior in the true
      natural state. But it is striking that the chimpanzees of this area behave very differently from
      the savanna-dwelling baboons. Access to food and sex is much less rigidly controlled, and
      the entire dominance hierarchy seems to be less in evidence. In one instance where a female
      was sexually receptive for a record 21 days, the males of the chimpanzee group, young and
      old alike, stood in line for her favors with only minor apparent bickering.54 This is not
      always typical behavior, and the adolescents were effectively barred from mating with some
      females in many cases, but compared to baboons, chimpanzees are absolute libertines in
      sexual matters. Strictly speaking, chimpanzees do not have true estrus cycles, but they do
      have periods of greater and lesser sexual receptivity.
           Similarly, there is also a diminution of territoriality. Chimpanzees run for kilometers
      along trails through the forests, often alone or with one or two others, and individuals
      frequently leave one small group to go live with another. So relaxed are chimpanzees, in
      fact, about sex and territoriality that they have aroused envious feelings in some human
      observers. “Chimpanzees, it seems, successfully achieve what Homo sapiens radicals only
      dream of: peaceful, non-competitive, non-coercive, non-possessive, egalitarian, jealousy-
      free, promiscuous, non-tyrannical communes.”55

                                                                      THE ORIGINS OF CULTURE       113


     This may be a somewhat idealized picture. Chimpanzees have elaborate threat rituals
and do menace each other according to a well-developed hierarchy. In addition, chimpanzees
are the only animals besides ourselves who regularly use objects as weapons—usually wooden
clubs or thrown rocks and debris.56 They ﬁght over food and females, and sometimes over
rank, and they are the only other primates known to practice cannibalism, having been
observed on several occasions eating young chimps alive.57
     Tanner notes that wild chimpanzees place nuts on ﬂat roots or stones and then break
them open by hitting them with sticks or rocks, suggesting that “a fairly intelligent ancestral
ape could have taken the step from such opportunistic tool use during foraging, to tool-
making and more regular use of tools in plant gathering.”58 She also notes that female
chimpanzees use tools more often than males in nut-cracking. Moreover, they generally use
tools in more complex ways than males, and they teach their daughters to use tools and
even supply them with tools.59
     In reviewing hunting and meat-eating by chimpanzees, Boesch and Boesch-
Achermann60 note that the frequency of hunting in wild chimpanzees is quite variable,
sometimes being dependent on group size and the number of adult males. There is also no
clear evidence that meat-sharing for sexual favors is more common when females are in
estrus. In addition, there seems to be a rudimentary sexual division of labor among
chimpanzees, with male chimpanzees more adept at hunting and female chimpanzees
spending more time nut-cracking or collecting termites and other invertebrates—a
prelude, perhaps, to the sharp division of labor in human hunting and gathering groups.


ETHNOLOGY AND THE STUDY OF EARLY HOMININ ECONOMIES
With the evidence from Gona, Olorgesailie, Olduvai Gorge, and the few other sites of this
time period (c. 2.6–1.0 million years ago), we must account for, among other develop-
ments: (1) the evolution of stone tool-use, (2) the approximate doubling of human brain
size, (3) increased stature and changes in facial architecture and other physical features, and
(4) the migrations of hominins throughout the warmer regions of the Old World.
      Great controversies have erupted over the explanation of these changes, particularly
about the economic basis of these transitions. What is at issue here is the very basis of almost
all human evolution, since we must assume that we are mainly the physical products of the
roughly two million years of natural selection on all the generations that connect us to the
hominins of Africa. Arguments on these issues have centered on whether or not early Homo
did no, some, or a lot of hunting, and how much like modern peoples they were in their
social relationships.61 It is not surprising, perhaps, that in trying to understand what those
selective forces and environments were, anthropologists have depended heavily on
ethnographic studies of people who until recently lived as hunter-foragers in the savannas
of southern and eastern Africa, particularly the Kalahari Bushmen. Some feel, however,
that the behavior of these modern-day hunter-gatherers may have almost nothing to tell
us about our hominin ancestors. Edwin Wilmsen,62 for example, suggests that almost every-
thing we know about these people is contaminated by Western misperceptions. But the
Kalahari hunter-gatherers and others at least illustrate some of the possibilities open to our
ancestors in this kind of environment.
      Studies of African savanna ecology suggest that scavenging could have been a signiﬁcant
part of early hominin repertoires. African savannas would seem to reward animals who are

114   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      opportunists and generalists when it comes to food: An early hominin might well
      have adopted the principle of “eat it if it moves, or has reasonably recently moved.”
      Schaller and Lowther spent a few days during the dry season on the Serengeti Plain
      and found a lot of edible meat in the form of a dead buffalo (which did not appear to
      have been killed by a predator), some lion kills, and a few incapacitated animals that
      could have been killed.63 Blumenschine and his colleagues found that scavenging would
      have been possible and even rewarding, presuming that our ancestors went for the
      brains and marrow of lion kills and other casualties.64 Small animals, such as juvenile
      Thompson’s gazelles, persisted as carcasses for only about a day before some scavenger
      totally consumed them, but larger animals, such as adult buffalo, remained as signiﬁcant
      food sources for about four days, after which even if they were not eaten by lions,
      hyenas, vultures, and so on, they were putrid to the point that their “market value” had
      plummeted.
           Even without scavenging, our ancestors may have developed a way to subcontract
      some of the effort and risk of hunting to lions in a way that is right in line with our later
      history as one of the most selﬁsh, exploitative, rapacious members of the animal family.
      O’Connell and his colleagues have shown that the Hadza, hunter-gatherers who live in
      northern Tanzania, sometimes scavenge simply by scaring lions away from kills by making
      a lot of noise.65
           The Kalahari hunter-gatherers keep their population densities low and thinly dis-
      tributed. The low level of productivity of their hot, arid environment, as manipulated by
      their simple technology (bows, arrows, digging sticks, and so forth), requires that they spend
      most of the year in groups of 25 people or less, often on the move from one camp to another.
      Most of their diet is made up of vegetable products, tortoises, and other small game, but
      occasionally giraffes and other large animals are killed, usually through cooperative hunt-
      ing by several males. Although females provide the bulk of the group’s food by gathering
      and processing plants and eggs, nestlings, turtles, and other small animals, men do all the
      hunting of large animals among most known remaining hunting-gathering societies,
      including the Bushmen and Australian Aborigines.
           Kalahari Bushmen also illustrate the value of division of labor. We all know that it is
      better, in complicated tasks, to work as an integrated group doing different things than for
      everyone to do every task, whether the task involves getting a football downﬁeld or building
      a supercomputer. The Kalahari split tasks into those that men do, those that women do,
      and those that everyone does, children included.
           Hunter-gatherer economic life is also dominated by the principle of reciprocity: Food
      and other resources are exchanged among kinsmen, balancing out the periodic shortages
      that may afﬂict any member or nuclear family in the band.
           Like most hunting and gathering societies, the Bushmen are at least somewhat
      territorial. They move often but always within a relatively restricted region, usually 25–30
      kilometers in all directions from a central water hole or home base. Clearly, some degree
      of territoriality is an advantage if resources are not uniformly distributed; it is efﬁcient to
      know where reliable sources of ﬂint, vegetables, game animals, and water are within one’s
      territory, and the group forced out of its territory is faced with unpredictable supplies and,
      perhaps, the hostility of the group on whose territory it is trespassing. Thus, any models or
      reconstructions we make regarding our early hominin ancestors should incorporate the
      assumption that they were probably at least loosely territorial.

                                                                    THE ORIGINS OF CULTURE      115


     Hunter-gatherer population densities are directly determined by resource availability
and are maintained by methods of population control that seem harsh to us. The aboriginal
population density of most of Australia (or at least these populations as they existed until
recent decades), for example, can be predicted with a high degree of accuracy simply from
the amount of average rainfall in the various areas. This balance between population and
resources is maintained mainly by marriage rules and female infanticide. Birdsell reports
that 15 to 30 percent of all babies are killed, usually by the grandmother, who places her
hand over the infant’s mouth and nose as it is born so that it never draws its ﬁrst breath.66
She acts out a group’s unstated decision that keeps a mother from carrying more than one
infant while she works.
     Studies of !Kung infant breast-feeding may reveal the powerful controls on fertility
rates that are available to a group simply through natural mechanisms. !Kung women
breast-feed their babies as often as 60 times every 24 hours, including during the night when
the mother is asleep, and there is some evidence that this frequency is necessary to produce
and maintain the hormonal levels that suppress ovulation; a study of women in Scotland
shows that they usually nurse their babies only six times in 24 hours and that this has less
effect in suppressing ovulation.67
     In her study of hunters and gatherers in New Guinea, Patricia Townsend observed that
although women produce over 90 percent of one group’s food, this society is strongly
patriarchal.68 Townsend found that the women in this group usually marry soon after
puberty and have about six children. Malaria and other diseases kill off about 43 percent
of the children early in life, but girls die from diseases at a much greater rate than boys,
probably from malign neglect. If thought necessary, unwanted girls are killed by
strangulation with a vine soon after birth.
     Most hunter-gatherers keep their numbers at a level far below what could be
supported in any average year, and it is the older people who remember the worst winters
and the longest droughts that must be accommodated by the group’s sizes. Someone said
that when an old person dies it is like a library burning down, and this is true also among
hunter-gatherers.
     In summary, the Kalahari Bushmen and other contemporary hunter-gatherers may
offer some general guidelines for interpreting the archaeological remains of our ancestors
in these areas of Africa—even though we know that in mentality and many other ways they
are profoundly different from early Homo.


MODELS OF CULTURAL ORIGINS

The distance is nothing; it is only the ﬁrst step
that is difﬁcult.
Marquise de Deffand (remarking on the legend that
St. Denis walked two leagues carrying his head in his
hands)

Having compared nonhuman primates to ourselves, let us look at several attempts to
formulate general explanations for the ﬁrst stages of the evolution of culture. Many people
have considered this problem, and it is a subject fraught with political implications, for it

116   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      involves the basic nature of humanity and the forces that produce cultural change. No
      explanation for cultural origins is complete or conclusive, but many have points of interest.
           A great difﬁculty in explaining the factors that produced humans out of a chimpanzee-
      like animal is that to do so one must try to reconstruct the patterns of natural selection that
      existed millions of years ago in ecosystems that no longer exist.
           Some years ago, Owen Lovejoy argued that bipedalism as an evolutionary product is
      essentially a matter of sex and the economics of foraging.69 As he notes, in some ways
      bipedalism seems an unlikely development; it is a slow method of movement, and an
      animal expends great amounts of energy just holding itself up. Also, because we evolved as
      a quadrupedal and semi-erect animal, bipedalism is in a sense an unnatural form of
      locomotion. Our spines evolved to serve as a cantilevered bridge-like structure, and even
      though this structure was successfully modiﬁed into a bipedal erect form, we are heirs to
      many problems, including slipped disks and other back problems, bunions, hernias, poor
      blood circulation in our legs and feet, and a shortened birth canal that means difﬁcult births
      for many mothers. If bipedalism is so bad, why should it appear? Lovejoy argues that all
      apes are potentially semi-erect animals by virtue of natural selection for “handedness”
      —the constant use of the hand to forage for food. And if one’s evolutionary niche does
      not reward great bursts of speed over the short run, bipedalism is quite effective for long
      periods of methodical hunting and gathering.
           Lovejoy notes that through the later history of the primates, there has been an
      evolution in the reproductive strategy. The trend has been toward decreasing the number
      of offspring a female has but increasing the parental investment in each one, so that they
      have a better chance to survive and in turn reproduce. (Ecologists call this a k-strategy, as
      opposed to the r-strategy of an animal like the houseﬂy, which has thousands of offspring,
      only a few of which survive.)
           The heart of Lovejoy’s argument is that bipedalism was selected over quadrupedalism
      in our ancestors because it was a way to increase reproductive success. It allowed our
      ancestors to have more offspring while maintaining a high level of parental investment in
      the form of food provision, protection, and training. This was accomplished by evolving
      an economic adaptation and social organization that allowed the mother to spend less of
      her energy getting her own food and more of her time taking care of offspring. Lovejoy
      argues that one way females could successfully raise several children born within a short
      time interval would be to induce the male to provide the female with food on a regular
      basis, to take part in other tasks of raising many children, and to do it all without competing
      with other males to the point that the group would break up into murderous, insanely
      jealous individuals. This meant that the dominance hierarchy and competition common
      in other primate groups had to be suppressed. One way in which this might occur is if
      individuals began to differ in perceived “attractiveness,” so that qualities of physical
      appearance and personality played a role in sexual desirability and feelings of “love.” The
      advantages of suppressed conﬂict in the human group might also be related to the fact that
      humans developed concealed ovulation and sexual receptivity.
           Many people have criticized Lovejoy’s model. As Kinzey notes, studies of chimpanzees
      show that it is the females, not the males, who most frequently share food with young
      chimps.70 Another problem is that substantial differences in size between males and females
      in primates seem to be associated with competition between males in polygamous mating
      patterns, whereas Lovejoy proposes monogamous patterns for early hominins.

                                                                     THE ORIGINS OF CULTURE        117


      But if one argues, as various scholars have,
that the negative aspects of bipedalism are com-
pensated for by the increased intelligence and
better tool-making abilities of our ancestors, how
was it possible for bipedalism to appear before any
signiﬁcant increase in brain size and—presumably
—intelligence took place? Recently, this question
of the origins of bipedalism has emphasized
several major avenues of research, including
biomechanics, energetics, and ecological contexts.
      Biomechanics71 is the study of motion and the
effects of forces on the body, for example, how
bones are shaped in part by the actions of muscles
on them. We know, for instance, that modern              FIGURE 3.11 The epigenetic development of the bicondylar
human babies are born with a femur (upper leg            angle in the human femur is shown in this growth sequence
bone) that has a bicondylar72 angle of zero degrees      from a seven-month fetus (right) to a seven-year-old child
(Figure 3.11). As a growing child learns to walk,        (left).
the femur begins to “knee-in” (develop the
bicondylar angle) as a result of how the muscles and ligaments interact (create a mechanical
load) on the condyles—by about eight years of age, a child achieves the adult bicondylar
angle of 8 to 11 degrees.73 This angle is important because it helps stabilize balance as a
human walks. Close examination of the form of fossil hominin bones therefore offers clues
as to whether or not they walked bipedally in the same way as modern humans.74 While
interpretations have varied, some researchers have suggested that the type of bipedalism
that australopiths such as “Lucy” had was not exactly the same as ours today. Such studies
are important in examining how bipedalism evolved in the hominins.
      Some researchers have examined the energetics of bipedality to assess whether this was
potentially signiﬁcant in the origins of this type of walking. Leonard and Robertson,75 for
example, propose that energy savings are important to reproductive success in early
hominins. Their model, which is based on a hypothetical reconstruction of “Lucy”
(Australopithecus afarensis), suggests that walking bipedally results in an energy savings of
4 percent over short day ranges (distances traveled in the search for food) and 15 percent
to 20 percent over large day ranges compared to nonhuman primates (monkeys and apes)
that walk quadrupedally (using all four limbs). These energy savings could be used for
growth and reproduction,76 thus echoing some of Lovejoy’s early ideas about the beneﬁts
of bipedalism.
      Still other researchers have concentrated on the ecological contexts that may have
facilitated the development of bipedalism. These studies often focus on the period of the
last common ancestor (LCA) to hominins and chimpanzees, in the period around 8 to 10
million years ago. Common to all of these is the observation that environmental changes
resulted in discontinuous habitats. That is, as open terrain in the form of wooded parklands
and savanna grasslands developed due to worldwide climatic drying trends, the continuous
forested areas in which the LCA lived were broken up by these more open contexts. Food
resources would become more scattered as a result.
      One explanation for the origins of bipedalism stresses that this context would lead to
increased competition for food and aggression both between groups and within groups.77

           118       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                 The development of bipedal displays, such as are seen in living
                                                 chimpanzees (Figure 3.12), is a mechanism for peacefully
                                                 resolving these conﬂicts, because actual attacks that lead to
                                                 death or injury tend to occur rarely in these situations. Instead,
                                                 the threat underlying the bipedal display is enough to prevent
                                                 an actual attack. Males that have bipedal display behavior
                                                 might thus be more successful in attracting mates, while
                                                 females with this behavior might have more access to food
                                                 resources as well as the ability to protect their young more
                                                 effectively. Over time, the juveniles in the group add the “play”
                                                 behavior of bipedal displays, and the wider spread use of this
                                                 behavior leads to changes in anatomy that facilitate walking
                                                 bipedally.
                                                      Other explanations for the origins of bipedalism in this
                                                 context emphasize having the hands free to gather as well as
                                                 carry food,78 or the adoption of one type of LCA social organ-
                                                 ization, the large group.79 Having a large group size, of course,
                                                 is one way to outcompete smaller groups for resources simply
                                                 by the force of sheer numbers and threat of aggression. The
                                                 disadvantage of a large group is that it will eat up the resources
                                                 in a given area at a much faster rate than a small group. This
                                                 means that a large group will have to cover more distance on
                                                 a daily basis in the search for food, and bipedalism is a strategy
FIGURE 3.12 Bipedal behavior in a bonobo.        to accomplish this extended travel. The evolutionary line
                                                 leading to chimpanzees, on the other hand, emphasized small
                 group size and less daily distance to travel, thus leading to the retention of quadrupedal
                 walking.
                      It is quite clear that bipedalism is very ancient, and that it originates long before stone
                 tool-use. But, what of other behavioral patterns that might have lead to or accompanied
                 the origins of culture? Food-sharing, for example, would tend to lengthen the period during
                 which a female was sexually responsive, if sex served as an inducement to food-sharing.
                 And this was an important evolutionary change in more ways than one. Human females
                 are fertile for only a relatively unpredictable three days a month, so intercourse at least a
                 few times a week would be necessary for successful fertility rates.
                      In an analysis of the link between sexual behavior and other aspects of culture, Donald
                 Symons has addressed the problem of human origins on the basis of a sustained com-
                 parison of sexuality in men and women.80 Symons summarizes the major differences
                 between men and women in this regard as follows. (1) Intrasexual competition generally is
                 much more intense among males than among females, and in preliterate societies
                 competition over women probably is the single most important cause of violence. (2) Men
                 incline to polygyny, whereas women are more malleable in this respect and, depending on
                 the circumstances, may be equally satisﬁed in polygamous, monogamous, or polyandrous
                 marriages. (3) Almost universally, men experience sexual jealousy of their mates. Women
                 are more ﬂexible in this respect, but in certain circumstances women’s experience of sexual
                 jealousy may be characteristically as intense as men’s. (4) Men are much more likely to be
                 sexually aroused by the sight of women and the female genitals than women are by the sight

                                                                         THE ORIGINS OF CULTURE       119


of men and the male genitals. (5) For men, physical characteristics, especially those associ-
ated with youth, are by far the most important determinants of women’s sexual attractive-
ness. For females, physical characteristics are somewhat less important determinants of
men’s sexual attractiveness; political and economic prowess are more important, and youth
is relatively unimportant. (6) Much more than women, men are predisposed to desire a
variety of sex partners for the sake of variety (although one is reminded here of Cornelia
Otis Skinner’s remark that “Women’s virtue is man’s greatest invention”). (7) Among all
cultures, copulation is considered to be essentially a service or favor that women render to
men, and not vice versa, regardless of which sex derives or is thought to derive greater
pleasure from sexual intercourse.81
      In the absence of evidence for a genetic basis for these supposed traits, however, and
given the fact that patriarchal societies have dominated human history, we cannot tell if
any of these traits are biologically based or are, instead, cultural constructions. Opinions on
this point vary. Admitting the great plasticity and potential for variability of human sexual
behavior, Symons thinks that there is a strong biological, genetic, profoundly evolutionary
basis to these apparent behavioral differences between males and females and these cultural
aspects of sexuality. And this is what one would expect, given our evolutionary origins. For
millions of years the evolutionary advantage has been with men who have had intercourse
with as many young women as they could—provided that the resulting progeny could
be raised to reproductive age. Lovejoy’s model was based on initial monogamous pairings,
but ethnographic evidence suggests that human mating patterns have been primarily
polygamous for millions of years.
      John Tooby and Irven DeVore have suggested that the various models of cultural
origins and subsequent human evolution seem most plausible if we assume that our
ancestors of several million years ago began to increase the time they spent hunting or
scavenging other animals.82
      They begin with male parental investment. As noted previously, it is highly unusual
among primates for males to invest signiﬁcant energy in providing their offspring with
food, yet humans do. Tooby and DeVore note that, whereas it is not economically efﬁcient
to carry low-calorie vegetable foods long distances back to one’s mate and offspring, meat
is a concentrated form of high-calorie nutrition, and thus would be more advantageous to
transport. Tooby and DeVore also point out that “male coalitions” may have developed
because of the advantages of group hunting. Reciprocity, sharing, and exchange, too, may
be linked to hunting. Tooby and DeVore argue that vegetable foods offer few evident
rewards to the kinds of exchange, sharing, and reciprocity typical of all human groups.
Vegetable foods come in many different forms and sizes, and animals tend to gather them
on the basis of energy costs and immediate needs. But meat, “unlike vegetable foods, comes
in discrete quantities: an entire animal is either captured or lost. . . . [V]ariability in hunting
success, and the fact that meat comes in chunked quantities often in excess of what the cap-
turers can readily consume, provides a ready explanation for food sharing, food exchange
and risk sharing through deferred reciprocation among the larger social group.”83
      Regarding the pronounced sexual division of labor among humans, Tooby and
DeVore suggest that extreme differentiation in the kinds of foods males and females gather
is not feasible without food exchange between males and females. “If males changed from
occasional to intensive hunting, one consequence would be the extreme sexual division of
labor found among humans, with females exploiting the more [ﬁxed, vegetable] food

120   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      sources.”84 Similarly, they see stone tool-use as probably an adjunct to the requirements of
      animal butchering and hunting.
           These forms of small-game hunting and scavenging would have rewarded group
      cooperation, reduced dominance hierarchies, improved communication systems, and
      encouraged the development of stone tools for processing meat and vegetable foods.
           In general summary of these models, we have seen that bipedalism, human sexuality,
      social networks, terrain, hunting/scavenging, and various other factors may all be related
      in complex patterns of interaction, resulting in the kinds of animals represented by “Lucy”
      and the other Hadar fossils. These hominins need not have been major tool-users to have
      been “cultural” in fundamental ways.


      Analyzing the Evidence
      How can we go about integrating all this ethnographic, archaeological, primatological, and
      paleontological evidence and use it to understand our origins? To begin with, in an
      evolutionary analysis we must concentrate on those factors that might have allowed some
      individuals and not others to have survived to pass on their genes, so that over time our
      brain size increased and all the other dimensions of the human animal were formed. And
      once we start examining differential reproduction, we must look directly at how food was
      procured, shared, and consumed.
           Initially, researchers vigorously debated whether early hominins hunted or scavenged
      animals based on observations of marks on animal bones and stone tools.85 One might
      think that the simple conjunction of stone tools amidst piles of animal bones, some of
      which show obvious cut marks from being hacked at with stone tools, irresistibly would
      lead one to the conclusion that our ancestors butchered and ate these animals. But one
      archaeologist’s stone-tool-cutting mark was another archaeologist’s hyena-bite mark, and
      when it came to the statistics of the extent and signiﬁcance of different kinds of bone
      alteration, entirely different interpretations arose.
           Since then, numerous studies have examined not only the marks on animal bones,
      but also the availability of animal carcasses in the landscape.86 These suggest that animal
      carcasses with plenty of remaining meat would have been especially available in the
      ecological niche along the woodlands margins (Figure 3.13). Unlike the open grasslands,
      where hyenas and other scavengers would make quick work of most existing carcasses
      including the bones, the woodland margins are not usually inhabited by these scavengers.
      Thus carcasses left behind by leopards that carry their prey up into the trees, or by other
      large cats, are more available in this setting. Additionally, the teeth of the large cats are
      not efﬁcient at stripping off all the meat, so that early hominins observing the cats could
      approach the carcasses once the cats left them behind. Stone tools therefore provided
      “sharp teeth” for hominins to strip meat from bones and clearly offered an advantage in
      these circumstances. Of course, it is entirely possible that hominins also scavenged bones
      from these carcasses and cracked them open with hammerstones to obtain the greasy and
      nutritious marrow.
           The stone tools of two million years ago include a diversity of forms, but most
      sharp-edged pieces are simple ﬂakes. They certainly are adequate for butchering animals,
      whether hunted or scavenged. The absence of “spear-points” or anything resembling
      them strongly suggests that these early hominins had no means of killing large animals,

                                                                           THE ORIGINS OF CULTURE         121

Ecological, zooarchaeological, and behavioral correlates of competition for larger mammal
carcasses, as documented in the Serengeti ecosystem of northern Tanzania.

                              Low competition                       High competition

Ecosystemic variable (N. Tanzania)
  Habitat                     Riparian woodlands                    Non-riparian or non-wooded
  Season and place            Dry in north, wet on plains           Wet in north? Dry on plains
     (Serengeti only)
  Type of competing           Flesh-eater                           Bone-cruncher
     carnivore
  Carnivore:ungulate ratio    Low (Serengeti)                       High (Ngorongoro)
  Stratum                     Arboreal                              Terrestrial
  Time of day                 Mid-day                               Dawn/dusk
  Cause of death              Mass drowning                         Predation by bone-crunching
                                                                      carnivore
Zooarchaeological traces
  Skeletal parts              Little differential destruction       Denser bones survive
                                                                      preferentially
  Portions                    High epiphysis:shaft fragment ratio   Low epiphysis:shaft fragment ratio
  Species                     Low carnivore:ungulate ratio;         High carnivore:ungulate ratio;
                                dominated by single species as        high species diversity?; more
                                in glut; more small species           large species
  Age (mortality)             High neonate:adult ratio              Low neonate:adult ratio
  Fragmentation               Low NISP:MNE or MNI                   High NISP:MNE or MNI
  Surface marks               Low incidence; single agent           High incidence; multiple agents
Behavioral strategy
  Timing of access            Planned search?; unrestricted         Opportunistic search?; access
                                access, including early in           restricted to end of resource life
                                resource life
  Processing/consumption      Energy limited?; complete             Time limited?; consumption of
                                consumption                           highest net yield available
Transport                     Process and consume where found       Transport easily removed parts to
                                                                      safe/concealed locale
Defense/pilfering             No strategies needed                  Cooperative and/or artificial
                                                                      techniques
Predation risk from           Lower                                 Higher
    competitors

FIGURE 3.13 Opportunities for scavenging carcasses in the East African landscape are assessed
using experimental and observational data.



although perhaps they could have used wooden spears—or, as noted earlier, they may not
have hunted.
     Why is it so important to know about the addition of meat to the diet? Here again we
are dealing directly with the factors that shaped us physically and to some extent mentally.
When anthropologists argue about the economy of early hominins they are arguing about
one of the driving forces of human evolution.

122   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      COULD EARLY PLEISTOCENE HUMANS SPEAK?
      Maybe. Academics are notorious for their maddening penchant for qualifying everything
      to the point of utter irresolution, but that’s the nature of human analysis, and when we ask
      a question such as this, the correct answer has to be that it depends in part on how one
      deﬁnes “speech.” Do chimpanzees, for example, speak? Clearly they communicate vast
      amounts of information to each other through noises they make, and they may well com-
      municate far more than we think they do. If we take the reasonable position that human
      abilities to convey meaning through speech can all be placed on a continuum between the
      abilities of a chimpanzee and Winston Churchill, then we can ask when abilities equal to
      our own ﬁrst evolved, and why.
            Various scholars87 believe that our contemporary ﬂuency of speech appeared only after
      about 50,000 years ago and in only a limited number of hominin species (perhaps only
      one); others believe that even the tool-makers of Olduvai Gorge could communicate vocally
      with much greater ﬂuency than chimpanzees. We’ll probably never know much more about
      this issue than we do now. The areas of the human brain most associated with speech, Broca’s
      and Wernicke’s areas, both of which are located on the left side of the brain, were almost
      certainly not as developed in early hominins, given that their brains were much smaller than
      ours. But speech is not simply a matter of brain size. Unlike the anatomy of other animals,
      the human larynx (air passageway in the throat) and the pharynx (food passageway in the
      throat) converge low in the throat, so that we cannot breathe and swallow at the same
      time—something most of us occasionally prove by choking on food swallowed “the wrong
      way.” The advantage to this odd conﬁguration is that it provides a relatively large chamber
      over the vocal cords, permitting sound production of great variety. Some estimates of the
      extent to which early hominins were evolving this human sound apparatus have been made
      on the basis of computer models, but we simply do not have adequate samples of the
      relevant anatomy of early hominins to be sure of their resemblance to us in this regard.
            Why would people have a better or worse chance of living and reproducing successfully
      based on their language abilities? Many possible reasons could be suggested. Just the know-
      ledge conveyed from one person to another, or from one group to another about resource
      availability in distant areas, conﬂict resolution, technological methods, or any number of
      other matters could improve the chances of survival and reproduction. If the !Kung Bushmen
      are any guide in this matter, language would be an extremely important adaptive tool even
      in this low-tech era—and it would greatly mitigate the crushing boredom of this way of life
      as well.


      SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

      We are but “pulvis et umbra,” Horace said, “dust and shadow,” and certainly this is true
      for the long line of fossils that connect us to our beginnings. Nor are the factors that have
      shaped our evolution entirely clear. Climate changes, scavenging, hunting, evolutionary
      change in the biology of our sexuality and mentality, bipedalism, tool-use—all these and
      many other factors seem to have been ingredients in the evolutionary experiment that is
      our past, but the evidence is far too slight to reduce us to some simple product of a few
      factors.

                                                                       THE ORIGINS OF CULTURE          123


      Even if we ﬁght through
all these issues of causation and
taxonomy and eventually reach
a consensus, we will be left
with an equally important and
profound question—the nature
of the mode and tempo of
human physical and cultural
evolution. The question is this:
Does evolution in such things
as human cranial capacity
(Figure 3.14), technological
efﬁciency, administrative cen-
tralization, urbanization, and
so forth, proceed gradually,
with approximately the same
rate of change, or are there long
periods of stability punctuated
by periods of rapid change? As
Robert McC. Adams phrased
it in the context of early states,
does the simile of a “ramp” or of
a series of “steps” best describe
our evolutionary history?88
      This simple question            FIGURE 3.14 The increase in cranial capacity over time in our ancestors was
involves some fairly murky            enormous and rapid by evolutionary standards, but the rate of increase has slowed
political issues. Some fear that      in the last 1,000,000 years, and we may have reached the limits allowed by the
to consider human behavior as         mechanics of human birth and locomotion.
largely an adaptation and the
result of natural selection means that human behavior is beyond social change, that
aggression, racism, and so forth may be genetically inherent. Some people think the
Marxian concept of dialectical development means that even in such matters as the physical
changes from the australopiths to ourselves, we should look for a developmental pattern
showing long periods of stability punctuated by periods in which physical characteristics
changed relatively rapidly. Thus, Gould and Eldredge say that “no gradualism has been
detected within any hominid taxon.”89 But J. E. Cronin and others who have analyzed the
measurements on fossil hominins from four million years ago to ourselves found no
evidence of “stasis” or “punctuation” and believe that the record of human evolution is best
seen as an example of gradual change with some periods of varying rates of evolution.90 To
have any kind of conclusive test of these competing ideas, we need the remains of hundreds
of early hominins, at least some of which fall in the time “gaps” for which we now have no
information.
      M. Henneberg has taken an interesting and novel approach to the lack of precise dates
and the problem of the rate at which human cranial capacities increased. He plotted the
estimated dates for a large group of human fossils from the past 3.5 million years against
the date for each of these fossils that would be predicted based on the assumption that the

124   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      increase in cranial capacity over time was gradual, at about the same rate—a rate estimated
      by a standard mathematical technique called regression.91 The results suggest that the
      increase over time in human cranial capacities was in fact gradual and at about the same
      rate—if one assumes that some fossils are incorrectly dated.
           As important as all these issues are, they are in a sense all just reﬁnements on a basic
      advance in human intellectual history: Whatever the tempo of human evolution, we now
      know its modes, its mechanisms, and its results more clearly than a person of a century and
      a half ago would ever have thought possible.


      BIBLIOGRAPHY
      Adams, R. McC. 1966. The Evolution of Urban Society. Chicago: Aldine.
      Alexander, R. D. 1975. “The Search for a General Theory of Behavior.” Behavioral Science 20:77–100.
      Anderson, P. 1983. “The Reproductive Role of the Human Breast.” Current Anthropology 24(1):25 – 45.
      Audette, R., and T. Gilchrist. 1999. Neanderthin: Eat Like a Caveman to Achieve a Lean, Strong, Healthy Body. New
                   York: St. Martin’s Paperbacks.
      Bartlett, T. Q., R. W. Sussman, and J. M. Cheverud. 1993. “Infant Killing in Primates: A Review of Observed Cases
                   with Speciﬁc Reference to the Sexual Selection Hypothesis.” American Anthropologist 95(4):958–990.
      Bergson, H. 1983. Creative Evolution (L’Evolution Creatrice), authorized translation by A. Miller. Lanham, MD:
                   University Press of America.
      Bertram, B. C. R. 1979. “Serengeti Predators and Their Social Systems.” In Serengeti: Dynamics of an Ecosystem,
                   ed. A. R. E. Sinclair and M. Norton-Grifﬁths. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
      Binford, L. R. 1981. Bones: Ancient Men and Modern Myth. New York: Academic Press.
      ———. 1985. “Human Ancestors: Changing Views of Their Behavior.” Journal of Anthropological Archaeology
                   4(4):292–327.
      ———. 1988. “Fact and Fiction About the Zinjanthropus Floor: Data, Arguments, and Interpretations.” Current
                   Anthropology 19(1):123–135.
      Birdsell, J. B. 1972. Human Evolution. Chicago: Rand McNally.
      ———. 1979. “Ecological Inﬂuences on Australian Aboriginal Social Organization.” In Primate Ecology and
                   Human Origins: Ecological Inﬂuences on Social Organization, ed. I. S. Bernstein and E. O. Smith,
                   pp. 117–151. New York: Garland STPM Press.
      Blumenschine, R. J. 1987. “Characteristics of the Early Hominid Scavenging Niche.” Current Anthropology
                   28(4):383–407.
      ———. 1995. “Percussion Marks, Tooth Marks, and Experimental Determinations of the Timing of Hominid
                   and Carnivore Access to Long Bones at FLK Zinjanthropus, Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania.” Journal of
                   Human Evolution 29:21–51.
      Blumenschine, R. J., J. A. Carvallo, and S. D. Capaldo. 1994. “Competition for Carcasses and Early Hominid
                   Behavioral Ecology: A Case Study and Conceptual Framework.” Journal of Human Evolution
                   27:197–213.
      Blumenschine, R. J., C. W. Marean, and S. D. Capaldo. 1996. “Blind Tests of Inter-Analyst Correspondence and
                   Accuracy in the Identiﬁcation of Cut Marks, Percussion Marks, and Carnivore Tooth Marks on Bone
                   Surfaces.” Journal of Archaeological Science 23:493–507.
      Boesch, C., and H. Boesch. 1981. “Sex Differences in the Use of Natural Hammers by Wild Chimpanzees: A
                   Preliminary Report.” Journal of Human Evolution 10:565–583.
      ———. 1984. “Possible Causes of Sex Differences in the Use of Natural Hammers by Wild Chimpanzees.” Journal
                   of Human Evolution 13:415–440.
      Boesch, C., and H. Boesch-Achermann. 2000. The Chimpanzees of the Taï Forest: Behavioural Ecology and
                   Evolution. New York: Oxford University Press.
      Boesch-Achermann, J., and C. Boesch. 1994. “Hominization in the Rainforest: The Chimpanzee’s Piece of the
                   Puzzle.” Evolutionary Anthropology 3(1):9–16.
      Brace, C. L. 1967. The Stages of Human Evolution: Human and Cultural Origins. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-
                   Hall.
      Brace, C. L., D. P. Tracer, L. Allen Yaroch, J. Robb, K. Brandt, and A. Russel Nelson. 1993. “Clines and Clusters
                   Versus ‘Race’: A Test in Ancient Egypt and of a Death on the Nile.” Yearbook of Physical Anthropology
                   36:1–31.
      Brain, C. K. 1981. The Hunters or the Hunted? Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
      Brooks, D. R., and E. O. Wiley. 1986. Evolution as Entropy: Toward a Uniﬁed Theory of Biology. Chicago: University
                   of Chicago Press.

                                                                                      THE ORIGINS OF CULTURE            125


Brown, F., J. Harris, and A. Walker. 1985. “Early Homo erectus Skeleton from West Lake Turkana, Kenya.” Nature
             316:788–792.
Bunn, H. T. 1981. “Archaeological Evidence for Meat-Eating by Plio-Pleistocene Hominids from Koobi Fora and
             Olduvai Gorge.” Nature 291:574 –577.
Bunn, H. T., L. E. Bartram, and E. M. Kroll. 1988. “Variability in Bone Assemblage Formation from Hadza
             Hunting, Scavenging, and Carcass Processing.” Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 7:412–457.
Bunn, H. T., and E. M. Kroll. 1988. “Reply to L. Binford ‘Fact and Fiction About the Zinjanthropus Floor: Data,
             Arguments, and Interpretations.’ ” Current Anthropology 29(1):135–149.
Cashdan, E. 1983. “Territoriality Among Hunter Foragers: Ecological Models and an Application to Four
             Bushman Groups.” Current Anthropology 24(1):47–66.
Clark, G. A. 1988. “Some Thoughts on the Black Skull: An Archaeologist’s Assessment of WT-17000 (A. boisei)
             and Systematics in Human Paleontology.” American Anthropologist 90(2):357–371.
Clarke, R. J., and P. V. Tobias. 1995. “Sterkfontein Member 2 Foot Bones of the Oldest South African Hominid.”
             Science 269:521–524.
Clutton-Brock, T. H. 1989. “Female Transfer and Inbreeding Avoidance in Social Mammals.” Nature 337:70–72.
Cohen, L. A. 1987. “Diet and Cancer.” Scientiﬁc American 257(5):42–48.
Conroy, G. C. 1990. Primate Evolution. New York: W. W. Norton.
Cook-Deegan, R. M. 1994. The Gene Wars: Science, Politics, and the Human Genome. New York: W. W. Norton.
Cordain, L. 2002. The PaleoDiet: Lose Weight and Get Healthy by Eating the Food You Were Designed to Eat.
             Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Cronin, J. E., N. T. Boaz, C. B. Stringer, and Y. Rak. 1981. “Tempo and Mode in Hominid Evolution.” Nature
             292:113–122.
Crook, J. H. 1972. “Sexual Selection, Dimorphism, and Social Organization in Primates.” In Sexual Selection and
             the Descent of Man 1871–1971, ed. B. Campbell. Chicago: Aldine.
Davis, E. 2005. “Science and Religious Fundamentalism in the 1920s.” American Scientist 93(3):253–260.
Devine, J. 1985. “The Versatility of Human Locomotion.” American Anthropologist 87:550–570.
Dunbaar, R. I. 1988. Primate Social Systems. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Eckhardt, R. B. 1988. “On Early Hominid Adaptation and Heat Stress.” Current Anthropology 29(3):493.
Farraro, G., Trevathan, W., and J. Levy. 1994. Anthropology. An Applied Perspective. New York: West Publishing.
Ferris, T. 1988. Coming of Age in the Milky Way. New York: William Morrow.
Fialkowski, K. 1986. “A Mechanism for the Origin of the Human Brain: A Hypothesis.” Current Anthropology
             27(3):288–290.
Finkel, D. J. 1981. “An Analysis of Australopithecine Dentition.” American Journal of Physical Anthropology
             55:69–80.
Fisher, E. 1979. Woman’s Creation. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Foley, R. 1987. “Hominid Species and Stone-Tool Assemblages: How Are They Related?” Antiquity 61:380–
             392.
Frisch, R. E. 1983. “Comment on P. Anderson, ‘The Reproductive Role of the Human Breast.’ ” Current
             Anthropology 24(1):25– 45.
Futuyma, D. J. 1992. “History and Evolutionary Processes.” In History and Evolution, ed. M. H. Nitecki and
             D. V. Nitecki. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Goodall, J. 1986. The Chimpanzees of Gombe. Cambridge, MA: Belknap (Harvard University Press).
Gould, S. J. 1977. Ever Since Darwin. New York: Norton.
Gould, S. J., and N. Eldridge. 1977. “Punctuated Equilibria: The Tempo and Mode of Evolution Reconsidered.”
             Paleobiology 3:115–151.
Grayson, D. K. 1983. The Establishment of Human Antiquity. New York: Academic Press.
Hamilton, M. E. 1984. “Revising Evolutionary Narratives: A Consideration of Alternative Assumptions About
             Sexual Selection and Competition for Mates.” American Anthropologist 86(3):651–662.
Harcourt-Smith, W. E. H., and L. C. Aiello. 2004. “Fossils, Feet and the Evolution of Human Bipedal
             Locomotion.” Journal of Anatomy 204(5):403–416.
Harding, R. S., and G. Teleki, eds. 1981. Omnivorous Primates. New York: Columbia University Press.
Harris, D. R., ed. 1980. Human Ecology and Savanna Environments. New York: Academic Press.
Harrison, T. 1978. “Present Status and Problems for Paleolithic Studies in Borneo and Adjacent Islands.” In Early
             Paleolithic in South and East Asia, ed. F. Ikawa-Smith. The Hague: Mouton.
Henneberg, M. 1989. “Morphological and Geological Dating of Early Hominid Fossils Compared.” Current
             Anthropology 30(4):527–528.
Hill, J. H. 1978. “Apes and Language.” Annual Review of Anthropology 7:89–112.
Hughes, A. R., and P. V. Tobias. 1977. “A Fossil Skull Probably of the Genus Homo from Sterkfontein, Transvaal.”
             Nature 65:310–312.
Ingold, T. 1988. The Appropriation of Nature. Iowa City: University of Iowa Press.
Isaac, G. 1977. Olorgesailie; Archaeological Studies of a Middle Pleistocene Lake Basin in Kenya. Chicago: University
             of Chicago Press.

126   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      Isbell, L. A., and T. P. Young. 1996. “The Evolution of Bipedalism in Hominids and Reduced Group Size in
                    Chimpanzees: Alternative Responses to Decreasing Resource Availability.” Journal of Human Evolution
                    30:389–397.
      Itzkoff, S. 1987. Why Humans Vary in Intelligence. Ashﬁeld, MA: Paideia.
      Jablonski, N. G., and G. Chaplin. 1993. “Origin of Habitual Terrestrial Bipedalism in the Ancestor of the
                    Hominidae.” Journal of Human Evolution 24:259–280.
      Jerison, H. J. 1983. “The Evolution of the Mammalian Brain as an Information-Processing System.” In Advances
                    in the Study of Mammalian Behavior, ed. J. F. Eisenberg and D. G. Kleinman, Special Publication
                    No. 7. The American Society of Mammologists.
      Johanson, D. C., and M. A. Edey. 1981. Lucy: The Beginnings of Humankind. New York: Simon and Schuster.
      Jolley, C. J. 1970. “The Seed-Eaters: A New Model of Hominid Differentiation Based on a Baboon Analogy.” Man
                    5:6–26.
      Kauffman, S. 1993. Origins of Order. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
      Kimbel, W. H., D. Johanson, and Y. Rak. 1994. “The First Skull and Other New Discoveries of Australopithecus
                    afarensis at Hadar, Ethiopia.” Nature 368:449–451.
      Kinzey, W. G., ed. 1987. The Evolution of Human Behavior: Primate Models. Albany: State University of New York
                    Press.
      Kramer, P. A. 1999. “Modelling the Locomotor Energetics of Extinct Hominids.” Journal of Experimental Biology
                    202:2807–2818.
      Krebs, J., and N. B. Davies. 1981. Introduction to Behavioral Ecology. Oxford: Blackwell.
      Kurland, J. A., and S. J. Beckerman. 1985. “Optimal Foraging and Hominid Evolution: Labor and Reciprocity.”
                    American Anthropologist 87(1):73–93.
      Leakey, M. G., C. S. Feibel, I. McDougall, and A. C. Walker. 1995. “New Four-Million-Year-Old Hominid Species
                    from Kanapoi and Allia Bay, Kenya.” Nature 376:565–571.
      Leakey, M. G., and R. E. Leakey, eds. 1978. Koobi Fora Research Project: Vol. 1, The Fossil Hominids and an
                    Introduction to Their Context, 1968–1974. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
      Leakey, R. E., and R. Lewin. 1977. Origins. New York: Dutton.
      Lee, R. B. 1979. The !Kung San. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
      Leonard, W. R., and M. L. Robertson. 1997. “Rethinking the Energetics of Bipedality.” Current Anthropology
                    38(2):304–309.
      ———. 2001. “Locomotor Efﬁciency and the Origin of Bipedality: Reply to Steudel-Numbers.” American Journal
                    of Physical Anthropology 116:174–176.
      Lewis, R. 1995. “The Rise of Antibiotic-Resistant Infections.” FDA Consumer Magazine Web posting.
      Lewontin, R. C. 1979. “Sociobiology as an Adaptationist Program.” Behavioral Science 24:5–14.
      Lieberman, L., and F. L. C. Jackson. 1995. “Race and Three Models of Human Origin.” American Anthropologist
                    97(2):231–242.
      Lieberman, P. E. 1991. Uniquely Human: The Evolution of Speech, Thought, and Selﬂess Behavior. Cambridge, MA:
                    Harvard University Press.
      ———. 1998. Eve Spoke: Human Language and Human Evolution. New York: Norton.
      Lieberman, P. E., E. S. Crelin, and D. H. Klatt. 1972. “Phonetic Ability and Related Anatomy of the Newborn and
                    Adult Human, Neanderthal Man, and the Chimpanzee.” American Anthropologist 74:287.
      Lovejoy, O. 1980. “Hominid Origins: The Role of Bipedalism.” American Journal of Physical Anthropology 52:50.
      Maddison, W. P., and D. R. Maddison. 1992. MacClade, Version 3, Analysis of Phylogeny and Character Evolution.
                    Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates.
      Marean, C. W., L. M. Spencer, R. J. Blumenschine, and S. D. Capaldo. 1992. “Captive Hyaena Bone Choice and
                    Destruction, the Schlepp Effect, and Olduvai Archaeofaunas.” Journal of Archaeological Science
                    19:101–121.
      Martin, K., and B. Voorhies. 1975. The Female of the Species. New York: Columbia University Press.
      McBrearty, S., and A. S. Brooks. 2000. “The Revolution That Wasn’t: A New Interpretation of the Origin of
                    Modern Human Behavior.” Journal of Human Evolution 39:453–563.
      McGrew, W. 1992. Chimpanzee Material Culture: Implications for Human Evolution. Cambridge: Cambridge
                    University Press.
      ———. 1998. “Culture in Nonhuman Primates?” Annual Review of Anthropology 27:301–328.
      McHenry, H. M., and K. Cofﬁng. 2000. “Australopithecus to Homo: Transformations in Body and Mind.” Annual
                    Review of Anthropology 29:125–146.
      O’Connell, J. F., K. Hawkes, and N. B. Jones. 1988. “Hadza Scavenging: Implications for Plio/Pleistocene Hominid
                    Subsistence.” Current Anthropology 29(2):356–363.
      Orchiston, D. W., and W. G. Siesser. 1982. “Chronostratigraphy of the Pleistocene Fossil Hominids of Java.”
                    Modern Quaternary Research in Southeast Asia 1:131–150.
      Parker, S. T., R. W. Mitchell, and M. L. Boccia, eds. 1994. Self-Awareness in Animals and Humans: Developmental
                    Perspectives. New York: Cambridge University Press.

                                                                                     THE ORIGINS OF CULTURE            127


Penny, D., L. R. Foulds, and M. D. Hendy. 1982. “Testing the Theory of Evolution by Comparing Phylogenic
             Trees Constructed from Five Different Protein Sequences.” Nature 297:197–200.
Peters, C. P., and R. J. Blumenschine. 1995. “Landscape Perspectives on Possible Land Use Patterns for Early
             Pleistocene Hominids in the Olduvai Basin, Tanzania.” Journal of Human Evolution 29:321–362.
Petraglia, M. D., and R. Potts. 1994. “Water Flow and the Formation of Early Pleistocene Artifact Sites in Olduvai
             Gorge, Tanzania.” Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 13(3):228–254.
Pianka, E. 1974. Evolutionary Ecology. New York: Harper & Row.
Pilbeam, D., and S. J. Gould. 1974. “Size and Scaling in Human Evolution.” Science 186:892–901.
Potts, R. 1987. “On Butchery by Olduvai Hominids.” Current Anthropology 28(1):95–96.
———. 1988. Early Hominid Activities at Olduvai. Hawthorne, NY: Aldine de Gruyter.
Potts, R., A. K. Behrensmeyer, and P. Ditchﬁeld. 1999. “Paleolandscape Variation and Early Pleistocene Hominid
             Activities: Members 1 and 7, Olorgesailie Formation, Kenya.” Journal of Human Evolution 37(5):747–
             788.
Quiatt, D. D., and V. Reynolds. 1993. Primate Behaviour: Information, Social Knowledge, and the Evolution of
             Culture. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Quiatt, D. D., and J. Itani, eds. 1994. Hominid Culture in Primate Perspective. Niwot: University Press of Colorado.
Relethford, J. H. 2000. The Human Species: An Introduction to Biological Anthropology, 4th ed. Mountain View,
             CA: Mayﬁeld.
Richmond, B. G., D. R. Begun, and D. S. Strait. 2001. “Origin of Bipedalism: The Knuckle-Walking Hypothesis
             Revisited.” Yearbook of Physical Anthropology 44:70–105.
Rose, K. D. 1994. “The Earliest Primates.” Evolutionary Anthropology 3(5):159–172.
Ruff, C. B., and J. A. Runestad. 1992. “Primate Limb Bone Structural Adaptations.” Annual Review of Anthropology
             21:407–433.
Ruvolo, M. 1997. “Genetic Diversity in Hominoid Primates.” Annual Review of Anthropology 26:515–540.
Salt, G. W., ed. 1984. Ecology and Evolutionary Biology. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Schaller, G. B., and G. R. Lowther. 1969. “The Relevance of Carnivore Behavior to the Study of Early Hominids.”
             Southwestern Journal of Anthropology 25:307–341.
Schrire, C., ed. 1984. Past and Present in Hunter-Gatherer Studies. New York: Academic Press.
Schwalbe, G. 1906. Studien zur Vorgeschichte des Menschen. Stuttgart: Scheizerbart.
Seaboook, J. 1994. “Building a Better Human.” The New Yorker, March 18, pp. 109–114.
Semaw, S. 2000. “The World’s Oldest Stone Artefacts from Gona, Ethiopia: Their Implications for Understanding
             Stone Technology and Patterns of Human Evolution Between 2.6–1.5 Million Years Ago.” Journal of
             Archaeological Science 27(12):1197–1214.
Sevink, J., E. H. Hebeds, N. Priem, and R. H. Verschure. 1981. “A Note on the Approximately 730,000-Year-Old
             Mammal Fauna and Associated Human Activity Sites Near Isernia, Central Italy.” Journal of
             Archaeological Science 8:105–104.
Shapiro, H. L. 1974. Peking Man. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Shefelbine, S. J., C. Tardieu, and D. R. Carter. 2002. “Development of the Femoral Bicondylar Angle in Hominid
             Bipedalism.” Bone 30(5):765–770.
Shipman, P. 2003. “We Are All Africans.” American Scientist 91(6):496–499.
Skelton, R. R., J. M. McHenry, and G. M. Drawhorn. 1986. “Phylogenetic Analysis of Early Hominids.” Current
             Anthropology 27(1):21–43.
Small, M. F. 1988. “Female Primate Sexual Behavior and Conception.” Current Anthropology 29(1):81–100.
———, ed. 1984. Female Primates: Studies by Women Primatologists. New York: A. R. Liss.
Smith, E. A. 1991. Inujjuamiut Foraging Strategies: Evolutionary Ecology of an Arctic Hunting Economy. Hawthorne,
             NY: Aldine de Gruyter.
Smith, K. C. 1992. “Neo-Rationalism Versus Neo-Darwinism: Integrating Development and Evolution.” Biology
             and Philosophy 7:431– 451.
Steudel-Numbers, K. L. 2003. “The Energetic Cost of Locomotion: Humans and Primates Compared to
             Generalized Endotherms.” Journal of Human Evolution 44(2):255–262.
Strum, S. C., and W. Mitchell. 1987. “Baboon Models and Muddles.” In The Evolution of Human Behavior: Primate
             Models, ed. W. G. Kinzey. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Speth, J., and D. Davis. 1976. “Seasonal Variability in Early Hominid Predation.” Science 192:441–445.
Swaicki, R. M. 1978. “Unusual Response of DDT-Resistant Houseﬂies to Carbinol Analogues of DDT.” Nature
             275:443–444.
Symons, D. 1979. The Evolution of Human Sexuality. New York: Oxford University Press.
Tanner, N. M. 1987. “The Chimpanzee Model Revisited and the Gathering Hypothesis.” In The Evolution of
             Human Behavior, ed. W. G. Kinzey. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Tattersall, I. 1992. “Species Concepts and Species Identiﬁcation in Human Evolution.” Journal of Human Evolution
             22:341–350.
———. 1994. “How Does Evolution Work?” Evolutionary Anthropology 3(1):2–3.

128   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      Teleki, G. 1981. “The Omnivorous Diet and Eclectic Feeding Habits of Chimpanzees in Gombe National Park,
                   Tanzania.” In Omnivorous Primates, ed. R. S. Harding and G. Teleki. New York: Columbia University
                   Press.
      Testart, A. 1982. “The Signiﬁcance of Food Storage Among Hunter-Gatherers: Residence Patterns, Population
                   Densities, and Social Inequalities.” Current Anthropology 23(5):523–537.
      Thomas, D. H. 1986. Reﬁguring Anthropology. Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press.
      Thorpe, S. K. S., R. H. Compton, M. M. Gunther, R. F. Ker, and R. M. Alexander. 1999. “Dimensions and Moment
                   Arms of the Hind- and Forelimb Muscles of Common Chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes).” American
                   Journal of Physical Anthropology 110:179–199.
      Tooby, J., and I. DeVore. 1987. “The Reconstruction of Hominid Behavioral Evolution Through Strategic
                   Modeling.” In The Evolution of Human Behavior: Primate Models, ed. W. G. Kinzey. Albany: State
                   University of New York Press.
      Toth, N. 1985. “The Oldowan Reconsidered: A Close Look at Early Stone Artifacts.” Journal of Archaeological
                   Science 12:101–120.
      Townsend, P. K. 1971. “New Guinea Sago Gatherers: A Study of Demography in Relation to Subsistence.” Ecology
                   of Food and Nutrition 1:19–24.
      Van den Berghe, P. L. 1972. “Sex Differentiation and Infant Care: A Rejoindor to Sharlotte Neely Williams.”
                   American Anthropologist 74:770–772.
      Van Lawick-Goodall, J. 1968. “The Behavior of Free-living Chimpanzees in the Gombe Stream Area.” Animal
                   Behavior Monographs 1:161–311.
      ———. “Some Aspects of Aggressive Behavior in a Group of Free-living Chimpanzees.” International Social
                   Science Journal 23:89–97.
      ———. 1973. “The Behavior of Chimpanzees in Their Natural Habitat.” American Journal of Psychiatry 130:1–12.
      Vertes, L. 1965. “Typology of the Buda Industry: A Pebble-Tool Industry from the Hungarian Lower Paleolithic.”
                   Quaternaria 7:185–195.
      Von Koenigswald, G. H. R. 1975. “Early Man in Java: Catalogue and Problems.” In Australopithecus
                   Paleoanthropology: Morphology and Paleoecology, ed. R. H. Tuttle. The Hague: Mouton.
      Watanabe, K. 1994. “Precultural Behavior of Japanese Macaques: Longitudinal Studies of the Koshima Troops.”
                   In The Ethological Roots of Culture, ed. R. A. Gardner, B. T. Gardner, B. Chiarelli, and F. X. Plooij,
                   pp. 81–94. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
      Wheatley, B. P. 1988. “Cultural Behavior and Extractive Foraging in Macaca fasciculris.” Current Anthropology
                   29(3):516–519.
      White, L. 1949. The Science of Culture. New York: Grove Press.
      Williams, M., D. Dunkerley, P. De Deckker, P. Kershaw, and J. Chappell. 1998. Quaternary Environments, 2nd ed.
                   New York: Oxford University Press.
      Wilmsen, E. 1989. Land Filled with Flies: A Political Economy of the Kalahari. Chicago: University of Chicago
                   Press.
      Wolpoff, M. 1994. “How Does Evolution Work?” Evolutionary Anthropology 3(1):4–5.
      Wolpoff, M., Xinzhi, Wu, and A. G. Thorne. 1984. “Modern Homo sapiens Origins: A General Theory of Hominid
                   Evolution Involving the Fossil Evidence from East Asia.” In The Origins of Modern Humans: A World
                   Survey of the Fossil Evidence, ed. F. H. Smith and F. Spencer. New York: A. R. Liss.
      Wood, B. 1987. “Who Is the ‘Real’ Homo habilis?” Nature 327:187–188.
      Wood, B., and B. G. Richmond. 2000. “Human Evolution: Taxonomy and Paleobiology.” Journal of Anatomy
                   196:19–60.
      Woodburn, J. 1982. “Egalitarian Societies.” Man (NS)17:431–451.
      Yellen, J. E. 1976. “Settlement Patterns of the !Kung: An Archeological Perspective.” In Kalahari Hunter-Gatherers:
                   Studies of the !Kung San and Their Neighbors, ed. R. Lee and I. Devore. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
                   University Press.
      Zeleznik, S., A. W. Grele, J. Pollack, and I. Aloni. 1989. “On Systematic Butchery by Plio/Pleistocene Hominids.”
                   Current Anthropology 29(1):151–153.



      NOTES
       1. Recent news stories have discussed Federal and ACLU lawsuits against various school districts to maintain
          the separation of church and state, as well as state legislature attempts in at least nine states to introduce the
          teaching of “intelligent design” into school curricula as an alternative to the theory of evolution.
       2. Bergson, L’Evolution Creatrice.
       3. Semaw, “The World’s Oldest Stone Artefacts form Gona, Ethiopia: Their Implications for Understanding
          Stone Technology and Patterns of Human Evolution Between 2.6–1.5 Million Years Ago.”

                                                                                    THE ORIGINS OF CULTURE           129


 4. Some researchers, for example, McGrew, “Culture in Nonhuman Primates?”, argue that differences across
    primate species may be a matter of degree rather than kind. This would mean that in a broad sense, species
    such as chimpanzees and humans both have culture, although the speciﬁcs of the cultures will differ.
 5. White, The Science of Culture.
 6. Wheatley, “Cultural Behavior and Extractive Foraging in Macaca fascicularis.” The Japanese macaque
    “cultural tradition” of washing sweet potatoes, and later wheat, in salt water, appears to have persisted
    over several generations; see, for example, Watanabe, “Precultural Behavior of Japanese Macaques:
    Longitudinal Studies of the Koshima Troops.”
 7. Brace, The Stages of Human Evolution, p. 51.
 8. See, for example, Alexander, “The Search for a General Theory of Behavior.”
 9. Alexander, “Evolution and Culture.”
10. Variously attributed.
11. These types of assumptions, however, must be viewed with some caution because they imply that chimpanzees
    have not evolved appeciably over the past several million years.
12. Grayson, The Establishment of Human Antiquity.
13. Dubois’s ﬁnds were eventually classiﬁed as Homo erectus.
14. Von Koenigswald, “Early Man in Java.” See also Harrison, “Present Status and Problems for Paleolithic Studies
    in Borneo and Adjacent Islands,” pp. 54–55.
15. Relethford, The Human Species: An Introduction to Biological Anthropology, is an up-to-date introduction to
    evolutionary theory as applied to people.
16. For the introductory student a good and well-illustrated introduction to evolutionary theory in anthropo-
    logical applications is in Farraro et al., esp. pp. 59–71.
17. There’s good reason to believe that Mendel falsiﬁed his data because his results are far too “perfect”
    mathematically and do not show the expected levels of “chance” variation, but this does not detract from his
    overall contribution. See Thomas, Reﬁguring Anthropology, pp. 288–291.
18. Birdsell, Human Evolution.
19. Brace et al., “Clines and Clusters Versus ‘Race’: A Test in Ancient Egypt and of a Death on the Nile.”
20. Crook, “Sexual Selection, Dimorphism, and Social Organization in Primates.”
21. See, for example, the exchange between Tattersall and Wolpoff, in Evolutionary Anthropology, 3(1), 1994.
22. Several examples of diet books based on presumed hunter-gatherer diets can be found, for example, Audette
    and Gilchrist’s Neanderthin: Eat Like a Caveman to Achieve a Lean, Strong, Healthy Body, and Cordain’s The
    PaleoDiet: Lose Weight and Get Healthy by Eating the Food You Were Designed to Eat.
23. Lewontin, “Sociobiology as an Adaptationist Program.”
24. Hamilton, “Revising Evolutionary Narratives: A Consideration of Alternative Assumptions About Sexual
    Selection and Competition for Mates.”
25. Rossetti was describing the day of Christ’s birth here in A Christmas Carol, not the Pleistocene.
26. Williams et al., Quaternary Environments.
27. Shipman, “We Are All Africans.”
28. Wood and Richmond, “Human Evolution: Taxonomy and Paleobiology.”
29. I (Wenke) am indebted to Dr. Thomas Morgan for some anecdotes on this point.
30. Attributed.
31. This taxonomy is quite recent and recognizes the close genetic links between chimpanzees and humans. The
    older terminology used the word “hominid” to mean humans and their ancestors. With the taxonomic
    revisions, hominid now applies to gorillas, chimpanzees, humans and their ancestors. The correct term for
    humans and their ancestors is “hominin.” See Wood and Richmond, “Human Evolution: Taxonomy and
    Paleobiology,” pp. 20–21.
32. Conroy, Primate Evolution.
33. There is some disagreement among scholars regarding the exact placement of several of the hominins. For
    example, some researchers prefer to classify Homo rudolfensis and Homo habilis as Australopithecus rudolfensis
    and Australopithecus habilis. Other researchers place Homo ergaster with Homo erectus.
34. Kimbel et al., “The First Skull and Other New Discoveries of Australopithecus afarensis at Hadar, Ethiopia.”
35. Leakey et al., “New Four-Million-Year-Old Hominid Species from Kanapoi and Allia Bay, Kenya.”
36. Clarke and Tobias, “Sterkfontein Member 2 Foot Bones of the Oldest South African Hominid.”
37. Toth, “The Oldowan Reconsidered: A Close Look at Early Stone Artifacts.”
38. Semaw, “The World’s Oldest Stone Artefacts from Gona, Ethiopia: Their Implications for Understanding
    Stone Technology and Patterns of Human Evolution Between 2.6–1.5 Million Years Ago.”
39. See Clark, “Some Thoughts on the Black Skull”; also McBrearty and Brooks, “The Revolution That Wasn’t:
    A New Interpretation of the Origin of Modern Human Behavior”; McHenry and Cofﬁng, “Australopithecus
    to Homo: Transformations in Body and Mind”; Wood and Richmond, “Human Evolution: Taxonomy and
    Paleobiology.”
40. Brown, Harris, and Walker, “Early Homo erectus Skeleton.”

130   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      41. Potts, Early Hominid Activities at Olduvai. See also Peters and Blumenschine, “Landscape Perspectives on
          Possible Land Use Patterns for Early Pleistocene Hominids in the Olduvai Basin, Tanzania”; Potts et al.,
          “Paleolandscape Variation and Early Plesitocene Hominid Activities: Members 1 and 7, Olorgesailie
          Formation, Kenya.”
      42. Petraglia and Potts, “Water Flow and the Formation of Early Pleistocene Artifact Sites in Olduvai Gorge,
          Tanzania.”
      43. Toth, “The Oldowan Reconsidered.”
      44. Tooby and DeVore, “The Reconstruction of Hominid Behavioral Evolution,” pp. 215–217.
      45. “Culture in Nonhuman Primates?”
      46. Crook, “Sexual Selection, Dimorphism, and Social Organization in Primates,” p. 235.
      47. Ibid.
      48. Pianka, Evolutionary Ecology.
      49. Anderson, “The Reproductive Role of the Human Breast.”
      50. Frisch, “Comment on Anderson, P. ‘The Reproductive Role of the Human Breast.’ ”
      51. Crook, “Sexual Selection, Dimorphism, and Social Organization in Primates,” p. 254.
      52. Bosch-Achermann and Boesch, “Hominization in the Rainforest: The Chimpanzee’s Piece of the Puzzle.”
      53. Goodall, The Chimpanzees of Gombe. Long-term studies of chimpanzees have also been undertaken in the
          Mahele Mountains National Park in Tanzania, in Bossou in Guinea, in the Kibale forest of Uganda, and
          in the Taï National Forest of Côte d’Ivoire; see Boesch and Boesch-Achermann, The Chimpanzees of the
          Taï Forest.
      54. Van Lawick-Goodall, “Some Aspects of Aggressive Behavior in a Group of Free-living Chimpanzees.”
      55. Van den Berghe, “Sex Differentiation and Infant Care: A Rejoinder to Sharlotte Neely Williams,” p. 772.
      56. Van Lawick-Goodall, “Some Aspects of Aggressive Behavior in a Group of Free-living Chimpanzees.”
      57. Van Lawick-Goodall, “The Behavior of Free-living Chimpanzees in the Gombe Stream Area”; idem., “Some
          Aspects of Aggressive Behavior in a Group of Free-living Chimpanzees”; idem., “The Behavior of
          Chimpanzees in Their Natural Habitat.”
      58. Tanner, “The Chimpanzee Model Revisited and the Gathering Hypothesis,” p. 20.
      59. Ibid., citing Boesch and Boesch, “Sex Differences in the Use of Natural Hammers,” and Boesch and Boesch,
          “Possible Causes of Sex Differences in the Use of Natural Hammers by Wild Chimpanzees.”
      60. The Chimpanzees of the Taï Forest, pp. 159–164, 204–205.
      61. Binford, “Human Ancestors.”
      62. Wilmsen, Land Filled with Flies: A Political Economy of the Kalahari.
      63. Schaller and Lowther, “The Relevance of Carnivore Behavior to the Study of Early Hominids.”
      64. Blumenschine, “Characteristics of the Early Hominid Scavenging Niche”; Blumenschine et al., “Competition
          for Carcasses and Early Hominid Behavioral Ecology: A Case Study and Conceptual Framework.”
      65. O’Connell et al., “Hadza Scavenging: Implications for Plio/Pleistocene Hominid Subsistence.”
      66. Birdsell, “Ecological Inﬂuences on Australian Aboriginal Social Organization.”
      67. Anderson, “The Reproductive Role of the Human Breast,” p. 31.
      68. Townsend, “New Guinea Sago Gatherers: A Study of Demography in Relation to Subsistence.”
      69. Lovejoy, “Hominid Origins: The Role of Bipedalism.”
      70. Kinzey, The Evolution of Human Behavior: Primate Models, p. x.
      71. Biomechanics uses physics to examine the action of forces on the body. In addition to statistical analyses,
          many of these studies use computer modeling and computer-generated simulations.
      72. The distal end of the femur (upper leg bone) articulates (meets) the proximal end of the tibia (large lower leg
          bone). At the distal end of the femur are lateral (toward the outside) and medial (toward the inside) condyles
          (rounded areas of bone that articulate with hollowed out areas on the proximal end of the tibia). In human
          bipedalism, the medial condyle grows at a faster rate than the lateral condyle, thus creating the bicondylar
          angle.
      73. Shefelbine et al., “Development of the Femoral Bicondylar Angle in Hominid Bipedalism.”
      74. For example, see Kramer, “Modelling the Locomotor Energetics of Extinct Hominids”; Ruff and Runestad,
          “Primate Limb Bone Structural Adaptations”; Thorpe et al., “Dimensions and Moment Arms of the Hind-
          and Forelimb Muscles of Common Chimpanzees (Pan Troglodytes)”; Harcourt-Smith and Aiello, “Fossils,
          Feet and the Evolution of Human Bipedal Locomotion.”
      75. Leonard and Robertson, “Rethinking the Energetics of Bipedality,” and “Locomotor Economy and the Origin
          of Bipedality: Reply to Steuden-Numbers.”
      76. Of course, not all researchers agree with Leonard and Robertson; see Steudel-Numbers, “The Energetic Cost
          of Locomotion: Humans and Primates Compared to Generalized Endotherms.”
      77. Jablonski and Chaplin, “Origin of Habitual Terrestrial Bipedalism in the Ancestor of the Hominidae.”
      78. Richmond et al., “Origin of Bipedalism: The Knuckle-Walking Hypothesis Revisited.”
      79. Isbell and Young, “The Evolution of Bipedalism in Hominids and Reduced Group Size in Chimpanzees:
          Alternative Responses to Decreasing Resource Availability.”

                                                                                THE ORIGINS OF CULTURE          131


80. Symons, The Evolution of Human Sexuality.
81. Ibid., pp. 27–28.
82. Tooby and DeVore, “The Reconstruction of Hominid Behavioral Evolution.”
83. Ibid., pp. 223–224.
84. Ibid., p. 224.
85. Binford, “Fact and Fiction About the Zinjanthropus Floor: Data, Arguments, and Interpretations”; Bunn and
    Kroll, “Reply to L. Binford ‘Fact and Fiction About the Zinjanthropus Floor: Data, Arguments, and
    Interpretations’ ”; Zeleznik et al., “On Systematic Butchery by Plio/Pleistocene Hominids.”
86. Blumenschine, “Percussion Marks, Tooth Marks, and Experimental Determinations of the Timing of
    Hominid and Carnivore Access to Long Bones at FLK Zinjanthropus, Oduvai Gorge, Tanzania”;
    Blumenschine et al., “Competition for Carcasses and Early Hominid Behavioral Ecology: A Case Study and
    Conceptual Framework”; Blumenschine et al., “Blind Tests of Inter-Analyst Correspondence and Accuracy
    in the Identiﬁcation of Cut Marks, Percussion Marks, and Carnivore Tooth Marks on Bone Surfaces”; Marean
    et al., “Captive Hyaena Bone Choice and Destruction, the Schlepp Effect, and Olduvai Archaeofaunas.”
87. Reviewed in Lieberman, Uniquely Human: The Evolution of Speech, Thought, and Selﬂess Behavior.
88. Adams, The Evolution of Urban Society.
89. Gould and Eldredge, “Punctuated Equilibria: The Tempo and Mode of Evolution Reconsidered.”
90. Cronin et al., “Tempo and Mode in Hominid Evolution.”
91. Henneberg, “Morphological and Geological Dating of Early Hominid Fossils Compared.”

