           9
           The Origins of Complex Societies
           in Egypt

                    Concerning Egypt I shall extend my remarks to
                    a great length, because there is no country that
                    possesses so many wonders, nor any that has
                    such a number of works that defy description.
                    Herodotus (c. 440 b.c.)




                    E      gypt’s similarities to other early civilizations are obvious: Egypt is yet another
                           variation on an ancient theme, a developmental pattern in which farmers succeeded
                 the hunter-forager-gatherers who had roamed northeast Africa for millennia, and then
                 within a few centuries produced state-level governments, writing, monumental architecture,
                 and the other aspects of “civilization,” including a spiral of, ﬁrst, civil wars, and later,
                                                                                centuries of ever-wider spheres
                                                                                of international warfare. In
                                                                                these and other developmental
                                                                                similarities Egypt is just one of
                                                                                a general class of phenomena
                                                                                —pre-industrial states, one of
                                                                                the six “primary civilizations”
                                                                                (see chapter 7).
                                                                                     Yet the similarities among
                                                                                ancient civilizations should
                                                                                not blind us to the unique
                                                                                genius of each. Egypt was a
                                                                                distinctive civilization whose
                                                                                excellence in arts, letters, and
                                                                                science can only be dimly
                                                                                glimpsed in its artifacts that lie
                                                                                in museum cases all over the
                                                                                world (Figure 9.1).
FIGURE 9.1 Museum visitors gaze at Tutankhamun’s throne at the Egyptian              Ancient Egypt’s most
Museum in Cairo.                                                                important contributions to the

                                                                   368

                                                                     THE ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN EGYPT         369


                                                                 EGYPT

                       0   GRAECO-ROMAN (322– )




IRON AGE
                           DYNASTIES 25–31 (712–322) LATE PERIOD Nubians and All Egypt (Dyn 25)      Saitic
                           Dynasty (Dyn 25) Saitic Dynasty (Dyn 26) Persian Dynasty (Dyn 27) Libyan Dynasty
                     500   (Dyns 28–30) Parsian Dynasty (Dyn 31)

                           DYNASTIES 21–25 (1080–712)       3RD INTERMEDIATE    Wen-Amun      Nubians      Thebes

                    1000




MIDDLE BRONZE AGE
                           DYNASTIES 18–20 (1570–1080) NEW KINGDOM Thebes, Eastern Delta             Egyptian State
                           in Levant Amarna Period: Tell el-Amarna Ramesside Era, Abu Simbel
                    1500
                           DYNASTY 12 (2050–1800) MIDDLE KINGDOM Thebes              DYNASTIES 13–17
                           (1800–1570) 2ND INTERMEDIATE Memphis (Ity-towy)           DYNASTIES 16–17 (1700–1570)
                             Hyksos era Avaris
                    2000   DYNASTIES 7–11 (2180–2050)       1ST INTERMEDIATE    Memphis     Hierakonpolie

                           DYNASTIES 3–6 (2650–2180) OLD KINGDOM Step pyramid of Djoser Saqqara                Great
                           Pyramids (Khufu, Khafre, Menkaure) Giza Worship of Re Heliopolis
                    2500
                           DYNASTIES 1–2 (2900–2650)        PHARAONIC STATE    King Menes   Hieroglyphic
                           writing Abydos, Saqqara
                    3000
                           NEOLITHIC (PREDYNASTIC) Irrigation agriculture Decorated pottery/palettes         El-Amra
                           Naqada (early) Urban centers?? El-Girzen Naqada Writing
                    4000

                           NEOLITHIC        Fayyum   El-Badari    Merimda

                    5000

                           Early Neolithic    Fayyum A

                    6000   Bir Kiseiba Nabta
                           Early Neolithic


                    7000
                           Early farming villages
                           Epipaleolithic/Early Neolithic
                    8000

                           Epipaleolithic

                    9000

370   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      comparative analyses of early civilizations may derive from its variations on the themes
      evident in other early civilizations. Egypt, for example, was one of the most politically
      centralized of early states, yet it also seems to have been the least urban; the complexity of
      its governmental bureaucracy was extraordinary, with rank upon rank of viziers, governors,
      and other ofﬁcials, but the vast majority of people seem to have lived in largely self-
      sufﬁcient villages and towns; and though its political cycles were closely related to a single
      environmental factor (Nile ﬂood levels), within these environmental limits Egypt’s
      sociopolitical evolution was a baroque interweaving of factors, personalities, and events.


      THE ECOLOGICAL SETTING

      Egypt . . . is an acquired country, the gift of the
      [Nile].
      Herodotus (c. 440 b.c.)

      Egypt is, indeed, in Herodotus’s much-repeated phrase, the gift of the Nile, and the Nile in
      turn is the gift of rainstorms in the mountains of eastern and central Africa. The “White
      Nile” ﬂows out of the lakes and springs of central Africa and ﬂows northward, where it is
      joined at Khartoum, in the Sudan, by the “Blue Nile,” which is fed by summer monsoonal
      rains in the Ethiopian savannas and highlands.1 Further north in the Sudan, the Atbara
      River, which also drains the Ethiopian highlands, joins the Nile.
           The White Nile’s volume does not vary much from season to season or year to year,
      but the Blue Nile and the Atbara ﬂuctuate with the sharply seasonal rainstorms in their
      watersheds. Thus, until the twentieth century, when huge dams were built in southern Egypt,
      the torrential spring rains in east Africa annually sent silt-choked ﬂoods pulsing down the
      Nile Valley, depositing along the way a rich layer of fertile silts and clays. Along the river’s
      course this natural alluviation has produced one of the world’s richest agricultural niches,
      which with even the simplest tools supports as many as 450 people per square kilometer.
           The Nile itself was an enormous source of food and other resources. The Nile perch,2
      for example, was a favorite food of ancient Egyptians before they became farmers and then
      throughout the pharaonic period as well. This ﬁsh lived in the ancient Nile in huge numbers
      and it is often found in warm shallow water—where it can easily be harpooned. It regularly
      grows to 75 kg in weight, and one specimen caught in Lake Nasser in recent times was over
      2 m long and weighed 175 kg.3 The Nile also teemed with wildfowl—a favorite food
      throughout Egyptian antiquity.
           Although highly productive, the Nile Valley is really only an extremely elongated oasis
      (Figure 9.2) where agricultural lands are sharply circumscribed in most regions by rocky
      deserts. From the Sudanese border to Cairo, the cultivable strip along both banks of the
      river is only a few kilometers wide in most places, and so sharp is the demarcation that, as
      the cliché has it, one can stand with one foot on the red desert sands and the other foot on
      the black, irrigated croplands (Figure 9.3). The ancient Egyptians called their country
      Kemet, or “black land,” after the life-giving dark silts that produced the crops that sustained
      them. The surrounding deserts they called Deshret, or “red land.” This distinction between
      desert and croplands is so marked because Egypt does not get enough precipitation to
      sustain any agriculture based on rainfall alone. The Nile is a single river through most of

                                                   THE ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN EGYPT         371




FIGURE 9.2 Some major Egyptian sites. Egypt’s desert and mountain frontiers protected it for
many centuries against outside inﬂuences, but already by 3000 b.c. its trade and military contacts
extended into Palestine, Nubia, and the Mediterranean world.

           372       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                     the land of Egypt, but north of
                                                                                     Cairo it divides into several
                                                                                     main branches, creating a delta
                                                                                     of ﬂat, well-watered, fertile
                                                                                     land. Although the origins of
                                                                                     Egyptian civilization were in
                                                                                     the south, near Hierakonpolis,
                                                                                     in later Egyptian history the
                                                                                     Delta was the agricultural heart-
                                                                                     land of the country, famed for
                                                                                     its wines, wheat, fruit, garden
                                                                                     crops, and huge herds of cattle
                                                                                     pastured there. As Egypt’s
FIGURE 9.3 A dramatic contrast exists between the well-watered, irrigated Nile
                                                                                     political and cultural focus
Valley corridor and the hyper-arid desert regions.
                                                                                     increasingly turned toward
                                                                                     Syro-Palestine, the Delta also
                      became a more important staging ground for armies and a crossroads of overland and
                      maritime trade routes.
                            The ancient Egyptians appreciated the basic geographic dichotomy of the Valley and
                      Delta and thought of their country as composed of two different geographical units: from
                      the Nubian border to the border of the Delta was ta-shema, the “land of the shema reed”;
                      north of that, the Delta, was ta-mehu, the “land of the papyrus plant.” Today most
                      archaeologists refer to this division as that between “Upper Egypt” in the south and “Lower
                      Egypt” in the north, the “Upper” and “Lower” reﬂecting the gradient of the Nile.
                            Thanks to the Nile, ancient Egyptians could traverse the length of their country in just
                      a week or so of pleasant sailing, providing a rapid, reliable channel for the movement of
                      goods, people, and information. The Egyptians did not use the wheel—either for vehicles,
                      pottery manufacture, or other uses—until quite late, many centuries after it was a mainstay
                      of Asian technology, probably because wheeled vehicles did not have much use in a country
                      where the Nile provides such easy transport and where there is limited advantage to moving
                      products among communities in an ecosystem that is quite similar over its entire length.
                      Egypt’s ecological similarity over most of its area and the Nile’s efﬁciency as a transport and
                      communications artery were key factors in the highly centralized governments that
                      developed in later Egyptian antiquity, and it is not surprising that in the southern reaches
                      of the Nile, where ﬁve cataracts (steep rapids) constitute impassable barriers to navigation,
                      the power of the Egyptian government often weakened.
                            Although there have been major ﬂuctuations in the annual volume of the Nile—for
                      example, catastrophically low water levels in some of the years between 2250 and 1950 b.c.
                      —the Nile ﬂoodplain has existed in essentially its present form since about 3800 b.c. In
                      ancient times, however, the Mediterranean coastline was farther inland (see Figure 9.2)
                      because the Delta had not sunk nearly as far as it has now under the weight of accumulated
                      silt. The gradient, periodicity, and other attributes of the Nile are such that complex
                      irrigation systems using dams and long feeder canals up river became important only fairly
                      late in Egypt’s history. For the most part the Nile forms small ﬂood basins that a few villages
                      could manage successfully.4 One simply waited for the spring ﬂoods to recede, leaving
                      behind their rich sediments, and then scattered seeds on the ground, herded pigs or sheep

                                                 THE ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN EGYPT      373


over the cropland to trample the seeds into the ground, weeded and hoed the crops as they
needed it, and then waited for the bountiful harvest. And while the Egyptians faced a lot of
competition for grain ripening in ﬁelds, especially from birds and rodents, they had the
friendly help of cats, which they “domesticated” (and vice versa), and most harvests were
bountiful.
     The annual ﬂoods were usually visible in southern Egypt, near the Nubian border, by
late May, and the river rose quickly thereafter, until the beginning of September, when it
began a long slow recession to its lowest level the next May. The Egyptian annual calendar
was based on this ﬂood cycle, dividing the year into three periods of four months each. The
period of ﬂooding, from July to October, was called akhet, which may have meant
“inundation.” Most of the crops were planted between November and February, a season
called peret, or “time of emergence,” in the sense that the farmland emerged as the ﬂoods
receded. The harvest season, or shemu, was from March to June.
     By ancient standards, Egypt was a rich country. The Israelites, wandering in the Sinai
deserts, bemoaned the rich meals they had enjoyed while living in Egypt: “[A]nd the
children of Israel . . . wept again and said, who shall give us ﬂesh to eat? We remember the
ﬁsh, which we did eat in Egypt for nought; the cucumbers, and the melons, and the leeks
and the onions and the garlic.”5 But if the spring ﬂoods were too high, then water stayed
on the lands too long and crops could not be sown in time to harvest them before the
summer heat destroyed them; if the ﬂoods were too low, not enough sediment and water
were available for good harvests. Ancient Egyptians used tripods to dip water from the river
to irrigate crops, and in some cases they trapped water behind dams during low ﬂood years,
so that they could use it later for irrigation; but in the long run—and with sensible storing
of grains—the Nile Valley was rich enough to support high population densities.


EARLY EGYPTIAN AGRICULTURE

The Nile Valley and Delta are among the richest agricultural niches in the world, and thus
the farming way of life may seem to be the “natural” state of human habitation there, but
in fact farming came to Egypt only relatively late. For many millennia before farming
appeared in Egypt, people lived there simply by hunting, ﬁshing, and gathering the area’s
rich profusion of indigenous plants and animals. Today the Nile Valley looks like a rather
poor place to try to make a living as a hunter-forager because the narrow Nile ﬂoodplain
runs through one of the harshest deserts on earth, the Sahara; but before about 60,000 years
ago rainfall made the deserts bloom for many millennia. In this Pleistocene epoch the Nile
itself teemed with ﬁsh and wildfowl, and areas that are now deserts along the Nile were for
long periods rich grasslands that supported wild cows, gazelles, and many other large
animals which, in turn, supported ancient Egyptian hunter-foragers.
      This centuries-old way of life began to fade away about 60,000 years ago. The African
rainfall patterns shifted, and the deserts replaced grasslands across much of North Africa.
And as these deserts expanded, almost all human life in Egypt was concentrated in the Nile
Valley and Delta, where until about 8000 b.c., people continued to hunt wild animals, ﬁsh,
and gather wild plant foods. Sometime between 8000 and 7000 b.c., agriculture and
domestication appear for the ﬁrst time in the Nile Valley area, with some scholars suggesting
that people in Egypt might have been in the process of domesticating cattle.6 But only at

374   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      about 7500 b.c. did some of them become full-time farmers and make the transition to
      village life and an economy based mainly on the foods that eventually were to serve as the
      staples of pharaonic Egypt—emmer wheat, barley, sheep, goats, cattle, and pigs.
           How did this transition to agriculture occur in Egypt? Egypt provides an interesting
      case to study this question because it exhibits both the processes by which people
      transmuted “wild” species into the ordinary domesticates of the village farm and also the
      means through which these people came to adopt Southwest Asian domesticates.
           There is some suggestion of intensiﬁed plant use at late Pleistocene northeast African
      sites in areas like Kom Ombo in the form of mortars, sickle blades, and other implements,
      but the adaptation appears to have been a mobile one, based on small groups pursuing a
      diversiﬁed hunting-foraging economy.7 Sometime after about 10,000 years ago, Egyptians
      appear to have been domesticating several varieties of local grasses,8 and they also
      apparently were in the process of domesticating cattle, and then later some other animals,
      such as the mongoose (ichneumon), gazelle, oryx, addax, ibex, and hyena—none of which
      ever became completely domesticated or extensively used as farm or food animals.
           The earliest evidence of forms of subsistence, settlement, and technology that differed
      signiﬁcantly from those of the late Pleistocene in northeast Africa comes from the desert
      areas of Bir Kiseiba and Nabta in southwest Egypt (see Figure 9.2). On the basis of evidence
      from this area, Wendorf, Schild, and Close note that both “cattle and pottery seem to have
      been known in the Sahara as early as anywhere else in the world.”9 Moreover, they observe
      that the people of about 6200–5900 b.c. lived in communities in which:

          The houses and pits indicate long term or, at least, recurrent settlement. At the very least,
          they must have been occupied for most of the year, and it seems likely that the Nile no
          longer played an important role in the settlement system, suggesting that a different kind
          of exploitation was now being employed in the desert. Instead of sites representing small
          family units or task-groups, there are now medium-sized villages, composed of perhaps as
          many as 14 family units . . . where there was at least sufﬁcient social control to determine
          the arrangement of the community.10

      One of the most intriguing discoveries at Nabta is the presence of wild sorghum, an
      important African cereal—in one structure at Nabta it represents 74 percent of the wild plant
      foods.11 Although sorghum was not to become one of the main staples of later Egyptian
      civilization, the use of this wild cereal by Neolithic people in Egypt clearly shows that—like
      their early Neolithic counterparts in the Levant—these early Egyptians were focusing
      intensively on plant foods that would later become domesticated crops. Wild sorghum,
      along with sheep and goats, has also been found in Neolithic contexts at Farafra, an oasis
      far out in the Sahara desert in north-central Egypt.12
            Compared to the glories of pharaonic civilization, these tiny communities described
      by Wendorf, Schild, and Close might seem of negligible importance and interest, but they
      demonstrate again the great breadth and pervasiveness of the changes that swept the world
      after the end of the last Pleistocene era. As we saw in chapter 6, for reasons not altogether
      clear people around the world after about 10,000 years ago began to interact with plants
      and animals in ways that led in many cases to domestication and agriculture; and in this
      same period of transition people all over the world appear to have begun living in larger
      communities, in which they spent much or all of the year. Not every group around the
      world changed in these ways, and hunting-foraging in the traditional ways continued
      throughout most of the world. But when we place these early Egyptian communities in the

                                                   THE ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN EGYPT         375


context of similar changes in Anatolia, Mesoamerica, northern China, and many other
places, this pattern of worldwide change appears revolutionary.
      These early Egyptian communities also illustrate the nature of cultural evolutionary
processes: Cultural change and transformation is a ﬁtful process of dead-ends, failures,
extinctions, and only occasionally the kinds of slight changes that result in long-term
revolutionary cultural transformation. For example, apparently these early Egyptian
communities did not make the transition to a fully agricultural, sedentary way of life in
these arid zones. Fekri Hassan and others have argued that eventually climate changes
induced people to abandon areas that were slowly turning into deserts and migrate into the
richer Nile Valley.13 Had these climatic changes not forced people out of what are now the
deserts of Egypt, perhaps they would have evolved their own agricultural communities on
the basis of local grasses, cattle, and other resources—but we will never know: Evolutionary
processes are not predictable and only reveal a “pattern” when viewed backward in time.
      Sometime between 6000 and 5000 b.c., domesticated wheat, barley, sheep, and goats
were introduced from outside Egypt and became the basis for the evolution of Egyptian
civilization. Whether these domesticates were introduced for the ﬁrst time in this
millennium or were just successfully farmed for the ﬁrst time is unknown, as are their
ultimate origins. The most likely source of the domestic wheat, barley, sheep, and goats that
formed the staples of the Egyptian diet is Syro-Palestine and other areas of Southwest Asia,
where they had already been in agricultural use for 2,000 years.
      Our most systematic evidence about these early agriculturalists is from the Fayyum
Oasis. British archaeologist Gertrude Caton-Thompson conducted excellent excavations
along the lake’s north shore in the 1930s, Fred Wendorf and Romauld Schild’s work there
in the 1970s greatly augmented Caton-Thompson’s ﬁndings, and additional work has been
done by other scholars.14
      Agriculture has such great inertia because once people begin making and using large
grinding stones, big grain storage silos, sickles, and all the rest of the primitive farmer’s tool
kit, there is a strong incentive not to move. Also, cereal grains ripen over a short interval,
and a farmer who is out hunting the week they ripen can expect to come back to a ﬁeld
stripped bare by rodents and birds.
      Thus it is puzzling that the ancient peoples of the Fayyum left no traces of houses or
prolonged occupation. Caton-Thompson found complete sickles in silos full of wheat and
barley in Fayyum sites dating to about 5000 b.c., but people here seem to have combined
some minor cereal farming with the ancient hunting-foraging ways. Partly for this reason,
some scholars see a resistance to the spread of agriculture in Egypt because of the richness
of the lake and river environments.15 But by 4000 b.c. agriculture had spread over much of
Egypt, including the southern areas. Some people still depended on ﬁsh and wild plants for
much of their food, while others were already heavily dependent on the wheat-barley,
sheep-goat-cattle-pig combination that underlies so much of Middle Eastern cultural
evolution.


THE PREDYNASTIC PERIOD (C. 4000–3000 B.C.)

One of the most impressive and puzzling things about ancient Egypt is the apparent rapidity
and comprehensiveness with which hundreds of unconnected and functionally similar
villages were transmuted into an organized social, economic, and political unity—the ﬁrst

           376        PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                           Egyptian state. This transformation began at about
                                                           4000 b.c. in the south and rapidly spread to the north,
                                                           encompassing most of Egypt by 3000 b.c.
                                                                The rise of the Egyptian “state” after circa 3100 b.c.
                                                           is really just a bold reconstruction of what we infer
                                                           happened. These inferences are based on (1) the spread
                                                           over much of Egypt of pottery and architectural styles
                                                           that suggest close, continuing contacts among people
                                                           over large areas of the country; (2) the investment of
                                                           massive amounts of labor and resources in tombs and
                                                           monumental buildings in such a way as to imply an
                                                           unequal distribution of wealth, power, and prestige;
                                                           and (3) some equivocal signs, like the Narmer Palette
                                                           (Figure 9.4), that seem to indicate a potentate in the
                                                           process of exercising kingly authority.
                                                                The evolution of Egyptian civilization began in the
                                                           south, in Upper Egypt. In 1894 Sir Flinders Petrie
                                                           excavated more than 2,000 graves at the site of Naqada,
                                                           just north of Luxor, and deﬁned the Predynastic
                                                           cultural sequence. These graves were ﬁlled with pottery
                                                           in different styles, as well as slate palettes, beautiful ﬂint
                                                           tools, jewelry made of bone and other materials, untold
                                                           beads, ﬁgurines, and other riches. These graves and
                                                           other Predynastic sites reveal a society quickly chang-
                                                           ing in the direction of the class-stratiﬁed, religious
                                                           unity that we know from documents of less than a
                                                           thousand years later.16
                                                                The largest and most complex cluster of Pre-
FIGURE 9.4 The Narmer Palette, a thin sheet of stone       dynastic settlements in Egypt are those at Hierakonpolis,
engraved with symbols that may reﬂect the political        the “City of the Hawk,” where excavations have gone
uniﬁcation of Egypt. King Narmer is shown wearing          on for almost a century (until recently under the direc-
different crowns on the different sides of the palette,
                                                           tion of the late Michael Hoffman).17
possibly symbolizing the political uniﬁcation of the
                                                                The Predynastic people of Hierakonpolis lived in
Delta and Nile Valley, under the representation of the
hawk-headed god Horus. Scenes of battle and what           rectangular,   semi-subterranean houses of mudbrick
appears to be a beheading suggest a military uniﬁcation of and  thatch;  they apparently worshipped in small, per-
the country.                                               haps  wooden    shrines;  and they made and distributed
                                                           regionally several kinds of pottery, some of it very
                      beautiful. They also hunted, herded, ﬁshed, and farmed the by now traditional array of
                      Egyptian plants and animals, and they buried their dead in rock and mudbrick tombs of a size
                      and content to reﬂect the social power and prestige of the individual. The famed Narmer
                      Palette (see Figure 9.4), which traditionally has been interpreted as commemorating
                      the uniﬁcation of the Nile Valley and Delta into a national state, was found at Hierakonpolis,
                      which may indicate that this city was an early capital of Egypt. But many scholars doubt
                      that the Narmer Palette was a unique record of the ﬁrst uniﬁcation of Egypt.18
                            Elsewhere in southern Egypt, excavations by Fekri Hassan at Naqada (see Figure 9.2)
                      suggest that by the middle of fourth millennium b.c. this site was a large town that already

                                                  THE ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN EGYPT        377


was fully dependent on agriculture. Naqada and Hierakonpolis may have been by far the
largest communities in all of southern Egypt at this time, with much smaller communities
scattered down the valley.
      In the north, beginning at about 3650 b.c. there were at least some large and compara-
tively wealthy communities, such as those at Ma’adi and El-Omari, both of which are just
south of what is now Cairo. Stone tools, pottery, and other artifacts show that the people
of Ma’adi exchanged products with Palestine, and they may have been part of a large trade
network that integrated commodities from the Levant, the Nile Valley, and even the deserts
and oases. The bones of donkeys have been found at Ma’adi, and one can imagine these
people sending caravans off across the desert to Palestine, while their boats plied the Nile
River trade. Burials at El-Omari included some apparently wealthy and perhaps powerful
people who were buried in straw mats, along with large stores of pots, stone tools, and other
goods.
      Other Predynastic communities have been found in northern Egypt, most of them
dating to just before 3000 b.c. At Minshat Abu Omar, hundreds of graves have been found
containing the distinctive pottery, alabaster jars, slate palettes, and other riches of the late
Predynastic. Excavations at Buto, in the northwestern Delta, have revealed clay cones ident-
ical to those used to decorate temples in the Uruk state centered in Mesopotamia at about
3200 b.c. Buto may have been one of the most important ports on maritime trade routes
over which vast quantities of timber, oil, wine, minerals, pottery, and other commodities
passed.19


THE ARCHAIC, OLD KINGDOM, AND FIRST INTERMEDIATE
PERIODS (C. 3000–2040 B.C.)

Despite the apparent extent of commercial relationships in Predynastic Egypt, the ceramics
of northern and southern Egypt remained quite different in style until about 3100 b.c.
As we noted in chapter 8 with regard to Southwest Asia, and as we will see in later chapters,
one apparently unfailing sign of increasing cultural complexity in ancient societies was
a growing uniformity over larger and larger areas of styles of pottery. In fact, around the
world, these increases in the area of distribution of certain styles and their growing
uniformity correlate precisely with the appearance of other elements of complexity, such
as more complex settlement patterns, monumental architecture, agricultural intensiﬁca-
tion, mortuary cults, and so on. Thus, we might suspect that in Egypt the same pattern
would hold, and there is evidence that it did. The distinctive styles of pottery from northern
sites like Ma’adi, Buto, and various other sites in the Delta20 appear to have been quickly
and completely replaced by the styles of southern Egypt.
     If this pattern of change does reﬂect the uniﬁcation of Egypt, we may wonder how it
was actually accomplished. As noted earlier, traditional sources suggest that Narmer, a minor
ofﬁcial from Upper Egypt, rose to power and conquered Lower Egypt at about 3100 b.c.,
and that he and his successors established a theocratic political system over the entire
navigable length of the Egyptian Nile. Narmer (also known as Menes) is recorded as having
built a capital at Memphis (near modern Cairo), diverting the stream of the Nile to create
a strategic position at the junction of Upper and Lower Egypt. His next several successors

378   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      were also powerful kings, but there is some evidence of internal dissension at about
      2900 b.c. Later, peace appears to have been restored, and major construction projects were
      undertaken in the centuries before 2700 b.c. We know from tombs and other archaeological
      evidence that already by the early Old Kingdom (c. 2700 b.c.), Egypt was a complexly
      organized nation-state, with monumental architecture, a multi-tiered economy, and a
      centralized and hierarchically arranged bureaucracy.
           Fekri Hassan has shown that the evolution of complex societies in Predynastic Egypt
      was a long, involved process, in which climate changes, warfare, evolving agricultural
      efﬁciency, and the development of religions and political institutions were all subtly
      interrelated. He stresses that no simple ecological model can account for these changes and
      that Egypt is not likely to have been uniﬁed by any single battle or ruler.21
           And while the Predynastic period saw the ﬁrst complex Egyptian societies, in trade
      patterns, occupational specialization, and settlement patterns, the Archaic and Old Kingdom
      periods were the great formative era of Egyptian civilization, the time when Upper and
      Lower Egypt were ﬁrst united politically and Egyptian forms of writing, architecture,
      administration, and ideology emerged.
           By 2700 b.c. the economic sphere was already quite complex, involving long-distance
      trade to Syria and beyond and considerable local exchange of craft goods and foodstuffs;
      but most Egyptians of the Old Kingdom period continued to live in unwalled, largely self-
      sufﬁcient villages. Apart from Memphis there were few towns or cities, which may have
      contributed to the political integration of the country, since there were no urban power
      centers to resist incorporation.22 Large areas of the middle Nile Valley were only sparsely
      settled, and population growth was quite slow, with little competition for agricultural land
      or irrigation water (although many new settlements appear to have been established in the
      Delta). Apparently, the slow population growth during the Old Kingdom (Butzer estimates
      an annual rate of 0.8 per 1,000 people) eventually did begin to exert some pressure on
      available resources toward the end of the period, since large game almost disappeared from
      the Alluvium and contemporary documents describe a shift away from pastoralism to a
      greater reliance on grain agriculture.23
           The middle of the third millennium b.c. was for Egypt a marvelous age in which many
      of the greatest pyramids and palaces were built, an integrated royal bureaucracy was
      formed, and arts and crafts were brilliantly executed (Figure 9.5). Because of the relatively
      comprehensive documents from this period, we know many of its political and social
      details.24 Economic exchange was apparently controlled almost entirely through the king;
      there were no “merchants”—in the capitalistic sense at least—until centuries after the end
      of the Old Kingdom. Craftsmen, scribes, peasants, and everyone else were required to
      perform some services in the name of the king and were liable for military and civil
      conscription, but there is a clear contrast here with the partially capitalistic, multi-tiered,
      highly differentiated economic system characteristic of the later Mesopotamian states.
           What Old Kingdom Egypt was like outside the main centers is less well known. Recent
      excavations and surveys have shown that the Old Kingdom Delta was densely occupied.25
      Many Delta settlements were probably “pious donations,” the granting of tax exemptions
      to certain communities whose revenues were used to support mortuary cults at Giza and
      elsewhere. Pharaoh Wahkare’ Khety III (2070–2040 b.c.), in his instructions to his son,
      Merykare, forcefully recommended building towns as a means to counteract political
      fragmentation and inefﬁcient organization, especially in the eastern Delta, which, he

                                                  THE ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN EGYPT          379


lamented, was being subdivided into rival provinces and cities.26
Old Kingdom Egypt had complex commercial and political
relationships to Southwest Asian cultures, and since most of
the sea and land routes to these areas were through the Delta, the
Delta’s importance increased. In fact, by about 2400 b.c. the
majority of Egypt’s population probably lived north of Saqqara,
and the seat of government power remained at Memphis, in the
north, through much of Egypt’s ancient history. Old Kingdom
towns at Hierakonpolis and other southern cities remained
important, however. Also, the Old Kingdom fort at Elephantine,
near Aswan, guarded the southern approaches to the Kingdom.
     Some characteristics distinguish Old Kingdom Egypt from
Mesopotamia and other early complex societies. For example,
there seem to have been no standing armies during most of the
Old Kingdom and no economically signiﬁcant slavery. In some
ways the economic system—although highly administered—was
a simple redistributive, almost chiefdom-like system, quite
different from that of early Mesopotamian states.


Pyramids
Djoser, the second king of the Third Dynasty who reigned from
about 2630 to 2611 b.c., was able to organize Egypt’s people and
economy to the extent that he, or his grand vizier, Imhotep, could
arrange construction of the great step pyramid at Saqqara as his
tomb (Figure 9.6). The actual crypt was built inside the pyramid,
whose six levels rose over 60 m and were surrounded by large
buildings and a stone wall more than 9 m wide with a perimeter
of more than 1.6 km. The pyramid complex at Saqqara was the              FIGURE 9.5 Lifelike funerary portrait
                                                                         masks such as this one, from the Fayyum, are
world’s ﬁrst large-scale stone building and remains, despite much
                                                                         a highlight in the history of mortuary art.
deterioration and the looting of its limestone facing, one of the
most beautiful. It truly must have been an impressive sight, 45
centuries ago, with its crisp white limestone facing contrasting with the cobalt blue sky,
green palm groves, and desert sands.
      Djoser’s successors, particularly those of the Fourth Dynasty (c. 2575–2465 b.c.)—the
beginning of the Old Kingdom Period—also built massive pyramids and experimented with
designs and constructions until the “perfect” pyramid form was achieved by King Khufu—
as exempliﬁed by the pyramids at Giza (Figure 9.7). It is not just the massive size of this and
other pyramids of this era that is so impressive, but also the complex engineering, the deft
execution of stone sculpture, and the precise planning such projects would have required.
      So much has been said and imagined about the pyramids, yet we can hope to know so
little. The minds that designed them and invested them with meaning are these many
centuries gone to dust, and not a single ancient Egyptian text of the period when they were
built describes how they were constructed or why.
      Cairo sprawls out and around the pyramids today in such clamorous ubiquity that the
only way to see the pyramids in a manner anything like that of the ancient Egyptian is to

           380       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                     come in from the west, in the
                                                                                     early morning, in the quiet of
                                                                                     the desert. The pyramids were
                                                                                     all located on the west bank of
                                                                                     the Nile, an equation no doubt
                                                                                     with death and the setting
                                                                                     sun. All are situated on the
                                                                                     limestone outcrop near the
                                                                                     river, to facilitate the transfer
                                                                                     of innumerable blocks of lime-
                                                                                     stone and alabaster, some of
                                                                                     which had to be shipped down
                                                                                     the Nile and then transported
                                                                                     up the bank to the construc-
                                                                                     tion area.
                                                                                           Exactly how the blocks
                                                                                     were quarried and transported
FIGURE 9.6 The stepped pyramid of the Pharoah Djoser at Saqqara is an early          remains unknown, but we
forerunner of the Pyramids at Giza.                                                  have some clues. Quarrying
                                                                                     probably involved a combina-
                                                                                     tion of hammering with hard
                      stones, chopping with copper adzes, and fracturing by heating the rock with ﬁres and then
                      splashing cold water on it. Mark Lehner has thoroughly analyzed evidence relating to the
                      surveying and construction methods used to build the pyramids, and he has evaluated the
                      various possible combinations of ramps, rollers, and so on against the physical remains.27
                      The Great Pyramid of Giza required the quarrying, transport, preparation, and laying of
                      about 2,300,000 stone blocks, each with an average weight of 2.5 tons, and an estimated
                      labor force equivalent to about 84,000 people employed for 80 days a year for 20 years. We
                      do not know how these people were mobilized and administered, but many think the
                      construction was done by the peasantry during the ﬂood seasons, when little agricultural
                      activity was required. The administration, feeding, direction, and planning required to
                      control such a work force, which included many highly trained craftsmen as well as
                      laborers, would obviously argue a high degree of political and bureaucratic centralization.
                      The king was apparently able to call on all the resources of the country, and direct them
                      and the people to virtually any end, and at times the entire national economy was probably
                      focused on these projects. The monarch’s absolute control is directly reﬂected in the texts
                      and in the mortuary complexes of the various levels of high-ranking administrators who
                      served him, many of whose tombs are laid out around the king’s, reﬂecting his control over
                      them even into eternity.
                           With the construction techniques available to Old Kingdom craftsmen, a pyramid is
                      the only architectural form that could support its own weight when built to the scale that
                      the Old Kingdom pyramids were. But we also have to account for the dimensions and
                      angles used. Engineering considerations obviously constrained the Egyptians to build the
                      pyramids at angles such that stone blocks could be raised to each new level and that the
                      whole could sustain its own weight. But I. E. S. Edwards suggested that this angle (about
                      52 degrees) parallels that of the slant of light on winter afternoons28 in Egypt, and he says

                                                 THE ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN EGYPT         381




FIGURE 9.7 The Pyramids at Giza are the focal points in a vast mortuary complex of tombs and temples.
But outside these mortuary centers Egypt was primarily a rural, agricultural society, with few cities.



the texts hint that the pharaohs ascended into heaven by walking up the rays of light.29 The
pyramids thus would be a ﬁrst step to the pharaoh’s union with the sun god and eternity.
      Limited as they were by the lack of electronic survey equipment and precisely
engineered tools, we cannot expect Egyptian craftsmen to have been up to modern
construction standards. The north corner of the Great Pyramid at Giza, for example, is
almost a whole inch higher than the south corner, and there is the famous example of the
“bent” pyramid at Dashur, the top of which leans at an odd angle to achieve its apex.
      Some of the most impressive features associated with the pyramids were the “solar
boats,” which are thought to have been buried at the time of the pharaoh’s death, to
facilitate his sailing into eternity. These boats were disassembled and buried in stone pits

382   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      near the pyramids, and in the 1960s and 1970s, when one was excavated and reconstructed,
      the wood, ropes, and other components were found to be almost perfectly preserved by the
      dark and aridity of the boat pits. In 1987 scientists introduced a camera through an airlock
      into another boat pit, in the hopes that the atmosphere would be unchanged since the time
      of burial, but the camera showed dung beetles walking around somewhat decayed segments
      of the boat.
           Earlier versions of boat burials, however, have a long history in Egypt, dating back to
      the period of the earliest dynasties. They have been found, for example, at Abydos,
      surrounding a funerary monument to the Second Dynasty Pharoah, Khasekhemwy, but
      they are stratigraphically earlier than this monument and may actually date to the period
      of the First Dynasty Pharoah, Djer, around 2920 b.c.30 The 12 boats at Abydos are “moored”
      with a small boulder placed either near the prow or the stern to anchor them, and they range
      in length from 19 to 29 m. Unlike the later Giza boat burials, however, those at Abydos are
      not complete—they lack decks, cabins, oars, and attached prows and sterns (which are
      fashioned of mudbrick instead). They are, in David O’Connor’s estimation, “proto-types”
      for the Giza boat pits.31
           Mark Lehner has argued that the placement of the various elements of the Giza
      monuments in relation to the geology of the area indicates that the Sphinx, the three main
      Giza pyramids, and various temples are part of a single uniﬁed design, in which the different
      strata of limestone on the Giza Plateau were carefully used to produce this magniﬁcent
      ceremonial center.32
           The pyramids continue to fascinate most people who see them, and numerous ideas
      have been suggested about what the pyramids meant to the ancient Egyptians and how they
      were constructed. On hot summer nights some tourists continue experiments to determine
      if the pyramids retard aging, heighten sexual potency, cure diseases, or in other ways give
      off powerful emanations.


      Egyptian Temples
      The Egyptians built thousands of temples, some of which still stand as classics of
      architectural accomplishment, such as the Temple of Queen Hatshepsut at Deir el-Bahri.
           In our own world architecture seems a somewhat chaotic art form and discipline, with
      the highest adulation often reserved for those who break free from tradition and introduce
      new forms that express an aesthetic sense but also function well. “Form follows function”
      and “less is more” are principles that have guided some great architects of the modern
      world, but new materials and methods allow them a freedom to experiment that was utterly
      unknown in the ancient world.
           Egyptian architects, too, evolved forms and developed new aesthetic expressions, but
      there was a canon of architectural principles for many buildings that did not permit
      innovation in certain fundamental aspects. In Ancient Egypt there was no sense of “art for
      the sake of art,” in the sense of a free-form expression of whim and whimsy. Egyptian
      architects did not, for example, use gigantic stone replicas of papyrus plants as columns for
      temples because of simple personal aesthetic preference. Everything had a purpose.
      Egyptian architecture was made to “work” in a profound sense.
           The traditional plan of Egyptian temples was based on the belief that the temple was
      not a place of meditation, as a modern church might be said to be, but, instead, a home of

                                                     THE ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN EGYPT      383


a god. Egyptian temples were static realizations in stone of the creation of the universe and
are to be seen as replicas of the universe at this moment of creation. Thus, the temples were
aligned on an east-west axis, so that each morning the rising sun, the god Ra, would shine
through the double pylon gate, representing two mountains, and penetrate the westernmost
chamber of the temple, to illuminate the statue of the god. The temple itself was subdivided
into different chambers, so that a person entering would only gradually pass through toward
the god, reﬂecting a step-by-step process of puriﬁcation in preparation for approaching the
god. As Nicholas Grimal explains:
    The approach consisted of a gradual movement from light to shadow, achieving total
    darkness in the holy of holies where the god dwelt. At the same time the ground slowly rose,
    achieving its highest point under the naos [large carved stone cubicles], which was thus
    located on the primeval mound emerging from Nun, the lake of chaos. Out of this aqueous
    environment rose the stems of the papyrus columns, their architraves holding up the sky,
    which was usually represented on the ceiling. In order to achieve this effect, the temple had
    to consist of at least three elements: a courtyard, a colonnade, and a pylon entrance.33
In this movement from light to dark, low to high, profane to sacred, ancient Egyptian
worshippers expressed many elements of their view of the world and the signiﬁcance of
their lives.

The Intellectual Foundations of the Ancient
Egyptian State
Wilson notes that the written language of Old Kingdom Egypt had no words for
“government” or “state” as impersonal terms, conceived apart from the pharaoh; the
Egyptian “theory of government was that the king was everywhere and did everything. . . .
The ﬁction of direct delegation of duty and of a direct report to the king was impossible to
maintain in practice; but in the theory of government it was no ﬁction, it was a working
reality.”34 Thus, the Egyptians viewed their state and culture metaphorically as a living
organism, an organism of which they were all a part, from the pharaoh himself to the
lowliest slave (described in chapter 7 and illustrated in Figure 7.3 using iconography from
the throne base of Pharaoh Senusret I—1971–1928 b.c.).
     A key concern to the Egyptian theory of government was “divine kingship.”35 The
ancient Egyptians viewed their state as a complex blend of human and divine elements that
was created and sustained by the interactions of people and gods, particularly through the
agency of the pharaoh. The divinity of the pharaoh was a complex idea, however. Various
scholars36 have suggested that the position of pharaoh, his “job,” in a sense, was regarded
as divine but that the person of the pharaoh was not considered divine. For example, a
statue of Chephren, for whom the second pyramid at Giza was constructed, shows the god
Horus protecting him by spreading his wings over Chephren. And usually the pharaoh is
pictured as confronting the gods, not as one of them. The pharaoh’s responsibility was the
“containment of unrule”—in other words, he had to ensure domestic tranquility and
prosperity. To that end he participated in many religious rituals.
     Shortly after 2495 b.c. there was a change in dynasties as well as in the religious
and political texture of the Old Kingdom. The worship of the sun god, Ra, emerged as the
dominant religion, and the nobility and provincial authorities began to encroach on the
king’s authority.

384   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      The First Intermediate Period (c. 2134–2040 B.C.):
      Breakup or Transformation?
      In a sense the end of the ﬁrst cycle of dynastic Egypt appears to have occurred between
      about 2134 and 2040 b.c., when the Old Kingdom state seems to have experienced a short
      period of disruption and change. Scholars differ on the extent of ﬂuctuations of royal power
      during the Fourth and Fifth Dynasties. Kemp suggests that in Upper Egypt the control of
      local affairs by the pharaoh’s overseer was gradually diluted during the late Old Kingdom,
      culminating in the appearance of provincial governors, or nomarchs.37 Trigger raises the
      possibility that a slow but continuous expansion and elaboration of society and economy
      in the Old Kingdom may have been accompanied by growing complexity and power of
      provincial administrative institutions.38 The apparent emergence of powerful nomarchs in
      the Sixth Dynasty may reﬂect a reduction of pharaonic power, but the pharaohs of this
      period were still able to send expeditions to Nubia and Palestine and to exert considerable
      internal control as well.39
           The political breakdown of Egypt toward the end of the Old Kingdom may have been
      in part a result of dramatic climatic changes. Rainfall decreased in much of Egypt after
      about 2900 b.c., and Butzer notes that decreasing rainfall would have reduced the resources
      and numbers of desert nomads as well as eliminated much of the seasonal pastoral
      movements into the deserts.40
           The concept of societal “collapse,” a dominant theme in many analyses of Egypt,
      Mesopotamia, China, and other early states,41 has some application to Egypt, but the
      periodic partial disintegrations of Egyptian polities seem to have been quite different. When
      its central government weakened, there was a reversion to greater autonomy for the
      provinces for brief periods. Even during the three “intermediate periods” that are taken as
      major divisions of Egypt’s culture history, the level of disruption may have been less than
      originally estimated.42 There was always a base level of expansion-collapse cycles as a result
      of variations in the Nile’s annual ﬂow. Various texts describe social disruptions that may
      be associated with ﬂood-level ﬂuctuations, but the Egyptian state evolved effective
      mechanisms to cope with these problems.
           To some extent, Egypt’s “intermediate periods” may have been periods of reorganiza-
      tion rather than of collapse. For example, the great decline in pyramid construction that
      marked the end of the Old Kingdom and the beginning of the First Intermediate Period
      does not necessarily reﬂect catastrophe; in fact, there is evidence that any economic
      dislocations in these periods were short-lived and relatively minor.43


      THE MIDDLE KINGDOM AND SECOND INTERMEDIATE
      PERIODS (2040–1550 B.C.)

      Reconstructing the sociopolitical changes of the Middle Kingdom (c. 2080–1640 b.c.)
      —Egypt’s “Classical” period—is a complex matter. In general, the history of the Middle
      Kingdom contains the same cycles of expansion and collapse that can be seen in all the great
      ancient empires. Periods of well-regulated trade, prosperity, and brilliance in art, architec-
      ture, and literature were punctuated by periods of revolution, poverty, and political

                                                     THE ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN EGYPT      385


fragmentation. The Middle Kingdom originated in the great civil unrest of the twenty-ﬁrst
century b.c., when, according to a contemporary account:
    [Grain] has perished everywhere. . . . People are stripped of clothing, perfume, and oil.
    . . . Everyone says, “There is no more.” . . . Strangers have come into Egypt everywhere.
    . . . Men do not sail to Byblos today: What shall we do for ﬁne wood? Princes and pious
    men everywhere as far as the land of Crete are embalmed with the resins of Lebanon, but
    now we have no supplies. . . . The dead are thrown in the river. . . . Laughter has perished.
    Grief walks the land.44

In the face of this turmoil, successive rulers sought to increase national integration while
directing defense and trade along increasingly active frontiers.45 The Eleventh Dynasty
Pharaoh Nebhepetre’ Mentuhotpe (c. 2061–2010 b.c.) and his immediate successors of the
Eleventh Dynasty reuniﬁed the country. He and his successors of the Eleventh and Twelfth
Dynasties reorganized the country with considerable energy, undertaking expeditions into
Nubia, Libya, and Syria; reopening trade routes to the Red Sea; and commencing again the
construction of monumental buildings. The capital was reestablished near Memphis, from
which both Upper and Lower Egypt could be ruled effectively; trade routes were extended;
fortresses were built along the country’s frontiers; and the tradition of co-regency was
established, in which sons were made co-rulers toward the end of their fathers’ reigns,
thereby eliminating some of the bloody battles for succession that had plagued previous
dynasties.
     There were also advances in Egyptian art and architecture during this period. Many
literary classics were composed, and the cult of Osiris completed its replacement of the
colder, sterner religion of Ra and gave the common people some hope of the afterlife that
in the past had been restricted to royalty.
     From about 1786 to about 1720 b.c., various kings managed to remain in general
control of most of Egypt, but gradually people from, it appears, Syro-Palestine, who were
collectively referred to as the Hyksos, began to inﬁltrate the Delta, and they eventually
appear to have been absorbed into the lower levels of Egyptian society. Gradually the power
of these Asiatic peoples increased. At about 1640 b.c. they captured Memphis, and the
Hyksos king adopted the trappings of Egyptian royalty. Artifacts made in the Hyksos
manner have been found all along the Nile Valley and as far south as Karnak, but it is not
clear how directly they were able to control most of the population. The skull of a ruler of
southern Egypt, Seqenenre’ Ta’o II (c. ruled at about 1600 b.c.), bears the imprint of a
western Asiatic-type battle axe,46 and there are other evidences of frequent conﬂict between
Egyptians and Asiatics along the eastern Delta border.


THE NEW KINGDOM AND THIRD INTERMEDIATE PERIODS
(1550–712 B.C.)

The hated Asiatics were largely expelled from Egypt by Pharaoh Ahmose I (c. 1550–1525 b.c.),
who ushered in a new age of political unity. The major cities of the New Kingdom were
Memphis, near what is now Cairo, and Thebes, at Luxor. Ahmose, a native of Thebes,
expelled the Hyksos from the Delta, and after several battles drove them beyond the eastern
frontier. He even captured the rich city of Sharuhen, in Palestine, and he and his successors

           386       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                      reformed the bureaucracy, modeling it after that of the Middle
                                                      Kingdom. He and his immediate successors also undertook
                                                      massive building projects to restore and expand cult complexes
                                                      at Abydos, Deir el-Bahari, and other major southern towns.
                                                           By the mid-ﬁfteenth century b.c. Egypt probably had a
                                                      population of many millions of people, whose governmental
                                                      institutions, religion, language, economy, and most other
                                                      aspects of life were probably remarkably like those of their
                                                      ancestors during all of the preceding 2,000 years.47 This great
                                                      weight of tradition must be considered when analyzing
                                                      Egyptian history. Time and time again Egypt would fragment
                                                      under revolt and invasion, but the ancient order would always
                                                      persist and reform.
                                                           New Kingdom documents, such as the Wilbour Papyrus,
                                                      describe a highly stratiﬁed society, with a king and elite who
                                                      could draw freely on the country’s wealth (Figure 9.8), and
                                                      under them provincial nobles, who inherited their titles and
                                                      wealth, lesser bureaucrats, priests, military ofﬁcers, wealthy
                                                      farmers, craftsmen, soldiers, and tenant-farmers, with peasants
                                                      supporting the whole structure (Figure 9.9).48
                                                           One of the greatest New Kingdom rulers, Thutmosis III,
                                                      reigned for 54 years (1479–1425 b.c.), and his mummiﬁed
                                                      body suggests that he died still looking quite young for his
FIGURE 9.8 Mummy of Queen Tiye—her
                                                      many years and accomplishments.49 Thutmosis III established
lovely hair still largely intact—who died about
1350 b.c. The position of the left hand is typical    Egypt’s Asiatic empire with his conquest of much of the east-
of Egyptian royalty.                                  ern Mediterranean coastal areas. Even powerful Assyria paid
                                                      material tribute to the Egyptian Empire, as did the Babylonians
                                                      and the Hittites. His surprise attack on Megiddo in Palestine
                        and his amphibious operation against the Mitanni, a powerful northern Mesopotamian
                        kingdom, established Egypt as a world power. By about 1450 b.c. Egypt had commercial
                        contacts on a large scale, exchanging products with Phoenicia, Crete, the Aegean Islands,
                        and its traditional African trading partners. Military paciﬁcation programs were extended
                        far into Nubia, and vast quantities of Nubian gold and building stone were shipped to the
                        Nile Valley.
                             One of the most famous New Kingdom monarchs was Akhenaten (ruled 1353–1335 b.c.),
                        who introduced a semi-monotheistic religion and tried to eradicate vestiges of older
                        polytheistic cults. He built marvelous temples to Aten, the new god, and constructed a new
                        capital at Tell el-Amarna in central Egypt, complete with magniﬁcent religious and
                        administrative buildings.
                             Akhenaten’s physical appearance suggests he may have been a hermaphrodite, and
                        some suspect that he had physical problems that produced some mental instabilities, but
                        he was a reasonably effective civil and military leader.

                          Akhenaten started off with certain disadvantages. From statues and portraits medical
                          historians have diagnosed tuberculosis, hyperpituaritism, hypogonadism, and acromegaly.
                          . . . Nor was his emotional life any healthier. His ﬁrst wife appears to have been his mother,

FIGURE 9.9 The bureaucratic organization of Egypt in the New Kingdom period. This reconstruction by David O’Connor (1983) shows the   THE ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN EGYPT
numerous ofﬁcials who organized most aspects of Egyptian society.




                                                                                                                                      387

388   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


          Tiy. . . . [T]hey had one daughter. Then he married his maternal cousin, Nefretiti, and
          fathered three more daughters. His third and fourth wives were not blood relatives, and
          there was one son of each marriage, the second of whom was to rule as the boy pharaoh
          Tutankhamun. Akhenaten’s ﬁfth and last marriage was to the third of his own daughters
          by Nefretiti. . . .50
      Soon after Akhenaten’s death, the old religions were reestablished by Smenkhare and the
      famous Tutankhamun. Akhenaten’s mummy was probably intentionally destroyed by
      bitter opponents of his attacks on the old religious traditions of Egypt.51 The “Boy King,”
      Tutankhamun, reigned as a teenager from about 1333 to 1323 b.c.,52 and powerful members
      of his court tried to reestablish the power of the central court by reviving the state religion
      in the classical traditions of the cult of Amun.
           When Howard Carter, whose work was funded by a British nobleman, Lord
      Carnarvon, discovered Tutankhamun’s undisturbed tomb in 1922, his ﬁnd captured the
      world’s attention as no other archaeological discovery has. Lord Carnarvon’s death from
      an infected mosquito bite in 1923 and other bad luck (to which we can add Howard Carter’s
      favorite donkey, who was bitten on the lip by a cobra and died within three hours),53
      inspired the notion of the “Curse of the Pharaohs” and made Lord Carnarvon’s son so
      disenchanted with things Egyptian that he had some of his father’s antiquities sealed away
      in the family castle. In 1988, with the help of a 75-year-old butler, these antiquities were
      rediscovered, but the most important ﬁnds from this tomb had long since been distributed
      among various museums, principally Cairo’s Egyptian Museum.
           Between about 1327 b.c. and the accession of Ramesses II (ruled 1290–1224 b.c.),
      Egypt’s fortunes varied, with periods of foreign invasion and some internal breakdowns of
      the social order. And from Ramesses II on, “[c]ontraction, not expansion, characterized
      the foreign policy while the disintegration of government became evident.”54 Even in an era
      of megalomaniacs, Ramesses II is impressive. While invading Palestine, he allowed himself
      and his army to be ambushed by Hittites. He barely salvaged himself by a strategic retreat,
      and then proceeded to cover almost every available ﬂat stone surface in Egypt (and much
      papyri) with heroic accounts of his mighty victory. Ramesses II and his successors were also
      plagued by court intrigues, probably some assassination attempts, various economic
      problems, and threats along the frontiers. Some scholars think that it may have been
      Ramesses II, or his successor, Mer-ne-Ptah, who refused to let the Israelites leave, as related
      in the biblical Exodus story, but few scholars consider this story to have much—if any—
      historical basis.55 There is little if any reliable evidence of major changes in the archaeological
      record of Palestine at the time the Exodus story is supposed to have occurred, nor are there
      any evident traces in Sinai, where presumably the million or more Israelites would have
      wandered. The eastern Delta was a strongly fortiﬁed military area at the time the Exodus is
      supposed to have occurred, and the area of Palestine which they were recorded in the Bible
      to have invaded was already largely controlled by the Egyptians, so it is difﬁcult to imagine
      how the Exodus story could have occurred as recorded. Also, the pyramids were built
      thousands of years before the Israelites arrived in Egypt—or were recognized as a distinct
      people, and it may be that the building projects described in the Bible as their work were
      small mudbrick complexes in the eastern Delta.
           In any case, the Exodus story is a classic example of the collision of myth and the
      positivistic view of history. As discussed in chapter 1, all history is interpretation, and the
      phrase “what actually happened” is to some scholars meaningless.

     At about 1000 b.c., Egypt lost military
control of Nubia, and the breakup of its
Asiatic empire brought it into confrontation
with the Israel of David and Solomon. The
Egyptians captured a city on the border of
Israel and agreed to peace with the marriage
of the pharaoh’s daughter to Solomon. But
ﬁve years after Solomon’s death Seshonk I
invaded Israel, plundered Jerusalem, and
reestablished Egypt’s control.
     During the ﬁrst millennium b.c., Egypt
had various periods of resurgence when
various kings reasserted Egyptian inﬂuence
in Palestine and Africa, and as late as 715 b.c.
Shako conquered the Delta and forged a
uniﬁed country once again. But continued
military pressures from Kush and the dis-
integration of national political and economic
systems ate away at the country’s structure
and stability, and at about 525 b.c. Cambyses,
a Persian king, conquered Egypt and reduced
it to a vassal kingdom, proclaiming himself
pharaoh. In 332 b.c., Alexander the Great
marched into Egypt, evicted the Persians,
and built the city of Alexandria. Later, the
Romans, Arabs, and British would complete
the conquest of Egypt, submerging almost
entirely this distinctive civilization that was
for so many years the light of the ancient
world (Figure 9.10). Not until a.d. 1952 was       FIGURE 9.10 Members of 1920s-era baseball teams play a road
Egypt again ruled by Egyptians.                    game.


ANCIENT EGYPTIAN ART AND THOUGHT

As we noted in chapter 1, some archaeologists now argue that the archaeological record can
only really be interpreted if we shift our attention away from the simplicities of technology,
environment, and economy, to the ideas, concepts, and world-views of ancient peoples.
Unlike many areas, in Egypt it is in some ways possible to do this because of its rich and
early literature. Through most of antiquity, Egyptians believed that their society and life in
general had been established by the gods and that they and all their social, political, and
economic relationships were part of a divinely designed, immutable world order. To some
extent, the Egyptian past makes sense only when viewed in that way.
     Certain themes are deeply embedded in ancient Egyptian culture. For one thing,
Egyptians seem to have been a “God-intoxicated” people, “half in love with easeful death.”
Herodotus wrote that they were the most “religious” people he had encountered, given to

                                             389

390   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      incessant and elaborate religious rituals and an enormous priestly bureaucracy. Their
      concern with death, and the vast energies and richness they invested in preparing for it, are
      manifestly evident, but it is also a testament to a people so passionately alive that they tried
      everything to perpetuate life into death.
            Mummiﬁcation was an attempt to preserve the body for use in the afterlife, when it
      would be revived and rehabilitated. Burial in the arid desert sands must have been the ﬁrst
      form of mummiﬁcation, but chemical methods were already developed by the Old
      Kingdom period. After death, the corpse was placed on a board and washed. The brain was
      removed by a hooked wire passed through the nose, an incision was made in the abdomen,
      and all the internal organs except the kidneys and heart were removed. A Greek of the third
      century a.d. reported that the stomach was then placed in a box and offered to the sun god,
      with the incantation, “If I have sinned in eating or drinking what was unlawful, the fault
      was not mine, but of this” (showing the box containing the stomach).
            The heart was left in, so that on the ﬁnal day it could be weighed against a feather, to
      see if its accumulated sins would tip the balance against eternal life. After the internal organs
      had been removed, the abdomen and chest cavity were washed in palm wine, and the
      viscera were placed in a container of natron (hydrated sodium carbonate) for 40 days. The
      liver, lungs, stomach, and intestines were then placed separately in four “canopic” jars, to
      be guarded over by four different deities. The body was then stuffed with sand, sawdust,
      linen, or straw and covered with dry natron crystals to desiccate it for another 40 days. Then
      it was washed once more and rubbed with wine, spices, and oils. The cheeks were some-
      times restored to life-like dimensions with rag stufﬁng, the incised abdomen was sewn up,
      and the hair and complexion were touched up with paint. The entire body was protected
      with a coating of resin, wrapped in linen bandages (up to 324 m2 of linen could be used),
      placed in a cofﬁn or tomb, and carried across to the west bank of the Nile for interment.
      At the close of ceremonies, the priest would incant: “You live again, you revive always,
      you have become young again, you are young again, and forever. . . .” It must have been a
      great comfort to the ancient Egyptians to hear these words and see the extensive care given
      the dead.
            Egyptian deities were conceived of as very human in their behavior, even to the extent
      that they could be intimidated. Egyptians recited prayers in which they ticked off the
      services rendered a god, demanding payment in the form of the prayer answered.
            For the Westerner, the physical world is a rather neutral place, where a lightning bolt
      or virus may strike one down, but on the basis of chance, without malevolence. Rocks are
      rocks, the dark is peopled only by morbid human projections, and death is inevitable, ﬁnal,
      complete. For the ancient Egyptian, however, the world teemed with unseen but animate,
      conscious forces; malignant spirits were everywhere, as were forces for good; and, with
      sufﬁcient effort, some of the inconveniences of being dead could be mitigated.
            Ancient Egyptians seem to have had a monophysitic perspective in that everything in
      the universe was thought to have been derived from one substance and to be an expression
      of that substance. The god Amun, for example, might reside in a stone statue, but also in
      a well-formed ram or a duck, or in all three at the same time. Nor were these considered just
      different representations; rather, “the image was the god for all working purposes.”56 The
      symbolic, mythical element seemed to pervade even quite practical areas, such as medicine.
      One remedy for schistosomiasis (a disease characterized by bloody urine) was to shape some
      cake dough like a penis, then wrap it in meat, recite an incantation, and feed it to a cat.57

                                                   THE ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN EGYPT        391


      In all this supernatural and symbolic content, we should not lose sight of the practical,
canny Egyptian. These were not people paralyzed by the Inﬁnite: They built houses, boats,
and beautiful buildings, and they enjoyed themselves in a world of color, play, and physical
pleasures that still seems attractive and alive, even when viewed only in fragmentary 4,000-
year-old paintings on tomb walls. When contemporary tourists see Egyptian wall paintings
they are often surprised at the riot of colors—even the great temple columns of Karnak
were brightly colored. This seems strange to many because we see beauty in the
monochrome simplicity of Egyptian stone reliefs and buildings. But it helps to understand
their art if one experiences ﬁrst-hand the qualities of Egyptian natural light, the sun rolling
up redly over the horizon, illuminating the blues and greens of river, sky, and vegetation
with a vividness possible only in the thin arid air of the Sahara, with the limestone of the
pyramids and temples absorbing and transforming the light into weights and colors and
dimensions and textures that constantly change.
      To our own, essentially Greek, minds, the Egyptians seem to have been unable to
distinguish between things and representations of things. J. Wilson argues that the
Egyptians saw no difference between supplying a dead king with real loaves of bread,
wooden models of bread, or loaves painted on the walls; it was not the actual thing that
mattered, it was the idea.58 The physical man needed physical bread, but in the spirit world,
“spiritual” bread was appropriate.59
      Similarly, Egyptian art challenges Western notions about aesthetics. For the Egyptians,
art was mainly functional and had a purpose—it was done so that people and things could
live forever. Wall frescoes, statues, and drawings were all done not just to record an image,
but “to create and maintain a perfect world in which the good life . . . could continue to
ﬂourish without opposition from the bad.”60 Therefore, decay and imperfection are seldom
shown in Egyptian art—people and objects are shown in ideal condition, since they are
meant to be part of an ideal afterlife. And given this purpose, people and objects, whether
loaves of bread, geese, gardens, or boxes, should be depicted in their most easily recogniz-
able forms and positions, and not necessarily from a single point of view or in perspective.
      The ethical basis of Egyptian society was a composite sense of order, fairness, and
justice, all expressed in the concept of maat, which is usually translated as “justice,” “truth,”
or “right-dealing.” It is interesting that English really has no single word equivalent to the
sense of maat, or to the Greek concept of “virtue,” which has a little of the same sense of
maat. For the Egyptian, maat was recognizing the order of the world and universe and the
necessity of doing the right thing, which usually meant following religious and civil laws
and customs. Justice tempered with mercy, giving to the widow and the orphan but
encouraging self-reliance and planning, doing one’s share—all these and more were part
of maat. One could demand justice and respect as a moral right, based on maat.



EGYPTIAN WRITING AND LITERATURE

One of the many mysteries of Egypt is the origin of its written language, or hieroglyphs
(“sacred carvings”) (Figure 9.11). These were ﬁrst used shortly before 3100 b.c. and con-
tinued in use until about a.d. 1100 (and are still used today by the crafty forgers in modern
Cairo’s tourist traps). Elements of the spoken ancient Egyptian are still used in the liturgy

392   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY




      FIGURE 9.11 The hieroglyphic signs in early Egyptian writing were representations of common
      objects, but they eventually acquired phonetic meaning—sound values—that allowed Egyptians to
      express their entire spoken language in writing. In later periods the signs were stylized and simpliﬁed
      to facilitate writing. The names of royalty were written in ovals—cartouches—and each ruler used
      several different names.


      of the Coptic Christian church. But hieroglyphic writing ﬁrst appeared in such a developed
      form that we cannot see the full transition from what was probably pictographic writing
      ﬁrst expressed on papyrus. Some scholars think writing was introduced from Mesopotamia,
      where it may have been in use some centuries before it appeared in Egypt, but there are
      great differences between the characters and materials used.

                                                  THE ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN EGYPT         393


     Ancient Egyptian was a mixture of signs and
symbols, some of them expressing sounds in the
spoken language, others indicating to the reader how
a written character with several possible meanings was
to be read in that speciﬁc context (Figure 9.12). It was
not used as a truly alphabetic system, but virtually
everything in the spoken language could be efﬁciently
conveyed in the written language.
     To a much greater degree than in modern English,
hieroglyphs were written in a manner that expressed
both contemporary aesthetic styles and the subject
matter. Thus, we get simple, grave characters in early
religious writings and more overblown, showy char-
acters in later military texts. The beautifully simple
hieroglyphic characters were complemented very
early on by a hieratic script (see Figure 9.11), which
was much more abstract and cursive and thus could
be written easily on papyrus with a reed pen and
ink.
     Various scholars had tried to decipher ancient
Egyptian writing in the eighteenth century and had
guessed correctly about the sound values and of some
of the characters, but they were also wrong about most
of the characters. One key to the eventual decipher-
ment of the language was the discovery of the Rosetta
Stone, which had been found by Napoleon’s soldiers
in 1799 in the northern Delta. We now know that its
text is an unimportant tribute to the Pharaoh Ptolemy
V, written at about 196 b.c., but it is signiﬁcant         FIGURE 9.12 Reading hieroglyphic writing required
                                                           recognizing symbols that convey sound values, symbols
because the same text was written in Greek as well as
                                                           that are determinatives—which clarify meanings in
in two forms of ancient Egyptian, hieroglyphic and         ambiguous contexts—and symbols that are grammatical
demotic—a cursive form of handwriting that was             markers. The inscription outlined in this ﬁgure is on the
easier to write on papyrus than the hieroglyphic script.   sarcophagus of Amenhotep II (died c. 1412 b.c.) and reads
The English scholar Thomas Young, for example,             “Illumine his face, open his eyes.”
recognized the names of Ptolemy, Cleopatra, and
Berenice—in parts of the Rosetta Stone inscriptions.
     It was Jean-François Champollion, however, to whom we are most indebted for the
decipherment of ancient Egyptian. Champollion was born in France in 1790, and by the
age of 16 he was ﬂuent in Latin, Greek, Coptic, and at least ﬁve other languages; and from
boyhood his physical features were such that eventually he was nicknamed “The Egyptian.”
To enter a Parisian school he was asked to write a paper on the subject of his choice, and
he wrote on Egypt under the Pharaohs with such obvious intelligence that he was
immediately asked to join the faculty.
     A key to Champollion’s success in deciphering Egyptian script was his exten-
sive knowledge of the many ancient Egyptian texts, and a major breakthrough was
when he

394   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


          . . . became the ﬁrst man in fourteen centuries to recognize the dual principle behind the
          Egyptian hieroglyphic script. . . . The name Ramses illustrates most clearly the dual
          principle: Ra means ‘sun’ in Coptic, and in the cartouche [the name of the king written in
          an oval] Champollion recognised the sun-disk, clearly representing the sense or idea ‘sun’,
          with the sound-value ra in Egyptian. The sign at the end of the cartouche was used to write
          the letter s in the name Ptolemy (Greek form in full Ptolemaios) on the Rosetta Stone, and
          so Champollion could read ra-?-s-s; he was then able to guess that the middle sign should
          read m, and he had the name Ramses, which he could explain from his knowledge of Coptic
          as ‘Ra-mise’ or ‘Ra is the one who gives birth to him’.61

      By extending these principles to other names and inscriptions, and by using the work of
      previous scholars, Champollion eventually became the ﬁrst person in centuries to be able
      to read an Egyptian text. He made mistakes, and later scholars greatly extended his work
      (and this work continues), but after Champollion the meaning of many ancient Egyptian
      texts could be understood.
            The ancient written Egyptian language was different from ancient Mesopotamian
      scripts in a signiﬁcant structural element. Sumerian nouns and verbs did not vary in their
      written forms depending on grammatical context, so that the word for mouth (ka), for
      example, was always the same, whether it was the subject, direct object, or some other
      grammatical element; but in ancient Egyptian the ﬁrst letter in the word for mouth, r,
      was followed by a different vowel, depending on the grammatical position of the word.62
      As H. W. F. Saggs notes, an important consequence of this is that the ancient Egyptians
      “already had an alphabet within their grasp.” Ancient Egyptians could have written all or
      most of their spoken language with just 24 signs. Saggs points out, however, that the
      Egyptians never simpliﬁed their written language to this alphabetic format—probably, as
      he says, because it would have been against the interest of the scribes who had mastered the
      difﬁcult and more cumbersome syllabic forms to use a system anyone could have mastered
      in just a few months—a reaction similar to that of print unions throughout history.63
            Since hieroglyphs give us only consonantal sound values (and not vowels), we will
      never know what ancient Egyptian really “sounded” like precisely, although no cat lover
      would have any problem with the fact that the ancient Egyptian word for cat was written
      with the sound values “MIW.”
            Egyptian literature took many forms. Dedicatory inscriptions recording the activities
      and histories of the kings and priests predominate, but there are also many poems, songs,
      ﬁnancial records, letters, medical texts, astronomical accounts, and so on. As ancient and
      strange as pharaonic culture may seem, there are many signs that these were very human
      people and would be recognizable to us in many ways.
            The theme of one love poem of the New Kingdom, for example, is the timeless lament
      of a young man prostrated by the adolescent passions that poetry celebrates in all cultures.
      He proclaims that the absence of the object of his desires (where she’s gone we don’t know)
      has so sickened him that doctors and priests are helpless. But if his girlfriend could only
      visit!

          Why, that girl’s better than any prescription,
           more to me than the Pharmacopoeia—
          My own secret Hathor Home Remedy?—
           Her slipping into my room from the road!

                                                 THE ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN EGYPT       395


       (have her examine me, then watch my energy!)
     And just let her look me full in the eye,
       every bit of my body is back in its prime.
     At the sound of her voice my heart leaps to her tune,
     And then when I kiss her, feel her length breast to thigh,
       Love’s evil spirits ﬂy clean from my system—
          God, what a girl, what a woman!
     And that bitch has been gone for a week!64


WHO WERE THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS?

Victory has a thousand fathers; defeat is an
orphan.
Chinese proverb

This chapter is mainly a review of ancient Egyptian cultural history, but the ancient
Egyptians offer an opportunity to consider some larger issues about such difﬁcult topics as
cultural “achievement” and the nature of historical interpretation. History is not only kind
to “winners,” most of history is written by them; also, most people like to be associated with
cultural “achievements”: Thus, it is not surprising that, as with the Sumerians (chapter 8),
many people have tried to claim the ancient Egyptians as their physical or intellectual
ancestors.
     Beyond this, there is the question of Egyptian contributions to Western civilization.
The traditional academic view is that the origins of Western civilization are mainly in the
classical Greek world, with some inﬂuences from Southwest Asia, but few if any from
Egypt.65 But the historian I. Bernal has argued that Western scholars have had anti-Jewish,
anti-Arab, and anti-Black African biases that resulted in their intentionally ignoring the
contributions of Egypt and Africa to Greek and Western civilization. Few scholars give
much credence to Bernal’s claims, but in this politically sensitive era they have achieved a
level of debate far beyond their rather esoteric academic subject.
     Various studies strongly suggest that ancient Egyptians were a distinctive people early
in the pharaonic period, but with much of the same variations of physical characteristics
that one sees in modern Egypt. The ancient Egyptians, of course, considered themselves
different from all other peoples and superior to them. They disparaged all other peoples,
particularly those with whom they had the most interactions, such as the “Asiatics” of
Syro-Palestine and the Nubians beyond their southern border.
     Their artistic representations of their neighbors are demeaning, and they clearly show
that the ancient Egyptians considered themselves physically different from Nubians and
other sub-Saharan Africans in facial features and skin tones, and from “Asiatics” as well.
Egyptian men were painted a darker color than women to underscore gender differences,
misleading some to conclude that most ancient Egyptians were very dark in skin tone;
but there is no evidence that they were much different in this regard from modern
Egyptians, with a wide range from the very light Mediterranean types to sub-Saharan
African tones.

           396       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                     SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

                       Many simplistic notions about the origins of cultural complexity have foundered on the
                       evidence from Egypt. Population growth, for example, may have produced fairly dense
                       concentrations of people in favorable agricultural areas, but the long-term pattern of
                       population growth was probably one of very slow increase through most of antiquity. Karl
                       Wittfogel’s notion of large-scale irrigation as a powerful impetus to empire (chapter 7) may
                       have some application to Egypt, for irrigation no doubt was important early on, and some
                       of the ﬁrst Egyptian stone engravings apparently show royalty in the process of opening
                       irrigation canals.66 But irrigation in ancient Egypt was primarily through the passive
                       blessings of the Nile ﬂood, and such irrigation works as were constructed seem to have been
                       small, local installations that did not require a lot of people or “paperwork” to run them.
                                                     Similarly, the Egyptians were fond of murals showing their
                                                     kings defeating hordes of foreigners, and people in the compet-
                                                     ing areas of pre-state Egypt may well have been given to bloody
                                                     civil wars. But the location of settlements, the lack of walled
                                                     towns and forts, and the art and literature do not support the
                                                     notion that the critical factor in Egyptian state origins was
                                                     Menes or someone else strapping on his sword, massing his
                                                     troops, and marching to the Mediterranean, leaving a uniﬁed
                                                     political state in his wake. Warfare was part of state formation
                                                     processes, but probably as a mechanism, not a primary cause.
                                                          Nor is there much solace for the orthodox Marxian
                                                     searching for the power of class conﬂict to produce states. Many
                                                     scholars can and do see Egypt as an example of the validity of
                                                     Marxian theory, but Egyptian literature and iconography seem
                                                     to exhibit more mutually supportive bonds of kinship and
                                                     religion than naked class struggle.
                                                          The pressure of nomads and others on the Egyptian
                                                     periphery seems to have been a factor occasionally, but there is
                                                     not much of a parallel here with the situation in ancient
                                                     Mesopotamia or in China, where nomad-farmer relationships
                                                     were a central theme in imperial developments.
                                                          A comparison of Mesopotamian and Egyptian settlement
                                                     patterns underscores that urbanization is just one strategy, not
                                                     an indispensable condition of cultural complexity. Whereas the
                                                     people of Mesopotamia early and dramatically aggregated into
                                                     fortiﬁed towns and cities, from which they conducted
                                                     agricultural, industrial, religious, and administrative
                                                     operations, the Egyptians did not even have a permanent
                                                     capital until late in the second millennium, when Thebes
FIGURE 9.13 This late second millennium              emerged as a center—although recent excavations reveal a
b.c. Egyptian sculpture of a noble woman has the     greater degree of urbanization than was previously thought to
vibrant, sensual quality typical of some later       have existed. The comparatively slow development of Egyptian
periods but in great contrast to archaic forms.      urbanism probably had many causes, including (1) the absence

                                                            THE ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN EGYPT                397


of any powerful foreign peoples on Egyptian borders, and thus relatively little need for large
walled defensive cities; (2) the uniformity of the environment all along the Nile, so that
there was little to be gained from large-volume, inter-regional exchange of food or craft
products; and (3) the pronounced political centralization, which inhibited development of
secular, economic differentiation.
     When the largest pyramids and other structures were built, population growth rates
were slow, there was apparently little pressure on the country’s resources, and large areas
of uninhabited but fertile land existed. If we view these pyramids as mechanisms to mobilize
and train a large work force, we must ask why such a work force would be an advantage,
since when the ﬁrst pyramids were built there were few large irrigation works and little
demand for a standing army. If we view the vast expenditures of wealth in the funerary
complexes as a means of “balancing” the economy by taking out of circulation inordinate
amounts of gold, silver, or craft items, there is some difﬁculty in explaining why this would
have been necessary in a society whose economic system and long-distance trade were
strictly controlled by the monarchy and where there were few large markets and almost no
free enterprise or capitalism of any kind.
     In conclusion, it has proven remarkably difﬁcult to prise apart the many causes and
effects that make up Egyptian cultural history, but we are beginning to understand at least
some aspects of this history. And, like other early civilizations, there is much about Egypt
that is interesting and rewarding at a level beyond that of the mechanics of its history
(Figure 9.13).



BIBLIOGRAPHY
Aldred, C. 1961. The Egyptians. New York: Praeger.
Allen, R. O., H. Hamroush, and D. J. Stanley. 1993. “Impact of the Environment on Egyptian Civilization Before
            the Pharaohs.” Analytical Chemistry 65(1):36 – 43.
Anderson, W. 1992. “Badarian Burials: Evidence of Social Inequality in Middle Egypt During the Predynastic Era.”
            Journal of the American Research Center in Egypt xxix:51–66.
Asante, M. K. 1990. Kemet, Afrocentricity, and Knowledge. Trenton, NJ: Africa World Press.
Badawy, A. 1967. “The Civic Sense of the Pharaoh and Urban Development in Ancient Egypt.” Journal of the
            American Research Center in Egypt 6:103–109.
Baer, K. 1960. Rank and Title in the Old Kingdom. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Baines, J. 1990. “Restricted Knowledge, Hierarchy, Decorum: Modern Perceptions and Ancient Institutions.”
            Journal of the American Research Center in Egypt xxvii:1–23.
Bakr, M. 1988. “The New Excavations at Ezbet el-Tell, Kufur Nigm: The First Season (1984).” In The Archaeology
            of the Nile Delta: Problems and Priorities, ed. E. C. M. van den Brink. Amsterdam: Netherlands
            Foundation for Archaeological Research in Egypt.
Bard, K. A. 1987. “The Geography of Excavated Predynastic Sites and the Rise of Complex Society.” Journal of the
            American Research Center in Egypt 24:81–93.
———. 1992. “Toward an Interpretation of the Role of Ideology in the Evolution of Complex Society in Egypt.”
            Journal of Anthropological Archaeology II:1–24.
———. 1994. From Farmers to Pharaohs. Shefﬁeld, UK: Shefﬁeld Academic Press.
Bard, K. A., and R. L. Carneiro. 1989. “Patterns of Predynastic Settlement Location, Social Evolution, and the
            Circumscription Theory.” Societes Urbaines en Egypte et au Soudan, Cahiers de Recherches de l’Institut
            de Papyrologie et d’Egyptologie de Lille 11:15–23.
Barich, K., and F. Hassan. 2000. “A Stratiﬁed Sequence from Wadi el-Obeiyd, Farafra. New Data on Subsistence
            and Chronology of the Egyptian Western Desert.” In Recent Research into the Stone Age of Northeastern
            Africa, ed. L. Kryzaniak, K. Kroeper, and M. Kobuciewicz, pp. 11–20. Studies in African Archaeology,
            Vol. 7. Poznan: Poznan Archaeological Museum.
Bernal, M. 1987. Black Athena: The Afroasiatic Roots of Classical Civilization, Vol. 1: The Fabrication of Ancient
            Greece. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.

398   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      Bokonyi, S. 1985. “The Animal Remains of Maadi, Egypt: A Preliminary Report.” In Studi di Paletnologia in Onore
                   di S. M. Puglisi. Rome: Universita di Roma “La Sapienza.”
      Bonani, G., H. Haas, Z. Hawass, M. Lehner, S. Nakhla, J. Nolan, R. Wenke, and W. Wölﬂi. 2004. “Radiocarbon
                   Dates of Old and Middle Kingdom Monuments in Egypt.” Radiocarbon 43(3):1297–1320.
      Bourriau, J. 1981. Umm el-Ga’ab: Pottery from the Nile Valley Before the Arab Conquest. Cambridge: Fitzwilliam
                   Museum.
      Bradley, D. G., D. E. MacHugh, P. Cunningham, and R. T. Loftus. 1996. “Mitochondrial Diversity and the Origins
                   of African and European Cattle.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 93(10):5131–5135.
      Brewer, D. J. 1991. “Temperature in Predynastic Egypt Inferred from the Remains of the Nile Perch.” World
                   Archaeology 22(3):288–303.
      Brewer, D. J., and R. Friedman. 1989. Fish and Fishing in Ancient Egypt. Warminster: Aris & Phillips.
      Brewer, D. J., and R. J. Wenke. 1992. “Transitional Late Predynastic-Early Dynastic Occupations at Mendes:
                   A Preliminary Report.” In The Nile Delta in Transition: 4th–3rd Millennium BC, Proceedings of the
                   Seminar Held in Cairo, 21–24 October, 1990, ed. E. C. M. van den Brink. pp. 191–197. Jerusalem:
                   R. Pinkhaus.
      Brothwell, D. R., and B. A. Chiarelli, eds. 1973. Population Biology of the Ancient Egyptians. London: Academic
                   Press.
      Butzer, K. W. 1976. Early Hydraulic Civilization in Egypt. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
      ———. 1980. “Pleistocene History of the Nile Valley in Egypt and Lower Nubia.” In The Sahara and the Nile, ed.
                   M. Williams and H. Faure. Rotterdam: Balkema.
      ———. 1984. “Long-Term Nile Flood Variation and Political Discontinuities in Pharaonic Egypt.” In From
                   Hunters to Farmers, ed. J. D. Clark and S. A. Brandt. Berkeley: University of California Press.
      Caneva, I., M. Frangipane, and A. Palmieri. 1987. “Predynastic Egypt: New Data from Maadi.” The African
                   Archaeological Review 5:105–114.
      ———. 1989. “Recent Excavations at Maadi (Egypt).” In Late Prehistory of the Nile Basin, ed. L. Krzyzaniak and
                   M. Kobusiewicz. Poznan: Polish Academy of Sciences.
      Cavalli-Sforza, L., and M. Feldman. 1981. Cultural Transmission and Evolution. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
                   University Press.
      Close, A. E., ed. 1980. Loaves and Fishes: The Prehistory of Wadi Kubbaniyya. New Delhi: Pauls Press.
      ———, ed. 1987. Prehistory of Arid North Africa. Essays in Honor of Fred Wendorf. Dallas: Southern Methodist
                   University Press.
      Coutellier, V., and D. J. Stanley. 1987. “Late Quaternary Stratigraphy and Paleogeography of the Eastern Nile
                   Delta, Egypt.” Marine Geology 77:257–275.
      Cruz-Uribe, E. 1985. Saite and Persian Demotic Cattle Documents. Chico, CA: Scholars Press.
      Davis, W. 1989. The Canonical Tradition in Ancient Egyptian Art. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University
                   Press.
      ———. 1992. Masking the Blow. Berkeley: University of California Press.
      Decker, W. 1992. Sports and Games of Ancient Egypt. Trans. A. Guttmann. New Haven: Yale University Press.
      Diop, C. A. 1974. The African Origin of civilization: Myth or Reality. New York: L. Hill.
      Edwards, I. E. S. 1961. The Pyramids of Egypt. London: Parrish.
      Eiwanger, J. 1987. “Die Archaologie der spaten Vorgeschichte: Bestand und Perspektiven.” In Problems and
                   Priorities in Egyptian Archaeology, ed. J. Assmann, G. Burkard, and V. Davies. London: Routledge &
                   Kegan Paul.
      Fairservis, W. 1972. “Preliminary Report on the First Two Seasons at Hierakonpolis.” Journal of the American
                   Research Center in Egypt 9:7–27, 67–99.
      ———. 1991. “A Revised View of the Na’rmr Paletette.” Journal of the American Research Center in Egypt
                   XXVIII:1–20.
      Farooq, M. 1973. “Historical Development.” In Epidemiology and Control of Schistosomiasis (Bilharziasis), ed.
                   N. Ansari. Baltimore: University Park Press.
      Fattovich, R. 1979. “Trends in the Study of Predynastic Social Structure.” First International Congress of Egyptology,
                   Cairo, Actes (Berlin): 17–39.
      Foster, J. L., illus. and trans., and Davies, Nina M., illus. 1992. Love Songs of the New Kingdom (Reprint ed.). Austin:
                   University of Texas Press.
      Frank, A. G. 1993. “Bronze Age World System Cycles.” Current Anthropology 34(4):383– 430.
      Frankfort, H., J. Wilson, and T. Jacobsen. 1949. Before Philosophy. Baltimore: Penguin.
      Friedman, J., and M. J. Rowlands. 1977. The Evolution of Social Systems. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
      Gautier, A. 1984. “Archaeozoology of the Bir Kiseiba Region, Eastern Sahara.” In Cattle-Keepers of the Eastern
                   Sahara. The Neolithic of Bir Kiseiba, ed. A. E. Close. pp. 49–72. New Delhi: Pauls Press.
      ———. 1987. “Prehistoric Men and Cattle in North Africa: A Dearth of Data and a Surfeit of Models.” In
                   Prehistory of Arid North Africa, ed. A. E. Close. Dallas: Southern Methodist University.
      Ghoneim, W. 1977. “Die Okonomische Bedeutung des Rindes im Alten Agypten.” Lexikon der Agyptologie 5:259.

                                                             THE ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN EGYPT                  399


Goedicke, H. 1967. Konigliche Dokumente aus dem alten Reich. Wiesbaden: Harrasowitz.
Grimal, N. 1991. A History of Ancient Egypt. Trans. I. Shaw. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.
Haaland, R. 1987. Socio-Economic Differentiation in the Neolithic Sudan. Oxford, England: British Archaeological
             Reports International Series 350.
Haas, H., J. Devine, R. J. Wenke, M. E. Lehner, W. Wolﬂi, G. Bonani. 1987. “Radiocarbon Chronology and the
             Historical Calendar in Egypt.” In Chronologies in the Near East, ed. O. Avrenche, J. Evin, and P. Hours.
             British Archaeological Reports 379:585–606.
Haas, J. 1982. The Evolution of the Prehistoric State. New York: Columbia University Press.
Hamilton, E. 1930. The Greek Way. New York: Norton.
Harlan, J. R. 1982. “The Origins of Indigenous African Agriculture.” In The Cambridge History of Africa, Vol. 1,
             ed. J. D. Clark. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Harlan, J. R., J. M. de Wet, and A. B. Stemler, eds. 1976. Origins of African Plant Domestication. The Hague:
             Mouton.
Harris, J. E., and K. R. Weeks. 1973. X-Raying the Pharaohs. New York: Scribner’s.
Hassan, F. 1986. “Desert Environment and Origins of Agriculture in Egypt.” Norwegian Archaeological Review
             19:63–76.
———. 1988. “The Predynastic of Egypt.” Journal of World Prehistory 2(2):135 –185.
———. 1992. “Primeval Goddess to Divine King. The Mythogeneis of Power in the Early Egyptian State.” In The
             Followers of Horus: Studies Dedicated to Michael Allen Hoffman, ed. R. Friedman and B. Adams.
             Oxford: Oxbow.
———. 1993. “Town and Village in Ancient Egypt: Ecology, Society, and Urbanization.” In The Archaeology of
             Africa, ed. T. Shaw, P. Sinclair, B. Andah, and A. Okpoko. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Hassan, F. A., and S. W. Robinson. 1987. “High-Precision Radiocarbon Chronometry of Ancient Egypt and
             Comparisons with Nubia, Palestine and Mesopotamia.” Antiquity 61(231):119–135.
Helck, W. 1971. Die Beziehungen Agyptens su Vorderasien im 3. und 2. Jahrtausend v. Chr. Wiesbaden: Harrasowitz.
———. 1974. Die altagyptische Gaue. Weisbaden: Harrassowitz.
———. 1975. Wirtschaftsgeschichte des alten Agyptens im 3. und 2. Jahrtausend vor Chr. Leiden-Koln: Brill.
Herodotus. 1972. Books I and II. Trans. A. D. Godley. London: Loeb Classical Library.
Hess, R. 1993. Amarna Personal Names. ASOR Diss. Series 9. Winona Lake, Indiana: Eisenbrauns.
Hoffman, M. 1980. Egypt Before the Pharaohs: The Prehistoric Foundations of Egyptian Civilization. New York:
             Knopf.
———. 1982. The Predynastic of Hierakonpolis—An Interim Report. Egyptian Studies Association, Publication
             No. 1. Cairo: Cairo University Herbarium and the authors.
———. 1989. “A Stratiﬁed Predynastic Sequence from Hierakonpolis (Upper Egypt).” In Late Prehistory of the
             Nile Basin and the Sahara, ed. L. Krzyzaniak and M. Kobusiewicz. Poznan: Poznan Archaeological
             Museum.
Hoffman, M. A., H. A. Hamroush, and R. O. Allen. 1986. “A Model of Urban Development for the Hierakonpolis
             Region from Predynastic Through Old Kingdom Times.” Journal of the American Research Center in
             Egypt 23:175–187.
Hoffmeier, J. K. 1994. “The Structure of Joshua 1-11 and the Annals of Thutmoses III,” in Faith, Tradition and
             History. Winona Lake: Eisenbrauns.
Jacquet-Gordon, H. 1962. Les Noms des Domaines Funeraires sous l’Ancien Empire Egyptien. Cairo: Institut
             Francais d’Archeologie Orientale.
Janssen, J. J. 1978. “The Early State in Egypt.” In The Early State, ed. H. J. M. Claessen and P. Skalnik. The Hague:
             Mouton.
Janssen, R., and J. Janssen. 1989. Egyptian Household Animals. Aylesbury, England: Shire.
Jeffreys, D. G. 1985. The Survey of Memphis I. London: The Egypt Exploration Fund.
ben-Jochannan, Y. B. 1972. Cultural Genocide in the Black and African Studies Curriculum. New York: ECA
             Associates.
Joffee, A. 1991. “Early Bronze I and the Evolution of Social Complexity in the Southern Levant.” Journal of
             Mediterranean Archaeology 4(1):3–58.
Johnson, A. L., and N. C. Lovell. 1994. “Biological Differentiation at Predynastic Naqada, Egypt: An Analysis of
             Dental Morphological Traits.” American Journal of Physical Anthropology 93:427–433.
Kaiser, W. 1964. “Einige Bermerkungen zur agyptische Fruhzeit.” Zeitschrift agyptische Sprache Altertumskunde
             91:86–125.
———. 1985. “Zur Sudausdehnung der vorgeschichtlichen Deltakulturen und zur fruhen Entwicklung
             Oberagyptens.” Mitteilungen des Deutschen Archaologischen Instituts Abteilung Kairo 41:61–87.
Kanawati, N. 1977. The Egyptian Administration in the Old Kingdom: Evidence on Its Economic Decline. London:
             Warminster, Aris & Phillips.
Kaster, J., trans. and ed. 1968. Wings of the Falcon. New York: Holt.
Kees, H. 1961. Ancient Egypt: A Cultural Topography. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

400   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      Kemp, B. J. 1977. “The Early Development of Towns in Egypt.” Antiquity 51:185–200.
      ———. 1982. “Old Kingdom, Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period in Egypt.” In The Cambridge
                  History of Africa, Vol. 1, ed. J. D. Clark. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
      ———. 1993. Ancient Egypt: Anatomy of a Civilization. New York: Routledge.
      Kitchen, K. A. 1989. “The Rise and Fall of Covenant, Law, and Treaty.” TynBul 40.
      ———. 1995. “The Patriarchal Age-Myth or History?” BAR 21(2). Biblical Archaeology Review 21(2):48ff.
      Kitto, H. D. F. 1951. The Greeks. Harmondsworth: Pelican.
      Knapp, A. B. 1988. The History and Culture of Ancient Western Asia and Egypt. Chicago: Dorsey.
      Kroeper, K. 1988. “The Excavations of the Munich East-Delta Expedition in Minshat Abu Omar.” In The
                  Archaeology of the Nile Delta: Problems and Priorities, ed. E. C. M. van den Brink. Amsterdam:
                  Foundation for Archaeological Research in Egypt.
      ———. 1989. “Settlement in the Nile Delta to the End of the Old Kingdom.” Doctoral dissertation. Warsaw:
                  Uniwersytet Warszawski Wydzial Historcyczny.
      ———. 1990. “Tell Ibrahim Awad North-eastern Delta.” Bulletin de Liaison 14:6–8.
      Kroeper, K., and D. Wildung. 1985. Minshat Abu Omar. Munich: Staatliche Agyptischer Kunst.
      Kromer, K. 1978. “Siedlungsfunde aus dem fruhen Alten Reich in Giseh.” Denkschriften, Oesterreichische Akademie
                  der Wissenschaften, Philosophisch-historische Klasse 136:1–130.
      Krzyzaniak, L. 1977. Early Farming Cultures on the Lower Nile: The Predynastic Period in Egypt. Warsaw: Polish
                  Academy of Sciences.
      ———. 1988. “Research on the Location of the Predynastic Settlement at Minshat Abu Omar.” Paper presented
                  at the Fifth International Congress of Egyptology, Cairo.
      Krzyzaniak, L., and M. Kobusiewicz, eds. 1989. Late Prehistory of the Nile Basin and Sahara. Poznan: Poznan
                  Archaeological Museum.
      Lehner, M. 1983. “Some Observations on the Layout of the Khufu and Khafre Pyramids.” Journal of the American
                  Research Center in Egypt 20:7–29.
      ———. 1985. The Pyramid Tomb of Hetep-heres and the Satellite Pyramid of Khufu. Mainz am Rhein: Philipp von
                  Zabern.
      Leprohon, R. Personal communication.
      Lovell, N. 1990. “Biosocial Consequences of the Development of Complex Societies in the Nile Valley and Delta.”
                  Proposal to the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada. Manuscript on ﬁle with
                  the author, Seattle, WA.
      Lubell, D., P. Sheppard, and M. Jackes. 1984. “Continuity in the Epipaleolithic of Northern Africa with Emphasis
                  on the Maghreb.” Advances in World Archaeology 3:143–168.
      Maisels, C. K. 1990. The Emergence of Civilization. London: Routledge Routledge & Kegan Paul.
      Marshall, F., and E. Hildebrand. 2002. “Cattle Before Crops: The Beginnings of Food Production in Africa.”
                  Journal of World Prehistory 16(2):99–143.
      McDonald, M. M. A. 1991. “Technological Organization and Sedentism in the Epipaleolithic of Dakhleh Oasis,
                  Egypt.” African Archaeological Review 9:81–109.
      Midant-Reynes, B. 2003. Aux origines de l’Égypte: du Néolithique à la emergence de l’État. Fayard.
      Millet, N. B. 1990. “The Narmer Macehead and Related Objects.” Journal of the American Research Center in Egypt
                  27:53–59.
      Mills, A. 1984. “Research in the Dakhleh Oasis.” In Origin and Early Development of Food-Producing Cultures in
                  North-Eastern Africa, ed. L. Krzyzaniak and M. Kobusiewicz. Poznan: Poznan Archaeological Museum.
      Moens, M., and W. Wetterstrom. 1989. “The Agricultural Economy of an Old Kingdom Town in Egypt’s West
                  Delta: Insights from the Plant Remains.” Journal of Near Eastern Studies 3:159–173.
      Morenz, S. 1973. Egyptian Religion. Trans. A. E. Keep. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
      O’Connor, D. 1982. “New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period, 1552– 664 b.c.” In Ancient Egypt. A Social
                  History, ed. B. G. Trigger, B. J. Kemp, D. O’Connor, and A. B. Lloyd. Cambridge, England: Cambridge
                  University Press.
      ———. 1987. “The Old Kingdom Town at Buhen.” Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American
                  Research Center in Egypt.
      ———. 1989. “New Funerary Enclosures (talbezirke) of the Early Dynastic Period at Abydos.” Journal of the
                  American Research Center in Egypt 26:51–86.
      ———. 1991. “Boat Graves and Pyramid Origins: New Discoveries at Abydos, Egypt.” Expedition 33(3):5–17.
      O’Connor, D., and D. Silverman, eds. 1994. Ancient Egyptian Kingship. New York: E. J. Brill.
      Oren, E. D. 1989. “Early Bronze Age Settlement in Northern Sinai: A Model for Egypto-Canaanite Inter-
                  connections.” In Proceedings of The Colloque d’Emmaus, British Archaeological Reports (527I):389–
                  405.
      Patterson, T. C., and C. W. Gailey, eds. 1987. Power Relations and State Formation. Washington, DC: American
                  Anthropological Association.
      Paynter, R. 1989. “The Archaeology of Equality and Inequality.” Annual Review of Anthropology 18:369–399.

                                                              THE ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN EGYPT                  401


Petrie, W. M. F. 1900. “The Royal Tombs of the First Dynasty, Part 1.” Egypt Exploration Fund Memoir 18. London.
Porten, B., and A. Yardeni. 1993. Textbook of Aramaic Documents from Ancient Egypt. 2 Vols. Jerusalem: The
            Hebrew University; Winona Lake: Eisenbrauns.
Posener-Krieger, P. 1976. Les Archives du Temple Funeraire de Neferirkare-kaki. 2 Vols. Cairo: Institut Francais
            d’Archeologie Orientale du Caire.
Quirke, S. 1990. The Administration of Egypt in the Late Middle Kingdom: The Hieratic Documents. New
            Malden: Sia.
———. 1992. Ancient Egyptian Religion. London: British Museum Press.
Quirke, S., and J. Spencer, eds. 1992. The British Museum Book of Ancient Egypt. New York: Thames and Hudson.
Redding, R. W. 1992. “Egyptian Old Kingdom Patterns of Animal Use and the Value of Faunal Data in Modeling
            Socioeconomic Systems.” Paleorient 18(2):99–107.
Redford, D. B. 1986. “Egypt and Western Asia in the Old Kingdom.” Journal of the American Research Center in
            Egypt 23:125–143.
———. 1989. “Prolegomena to Archaeological Investigations of Mendes.” Manuscript on ﬁle with Wenke,
            Seattle, WA.
———. 1992. Egypt, Canaan, and Israel in Ancient Times. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Reeves, C. 1992. Egyptian Medicine. Buckinghamshire, England: Shire.
Reeves, N. 1990. The Complete Tutankhamun. New York: Thames and Hudson.
Reeves, N., and J. H. Taylor. 1992. Howard Carter Before Tutankhamun. London: British Museum Press.
Rice, M. 1990. Egypt’s Making: The Origins of Ancient Egypt. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Rindos, D. 1984. The Origins of Agriculture. New York: Academic Press.
Rizkana, I., and J. Seeher. 1984. “New Light on the Relation of Maadi to the Upper Egyptian Cultural Sequence.”
            Mitteilungen des Deutchen Archaologischen Instituts Abteilung Kairo 40:237–252.
Saggs, H. W. 1991. Civilization Before Greece and Rome. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Seidlmayer, S. 1987. “Wirtschaftliche und gesellschaftliche Entwicklung im Ubergang vom Alten zum Mittleren
            Reich: Ein Beitrag zur Archaologie der Graberfelder der Region Qau-Matmar in der Ersten
            Zwischenzeit.” In Problems and Priorities in Egyptian Archaeology, ed. J. Assman, G. Burkhard, and
            V. Davies. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Service, E. 1975. Origins of the State and Civilization. New York: Norton.
Shafer, B. E., ed. 1991. Religion in Ancient Egypt: Gods, Myths, and Personal Practice. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University
            Press.
Shaw, I. 1991. Egyptian Warfare and Weapons. Aylesbury, England: Shire.
Sjoberg, G. 1960. The Preindustrial City. New York: The Free Press.
Smith, H. S., and D. G. Jeffreys. 1986. “A Survey of Memphis, Egypt.” Antiquity LX:88–95.
Spencer, A. J. 1982. Death in Ancient Egypt. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Strudwick, N. 1985. The Administration of Egypt in the Old Kingdom: The Highest Titles and Their Holders. London:
            KPI.
Tannahill, R. 1982. Sex in History. Briarcliff Manor, NY: Scarborough Books.
Teeter, E. 1993. Personal communication.
Trigger, B. G. 1979. “Egyptology and Anthropology.” In Egyptology and the Social Sciences, ed. K. Weeks. Cairo:
            American University in Cairo Press.
———. 1982a. “The Rise of Civilization in Egypt.” In The Cambridge History of Africa, Vol. 1, ed. J. D. Clark.
            Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
———. 1982b. “Archaeological Analysis and Theories of Causality.” Culture 2(2):31– 42.
———. 1984. “The Mainlines of Socioeconomic Development in Dynastic Egypt to the End of the Old Kingdom.”
            In Origin and Early Development of Food-Producing Cultures in North-Eastern Africa, ed. L. Krzyzaniak
            and M. Kobusiewicz. Poznan: Poznan Archaeological Museum.
———. 1985. “The Evolution of Pre-industrial Cities: A Multilinear Perspective.” Melanges offerts Jean Vercoutter.
            Paris: Editions Recherce sur les Civilisations.
———. 1990. “Monumental Architecture: A Thermodynamic Explanation of Symbolic Behavior.” World
            Archaeology 22:119–131.
Uphill, E. P. 1988. Egyptian Towns and Cities. Aylesbury, England: Shire.
Van den Brink, E., ed. 1988. The Archaeology of the Nile Delta: Problems and Priorities. Amsterdam: Amsterdam
            Foundation for Archaeological Research in Egypt.
Vinogradov, I. V. 1982. “The Predynastic Period and the Early and the Old Kingdoms in Egypt.” In Early Antiquity,
            ed. I. M. Diakonoff. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Von der Way, T. 1987. “Tell el-Fara’in-Buto, 2 Bericht mit einem Beitrag von Klaus Schmidt zu den lithischen
            Kleinfunden.” Mitteilungen des Deutschen Archaologischen Instituts Abteilung Kairo 3:241–250.
———. 1988. “Investigations Concerning the Early Periods in the Northern Delta of Egypt.” In The Archaeology
            of the Nile Delta: Problems and Priorities, ed. E. C. M. van den Brink. Amsterdam: Netherlands
            Foundation for Archaeological Research in Egypt.

402   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      ———. 1992. “Indications of Architecture with Niches at Buto.” In The Followers of Horus: Studies Dedicated to
                  Michael Allen Hoffman, ed. R. Friedman and B. Adams. Oxford: Oxbow.
      Waldrop, M. M. 1992. Complexity. New York: Touchstone.
      Wasylikowa, K., J. Mitka, F. Wendorf, and R. Schild. 1997. “Exploitation of Wild Plants by the Early Neolithic
                  Hunter-Gatherers of the Western Desert, Egypt: Nabta Playa as a Case-Study.” Antiquity 71:932–941.
      Watson, R. A. 1990. “Ozymandias, King of Kings: Postprocessual Radical Archaeology as Critique.” American
                  Antiquity 55(4):673–489.
      Wegner, J. 2000. “A Hundred Years at South Abydos: Reconstructing the Temple of Pharoah Senwosret III.”
                  Expedition 42(2):9–18.
      Wendorf, F., R. Said, and R. Schild. 1980. Prehistory of the Eastern Sahara. New York: Academic Press.
      Wendorf, F., R. Schild, and Associates. 2002. Holocene Settlement of the Egyptian Sahara, Vol. 1: The Archaeology
                  of Nabta Playa. New Youk: Kluwer Academic/Plenum.
      Wendorf, F., R. Schild, and A. Close. 1984. Cattle-Keepers of the Eastern Sahara. The Neolithic of Bir Kiseiba. New
                  Delhi: Pauls Press.
      ———. 1989. The Prehistory of Wadi Kubbaniya, Vols. 2 and 3. Dallas: Southern Methodist University Press.
      Wenke, R. J. 1981. “Explaining the Evolution of Cultural Complexity: A Review.” In Advances in Archaeological
                  Method and Theory, ed. M. B. Schiffer. New York: Academic Press.
      ———. 1986. “Old Kingdom Community Organization in the Western Egyptian Delta.” Norwegian
                  Archaeological Review 19(1):15–33.
      ———. 1989. “Egypt: Origins of Complex Societies.” Annual Review of Anthropology 18:129–155.
      ———. 1991. “The Evolution of Early Egyptian Civilization: Issues and Evidence.” Journal of World Prehistory
                  5(3):279–329.
      Wenke, R. J., and D. J. Brewer. 1996. “The Archaic—Old Kingdom Delta: The Evidence from Mendes and Kom
                  el-Hisn.” In House and Palace in Egypt, ed. M. Bietak. Vienna: Austrian Archaeological Institute.
      Wenke, R., J. Long, and P. Buck. 1988. “Epipaleolithic and Neolithic Settlement in the Fayyum Oasis of Egypt.”
                  Journal of Field Archaeology 15(1):29–51.
      Wenke, R. J., R. Redding, P. Buck, H. A. Hamroush, M. Kobusiewicz, and K. Kroeper. 1988. “Kom el-Hisn:
                  Excavations of an Old Kingdom West Delta Community.” Journal of the American Research Center in
                  Egypt xxv:5–34.
      White, L. 1949. The Science of Culture. New York: Grove Press.
      Wilson, H. n.d. Egyptian Food and Drink. Princes Risborough, England.
      Wilson, J. A. 1946. “Egypt: The Nature of the Universe.” In Before Philosophy, ed. H. A. Frankfort et al. Baltimore:
                  Penguin.
      ———. 1951. The Culture of Ancient Egypt. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
      ———. 1960. “Civilizations Without Cities.” In City Invincible, ed. C. H. Kraeling and R. McC. Adams. Chicago:
                  University of Chicago Press.
      Wittfogel, K. A. 1957. Oriental Despotism: A Comparative Study of Total Power. New Haven: Yale University Press.
      Wright, H. T. 1986. “The Evolution of Civilizations.” In American Archaeology, Past and Future, ed. D. J. Meltzer,
                  D. D. Fowler, and J. A. Sabloff. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
      Yoffee, N. 1979. “The Decline and Rise of Mesopotamian Civilization: An Ethnoarchaeological Perspective on the
                  Evolution of Social Complexity.” American Antiquity 44:5–35.
      Yoffee, N., and G. Cowgill, eds. 1988. The Collapse of Ancient States and Empires. Tucson: University of Arizona
                  Press.
      Younger, K. L. 1990. Ancient Conquest Accounts: A Study in Ancient Near Eastern and Biblical History Writing.
                  JSOT Supp. 98. JSOT Press: Shefﬁeld, England.



      NOTES
       1. The ﬁlm Mountains of the Moon is an entertaining story of the search for the origins of the Nile.
       2. Lates niloticus.
       3. Brewer and Friedman, Fish and Fishing in Ancient Egypt, p. 74.
       4. Butzer, “Long-Term Nile Flood Variation.”
       5. Numbers 11:4 –6.
       6. The archaeological argument for domestication of cattle was ecological. In the early Holocene, cattle bones
          are found at seasonal lake sites far out into the hyper-arid Sahara Desert. These sites are present because of
          wetter periods during the early Holocene that permitted human exploitation of areas away from the Nile
          Valley. The aridity of the desert, except for the seasonal lake areas, is thought to be a barrier to wild cattle
          being part of the local fauna; wild cattle are present, however, in the well-watered Nile Valley. Thus, the pre-
          sence of cattle at these early Holocene desert sites is thought to be the result of people bringing these animals

                                                               THE ORIGINS OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN EGYPT                   403


    to these locales (for example, see Wendorf et al., Holocene Settlement of the Eastern Sahara, Vol. 1: The
    Archaeology of Nabta Playa). Recently, studies of cattle DNA indicate that the archaeological interpretations
    of local domestication of cattle are likely correct (see Bradley et al., “Mitochondrial Diversity and the Origins
    of African and European Cattle”), and other scholars are increasingly accepting the local domestication of
    cattle in Africa (for example, Marshall and Hildebrand, “Cattle Before Crops: the Beginnings of Food
    Production in Africa”).
 7. Wendorf et al., Cattle-Keepers of the Eastern Sahara. The Neolithic of Bir Kiseiba; Wendorf et al., The Prehistory
    of Wadi Kubbaniya, Vols. 2 and 3; Close, Prehistory of Arid North Africa: Essays in Honor of Fred Wendorf;
    Lubell et al., “Continuity in the Epipaleolithic of Northern Africa with Emphasis on the Maghreb.”
 8. Aristida, Eragrostis, Panicum, and Echinocloa.
 9. Wendorf, Schild, and Close, Cattle-Keepers of the Eastern Sahara: The Neolithic of Bir Kiseiba, p. 428.
10. Ibid., p. 425.
11. Wasylikowa et al., “Exploitation of Wild Plants by the Early Neolithic Hunter-Gatherers of the Western
    Desert, Egypt: Nabta Playa as a Case-Study.”
12. Barich and Hassan, “A Stratiﬁed Sequence from Wadi el-Obeiyd, Farafra. New Data on Subsistence and
    Chronology of the Egyptian Western Desert,” cited in Midant-Reyes, Aux origines de l’Égypte: du Néolithique
    à l’émergence de l’État.
13. Hassan, “Desert Environment and Origins of Agriculture in Egypt”; Hassan, “The Predynastic of Egypt.”
14. Reviewed in Wenke et al., “Epipaleolithic and Neolithic Settlement in the Fayyum Oasis of Egypt.”
15. Although it should be pointed out that early Neolithic farmers in the Levant also incorporated many wild
    plant foods and wild animals in their diet (chapter 8). This combination of wild and domesticated subsistence
    economies merely reﬂects the lengthy transition from reliance mainly on wild foods to reliance mainly on
    domesticated foods. The Fayyum case in Egypt may thus reﬂect this type of transition rather than a resistance
    to the spread of agricultural lifeways.
16. Hassan, “The Predynastic of Egypt.” Also see Bard, From Farmers to Pharaohs.
17. Hoffman, Egypt Before the Pharaohs; Hoffman, The Predynastic of Hierakonpolis—An Interim Report; Hoffman
    et al., “A Model of Urban Development for the Hierakonpolis Region from Predynastic Through Old
    Kingdom Times.”
18. Reviewed in Wenke, “The Evolution of Early Egyptian Civilization: Issues and Evidence.”
19. von der Way, “Investigations Concerning the Early Periods in the Northern Delta of Egypt”; van den Brink,
    ed., The Archaeology of the Nile Delta: Problems and Priorities.
20. See van den Brink, ed., The Archaeology of the Nile Delta: Problems and Priorities; Wenke, “The Evolution of
    Early Egyptian Civilization: Issues and Evidence.”
21. Hassan, “The Predynastic of Egypt.”
22. Service, Origins of the State and Civilization, p. 228.
23. Butzer, Early Hydraulic Civilization in Egypt.
24. Trigger, “The Rise of Civilization in Egypt.”
25. Wenke et al., “Kom el-Hisn: Excavations of an Old Kingdom West Delta Community.”
26. Badawy, “The Civic Sense of the Pharaoh and Urban Development in Ancient Egypt,” p. 105.
27. Lehner, “Some Observations on the Layout of the Khufu and Khafre Pyramids.”
28. See Emily Dickinson’s “There’s a certain slant of light . . .” for a lovely meditation on this light and, of course,
    death.
29. Edwards, The Pyramids of Egypt.
30. O’Connor, “Boat Graves and Pyramid Origins: New Discoveries at Abydos, Egypt.”
31. Ibid., p. 14.
32. Lehner, “Some Observations on the Layout of the Khufu and Khafre Pyramids.”
33. Grimal, A History of Ancient Egypt, pp. 264–265.
34. Wilson, The Culture of Ancient Egypt, p. 79. See also Kemp, “Old Kingdom, Middle Kingdom and Second
    Intermediate Period c. 2686–1552 b.c.”; Trigger, “Egyptology and Anthropology,” pp. 32–50.
35. See O’Connor and Silverman, eds., Ancient Egyptian Kingship.
36. Ibid.; R. Leprohon, personal communication.
37. Kemp, “Old Kingdom, Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period c. 2686–1552 b.c.,” p. 108.
38. Trigger, “The Mainlines of Socioeconomic Development in Dynamic Egypt to the End of the Old Kingdom,”
    p. 107. See also Kanawati, The Egyptian Administration in the Old Kingdom. Evidence on Its Economic Decline,
    pp. 69–77; Goedicke, Konigliche Dokumente aus dem Alten Reich.
39. Butzer, “Pleistocene History of the Nile Valley in Egypt and Lower Nubia,” p. 278; Kemp, “Old Kingdom,
    Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period c. 2686–1552 b.c.,” p. 113.
40. Butzer, Early Hydraulic Civilization in Egypt, pp. 26–27.
41. Yoffee, “The Decline and Rise of Mesopotamian Civilization: An Ethnoarchaeological Perspective on the
    Evolution of Social Complexity”; Yoffee and Cowgill, The Collapse of Ancient States and Empires.
42. Strudwick, The Administration of Egypt in the Old Kingdom: The Highest Titles and Their Holders.

404   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      43. Ibid.
      44. Aldred, The Egyptians, p. 102.
      45. Kemp, “Old Kingdom, Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period c. 2686–1552 b.c.”
      46. Quirke and Spencer, The British Museum Book of Ancient Egypt, p. 40.
      47. O’Connor, “New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period, 1552–664 b.c.,” p. 190.
      48. Ibid., pp. 194–195.
      49. Ibid., p. 219.
      50. Tannahill, Sex in History, pp. 77–78.
      51. O’Connor, “New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period, 1552–664 b.c.,” p. 222.
      52. The fascination with all things Egyptian is clearly seen in the many recent stories in the newspapers that have
          focused on the “mystery” of Tutankhamun’s death at such an early age. Earlier surmises, based on pieces of
          skull bone found inside his brain case, suggested to some that Tutankhamun was murdered by a blow to the
          head. Recent CT scans, however, do not conﬁrm this; these broken pieces of skull are due to mishandling of
          the mummy when it was discovered in the early 1960s. Tutankhamun does appear to have suffered a badly
          broken leg prior to his death, and some speculation suggests that he succumbed to an infection related to the
          break.
      53. Carter’s donkey was named San Toy, and reportedly would wander through the excavation camp until she
          found Carter and then “bray with delight.” Reeves and Taylor, Howard Carter Before Tutankhamun, p. 60.
      54. O’Connor, “New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period, 1552–664 b.c.,” p. 222.
      55. This issue remains contentious. See Hess, Amarna Personal Names; Younger, Ancient Conquest Accounts: A
          Study in Ancient Near Eastern and Biblical History Writing; Kitchen, “The Rise and Fall of Covenant, Law, and
          Treaty”; Kitchen, “The Patriarchal Age-Myth or History?”; Hoffmeier, “The Structure of Joshua 1–11 and the
          Annals of Thutmoses III.”
      56. Wilson, “Egypt: The Nature of the Universe,” p. 73.
      57. Farooq, “Historical Development,” p. 2.
      58. Wilson, “Egypt: The Nature of the Universe,” p. 72.
      59. Ibid.
      60. Quirke and Spencer, The British Museum Book of Ancient Egypt, p. 150.
      61. Ibid., p. 129.
      62. Saggs, Civilization Before Greece and Rome, pp. 73–74.
      63. Ibid.
      64. Translation by John Foster, Love Songs of the New Kingdom, pp. 58, 61.
      65. See Frankfort, The Birth of Civilization in the Near East; Hamilton, The Greek Way; Kitto, The Greeks.
      66. Wittfogel, Oriental Despotism: A Comparative Study of Total Power; Hoffman, Egypt Before the Pharaohs: The
          Prehistoric Foundations of Egyptian Civilization, p. 315.

10
The Evolution of Complex Societies
in the Indus Valley

Enough has been said to show that India
confronts Egypt and Babylonia in the third
millennium [b.c.] with a thoroughly
individual, and independent civilization of her
own, technically the peer of the rest. And plainly
it is deeply rooted in India soil.
V. Gordon Childe1




A           ncient texts bring the people of the past to life much more vividly than do their
            bricks, bones, and pots, and thus it is particularly frustrating that the written
language of the ﬁrst great civilization of South Asia, the Harappan State (c. 2600–1900 b.c.)
(Figure 10.1), continues to defy decipherment. Since the discovery of its archaeological
remains early in the twentieth century, the Harappan civilization that ﬂourished in the
Indus Valley, in what is now Pakistan and India, in the third millennium b.c., has been
unfairly considered a sort of poor relation to the great states and empires that graced the
Mesopotamian alluvial plain and the Nile Valley. Not only did the Indus Valley cultures
mature many centuries later than those in Egypt and Southwest Asia, they also neglected
to leave much in the way of the pyramids, tombs, and palaces so prized by archaeologists.
Nor was the Harappan a particularly long-lived civilization; its mature phase lasted only
about ﬁve or six centuries2 (Figure 10.2).3 Perhaps the most important factor in the relative
neglect of Harappan culture by scholars is that until its ﬁrst great cities were discovered in
the ﬁrst half of the twentieth century (many by Sir John Marshall), no one had any idea of
its existence. Scholars knew that Alexander the Great invaded the northwestern Indus
Valley in 326 b.c., but they had no idea that 2,000 years earlier a great civilization had
ﬂourished and died in this area. As Gregory Possehl noted,4 we “do not know what these
people called themselves or their cities. . . . We have no king lists, no internal chronology
. . . no historical account of commerce, production . . . no historical record of the internal
social organization.”
       On the basis of its archaeological record, however, we know that the Harappan culture
is yet another example of the appearance of a pre-industrial “state,” whose major evolu-
tionary dynamics now appear to have been primarily self-contained, with only minor

                                                405

406   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                INDUS                                       aspects that were the results of outside
                                                            inﬂuences. In fact, the Indus Valley cul-
           A.D. 500                                         tures are of great interest for the study
                                                            of the origins of cultural complexity
                  0                                         for several reasons: (1) Backed brick
                       Alexander the Great
                                                            architecture, prototypes of the Indus
           500 B.C.    Persian invasions
                                                            square stamp seal, and town planning—
              1000                                          characteristics that help deﬁne Mature
                                                            Harappan civilization—may have
              1500     Demise of Harappan State             appeared very rapidly beginning during
                                                            a transitional phase between the Early
              2000     Spread of Harappan Civilization      and Mature Harappan stages, with a
                                                            highly urbanized society developing out
              2500     Mature Harappan Civilization
                                                            of a rather simple one in perhaps as little
              3000     Early Harappan Civilization          as 100 –150 years 5 —although others
                                                            dispute this view;6 (2) they constructed
              3500     Initial Settlement of Indus Alluvium massive cities with perhaps the most
                                                            advanced sense of town planning
              4000     Neolithic–Urban Transition           and provision of city services (e.g.,
                                                            a municipal water and sewage system)
              6500
                                                            in the ancient world until the advent of
              7000     Early Indo-Iranian Agriculture
                                                            the Romans; (3) their area of cultural
                                                            and political inﬂuence and control
              7500                                          extended over almost 1.3 million km2—
                                                            considerably more territory than any
                                                            other Old World civilization of this
                                                            period; (4) Harappan culture over this
                                                            large area appears very homogenous,
                                                            compared to Mesopotamia; and (5)
      although there were undoubtedly elite rulers, and other social classes, Harappan civilization
      has left us very little in the way of archaeological materials that point to unequal
      distribution of wealth and resources—lacking are sumptuous burials and accompanying
      burial good wealth, numerous images of rulers and their exploits, and concentrations of
      palaces and large residential houses for the ruling elite within the cities.7
            It is not an uncommon archaeological irony that the Indus civilization, so interesting
      in various ways, is one of the most archaeologically inaccessible. Some critical phases of its
      archaeological record are buried beneath meters of alluvium and beneath the water table.
      Along with the pleasures of sloshing through mud against a background whine of pumps,
      the archaeologist working on early complex societies in the Indus must be prepared for the
      collapse of huge walls of debris as he or she cuts down through the alluvium to the earliest
      levels. For this and other reasons, our knowledge of Harappan civilization is in some ways
      less than that of Egypt and Mesopotamia. One effect of this has been that interpretations of
      Harappan civilization have suffered the effects of “received wisdom”: In the absence of
      adequate data, characterizations of Harappan civilizations made in the 1950s and before
      have been repeated and recycled long past the time they have been shown to be inaccurate.
      Thus, as Jim Shaffer notes, Stuart Piggot’s characterization in 1950 of the Harappan

                                          THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN THE INDUS VALLEY                                                             407



                                                                          Saral Khola Hathial West
                                                                                                                             Manda
                                                                              Jhang

                        AFGHANISTAN                        Tarakai Qila Islam Chowki
                                                                              Mianwall          Riv
                                                                                                    er
                                                                 Lewan                       ab
                                                                                           n
                                                               Hathala              Jho
                                                                                      Ch
                                                                                         e
                                                         Rehman Dheri Gumla            kint
                                                                                                     r               e
                                                                                                                  Riv
                                              Periano Ghundai                                                vi
                                                                            Laiah                       Ra                                     Ropar
                        i ver                                                                                                        Bara
                   andR                                                                             Harappa                  Lakhmirwala
                                                                                                                                               Chandigarth
               irn                                                          Vainiwal                                                           Hulas Bargaon
             Ha                 Damb Sadast                                                             ive
                                                                                                             r
                                                       Dabar Kot                                   el R             Banawali              Rakhigarhi
                                Faiz Mohammad                                                 Sud                  Sothi
                                                                                      Kudwala Kalibangan Slswal          Alamgirpur
                                                                      Lurewala                                  Mitathal    Manpur
                                     Nausharo                                   an                                                                      Ya
                                             Judeirjo-daro                il st                                                                            n
                                Pathani Dambs                           o                    Lunkaransar Lake                Ga
                                                             r       Ch                                                         ng                      mu
                                                         ive                     Ganweriwala                                       es
                                                                                                                                                             aR
                        PAKISTAN                    u sR                         Ganger Lake                                          R                                    ivo
                                         Jhukar nd                                                Didwana Lake                                               ivo              r
               Kargushki Damb                   I                                                                                                              r
                                   Mohenjo-daro
                                                      Kot Diji Ahmad Khan Dherl
                             Mehi
      Shami Damb          Nindowari      Roheljo Kund                                        Sambhar Lake                    r
                                          Pandi Wahi                                                                      ive
                                                                                                                       rR
            Miri Qalat
                       Kulii Edith
                              Shahr SehwanGhazi Shah
                                                                              INDIA                            am
                                                                                                                  o ba
                                                     Chanhu-daro                         Pushkar Lake       Ch
                                        Amri                                      i v er
    Sutkagen-dor Sotka Koh                                                     iR
                                     Bala Kot                              Lun
                                                    Gharo Bhiro
                                     Allahdino

                                                     Kot Kori                                       Ri v
                                                                                                        er
                                        Koonj Soor         Dholavira Nagwada                    rmao                     r
                                                      Desalpur                                                    iR
                                                                                                                    ive
                                                            Surkotada                         S a oa          ah
           ARABIAN SEA                                                   Kuntasi                             M
                                                                               Lothal
                                                                                                                                            iver
                                               Nageshwar                    Rangpur                                                    ada R
                                                                                                                                   Narm
                                                                    Rojdi                              Megham                  0      100         200          300
                                                                                Padri                                                                                km

                                                                                                                               0            100                   200 mi
                                                                                                        Bhagatrav
                                                                      Somnath
                                                                                                          Malvan

FIGURE 10.1 The heartland of the Harappan civilization is the Indus Valley.

civilization as rigidly stratiﬁed, centralized, and authoritarian has
been “repeated in nearly every synthesis on the culture to date,”8
despite evidence that challenges these characterizations.9


THE ECOLOGICAL SETTING

Aristobulus . . . says that when he was sent upon
a certain mission [to Pakistan and India] he
saw a country of more than a thousand cities,
together with villages, that had been deserted
because [a great river] had abandoned its
proper bed.
Strabo (c. 63 b.c.–24 a.d.)10                                                                             FIGURE 10.2 Harappan writing.

408   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      Millions of years ago, movements of the earth’s crust forced the Indian subcontinent
      against the main Eurasian land mass with such pressure that the land in between was
      squeezed upward, creating the Himalayan Mountains. Every spring, melting snow in
      these mountains sends ﬂoods down the rivers that cross the lowlands to the sea. Of these
      rivers, the Indus and its ﬂoodplain form a large segment of the area between the borders
      of present-day Pakistan and India (see Figure 10.1). During the early Holocene, the
      large ﬂoodplains of this region apparently stabilized, when the development of soil
      occurred at a faster rate than alluviation (the process of sediment deposition by ﬂowing
      water).11
            So little rain falls on this plain during the average year that reliable agriculture is
      possible only through irrigation from the river, although geological work in the Lower
      Indus Valley suggests that—like Egypt—ﬂood inundation may have been the main way that
      agricultural areas received their water.12 The Indus civilizations, thus, are—like those in all
      other “pristine” cases except Mexico—the gift of large rivers. The stabilized ﬂoodplains that
      existed during the earlier part of the Holocene likely also contributed to the success of early
      settlements located here.
            Indus Valley cultures are really the products of two rivers, the Indus and the Ghaggar-
      Hakra, which is now extinct. In ancient times these two rivers ran roughly parallel to each
      other, creating a vast alluvial plain with great potential for farming and herding. The
      Ghaggar-Hakra was the legendary Saraswati River mentioned in later Sanskrit texts—and
      it may have been the river that had supported the settlements that Aristobulus (quoted
      earlier) saw abandoned. According to the archaeologist M. Mughal,13 the Ghaggar-Hakra
      supported many communities, including two cities that were as large as the two largest
      known Indus Valley cities, Mohenjo-daro and Harappa.
            Compared to the Nile, the Indus River, and probably the Ghaggar-Hakra River as well,
      were relatively unpredictable, with great annual ﬂuctuations in their volume and course.
      Frequently, the rivers ﬂowed across the countryside in devastating ﬂoods. Centuries of this
      ﬂooding have left the Indus ﬂoodplain a maze of old river channels and great deposits of
      silt, all smoothed down by the action of wind and water. The great fertility of these soils is
      complemented by the arid, hot climate, which, like that of Egypt and Mesopotamia,
      supports several crops a year and a great diversity of plant species.
            Recent research on avulsions—natural changes—in the course of the Indus River has
      yielded important information about the placement of its ancient course(s). Louis Flam has
      identiﬁed three major courses, the earliest of which is the Jacobabad (Early Holocene),
      followed by the Sindhu Nadi (Middle Holocene), and the Kandhkot (Late Holocene).14 At
      the time of the Early and Mature Harappan stages, the Sindhu Nadi Course was the path
      of the Indus River, and it ran considerably to the west of the modern course. Flam suggests
      that the placement of Harappan sites can be understood in part by examining their distance
      from the Sindh Nadi Course—for example, Mohenjo-daro is some 25 km to the southeast
      and thus outside the area of the worst of the unpredictable annual ﬂooding of the
      ﬂoodplain. The shift of the Sindhu Nadi Course to the east toward the end of the third
      millennium b.c.—about the same time that Mohenjo-daro declined—may have subjected
      this city to annual ﬂood ravages that persuaded people to relocate elsewhere.15
            Because the Indus River is navigable over much of its length, ships could sail between
      Harappan cities with goods and, presumably, transport the bureaucrats sent by the central
      government to collect taxes and administer the provinces.

                                    THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN THE INDUS VALLEY         409


      Like those of ancient Mesopotamia, the ancient cultures and polities of the Indus
Valley must be seen as the products of a wide sphere of long-term cultural interactions of
people far beyond the river plain itself. To the west of the hot Indus plains the arid foothills
and mountains of Pakistan, Afghanistan, and Iran sharply limit the extension of agriculture,
but they also provide valuable minerals, metals, animal products, and other goods and are
the homelands of pastoral and nomadic peoples who exerted great inﬂuence on lowland
civilizations. Because the Himalayas to the north posed a formidable barrier to transport,
the diffusion of new ideas, objects, and peoples into and out of the Indus Valley was mainly
along routes through these western borderlands, or along the thin coastal strip on the
Arabian Sea. The Great Indian Desert to the east of the Indus Valley reduced contacts with
the rest of the subcontinent. As a result, the Indus Valley was, like Egypt and Peru, an area
of rich agricultural lands sharply bounded by highlands, desert, and ocean.


THE NEOLITHIC BACKGROUND TO SOUTH ASIAN
CULTURAL COMPLEXITY (C. 7000–4300 B.C.)

One of the primary archaeological discoveries of the past decade in South Asia is that the
village farming way of life, which was once thought to have been a rather recent
development in this area, actually has deep and extensive roots.16 The ancestors of the
people who built the Indus civilizations spent thousands of years as small-time farmers and
herders in the highlands above the Indus; most of the plain was perhaps only lightly
occupied during these centuries. Domesticated wheat and the remains of domesticated
sheep and goats have been found in levels dating to about 7000 b.c. in several sites in
Afghanistan and Baluchistan, and the evidence suggests that thereafter the agricultural and
pastoral ways of life spread gradually, from west to east, throughout highland areas where
rainfall and streams provided sufﬁcient water.
     The Neolithic background to Harappan civilization has been clariﬁed by recent work
at several sites, including Kili Ghul Mohammad in the Quetta Valley, Baluchistan; Ghar-
i-Mar and Aq Kupruk II in Afghanistan; and especially at Mehrgarh, on the Kachi Plain,
in Pakistan.
     Mehrgarh was ﬁrst occupied shortly after 7000 b.c. by people who lived in simple,
multi-roomed mudbrick buildings and seem to have subsisted on a blend of cereal farming
and hunting (Figure 10.3). This community is the ﬁrst known
example in the Indus area of the basic domesticated plants,
animals, agricultural technologies, and the village form of
community organization, all appearing together as a func-
tioning entity—a form of economy and society that would be
the basic building block of all the civilizations that followed
in this part of Asia. Around the world, pottery is usually found
at locales where economies were based on domesticated cereals
since pottery is so useful in making the soups, stews, and
porridges (and beer) that take maximum advantage of cereals.
But like the earliest Neolithic peoples of Southwest Asia, the
people of early Mehrgarh did not use pottery to store their         FIGURE 10.3 Possible mudbrick storage
domesticated wheat and barley. Archaeologists have found            structures from Mehrgarh, Pakistan.

410   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      ovens in these buildings, so the people of Mehrgarh may have used these cereals for making
      bread. They also hunted extensively. Most of the bones from the earliest levels of Mehrgarh
      are from gazelle, deer, antelope, wild water buffalo, wild sheep and goat, wild cattle, wild
      pig, and even elephant.
           Soon after about 5500 b.c., however, the people of Mehrgarh had begun to specialize
      mainly on sheep, goat, and cattle, which Richard Meadow, a faunal analyst, thinks is an
      indication that these animals were being kept and in the process of domestication. He notes
      that some evidence from Mehrgarh indicates that they were using domesticated hump-
      backed cattle (“zebu”), and he suggests that the keeping and herding of zebu (Bos indicus)
      appeared on the eastern margins of the Middle East as early as non-humped cattle (Box
      taurus) were kept and herded the western areas of the Middle East.17 Moreover, beginning
      at about 5500 b.c. the people of Mehrgarh began to use a crude but serviceable kind of
      pottery. They also used copper tools and imported turquoise and lapis lazuli from Iran and
      Afghanistan and marine shell from the Arabian Gulf area—and they used some of these
      exotic items in the form of beads to decorate the corpses of their deceased.
           As the farming way of life spread over South Asia, people seem to have domesticated
      other animals, such as the pig, water buffalo, and the distinctive hump-backed cattle still
      found all over this area.18 And like their neighbors in Southwest Asia, they complemented
      wheat and barley with many other crops, including peas, lentils, and other legumes, which
      people all over the world discovered could provide the vegetable proteins so often needed
      in the uncertain circumstances of primitive agriculture.
           Like other early agriculturalists around the world, the early farming peoples of
      southern Asia solved the problem of clothing by domesticating a plant for ﬁber, speciﬁcally,
      cotton. Just as linen and wool were the staple textiles in Egypt and Mesopotamia, respec-
      tively, cotton became the primary source of cloth for South Asia—as it did in Peru and
      elsewhere. Textiles are by no means the invention only of agriculturalists, however: Various
      hunter-foragers around the world wove natural plant ﬁbers into clothing. The growing
      populations of early farming cultures, however, and the need for seasonally adaptable and
      cheap clothing seems to have resulted in the domestication of a plant that could be grown
      intensively and easily converted to textiles. Cotton was probably domesticated in several
      areas of southern Asia between about 7000 and 5000 b.c., but the evidence of precisely when
      and where this occurred is unclear.
           As humble as these beginnings of South Asian civilization might seem, they clearly
      involve the same elements that we have already seen in Egypt and Mesopotamia. By about
      7000 b.c. people from all over this area, though just a few thousand years removed from
      their hunter-forager ancestors, were experimenting with various economic strategies.
      Within a few thousand years these people had achieved a reliable, productive blend of
      economic activities that particularly suited their circumstances. They all solved the same
      basic problems of living. They found that cattle, pigs, sheep, and goats were a particularly
      productive mix of large domesticated animals, that wheat and barley could form the core
      of their food-production, that ceramic containers were ideal food-processing and storage
      vessels, that textiles could be made from a diversity of plants and animals, and that
      mudbrick buildings and permanent villages made effective residences.
           All of these developments may seem natural, almost inevitable, but they were not.
      We should not imagine that these people—from North Africa to India —ﬁne-tuned their
      economies from generation to generation until they all converged on essentially the same

                                   THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN THE INDUS VALLEY        411


solutions to these problems of living. People experimented with various aspects of these
economies to solve personal needs, and some solutions proved better than others. The
process for making durable pottery, for example, may well have been independently
“invented” scores, perhaps hundreds, of times in South and West Asia and North Africa.
Textile production, too, was probably independently “invented” many times.
     One gets the sense that necessity really was the mother of invention in many of these
developments. Pottery’s uses are probably most obvious. Primitive farmers in general had
to ﬁnd a way to water their plants effectively, store the grain, boil it, and serve it, and
although animal skins, wooden bowls, and other containers can meet some of these uses,
only pottery is cheap, durable, available everywhere, and reasonably effective at meeting all
these needs. Textiles, too, offer obvious advantages over animal skins and other possible
sources for clothing, bags, ropes, nets, and so forth. To make clothing out of animal skins,
which we have reason to believe were the primary source of clothing for almost all hunter-
foragers, one must truly “cut one’s coat to ﬁt one’s cloth,” as the old maxim has it. But
cotton, linen, or wool textiles can be mass-produced in variable sizes and textures in rela-
tively cheap and reliable fashion, as opposed to the exigencies of antelope or tiger hunting.
Moreover, although people could certainly have worn clothing of leather and other forms
of animal skin in the hot river valleys of the Nile, the Indus, the Tigris-Euphrates, and
elsewhere in the area, life must have been much more comfortable in the linens, cottons,
and thin wools that these people eventually wore.



THE NEOLITHIC–URBAN TRANSITION (C. 4300–3200 B.C.)

Harappan civilization, like those of the Nile Valley and Mesopotamia, seems so much a
creation of its speciﬁc environment that it is easy to lose sight of the wider ecological and
cultural contexts in which it was set. Harappan civilization, in particular, can be seen as a
direct product of the village farming tradition that spread all over the uplands of Iran,
Afghanistan, and Pakistan after 5000 b.c.19
     At this time, many settlements in the highlands west of the Indus were probably based
on simple wheat farming supplemented by sheep- and goat-raising and some hunting and
gathering. These farmers made pottery and used a few copper tools, but the sites of some
villages are so insubstantial that they suggest a relatively mobile population and perhaps
only seasonal occupation.20 Slowly, however, these villages grew and farming became the
way of life over an ever-larger area. To the south and east, too, Neolithic cultures were
forming. Rice may well have been cultivated on the Ganges Plain by 4500 b.c.; indeed, all
over South Asia at this time people made intensive use of many cereals, although most of
these never became staples like wheat and rice.21 In a sense, it is as if all of these farming
traditions coalesced on the Indus ﬂoodplain. Boosted by the great agricultural productivity
of this area and its easy riverine transport, these village-farming adaptations were
subsequently transformed into an urban civilization.
     Like the origins of farming itself, the cultural transformation of a simple agricultural
society into a state might appear in retrospect to be an automatic and inevitable outcome
of a favorable mix of agricultural economies and particularly productive conditions
for farming, but this is not the case. The Indus Valley civilizations seem another classic

412   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      demonstration of the discontinuous nature of cultural evolution. Rather than a smooth
      building process wherein Neolithic villages added the components of civilization trait by
      trait, we see in the Indus area the same pattern evident in Mesopotamia, where initial moves
      toward complexity stalled and disappeared, while areas that were once on the periphery
      became the core developmental regions.
           As Kenoyer notes,22 early interpretations of Indus civilizations were that these people
      derived from a single ethnic group, but the evidence suggests that the Indus civilizations
      —like those of Mesopotamia—were built of mosaics of ethnic groups, languages, and
      adaptations.
           Harappan civilization was much like Mesopotamia in its pattern of core-periphery
      relationships, and very much unlike Egypt, for example. Egypt was sheltered by poor
      harbors on the north, steep rapids in the south, and large and largely unpopulated deserts
      on the east and west; thus, the idea of a “core” and a “periphery” is not really applicable,
      except in the sense of the differences between the central government and provincial
      authorities and towns. In Mesopotamia, in contrast, hundreds of distinctive cultures and
      economies ﬂourished in the area from Anatolia to highland Iran and the Persian Gulf,
      although states centered in Mesopotamia repeatedly dominated these other cultures.23
           Daniel Miller sees a similar pattern of core-periphery relationships between the edge
      of the highlands bordering the Indus Plain and the plain itself. He notes that by 4000 b.c.
      communities all over what is now Pakistan traded in marine shells, lapis lazuli, and other
      goods; had a degree of overall planning evident in the architecture; and produced pottery
      in regional styles that may reﬂect competitive political entities.24
           Unfortunately, the ﬁrst critical steps toward complexity, in the form of growing
      differences in the size and socioeconomic and political power of some communities, are
      difﬁcult to document with settlement pattern data25 and other evidence. 26
           Miller observes that several regions on the Indus Plain and in eastern Iran at this time
      were “moving toward a greater degree of social complexity and urbanization,”27 although
      eventually the Indus Plain became the developmental center. And although some of the
      mature Harappan civilization can be found in these developments of the ﬁfth and fourth
      millennia b.c., the cultural changes that occurred as part of the Harappan civilization after
      about 2600 b.c. seem to have an indigenous and in some ways revolutionary character.28



      EARLY HARAPPAN CULTURE (C. 3200–2500 B.C.)

      As Possehl has noted,29 the emergence of Harappan civilization seems to have involved great
      continuity over thousands of years in such things as the production and use of items for
      basic subsistence, local trade, and personal decoration (such as chert knives, clay female
      ﬁgurines, and copper rings), but also considerable discontinuity in cultural trends: These
      discontinuities appear most pronounced in such things as degree of urbanism, social
      stratiﬁcation, and occupational specialization.
           These discontinuities—relatively abrupt changes in core aspects of these societies
      between about 3200 and 2600 b.c.—have been archaeologically exposed at only a few sites
      (e.g., Amri, Nausharo, and Harappa), but there are many other sites that date to this period.
      Possehl30 lists 463 sites of this period and notes that they do not seem to vary greatly in size

                                   THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN THE INDUS VALLEY        413


(and therefore, by inference, in population). Most are about 5 hectares in area, although
there are a few much larger communities in the 22- to 30-hectare range. As we noted in
chapter 8, one of the things archaeologists look at to infer changes in the sociopolitical
nature of a society is the degree of diversity in the population size of the communities in a
particular polity. States tend to have a wide range of communities of different sizes, ranging
from large cities to many tiny villages. But communities in areas that are not politically and
economically integrated and administered tend to be about the same size.
       There may have been only two general size groups, big cities and smaller towns and
villages,31 but overall, the population in the region appears to have more than tripled
between about 3200 and 2600 b.c. In addition, more remote areas, such as the Kuli complex
in Baluchistan, were brought into the Harappan cultural sphere. Between 3000 and 2400
b.c., settlements appeared at Kot Diji, Harappa, Kalibangan, and elsewhere, perhaps
founded by people moving in from the western highlands. The few excavated settlements
of this period reveal simple mudbrick houses in small villages scattered in areas where no
extensive irrigation would have been necessary. Some villages were walled, though there
was certainly no shortage of land or pressure on other resources at this time. These various
lowland settlements prior to 2600 b.c. show some stylistic uniformity and a great deal of
economic and architectural similarity, but they appear to have been economically and
politically independent and self-sufﬁcient and reﬂect none of the rigid planning typical of
later settlements here.
      When we look at the changes in the composition of these communities during this
same period of settlement pattern changes (i.e., between 3200 b.c. and 2600 b.c.), we see
some interesting developments. As noted in chapter 7, in every one of the world’s early
civilizations there was a gradual elaboration of “public,” often monumental, architecture,
in the form of pyramids, forts, temples, plazas, warehouses, municipal waterworks, and so
on. Given this, it is not surprising that until about 2600 b.c. few of the communities found
in the Harappan area have much evident public architecture. A few possible defensive walls
at Kot Diji and a few other sites have been found, but as Possehl notes, only 3 of the 463
known pre-urban sites of this formative period have walls around the community. Nor is
there much evidence of social stratiﬁcation, as would be indicated by elaborate tombs,
expensively constructed residences, and so forth. But after 2600 b.c. the major Harappan
cities are marked by large buildings, such as “citadels” and “warehouses,” and by differences
in residential structures that probably correlate with wealth and status.
      If we look for factors in the evolution of Harappan civilization, we ﬁnd the usual
correlates of early civilizations: an ecological setting that permitted relatively high
agricultural productivity with simple technology; a riverine system that facilitated transport
and command/control mechanisms; and a highly varied mix of cultures and natural
resources concentrated in a relatively small area by natural terrain features. But the
Harappan civilization may be one of the few cases where foreign trade was a powerful
stimulus to the development of this culture and many of its forms. Harappan communities
extracted minerals, metals, animal products, and many other commodities from the
surrounding foothills and mountains and circulated these not only through local and
regional trade, but also with Mesopotamian states via the sea lanes of the Persian Gulf
(Figure 10.4). The cities of Harappa, Mohenjo-daro, and Lothal, for example, seem to be
evenly spaced and optimally placed to exploit speciﬁc resources found in the areas around
them; they may have been “central places” (see chapter 7) in a commercial network of

                414          PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                                                               Fergana
Mediterranean
                                                                       Caspian
                                                                       Sea          Namazga Depe
Sea                                                                                                        Altyn Depe
                                  Mosul
       Belrut                                                                       Tureng Tepe
                  Damascus
                              MESOPOTAMIA                                 Tehran      Tepe Hissar
 Tel Aviv                                                       Humadan
                Amman                        Baghdad
                                                                                                                                      Kabul
                                 Knalajeh
                                      Kish                 Susa                               TURAN            Herat
                                                                                                                                              Peshawar
                                                 Al Hiba                  Isfahan
                                        Uruk                                                                     Mundigak
                                               Ur                                         Shahr-i Sokhta
                                                Basra                                     Shah Dad                Kill Ghul               Gumta
                                                                                                                Mohammad
                                                                                           Kerman                     Quetta                      Harappa
                                                                           Shiraz
                                                           Ar                                         Zahidan
                                                            ab
                                                              jan           Tepe Yahya
                                                                  Gu          Bandar Abbas
                                                                    lf
                                                                                                                                         MELUHHA
     Red
                                                                                           Bampur                Kulli
                                             DILMUN
      Sea                                        Rlyadh                                                        Sutkagen-dor    Karachl

                 Mecca
                                                                                                                                          Ahmedabad
                                                                           MAGAN                       Arabian Sea                           Lothal
                                                                                    Ras al Janayz                                        Rojdi



                                                                                                           0                   500

                                                                                                                  kilometers




                                                                                                                       modern city
                                                                                                                       ancient city



FIGURE 10.4 The Indus Valley region maintained trade contacts over a wide area of Middle Asia.


                             integrated local, regional, and foreign trade.32 Mesopotamian texts suggest that states in this
                             area regularly received commodities from far to the east, as well as from Magan and
                             Meluhha, two ports whose location is not certain but which may have been in the Indus
                             Valley. Gold, silver, copper, carnelian, lapis lazuli, ivory, oils, and many other commodities
                             probably ﬂowed west from the Indus to Mesopotamian towns, most of which were located
                             far from natural sources of these exotic goods. But the Mesopotamians could reciprocate
                             with cereals, leather, wool, and other products of their proliﬁc agricultural system. The
                             details of such trading patterns are poorly preserved in the archaeological record because
                             the foodstuffs would have been consumed, leaving no traces (not even pollen), while the
                             exotics, such as gold and precious stones, were fungible wealth: They could exchange hands
                             hundreds of times and be converted to many different kinds of wealth, obscuring their
                             original point of production and entry into the initial exchange network.
                                  In the contemporary world there are great “economies of scale” and other advantages
                             to international trade that are directly economic in impact. If individual nations concen-
                             trate on what they do best economically and exchange products in an integrated network,

                                     THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN THE INDUS VALLEY            415


great advantages accrue to all—at least according to classical economic theory. Modern
Japan and Singapore have few resources, but they have concentrated on highly efﬁcient
production of goods for export. In today’s world, oil from the Persian Gulf, fruit from
Central America, metals from Africa, ﬁnancial services from the United Kingdom, and tens
of thousands of other goods and services lock most of the world’s people into inter-
dependent economies that offer at least some beneﬁts to all, despite the exploitative labor
they stimulate and the destruction of rain forests and other environments that they cause
directly.
     But trade in the ancient world was not entirely the same thing. If the only transport
available is pack animals and primitive sailing ships, there is little advantage to shipping
dates from the Indus Valley to the Tigris-Euphrates Valley. Nor does it make much sense
to move pottery from Egyptian kilns to Mohenjo-daro. The pattern of trade we infer
between Harappan and Mesopotamian civilizations included some useful functional items,
but much was in the form of exotics such as gold, whose most direct use was in reinforcing
and elaborating the social distinctions between elites and commoners. One cannot consider
these exotics to be functionally worthless on this account, however, because class-
stratiﬁcation seems to have been a basic functional element in constructing the competitive
expansionist societies that all early states were.
     Trade may have been an important stimulus to the rise of Harappan civilization, but
Harappan civilization seems to have “taken off ” at a time when there is some evidence (in
the form of burned buildings) of regional warfare.33



MATURE HARAPPAN CIVILIZATION (C. 2500–1900 B.C.)

The appearance of large cities shortly after 2600 b.c., and the associated spread of a
distinctive constellation of artifacts and architectural styles over much of the Indus Valley,
marked the emergence of Harappan civilization. This system survived only about 600 years,
but managed to integrate much of the Indus Plain in a cultural unit.
     In the Indus area the sites that date to the Mature Harappan period (after about
2600 b.c.) include three relatively huge communities (c. 80–85 hectares). These cities—
Mohenjo-daro, Harappa, and Ganwariwala—are evenly spaced, as we would expect on the
basis of locational theory of state-level settlement patterns (see chapter 7), but there are
also clusters of sites in other size categories. Whether or not these corresponded to the
traditional sense of terms like capital, regional capital, provincial center, town, village, hamlet,
and so on is unclear. More than 800 Mature Harappan sites are known, and these are spread
over an area that at 1.25 million km2 is larger than the ﬁrst Egyptian state and the total area
of Sumer, Akkad, and Assyria.34
     Miller notes that Harappan civilization is not really a strictly riverine civilization,
for Harappan settlements are found in many ecological zones, and only after the main
Harappan developments were well underway did settlements begin to cluster along the
river. Most research on Indus sites has been devoted to the largest settlements, especially
Mohenjo-daro, Harappa, Chanhu-daro, Pathiani Kot, Judeirjo-daro, Kalibangan, and Lothal.
Doubtless many smaller Harappan settlements are buried beneath silt or have been washed
away by ﬂoods.

           416       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                         The largest Harappan
                                                                                    settlement, Mohenjo-daro
                                                                                    (Figure 10.5), covers at least
                                                                                    2.5 km 2 and may have had
                                                                                    40,000 inhabitants. M. Jansen
                                                                                    has argued that Mohenjo-daro
                                                                                    was not so regularly constructed
                                                                                    as archaeologists once thought,
                                                                                    and that only the central
                                                                                    “platform mound” area (about
                                                                                    100 hectares) 35 of the city
                                                                                    was planned—although there
                                                                                    were many more hectares of
                                                                                    suburban unplanned residen-
                                                                                    tial areas around the main
                                                                                    city center. Compared to
                                                                                    the jumbled anarchy of most
                                                                                    Mesopotamian city plans,
                                                                                    however, Mohenjo-daro was
FIGURE 10.5 Some elements of the “Citadel” at Mohenjo-daro are evident in           quite orderly.36 M. A. Fentress
this photograph (the large circular Buddhist shrine in the background was built     has questioned the overall
many centuries after Mohenjo-daro was abandoned).
                                                                                    similarity of Mohenjo-daro
                                                                                    and Harappa, but here too, by
                      Mesopotamian standards, these settlements are quite similar.37 Miller, in fact, notes that
                      even tiny Harappan hamlets seemed to try to emulate the grid pattern and other designs of
                      the major Harappan metropolises.38
                           Mohenjo-daro was bisected by a north-south street some 9 m wide that was ﬂanked
                      by drainage ditches. Public toilets and sewers and bathrooms in houses were connected to
                      the main sewage lines. Most residences were made of ﬁred brick, comprising several rooms
                      arranged around an open courtyard, and the majority appear to have had private showers
                      and toilets drained by municipal sewage systems. Some houses were two stories high and
                      larger and more elaborate than others, but the overall impression is one of uniformity. In
                      fact, A. Sarcina found that almost all houses at Mohenjo-daro were of two basic patterns:
                      those having a courtyard at one corner that was ﬂanked by rooms on two sides, or those
                      with a courtyard in the center and rooms on three sides.39 Also, almost all the houses were
                      of the same approximate size and construction: 77 percent of the buildings seem to have
                      been ordinary houses, while the rest were small shops and businesses distributed
                      throughout the living areas.40 If gross differences in wealth divided the inhabitants, these
                      inequities are not reﬂected in residential architecture, at least not to the extent that they
                      were in Mesopotamia.
                           At Mohenjo-daro and some other large sites, such as Harappa, the carefully arranged
                      residential areas were ﬂanked on the west by a large raised mound with a wall around it.
                      This mound (sometimes called a citadel or Mound of the Great Bath) is about 150 m to the
                      north of the area of settlement known as the Lower Town. These residential areas appear
                      to have been adjacent to areas that were devoid of any settlement and perhaps were
                      regularly ﬂooded by a branch of the river. It has even been suggested that this ﬂooding

                                   THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN THE INDUS VALLEY        417


may have been deliberate, to create a pool of water for bathing, ﬁshing, or some other
activity.
     One of the most interesting structures on the high mound itself is the Great Bath, a
swimming-pool-like building about 12-by-7 m and 2.5 m in depth with a sunken enclosure,
constructed of baked brick and lined with bitumen. Flanking the pool are what appear to
have been dressing rooms, carefully staggered to give maximum privacy.41 The Great Bath
may have ﬁgured in some religious activities, but it contained no obvious icons or other
religious elements and may have been mainly just a public bathing facility.
     Adjacent to the bath are various mudbrick platforms and rooms, variously—and
imaginatively—interpreted as granaries, assembly halls, and garrisons, but there is little
evidence with which to infer their functions. Overall, the Mound of the Great Bath was
about 450 m long and 90 m wide at its maximum extent—representing a major investment
of labor and materials. Thus, while there is nothing at Mohenjo-daro or any other Indus
city to compare with the Egyptian pyramids or the White Temple at Uruk, the Indus city-
dwellers nonetheless diverted considerable energy and resources to building projects. The
major difference seems to have been that, in contrast to the largely ceremonial public
architecture in Mesopotamia and Egypt, the Indus Valley constructions provided some
return in the way of administrative buildings, better defenses, and more storage space.
     There is at least a possibility that Harappan civilization was “cut off ” in the midst of
its development by invasion, ﬂood, interrupted trade routes, or some other factor, and that
more “wasteful” monumental architecture might eventually have appeared in the Indus
cities had they been allowed to develop for a longer period. The absence of easily accessible
building stone may also account for the comparatively utilitarian and drab Harappan
monumental architecture—although such limitations did not hamper Mesopotamian
monumental building efforts (see chapter 8).
     The thousands of people who lived at Mohenjo-daro included many craftsmen, such
as goldsmiths, potters, weavers, brick masons, architects, and many other specialists,
and streets were lined with stores and shops. Cereals—particularly barley, but also wheat—
were the basis of the economy, supplemented by dates, melons, sesame, peas, mustard,
and other crops. Cattle, sheep, goats, pigs, and domestic fowl were the major animal foods,
and buffaloes, camels, asses, dogs, and cats were also kept. A few elephant bones have even
been found. The horse apparently was rarely used until the very end of the Harappan
period.
     Most of the larger Harappan settlements were similar to Mohenjo-daro in architecture
and economy, but the site of Lothal, although only about 250–300 m in size, shows an
impressive complexity for a relatively small settlement42 (Figure 10.6). A large tank, which
the excavator, S. R. Rao, and others have interpreted as a dock,43 may not be44—its function
is unclear. There was a factory for making beads from carnelian, crystal, jasper, and other
stones and facilities for making ornaments out of bronze, elephant tusks, and many other
commodities. Possehl sees in Lothal’s precise layout and concentrations of exotic
commodities an entrepôt, a frontier settlement of entrepreneurs who were processing raw
materials from the hinterlands and sending products on to the great Harappan cities. He
also notes that Harappan urbanites and hunter-gatherers probably not only coexisted, they
were likely continually trading products, with such things as copper knives, pottery, and
steatite beads from Harappan communities, while hunter-gatherers supplied stone, meat,
beeswax, wood, charcoal, string, rope, reeds, and so on.45

418   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                            Lothal: Mature Harappan Town

                                                                 Ancie
                                                                         nt
                                                                                    Nulla
                                                                                          h
                                                                         kiln       metal
                                                                                    working




                 Cemetery
                                                                                    Lower Town
                                                                                    Habitation
                                             Lower Town                 street                                                               N
                                                               kiln
                                                                                                                               sure
                            Bead Factory
                                                                                       drain




                                                                                                       P l a t f o r m   Brick Lined Enclo
                                            Industrial Area

                                                      street
                                                                                 Acropolis
                                             kiln


                            Site Boundary
                                            street


       River                                                           bathing platforms


                                                                                         Warehouse




       Ancient
                                                                                                     Well
                                                                                 Site Boundary
                                             Entrance


                       0                                         100

                                             meters




      FIGURE 10.6 A plan map of the settlement at Lothal, India.


           We know little about the smaller Harappan settlements. The few that have been
      examined seem to have brick walls around a district within the site, perhaps in imitation
      of the citadels at the larger cities, and the basic arts and crafts and subsistence practices also
      appear to have been patterned after those of the larger cities.
           Relatively few Harappan cemeteries have been found, but the bodies so far excavated were
      buried with far fewer evidences of social differentiation than in Mesopotamia and Egypt.46

                                    THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN THE INDUS VALLEY           419


      Harappan settlements, with their precisely administered character, would seem to be
excellent subjects for the systematic analysis of settlement patterns. Such an analysis might
help archaeologists discern the economic and political forces that dictated where people
lived, but generally, archaeologists have not competed with each other for a chance to do
systematic surveys on the intensely hot, heavily populated Indus Plain.
      Scholars have debated whether Harappan civilization was a chiefdom, state, or empire.
As is discussed at length in chapter 7, such debates are usually unresolvable because few
people agree on what these political types are, and what kinds of archaeological evidence
reﬂect them. What we do know of Indus settlement patterns suggests at least four different
size categories (see chapter 7), comparable to, for example, those of Mesopotamia in the
third millennium b.c. If we consider three or more administrative levels to be evidence of
state-level political organization, then the Harappan civilization was certainly a state.
      If we discard political typologies and concentrate on things we can measure archae-
ologically, such as the size of the area over which we ﬁnd similar artifact styles, or differences
in the sizes of communities that existed at the same time, or the existence of a script, or a
standardized system of weights and measures, and so forth, the evidence from Harappa
civilization might be best interpreted within the context of the rise of urbanism or perhaps
as a reﬂection of the power of ideology.47 In fact, the Harappan population at the begin-
ning of the second millennium b.c. probably totaled at least 200,000 people, and the tightly
organized fabric of their lives suggests perhaps an empire-like political system, but we
may never know how complex the socioeconomic and political institutions of this culture
were.


The Indus Script and Weights and Measures
The similarity of Harappan cities, towns, and villages probably reﬂects a nation in which
various settlements were in regular and diverse communication with each other. Clay and
metal models of wheeled carts and river boats are the only artifacts remaining of a
transportation system that once probably moved large quantities of ﬂint tools, pots, and
other artifacts, some mass-produced at a few locations. The considerable degree of
occupational specialization evident in these artifacts suggests intensive local trade, but there
is a strong possibility that this was a kind of administered, noncapitalistic redistribution,
rather than a free-enterprise or peasant marketing system. One possible key to the
Harappan economic system is the hundreds of Harappan stamps and seals (Figure 10.7)
that have been found; these may have been used to denote ownership or make records of
transactions. The apparently ritual scenes depicted in so many of these might argue against
this interpretation, but the question will remain unresolved as long as the Harappan script
is undeciphered.
     Much of Harappan writing is in the form of inscriptions on these stamp seals. Many
other documents could have been written on palm leaves or some other long-since decayed
medium. The estimated number of unique symbols is between 350 and 425, which means
that the writing is almost certainly not alphabetic: Alphabetic languages use one symbol for
each unique sound in the spoken language, and no known language has more than about
50 alphabetic characters. Since the Indus script contains about 400 unique characters, it is
probably made up of symbols indicating syllables in the spoken language, plus some
determinatives and other marks to aid interpretation.

420   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY




      FIGURE 10.7 Harappan seals were inscribed with many different symbols in complex
      arrangements, suggesting a form of written language, but this language has not yet been deciphered.




           Parpola48 used a computer analysis to try to ﬁnd a language that ﬁt the apparent
      structure of the Indus script, but he concluded that it is not related to any known writing
      system. One of the Indus languages may have been Dravidian, from southern India, but no
      links have been conclusively demonstrated. Various scholars have suggested that the
      ancient Indus language was part of a group that extended from the Elamite-speakers of Iran
      into northern India, and that the Indus script represents this language family—not
      Dravidian itself.
           If other early scripts are any guide, the majority of these Indus documents and those
      that presumably have been lost may have had to do with such mundane matters as Farmer
      A selling 18 cows to Farmer B and paying the appropriate taxes; others may include a ritual
      prayer or blessing on the ruler, followed by some record of events and transactions of
      ordinary daily life. Computers now hum away, trying to ﬁnd patterns of co-occurrence
      among the 400 Indus symbols, and some day we may have a clear sense of what they mean.

                                   THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN THE INDUS VALLEY        421


But the texts are so few and the characters so stylized that it will not be easy to decipher
them.
     The most common form49 of Indus writing was on intaglio seals (i.e., an engraving on
stone or some other hard material so that when clay or some soft material is impressed with
it the engraved elements appear in shallow relief ). Impressions of seals have been found on
pottery, lumps of wet clay, and other materials. The script also appears as grafﬁti, scratched
or painted on clay surfaces. Examination of these reveals that the script was often written
from right to left, and from top to bottom, but in some longer inscriptions the lines are
boustrophedonic, meaning that the lines alternated (i.e., ﬁrst line from right to left, second
line from left to right, and so on). Most inscriptions are short, containing just ﬁve or six
signs—far fewer elements than most Egyptian or Mesopotamia documents.
     Archaeologists have tried to correlate the locations where these seals were found with
some notions of their use, but they seem to be distributed throughout the communities in
which they were used. George Dales and Mark Kenoyer50 have recently suggested that the
spatial distribution of the seals may suggest that the people who used them were restricted
to certain areas, such as along main streets and access routes.
     Unlike Mesopotamian writing, there is no evidence that Harappan writing evolved out
of the gradual elaboration of a simpler system. This writing seems to have appeared rapidly
and in full form—something like the ancient written Egyptian language. This might suggest
that the idea of writing was introduced from western Asian cultures and adapted to local
styles, but there are no clear similarities between the Indus script and others. Also, as with
ancient written Egyptian, we do not know whether the “suddenness” of the appearance of
the Indus script is simply a result of archaeological biases: Early forms of these languages
may have been written on materials that did not preserve or on materials that have not been
found in sufﬁcient numbers to trace the origins of these languages.
     The writing system was complemented by a standardized system of weights and
measures. Small, precisely cut pieces of chert in both binary and decimal arrangements were
used as counterweights in balances, and several measuring sticks marked off in units of
about 33.5 cm have been found; apparently this unit was the common measurement of
length, much like the English foot, for many of the buildings are precisely constructed to
this scale.51
     The writing, seals, and weights suggest substantial interregional—perhaps international
—trade, and we have some reports of Harappan colonies as far away as Afghanistan and
Oman.52 But as Miller claims, “It can, however, by now be asserted that there is a remarkable
lack of evidence for external trade in Harappan material.”53 Harappan peoples may have
traded principally in raw materials rather than the ﬁnished goods that would allow
identiﬁcation of trade patterns, but the overall evidence of foreign trade is slight when
compared with Mesopotamia at the same period of development.
     The Harappan art and religious architecture so far discovered seem less varied,
complex, and beautiful than that of the same period in Mesopotamia, but they have a
certain affecting quality (Figure 10.8). The most popular art was in the form of terra cotta
ﬁgurines, the majority of which were standing females, heavily adorned with jewelry.
For reasons that will probably forever remain unclear, the Harappan people simply did
not produce large amounts of “art” in the form of sculpture, ﬁgurines, paintings, or even
bodily adornment—or at least few such things have been preserved into our own time (Fig-
ure 10.9).

           422       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                  THE DECLINE
                                                                                  OF HARAPPAN
                                                                                  CIVILIZATION
                                                                                  (C. 1900–1000 B.C.)

                                                                                  As we have noted, most civil-
                                                                                  izations do not die the same
                                                                                  way that biological organisms
                                                                                  do. Civilizations are transmuted
                                                                                  by time and circumstance so
                                                                                  that they change, but usually
                                                                                  complexes of their constituent
                                                                                  elements live on for millennia
                                                                                  in languages, art, and other
                                                                                  forms.
                                                                                       The Harappan civilization
                                                                                  is part of the cultural stream
                                                                                  that connects even the present-
                                                                                  day inhabitants of the Indus
FIGURE 10.8 This Harappan toy cart is one of the earliest known models of         to their long and complex
wheeled vehicles.                                                                 ancestry, but archaeologists
                                                                                  have long wondered if the
                                                                                  Indus might really be that rare
                  civilization that, rather than being transformed, was obliterated, perhaps by ﬂood, drought,
                  invasion, or some other calamity. The principal archaeological evidences relating to the
                  demise of Harappan civilization are (1) the increasing heterogeneity of pottery and other
                  artifact styles within the same area that in earlier centuries had been so uniform stylistically;
                  (2) the “degradation” of art and architecture toward the end of the Harappan period—
                  which has led some imaginative scholars to suppose that the Harappans had lost their sense
                  of central unity and purpose; and (3) the discovery of about a score of human skeletons
                  “sprawled” in the streets and buildings of Mohenjo-daro (Figure 10.10), thought by some
                  to be perhaps the aftermath of an invasion.
                        Hydrologist Robert Raikes suggests that Harappan civilization was terminated by
                  destruction of their ﬁelds and settlements as a result of ﬂoods brought on by major shifts
                  of the earth’s crust near the mouth of the Indus River.54 Raikes notes the lack of settlements
                  in the area near the mouth of the river and points out that the fossil beaches are many miles
                  inland from the present coast. This is what one would expect if the river’s route to the sea
                  were blocked by an uplift of land near the mouth, since water would have been backed up
                  into a large lake that eventually could have inundated the Harappan area. Other viable
                  geological explanations include Flam’s work on the shift in the course of the Sindhu Nadi
                  which may have placed major Harappan cities more directly in the pathway of extensive
                  and damaging annual ﬂoods.55
                        Alternatively, Possehl notes that several strains of domesticated African millet were
                  introduced to South Asia at about the time of the Harappan decline. He suggests that
                  these domesticates were better suited to areas south of the Harappan homeland and

                                THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN THE INDUS VALLEY      423


that populations might have thus shifted to those
areas.56
     B. K. Thapar57 sees the demise of Harappa in a
destructive combination of several factors, includ-
ing (1) tectonic movements that made the Indus and
other rivers in this area prone to shifting courses and
ﬂooding at destructive levels; (2) wholesale destruc-
tion of forests and overgrazing in the Himalayan
foothills that led to erosion and subsequent changes
in stream courses as these channels built up their
beds with silt; and (3) tectonic movements and
marine regressions that stranded major ports several
kilometers inland and lowered the water table in
many areas.
     A more romantic suggestion is that the
Harappan civilization was destroyed by repeated
invasions of semi-nomadic peoples coming out of
Central Asia and Iran. The Rig Veda, the oldest
surviving Vedic Sanskrit text, describes the conquest
of the dark-skinned natives of the Indus Plain by
lighter-skinned Aryan invaders, and the Harappans
have traditionally been associated with the former.
The translation of Sanskrit literature, ﬁrst accom-
plished in the sixteenth century, revealed major
similarities between Sanskrit, Greek, and European
and Central Asian language families. These sim-
ilarities were eventually traced to origins in the
Caucasus Mountains of southern Russia and
adjacent areas and associated with tall, long-headed,    FIGURE 10.9 This lovely bronze ﬁgure from Mohenjo-
ﬁerce peoples collectively referred to as Aryans or      daro is one of the few examples of Harappan art.
Indo-Europeans. Some believe that shortly after
1900 b.c., these peoples apparently invaded and inﬂuenced the cultures of India, Central
Asia, Western Asia, and Europe.
     Bronze weapons and other artifacts traditionally associated with the Indo-Europeans
have been found in the upper levels of some Harappan sites, and some scholars have
identiﬁed these with the invaders referred to in the Rig Veda. It is difﬁcult to substantiate
these invasions, and many now believe that such invasions are either at most only a minor
part of the Harappan collapse or were simply migrations spread out over many millennia
and in the absence of major armed conﬂict.58 Kennedy speciﬁcally rejects the notion that
the bodies Sir Mortimer Wheeler found at Mohenjo-daro were massacred.59
     Overall, there may have been a gradual shift of power away from the Harappan
heartland to peripheral groups in the south and east, where the evolutionary potential may
have been higher because of the emergence there of rice or millet agriculture. Political and
cultural inﬂuence may well have gravitated to those areas outside the primarily wheat-
growing regions of the Harappan sphere of inﬂuence.60 Colin Renfrew has challenged the
old notion of Indo-European invaders who sacked the Indus civilizations and suspects that

           424       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                        the people of the Indus Plain
                                                                                        were already Indo-European
                                                                                        speakers.61 Rather than a viol-
                                                                                        ent spread of Indo-European
                                                                                        storm-troopers, there may well
                                                                                        have been a spread of the Indo-
                                                                                        European languages, along
                                                                                        with elements of crops and
                                                                                        agriculture.
                                                                                             The end of Harappan
                                                                                        civilization was probably a
                                                                                        result of many factors. Con-
                                                                                        tinued pressure from peripheral
                                                                                        groups, the altering courses of
                                                                                        the Indus River and the drying
                                                                                        up of other rivers as their
                                                                                        courses and sources changed,
FIGURE 10.10 These skeletons found lying in a public area of Mohenjo-daro               droughts, ﬂoods, earthquakes
were interpreted by some as evidence of an invasion, but there is little proof of this. —all may have contributed to
                                                                                        the gradual abandonment of
                                                                                        Harappan centers.
                            After the Harappan downfall, many diverse cultures appeared throughout India and
                      Pakistan, ranging from hunters and gatherers to highly sophisticated urban-based
                      civilizations. The centers of power and inﬂuence gradually shifted from the Indus Valley to
                      the great Ganges River Valley where, after about 1100 b.c., large cities were built and state-
                      level political systems were formed. Many Harappan elements appeared in these later
                      societies, including aspects of metallurgy, architecture, pottery styles, and agriculture.


                     SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

                     Scholars dispute general interpretations of the Indus culture history. Some stress the
                     ecological, demographic, and technological bases of life on the Indus Plain,62 while others
                     emphasize sociopolitical factors.63
                           It is difﬁcult to see an obvious equation between the simple ecological circumstances
                     of life on the ancient Indus Plain and the differences that distinguish Harappan settlements
                     from those in Mesopotamia or Egypt. The planning and execution of Harappan settlements
                     bespeak a powerful centralized authority, perhaps rivaling that of ancient Egypt, but there
                     is no evidence in Harappa of the great tombs, palaces, and pyramids that accompanied
                     theocratic states in Egypt and elsewhere.64
                           Because of its brevity, lack of monumental architecture, and absence of obvious wealth
                     differential and militarism, the Harappan civilization, some have argued, was not a true
                     state, merely a chiefdom.65 But as Jacobson notes, recent discoveries cast doubt on this
                     interpretation.66 Settlement pattern studies show considerable variation in the sizes of
                     communities and rates of population growth that are consistent with changes to state-level
                     societies.67 The Harappan civilization also featured a form of writing that, even if not

                                    THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN THE INDUS VALLEY          425


developed, may have conveyed a great deal of administrative and economic information—
should we be able to decipher it someday—and recent excavations show a degree of military
fortiﬁcation and economic stratiﬁcation not previously suspected.
     Shaffer concludes that in some ways the analytical models applied to Mesopotamia and
other early states are not really applicable to Harappan culture.68 He notes, for example,
that compared to Mesopotamia, the Harappan culture did not seem to exhibit the same
degree of cyclical rise and fall of state governments, and that in the Indus Valley, a
technologically advanced, urban, literate culture was achieved without the usually
associated social organization based on hereditary elites, centralized political government
(states, empires), and warfare.69
     Kenoyer suggests that
    the Indus state was composed of several competing classes of elites who maintained
    different levels of control over the vast region of the Indus and Ghaggar-Hakra Valley.
    Instead of one social group with absolute control, the rulers or dominant members in the
    various cities would have included merchants, ritual specialists, and individuals who
    controlled resources. . . . These groups may have had different means of control, but they
    shared a common ideology and economic system. . . . This ideology would have been
    shared by occupational specialists and service communities, who appear to have been
    organized in loosely stratiﬁed groups.”70
Long-distance trade, particularly the ﬂow of goods from the Indus Valley to Mesopotamia,
has frequently been suggested as a key factor in the development—and decline—of
Harappan civilization. Harappan seals and seal impressions have been found in limited
quantities in Mesopotamia and along the Persian Gulf, and there clearly was some
commerce between these areas, perhaps by way of ships sailing along the coast and caravans
traversing the Iranian Plateau. Exactly which commodities would have been shipped from
the Indus Valley westward is unknown, although steatite and a few kinds of semi-precious
stones and other minerals would have been likely trade items. Commerce appears to have
been very one-sided, however, with little going from Southwest Asia to the Indus area, and
this has suggested to some that Harappan civilization may have been established and
maintained mainly by Mesopotamian or Iranian states. Indeed, some Mesopotamian
elements exist in the Indus cultures—carved stone boxes, dice, faience, wheeled vehicles,
shaft-hole axes, religious art motifs, and the “ram-style” sculptural motif. But taken as a
whole, long-distance trade seems to have had little importance in the evolution of cultural
complexity in the Indus Valley. The volume of product exchange was very low and mainly
in luxury items, and the movement of goods appears to have been accomplished through
intermediaries in the Iranian Plateau, rather than through deliberate and directly
administered trade between Harappans and Mesopotamians.
     As in the case of Egypt and Mesopotamia, rates of population growth in the Indus
Valley appear to have been slow, and there is no evidence of pressure on the agricultural
systems until long after the Harappan civilization had collapsed.
     So in the case of the Indus civilizations we again see the divergence in modern
archaeological interpretation. For some, the ecological, technological, and demographic
factors are primary, and interpretations are limited quite closely to aspects of
administration, class differences, trade, and other aspects of the society that can be related
directly to artifacts. But others consider such analyses to be limited, and they stress, instead,
the ideological elements that determine a society.

426   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      BIBLIOGRAPHY
      Adams, R. McC. 1979. “The Natural History of Urbanism.” In Ancient Cities of the Indus, ed. G. L. Possehl. New
                   Delhi: Vikas Publishing House.
      Agrawal, D. P. 1971. The Copper Bronze Age in India. New Delhi: Manoharlal.
      ———. 1982. The Archaeology of India. Guildford: Curzon Press.
      ———. 1984. “Metal Technology of the Harappans.” In Frontiers of the Indus Civilization, ed. B. B. Lal and
                   S. P. Gupta. New Delhi: Books and Books.
      Agrawal, D. P., and S. D. Kusumgar. 1974. Prehistoric Chronology and Radiocarbon Dating in India. New Delhi:
                   Manoharlal.
      Allchin, F. R. 1960. Piklihal Excavations. Hyderabad, India: Government of Andhra Pradesh.
      ———. 1961. Utnur Excavations. Hyderabad, India: Government of Andhra Pradesh.
      ———. 1963. Neolithic Cattle-Keepers of South India. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
      ———. 1968. “Early Domesticated Animals in India and Pakistan.” In Man, Settlement and Urbanism, ed.
                   P. J. Ucko, R. Tringham, and G. W. Dimbleby. London: Duckworth.
      ———. 1969. “Early Cultivated Plants in India and Pakistan.” In The Domestication and Explanation of Plants and
                   Animals, ed. P. J. Ucko and G. W. Dimbleby. London: Duckworth.
      ———. 1974. “India from the Late Stone Age to the Decline of Indus Civilization.” Encyclopaedia Britannica
                   9:336 –348.
      ———. 1989. “City and State Formation in Early Historic South Asia.” South Asian Studies 5:1–16.
      Allchin, B., and F. R. Allchin. 1968. The Birth of Indian Civilization. Baltimore: Penguin.
      ———. 1983. The Rise of Civilization in India and Pakistan. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
      Allchin, F. R., and D. K. Chakrabarti, eds. 1979. A Source Book of Indian Archaeology, Vol. 1. New Delhi:
                   Munshirman Maroliarlal.
      Bhan, K. K. 1989. “Late Harappan Settlements of Western India, with Speciﬁc Reference to Gujurat.” In Old
                   Problems and New Perspectives in the Archaeology of South Asia, ed. J. M. Kenoyer. Madison: Wisconsin
                   Archaeological Reports, Vol. 2.
      Bisht, R. S. 1984. “Structural Remains and Town Planning of Banawali.” In Frontiers of the Indus Civilization, ed.
                   B. B. Lal and S. P. Gupta. New Delhi: Books and Books.
      Buchanan, B. “A Dated Seal Impression Connecting Babylonia and Ancient India.” In Ancient Cities of the Indus,
                   ed. G. L. Possehl. New Delhi: Vikas Publishing House.
      Chakrabarti, D. K. 1984. “Origins of the Indus Civilization: Theories and Problems.” In Frontiers of the Indus
                   Civilization, ed. B. B. Lal and S. P. Gupta. New Delhi: Indian Archaeological Society.
      Childe, V. G. 1953. New Light on the Most Ancient East. New York: Praeger.
      ———. 1979. “The Urban Revolution.” In Ancient Cities of the Indus, ed. G. L. Possehl. New Delhi: Vikas
                   Publishing House.
      Cunningham, A. 1979. “Harappa.” In Ancient Cities of the Indus, ed. G. L. Possehl. New Delhi: Vikas Publishing
                   House.
      Dales, G. F. 1964. “The Mythical Massacre at Mohenjo Daro.” Expedition 6(3):36 – 43.
      ———. 1965. “New Investigations at Mohenjo Daro.” Archaeology 18(2):145 –150.
      ———. 1966. “The Decline of the Harappans.” Scientiﬁc American 214(5):93 –100.
      ———. 1968. “Of Dice and Men.” Journal of the American Oriental Society 88(1):14 –23.
      ———. 1979. “The Balakot Project: Summary of Four Years of Excavations in Pakistan.” In South Asian
                   Archaeology 1977, ed. M. Taddei. Naples: Instituto Universitario Orientale.
      Dales, G. F., and J. M. Kenoyer. 1990. “Excavation at Harappa—1988.” Pakistan Archaeology 24:68 –176.
      Durante, S. 1979. “Marine Shells from Balakot, Shahr-i Sokhta and Tepe Yahya: Their Signiﬁcance for Trade and
                   Technology in Ancient Indo-Iran.” In South Asian Archaeology 1977, ed. M. Taddei. Naples: Instituto
                   Universitario Orientale.
      During-Caspers, E. L. C. 1984. “Sumerian Trading Communities Residing in Harappan Society.” In Frontiers of
                   the Indus Civilization, ed. B. B. Lal and S. P. Gupta. New Delhi: Books and Books.
      Dyson, R. H. 1982. “Paradigm Changes in the Study of the Indus Civilization.” In Harappan Civilization: A
                   Contemporary Perspective, ed. G. L. Possehl. New Delhi: AIIS.
      Fairservis, W. A., Jr. 1956. Excavations in the Quetta Valley, West Pakistan. NY: Anthropological Papers of the
                   American Museum of Natural History 45(2).
      ———. 1967. “The Origin, Character and Decline of an Early Civilization.” Novitates 2302:1– 48.
      ———. 1975. The Roots of Ancient India. 2nd ed. rev. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
      ———. 1984. “Archaeology in Blauchistan and the Harappan Problem.” In Frontiers of the Indus Civilization, ed.
                   B. B. Lal and S. P. Gupta. New Delhi: Books and Books.
      Fairservis, W. A., and F. C. Southworth. 1989. “Linguistic Archaeology and the Indus Valley Culture.” In Old
                   Problems and New Perspectives in the Archaeology of South Asia, ed. J. M. Kenoyer. Madison: Wisconsin
                   Archaeological Reports, Vol. 2.

                                           THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN THE INDUS VALLEY                       427


Fentress, M. A. 1976. Resource Access, Exchange Systems and Regional Interaction in the Indus Valley: An
             Investigation of Archaeological Variability at Harappa and Mohenjodaro. Ann Arbor: University
             Microﬁlms.
———. 1979. “Indus Charms and Urns, a Look at the Religious Diversity at Harappa and Mohenjodaro.” Man
             and Environment 3:9 –104.
———. 1985. “Water Resources and Double Cropping in Harappan Food Production.” In Recent Advances in
             Indo-Paciﬁc Prehistory, ed. V. N. Misra and P. Bellwood. New Delhi: Oxford and IBH.
Flam, L. 1991. “Excavations at Ghazi Shah, Sindh, Pakistan.” In Harappan Civilization: A Contemporary
             Perspective, 2nd ed., ed. G. L. Possehl. New Delhi: Oxford and IBH.
———. 1999. “The Prehistoric Indus River System and the Indus Civilization in Sindh.” Man and Environment
             24(2):35–69.
Frankfort, H.-P., and M.-H. Pottier. 1978. “Sondage Preliminaire sur l’Establissement Protohistorique Harapeen
             et Post-Harapeen de Shortugai.” Ars Asiatique 34:29 – 86.
Gadd, C. J. 1979. “Seals of Ancient Indian Style Found at Ur.” In Ancient Cities of the Indus, ed. G. L. Possehl. New
             Delhi: Vikas Publishing House.
Gadd, C. J., and S. Smith. 1979. “The New Links Between Indian and Babylonian Civilization.” In Ancient Cities
             of the Indus, ed. G. L. Possehl. New Delhi: Vikas Publishing House.
Gupta, S. P. 1978. Archaeology of Soviet Central Asia and the Indian Borderlands, Vol. 1. New Delhi: B. R. Publishing
             Co.
Jacobson, J. 1979. “Recent Developments in South Asian Prehistory and Protohistory.” Annual Review of
             Anthropology 8:467–502.
Jansen, M. 1979. “Architectural Problems of the Harappa Culture.” In South Asian Archaeology 1977, ed.
             M. Taddei. Naples: Instituto Universitario Orientale.
———. 1981. “Settlement Patterns in the Harappa Culture.” In South Asian Archaeology 1979, ed. H. Hartel.
             Berlin: Dietrich Reimer.
———. 1987. “Mohenjo-Daro—Stadt am Indus.” In Vergessen Städt am Indus, ed. M. Jansen and G. Urban.
             Mainz am Rhein: Phillip von Zabern.
Jarrige, J. F. 1981. “Economy and Society in the Early Chalcolithic/Bronze Age of Baluchistan.” In South Asian
             Archaeology 1979. Berlin: Dietrich Reiner.
———. 1984. “Chronology of the Early Period of the Greater Indus as Seen from Mehrgarh, Pakistan.” In South
             Asian Archaeology 1981, ed. B. Allchin. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Jarrige, J. F., and M. Lechevaleier. 1979. “Excavations at Mehrgarh, Baluchistan: Their Signiﬁcance in
             the Prehistorical Context of the Indo-Pakistan Borderlands.” In South Asian Archaeology 1977, ed.
             M. Taddei. Naples: Instituto Universitario Orientale.
Jarrige, J. F., and R. H. Meadow. 1980. “The Antecedents of Civilization in the Indus Valley.” Scientiﬁc American
             243(2):122–133.
Johnson, G. A. 1973. Local Exchange and Early State Development in Southwestern Iran. Ann Arbor: Museum of
             Anthropology, Anthropological Papers, University of Michigan, No. 51.
Joshi, J. P., and M. Bala. 1981. “Manda: A Harappan Site in Jammu and Kashmir.” In Harappan Civilization: A
             Contemporary Perspective, ed. G. L. Possehl. New Delhi: Oxford and IBH.
Kelly, D. H., and B. Wells. 1995. “Recent Progress in Understanding the Indus Script.” The Review of Archaeology
             16(1):15–23.
Kennedy, K. 1982. “Skulls, Aryans and Flowing Drains: The Interface of Archaeology and Skeletal Biology in the
             Study of the Harappan Civilisation.” In Harappan Civilization, ed. G. Possehl. Warminster, England:
             Aris & Phillips.
———. 1984. “Trauma and Disease in the Ancient Harappans.” In Frontiers of the Indus Civilization, ed. B. B. Lal
             and S. P. Gupta. New Delhi: Books and Books.
Kennedy, K., and G. L. Possehl, eds. 1976. Ecological Backgrounds of South Asian Prehistory. South Asia Occasional
             Papers and Theses, No. 4. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University South Asia Program.
Kenoyer, J. M. 1991. “The Indus Valley Tradition of Pakistan and Western India.” Journal of World Prehistory
             5(4):331–385.
———. 1998. Ancient Cities of the Indus Valley Civilization. New York: Oxford University Press.
Kohl, P. L. 1979. “The ‘World Economy’ of West Asia in the Third Millennium b.c.” In South Asian Archaeology
             1977, ed. M. Taddei. Naples: Instituto Universitario Orientale.
———. 1987. “State Formation: Useful Concept or Idée Fixe?” In Power Relations and State Formation, ed. T. C.
             Patterson and C. W. Gailey. Washington, DC: American Anthropological Association.
Lamberg-Karlovsky, C. C. 1967. “Archaeology and Metallurgical Technology in Prehistoric Afghanistan, India
             and Pakistan.” American Anthropologist 69:145 –162.
———. 1975. “Third Millennium Modes of Exchange and Modes of Production.” In Ancient Civilization and
             Trade, ed. J. Sabloff and C. C. Lamberg-Karlovsky. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press and
             the School of American Research.

428   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      ———. 1979. “Trade Mechanisms in Indus-Mesopotamian Interrelations.” In Ancient Cities of the Indus, ed.
                  G. L. Possehl. New Delhi: Vikas Publishing House.
      Lambrick, H. T. 1967. “The Indus Flood Plain and the ‘Indus’ Civilization.” Geographical Journal 133(4):483 – 495.
      ———. 1979. “Stratigraphy at Mohenjo Daro.” In Ancient Cities of the Indus, ed. G. L. Possehl. New Delhi: Vikas
                  Publishing House.
      Leshnik, L. S. 1968. “The Harappan ‘Port’ at Lothal: Another View.” American Anthropologist 70:911–922.
      Loftus, R. T., D. E. MacHugh, D. G. Bradley, P. M. Sharp, and P. Cunningham. 1994. “Evidence for Two
                  Independent Domestications of Cattle.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 91: 2757–2761.
      Mackay, E. J. H. 1979. “Further Links Between Ancient Sind, Sumer and Elsewhere.” In Ancient Cities of the Indus,
                  ed. G. L. Possehl. New Delhi: Vikas Publishing House.
      Mahadevan, I. 1979. “Study of the Indus Script through Bi-lingual Parallels.” In Ancient Cities of the Indus, ed.
                  G. L. Possehl. New Delhi: Vikas Publishing House.
      Mallory, J. P. 1988. In Search of the Indo-Europeans. New York: Thames and Hudson.
      Marshall, J. 1979. “Harappa and Mohenjo Daro.” In Ancient Cities of the Indus, ed. G. L. Possehl. New Delhi: Vikas
                  Publishing House.
      Meadow, R. H. 1984. “Animal Domestication in the Middle East: A View from the Eastern Margin.” In Animals
                  and Archaeology, ed. J. Clutton-Brock and C. Grigson. Vol. 3. Oxford: British Archaeological Reports,
                  S-202.
      ———. 1993. Harappan Civilization: A Recent Perspective, 2nd ed., ed. G. Possehl. New Delhi: Oxford and IBH
                  Publishing.
      Miller, D. 1985. “Ideology and the Indus Civilization.” Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 4(1):34 –71.
      Mughal, M. R. 1970. “The Early Harappan Period in the Greater Indus Valley and Northern Baluchistan.”
                  Doctoral dissertation, University of Pennsylvania.
      ———. 1974. “New Evidence of the Early Harappan Culture from Jalilpur, Pakistan.” Archaeology 27:106 –113.
      ———. 1990. “Further Evidence of the Early Harappan Culture in the Greater Indus Valley: 1971–90.” South
                  Asian Studies 6:175 –200.
      Oppenheim, A. L. 1979. “The Seafaring Merchants of Ur.” In Ancient Cities of the Indus, ed. G. L. Possehl. New
                  Delhi: Vikas Publishing House.
      Pande, B. M. 1973. “Inscribed Copper Tablets from Mohenjo Daro: A Preliminary Analysis.” In Radiocarbon and
                  Indian Archaeology, ed. D. P. Agrawal and A. Ghosh. Bombay: Tata Institute of Fundamental Research.
      Parpola, A. 1986. “The Indus Script: A Challenging Puzzle.” World Archaeology 17(3):399 – 419.
      ———. 1994. Deciphering the Indus Script. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
      Piggott, S. 1950. Prehistoric India. London: Pelican.
      Possehl, G. L. 1974. “Variation and Change in the Indus Civilization.” Doctoral dissertation, University of
                  Chicago.
      ———. 1976. “Lothal: A Gateway Settlement of the Harappan Civilization.” In Ecological Backgrounds of South
                  Asian Prehistory, ed. A. P. Kennedy and G. L. Possehl. South Asia Occasional Papers and Theses
                  4:118–131. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University South Asia Program.
      ———. 1977. “The End of a State and the Continuity of a Tradition in Proto-Historic India.” In Realm and Region
                  in Traditional India, ed. R. Fox. Durham NC: Duke University Program in South Asian Studies.
      ———, ed. 1979. Ancient Cities of the Indus. New Delhi: Vikas Publishing House Pvt Ltd.
      ———. 1980. “African Millets in South Asian Prehistory.” Mimeographed.
      ———. 1990. “Revolution in the Urban Revolution: The Emergence of Indus Urbanism.” Annual Review of
                  Anthropology 19:261–282.
      ———. 1992. “The Harappan Civilizations in Gujarat: The Sorath and Sindhi Harappans.” The Eastern
                  Anthropologist 45(1 & 2):117–154.
      ———, ed. 1993. Harappan Civilization: A Recent Perspective, 2nd ed. New Delhi: Oxford and IBH Publishing.
      ———. 1999. “Transformation of the Indus Civilization.” Man and Environment 24(2):1–33.
      ———. 2002. The Indus Civilization: A Contemporary Perspective. Walnut Creek, CA: Altamira.
      Possehl, G. L., and M. H. Raval. 1989. Harappan Civilization and Rojdi. New Delhi: Oxford and IBH and AIIS.
      Raikes, R. L. 1964. “The End of the Ancient Cities of the Indus.” American Anthropologist 66(2):284 –299.
      ———. 1965. “The Mohenjo-Daro Floods.” Antiquity 39:196 –203.
      Raikes, R. L., and R. H. Dyson, Jr. 1961. “The Prehistoric Climate of Baluchistan and the Indus Valley.” American
                  Anthropologist 63(2):265 –281.
      Ralph, E. K., H. N. Michael, and M. Han. 1979. “Radiocarbon Dates and Reality.” In Ancient Cities of the Indus,
                  ed. G. L. Possehl. New Delhi: Vikas Publishing House.
      Ramaswamy, C. 1968. “Monsoon over the Indus Valley During the Harappan Period.” Nature
                  217(5129):628 – 629.
      Rao, S. R. 1968. “Contacts Between Lothal and Susa.” Proceedings of the Twenty-sixth International Congress of
                  Orientalists, Vol. II, pp. 35 –37.
      ———. 1973. Lothal and the Indus Civilization. Bombay: Asia House.

                                           THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN THE INDUS VALLEY                      429


———. 1979. “A ‘Persian Gulf ’ Seal from Lothal.” In Ancient Cities of the Indus, ed. G. L. Possehl. New Delhi:
             Vikas Publishing House.
Ratnagar, S. 1981. Encounters, The Westerly Trade of the Harappan Civilization. Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Renfrew, C. 1988. “Archaeology and Language.” Current Anthropology 29(3):437– 468.
Sankalia, H. 1974. The Prehistory and Protohistory of India and Pakistan. Pune, India: Deccan College.
———. 1979. “The ‘Cemetery H’ Culture.” In Ancient Cities of the Indus, ed. G. L. Possehl. New Delhi: Vikas
             Publishing House.
Sarcina, A. 1979a. “The Private House at Mohenjodaro.” In South Asian Archaeology 1977, ed. M. Taddei. Naples:
             Instituto Universitario Orientale.
———. 1979b. “A Statistical Assessment of House Patterns at Mohenjodaro.” Mesopotamia 13/14:155 –199.
Schuldenrein, J., R. P. Wright, M. R. Mughal, and M. A. Khan. 2004. “Landscapes, Soils, and Mound Histories of
             the Upper Indus Valley, Pakistan: New Insights on the Holocene Environments Near Ancient
             Harappa.” Journal of Archaeological Science 31:777–797.
Service, E. 1975. Origins of the State and Civilization. New York: Norton.
Shaffer, J. G. 1978. Prehistoric Baluchistan. Delhi: B. R. Publishers.
———. 1982. “Harappan Culture: A Reconsideration.” In Harappan Civilization, ed. G. L. Possehl. New Delhi:
             Oxford and IBH.
———. 1984. “The Indo-Aryan Invasions: Cultural Myth and Archaeological Reality.” In The People of South
             Asia, ed. J. R. Lukacs. New York: Plenum Press.
———. 1988. “One Hump or Two: The Impact of the Camel on Harappan Society.” In Orientalia Iosephi Tucci
             Memoriae Dicata, ed. G. Gnoli and L. Lanciotti. Rome: IsMEO.
———. 1991. “The Indus Valley, Baluchistan and Helmand Traditions: Neolithic Through Bronze Age.”
             In Chronologies in Old World Archaeology, 3rd ed., ed. R. Ehrich. Chicago: University of Chicago
             Press.
Singh, G. 1979. “The Indus Valley Culture.” In Ancient Cities of the Indus, ed. G. L. Possehl. New Delhi: Vikas
             Publishing House.
Thapar, B. K. 1975. “Kalibangan: A Harappan Metropolis Beyond the Indus Valley.” Expedition 17(2):19 –32.
Tosi, M. 1984. “The Notion of Craft Specialisation and Its Representation in the Archaeological Record of Early
             States in the Turanian Basin.” In Marxist Perspectives in Archaeology, ed. M. Spriggs. Cambridge:
             Cambridge University Press.
Trigger, B. 1972. “Determinants of Urban Growth in Pre-Industrial Societies.” In Man, Settlement and Urbanism,
             ed. P. J. Ucko, R. Tringham, and G. W. Dimbleby. London: Duckworth.
Van Lohnizen-de Leeuw, J. E., and J. M. M. Ubagns, eds. 1974. South Asian Archaeology. Leiden, Netherlands:
             Brill.
Vishnu-Mittre. 1977. “Discussion on Local and Introduced Crops.” In The Early History of Agriculture: A Joint
             Symposium of the Royal Society and the British Academy, organized by J. Hutchinson. London: Oxford
             University Press.
Wheatley, P. 1972. “The Concept of Urbanism.” In Man, Settlement and Urbanism, ed. P. J. Ucko, R. Tringham,
             and G. W. Dimbleby. London: Duckworth.
Wheeler, Sir M. 1979. “Harappan Chronology and the Rig Veda.” In Ancient Cities of the Indus, ed. G. L. Possehl.
             New Delhi: Vikas Publishing House.
Wheeler, R. E. M. 1950. Five Thousand Years of Pakistan. London: Royal India and Pakistan Society.
Wolpert, S. A. 1977. A New History of India. London: Oxford University Press.
Wright, H. T. 1986. “The Evolution of Civilizations.” In American Archaeology Past and Future, ed. D. J. Meltzer,
             D. D. Fowler, and J. A. Sabloff. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
Wright, H. T., and S. Pollock. 1985. “Regional Socio-economic Organization in Southern Mesopotamia: The
             Middle and Late Fifth Millennium b.c.” In La Mesopotamie: Pre- et Protohistoire, ed. J.-L. Huot. Paris:
             C.N.R.S.
Wright, R. P. 1989. “The Indus Valley and Mesopotamian Civilizations: A Comparative View of Ceramic
             Technology.” In Old Problems and New Perspectives in the Archaeology of South Asia, ed. J. M. Kenoyer.
             Madison: Wisconsin Archaeological Reports, Vol. 2.
Yule, P. 1982. Lothal. Munich: C. H. Beck.
Zide, A. R. K. 1979. “A Brief Survey of Work to Date on the Indus Script.” In Ancient Cities of the Indus, ed.
             G. L. Possehl. New Delhi: Vikas Publishing.



NOTES
 1. Childe, New Light on the Most Ancient East, p. 183; cited by Possehl, “Revolution in the Urban Revolution:
    The Emergence of Indus Urbanism,” p. 267.

430   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


       2. Viewed from the perspective of its entire sequence (including development and demise), however, Harappan
          civilization has a much lengthier history, lasting from about 3200 through 1000 b.c. (see Possehl, The Indus
          Civilization: A Contemporary Perspective, p. 29).
       3. Kenoyer’s chronological divisions (see Kenoyer, Ancient Cities of the Indus Valley Civilization, p. 24) are some-
          what different from those proposed by Possehl (see Possehl, The Indus Civilization: A Contemporary
          Perspective, p. 29). Possehl’s chronology is followed in this chapter.
       4. Possehl, “Revolution in the Urban Revolution: The Emergence of Indus Urbanism,” p. 262.
       5. Possehl, The Indus Civilization: A Contemporary Perspective, p. 51.
       6. Kenoyer, “The Indus Valley Tradition of Pakistan and Western India”; Kenoyer, Ancient Cities of the Indus
          Valley Civilization, p. 49.
       7. Kenoyer, Ancient Cities of the Indus Valley Civilization, pp. 81– 82.
       8. Shaffer, “Harappan Culture: A Reconsideration.”
       9. Also see Possehl, “Revolution in the Urban Revolution: The Emergence of Indus Urbanism.”
      10. Strabo and many other Greek historians wrote about the eastern lands Alexander had conquered, but few
          of them appear to have seen them in person, and thus their accounts were based on travelers’ accounts and
          second-hand knowledge.
      11. Schuldenrein et al., “Landscapes, Soils, and Mound Histories of the Upper Indus Valley, Pakistan: New
          Insights on the Holocene Environments Near Ancient Harappa.”
      12. Flam, “The Prehistoric Indus River System and the Indus Civilization in Sindh,” pp. 61–64.
      13. Mughal, “Further Evidence of the Early Harappan Culture in the Greater Indus Valley: 1971–90.”
      14. Flam, “The Prehistoric Indus River System and the Indus Civilization in Sindh,” pp. 54 –55.
      15. Ibid., pp. 64 – 65.
      16. Possehl, “Revolution in the Urban Revolution: The Emergence of Indus Urbanism,” p. 261.
      17. Meadow, Harappan Civilization: A Recent Perspective, p. 311.
      18. The local domestication of the hump-backed cattle, Bos indicus, is supported by research on the DNA of
          cattle (see Loftus et al., “Evidence for Two Independent Domestications of Cattle”).
      19. Fairservis, “The Origin, Character and Decline of an Early Civilization.”
      20. Allchin, “India from the Late Stone Age to the Decline of Indus Civilization,” p. 337.
      21. Vishnu-Mittre, “Discussion on Local and Introduced Crops.”
      22. Kenoyer, “The Indus Valley Tradition of Pakistan and Western India,” p. 332.
      23. Miller, “Ideology and the Indus Civilization,” p. 38.
      24. Ibid., p. 39; Jarrige and Lechevaleier, “Excavations at Mehrgarh, Baluchistan: Their Signiﬁcance in the
          Prehistorical Context of the Indo-Pakistan Borderlands”; Gupta, Archaeology of Soviet Central Asia and the
          Indian Borderlands; Durante, “Marine Shells from Balakot, Shahr-i Sokhta and Tepe Yahya”; Fairservis,
          The Roots of Ancient India.
      25. Wright, “The Evolution of Civilizations.”
      26. Ibid., p. 337. In comparing the Indus Valley and Mesopotamia, Wright concludes that by the late ﬁfth and
          early fourth millennia b.c. some areas of the Indus Plain had settlements of such different sizes that we may
          suspect that they reﬂect hierarchically organized societies.
      27. Miller, “Ideology and the Harappan Civilization,” p. 40.
      28. Mughal, “The Early Harappan Period in the Greater Indus Valley and Northern Baluchistan.”
      29. Possehl, “Revolution in the Urban Revolution: The Emergence of Indus Urbanism,” p. 270.
      30. Ibid., p. 270.
      31. Ibid., p. 271.
      32. Possehl, ed., Harappan Civilization: A Recent Perspective.
      33. Wright, “The Evolution of Civilizations,” p. 340.
      34. Jansen, “Settlement Patterns in the Harappa Culture,” p. 252; Agrawal, The Archaeology of India, p. 135; Miller,
          “Ideology and the Harappan Civilization,” p. 40.
      35. Jansen, “Settlement Patterns in the Harappa Culture.”
      36. Shaffer, “Harappan Culture: A Reconsideration.”
      37. Fentress, Resource Access, Exchange Systems and Regional Interaction in the Indus Valley, pp. 136 –137.
      38. Miller, “Ideology and the Harappan Civilization.”
      39. Sarcina, “The Private House at Mohenjodaro”; Sarcina, “A Statistical Assessment of House Patterns at
          Mohenjodaro.”
      40. Miller, “Ideology and the Harappan Civilization,” p. 48; Sarcina, “The Private House at Mohenjodaro”;
          Sarcina, “A Statistical Assessment of House Patterns at Mohenjodaro.”
      41. Fairservis, The Roots of Ancient India, pp. 246 –247.
      42. Possehl, “The End of a State and the Continuity of a Tradition in Proto-Historic India.”
      43. Rao, Lothal and the Indus Civilization.
      44. Possehl, “The End of a State and the Continuity of a Tradition in Proto-Historic India.”

                                          THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN THE INDUS VALLEY                    431


45. Ibid. For Possehl’s analysis of the interactions between Harappans and hunter-foragers, see his “The Harappan
    Civilization in Gujarat: The Sorath and Sindhi Harappans,” especially pp. 125 –126.
46. Miller, “Ideology and the Harappan Civilization,” pp. 56 –57; but also see Fentress, “Indus Charms and Urns,
    a Look at the Religious Diversity at Harappa and Mohenjodaro.”
47. Possehl, The Indus Civilization: A Contemporary Perspective, pp. 249 –250.
48. Parpola, “The Indus Script: A Challenging Puzzle.” Wenke is indebted to Gregory Possehl (personal com-
    munication) for references and a summary of current interpretations for this paragraph on the language
    afﬁliation of the Indus script.
49. The following description of Indus writing is taken mainly from Kenoyer, “The Indus Valley Tradition of
    Pakistan and Western India.” Also see Kelly and Wells, “Recent Progress in Understanding the Indus Script.”
50. Dales and Kenoyer, “Excavation at Harappa—1988”; Kenoyer, “The Indus Valley Tradition of Pakistan and
    Western India.”
51. Allchin, “India from the Late Stone Age to the Decline of Indus Civilization.”
52. Frankfort and Pottier, “Sondage Preliminaire sur l’Establissement Protohistorique Harapeen et Post-
    Harapeen de Shortugai”; Miller, “Ideology and the Harappan Civilization,” p. 54.
53. Miller, “Ideology and the Harappan Civilization,” p. 55.
54. Raikes, “The Mohenjo-Daro Floods.”
55. Flam, “The Prehistoric Indus River System and the Indus Civilization in Sindh.”
56. Possehl, “African Millets in South Asian Prehistory.”
57. Tharpar, “Kalibangan: A Harappan Metropolis Beyond the Indus Valley.”
58. Possehl, The Indus Civilization: A Contemporary Perspective, p. 249.
59. Kennedy, “Skulls, Aryans and Flowing Drains: The Interface of Archaeology and Skeletal Biology in the Study
    of the Harappan Civilisation.”
60. Fairservis, The Roots of Ancient India, p. 311.
61. Renfrew, “Archaeology and Language.”
62. Shaffer, Prehistoric Baluchistan; Possehl, “African Millets in South Asian Prehistory.”
63. Miller, “Ideology and the Harappan Civilization.”
64. Service, Origins of the State and Civilization, p. 246.
65. Ibid.
66. Jacobson, “Recent Developments in South Asian Prehistory and Protohistory.”
67. Johnson, Local Exchange and Early State Development in Southwestern Iran.
68. Shaffer, “Harappan Culture: A Reconsideration.”
69. Ibid., p. 49; Miller, “Ideology and the Harappan Civilization.”
70. Kenoyer, “The Indus Valley Tradition of Pakistan and Western India,” p. 369.

11
The Evolution of Complex Societies
in China

     Let the past serve the present.
     Mao Zedong




     S        hortly after 3000 b.c., just a century or so after Harappan civilization began in the
              Indus region, the people of North China began a period of development that was
     to take them from simple agricultural tribes to one of the most brilliant and complex
     civilizations of antiquity (Figure 11.1). Because scientiﬁc archaeology in China is only a few
     decades old, however, and because much of the literature on Chinese archaeology has not
     been accessible to foreign scholars, ancient Chinese civilization has not had the place in
     Western scholarship that it deserves.
           Like ancient Egypt, China was, superﬁcially at least, intensely self-absorbed and inward
     looking, and it saw itself as the center of the world whose periphery was populated by
     vicious barbarians. But China has a far larger and more varied physical landscape than
     Egypt—or Mesopotamia, for that matter—and this and other factors made its civilization
     a rich amalgam of many diverse ethnic groups and cultures.
           Mesopotamia, Egypt, and Europe gave the world many great technological inventions,
     but ancient East Asia’s contributions include such fundamental advances as the magnetic
     compass, gunpowder, printing, paper, paddle-wheel propulsion, and many other
     inventions.1 China’s traditions, for example, its writing system, are also the only ones that
     have lasted until today.
           In analyzing history it is interesting that, although the Chinese invented gunpowder,
     they used it exclusively for ﬁreworks. Europeans quickly saw other interesting potential uses
     for it. China, thus, provides an object lesson in a rather brutal historical dynamic: China
     was once among the largest, most powerful, and most innovative civilizations in the world,
     but it too was eventually dominated by the rise of the West, which exploited it for centuries.
     As the twenty-ﬁrst century begins, however, there are indications that the world’s center of
     power is shifting back toward China. The world has become so interconnected politically
     and economically that the kinds of massive imbalances of power of nations that marked
     the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries may never occur again, but China’s enormous
     population, strong national sense of identity and culture, and rich natural resources may
     support a great expansion of its economy and power in this century. It would be truly

                                                 432

                                                 THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN CHINA   433


                                              CHINA

AD 618    Tang dynasty uniﬁes China empire based on Chang’an, world’s largest city
          (1 million inhabitants)
AD 220    Collapse of Han dynasty, China divided into three independent states

AD 150    Buddhism reaches China

AD 105    Paper comes into use in China

  50 BC   Chinese silk traded to Romans

 108 BC   Chinese take control of Korea establishing military outposts

 119 BC   Chinese iron industry becomes state monopoly

 206 BC   Accession of the Han dynasty

 210 BC   Emperor Shih Huang-ti interred in vast mausoleum with terracotta army

          Shih Huangh-ti ﬁrst Qin emperor builds the Great Wall

 221 BC   Uniﬁcation of China by the Qin dynasty

 350 BC   Crossbow invented

 403 BC   Warring States Period ﬁnds of bronze and iron weapons and city defenses

 500 BC   Beginning of coinage

 550 BC   First signiﬁcant iron production

 770 BC   Beginning of Eastern Zhou

1046 BC   Zhou dynasty replaces the Shang

1400 BC   First written inscriptions on oracle bones and bronze ritual vessels

1600 BC   Emergence of Shang civilization in northeast China

1900 BC   Erh-li-t’ou culture

2000 BC   Urban settlements

2500 BC

          First bronze artifacts

2700 BC   Evidence of silk weaving

3000 BC   Early Complex Societics Longshan Culture

5000 BC   Yangshao Culture Bampo Jiangzhai

6500 BC   Early Farmers Cishan Peiligang Dadiwan

           434       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                ironic, but it is entirely plausible that the archae-
                                                                ologists of the future will need to know Mandarin
                                                                in order to participate fully in their discipline.



                                                                THE ECOLOGICAL SETTING

                                                                Modern China incorporates an area slightly larger
                                                                than the contemporary United States. Within this
                                                                territory are vastly different environments, ranging
                                                                from the Himalayas to the Paciﬁc shore, and
                                                                ethnic groups throughout this vast expanse
                                                                played formative roles in shaping Chinese civil-
                                                                ization. K. C. Chang—whose work and writings
                                                                until recently provided much of what is known
                                                                about China in the West—deﬁned three ecological
                                                                zones as crucial areas in the evolution of ancient
                                                                Chinese civilization: the Huanghe (formerly
                                                                transliterated, under the Wade-Giles system, as
                                                                “Hwang Ho”) valley; the southern deciduous
                                                                zone; and the northern forests and steppes.2 He
                                                                also notes that for some thousands of years after
                                                                the end of the Pleistocene at about 12,000 years
                                                                ago, China’s climate was somewhat warmer and
                                                                moister than it is today, and much of the country
                                                                was probably heavily forested, from the temper-
                                                                ate forests of the north to the jungles in the
                                                                south. Chang observes that because of China’s
FIGURE 11.1 A portion of the terracotta army interred with
Emperor Shih Huang-ti.                                          mountainous nature and heavy post-Pleistocene
                                                                vegetative cover, people were probably restricted
                   to the river valleys at ﬁrst, since these would have been the richest sources of food and would
                   have offered the most open land for farming. Developments in these three ecological zones
                   eventually overlapped, and in later periods of antiquity the vast populations of nomads on
                   the northern and western frontier of China greatly inﬂuenced the character of Chinese
                   civilization.
                         During the Holocene, when Neolithic and later societies were present in China,
                   paleoclimate and paleoenvironment were inﬂuenced by the strength of the East Asian
                   monsoon.3 The East Asian monsoon is a precipitation—rainfall—belt that shifts gradually
                   northward during the period from winter to summer each year. Precisely where the heaviest
                   precipitation associated with this rainfall belt fell during different points in the past changed
                   over time because of changes in solar radiation and the conditions of the surface of the
                   Northern Hemisphere—for example, 9,000 years ago, the maximum northerly extent of
                   the monsoon belt was just to the north of some of the early Neolithic cultures of the
                   Huanghe River area.4 By 6,000 years ago, the maximum extent of the rainfall belt reached
                   only as far north as just north of the Yangtze River area. The East Asian monsoon is thus

                                               THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN CHINA         435


an important feature of the ecological setting of various Neolithic and later societies, as well
as in the levels of lakes, river ﬂooding, and growth of vegetation.
     Geological processes that likely had an impact on people living in the Huanghe area
include shifts in the course of the Huanghe River5—similar to avulsions seen in the
Mesopotamian Euphrates and Tigris rivers.
     Other geological factors that may have inﬂuenced some societies in China include
rising sea levels, perhaps acting in combination with increased rainfall during the middle
Holocene.6 In the delta of the Yangtze River, for example, Stanley and his colleagues have
documented a major inundation of the central delta area. This removed previously dry land
from the territory available to people for settlement and use for agriculture. Stanley and his
colleagues believe that this inundation is partly responsible for the disappearance of the local
Neolithic culture—the Liangzhu—about 4,200 years ago. After 3,900 years ago, when shifts
in climate resulted in some of the delta land being reexposed, a few of the Liangzhu sites
were reoccupied by people of the early Bronze Age—known locally as the Maqiao culture.7
     Wheat and barley supplied much of the energy that ran Mesopotamian and Egyptian
societies, but in China rice and millet were in many instances as important as wheat or
barley. North China’s developmental leadership was closely tied to its agricultural potential.
Pleistocene winds blowing off the Gobi Desert covered parts of North China with a layer
of loess (a ﬁne grain sediment) that reached a depth of several hundred meters. The
Huanghe River (or “Yellow River”—from the color given it by the loess it carries) cuts
through these loess plains, frequently changing its course, and through ﬂooding and
draining it has created a rich agricultural zone of lakes, marshes, and alluvial ﬁelds. Loess
is the agricultural soil par excellence: It is organically rich, requires little plowing, and
retains near the surface much of the sparse rain that falls on North China. Moreover, it can
yield large crops with little fertilization, even under intensive cultivation. The southern
alluvial plains, with their hot, humid climate, eventually became the great rice heartlands.
     Early farmers around the world converged in ﬁnding, through domestication and
agriculture, four key ingredients to the village-farming way of life: They all found (1) a
source for textiles; (2) a productive, high carbohydrate, main crop plant; (3) an edible oil
for cooking; and a (4) a reliable source of animal protein. The initial northern Chinese
solutions to these problems were hemp for textiles, millet for a main crop plant, rapeseed
and soybeans for edible oils, and pigs for meat. But east Asia—including Japan, Southeast
Asia, Korea, and other areas peripheral to the mainland—domesticated an impressive range
of other plants, perhaps more than any other area of the world. Wheat, barley, and perhaps
other plants may have been introduced from western Asia, but east Asian domesticates
and/or early cultivars include apricot, peach, pear, persimmon, and plum trees; soybeans,
mung beans, peas, and other legumes; buckwheat, various kinds of millet, barley, and rice;
safﬂower, rape, and other producers of edible oils; Chinese cabbage, radishes, and other
vegetables; and a variety of special-purpose plants such as the lacquer tree (lacquer), hops
(ﬂavoring agent), hemp (ﬁbers and drugs), and the bottle gourd (containers).


EARLY FARMERS (C. 7000–5000 B.C.)8

K. C. Chang suggested that one of the most signiﬁcant discoveries in the prehistoric
archaeology of North China is the discovery in eastern Shensi Province and other areas of

436   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY




      FIGURE 11.2 The earliest Neolithic cultures of North China appeared in several distinct regions,
      shown here in darker shading, with the approximate boundaries of their artifact style distributions
      shown in lighter shading.



      microlithic stone tools dating perhaps (the dating is uncertain) to about 13,000 years ago.
      These ﬁnds are important because little is known about the people of China as the
      Pleistocene ended or about their descendants, whose hunting-foraging culture gave way to
      the ﬁrst farmers. The distinctive artifact styles of these stone tools and other ﬁnds indicate
      that a large population of pre-agricultural peoples were widely distributed over much of
      China about 10,000 years ago. Most of these people were hunter-gatherers, with some
      groups specializing in ﬁshing near the coasts and large lakes.
           Although there are gaps in the archaeological record in the centuries just after these
      microlithic industries were in use, during the past decade many sites have been found that
      appear to have been the earliest Chinese farming communities. These villages date to
      between about 6500 and 5000 b.c. and have been grouped into regional clusters (Figure 11.2).
      These include the Cishan, Peiligang, and Dadiwan, as well as several other cultures.9 These
      settlements were located along the lower terraces of the western highlands, in the valleys of
      the Wei, Huanghe, and a few other rivers. This warm, moderately rainy area has great
      agricultural potential, especially in the alluvial plains, the loess plateau, and the hilly lands
      of the Shangdong peninsula. Early farmers in this area took advantage of these zones
      by staking their subsistence on several highly reliable and stable resources. Probably the
      most important food source was millet, a cereal grass (both foxtail millet [Setaria italica]
      and broomcorn millet [Panicum miliaceum]) that produces a very nutritious grain.
      Nutritionally as rich as wheat, millet is also quick-maturing and drought-resistant—making
      it admirably suited to North China—and its stems can be used for food, fuel, and fodder.
      Stone sickle blades, grinding stones, and other tools indicate that much farming was

                                                THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN CHINA         437


devoted to millet, which was complemented with vegetables, an edible vegetable oil (in the
form of rapeseed [Brassica]), and meat from domesticated pigs and chickens. The farmers
also collected walnuts, hazelnuts, and other wild plant foods and hunted deer. Like many
other peoples around the world, their ﬁrst domesticate was probably the dog, skeletons of
which have been found at various sites. These early farmers lived mainly in small (2–3 m
in diameter) subterranean houses. They already knew how to make pottery at this time,
and used an impressive diversity of ground stone grinders, bone needles, and many other
implements of stone, bone, and wood.
     The earliest agricultural sites in South China are only a bit later than those in the north,
but our knowledge of them is much less advanced. Several caves in China and Thailand
have deeply buried remains from this period, and some of these early levels contain cord-
marked pottery and what may be the remains of domesticated plants.


REGIONAL NEOLITHIC DEVELOPMENTS IN NORTH CHINA
(5000–3000 B.C.)

The largest and best-known early agricultural Chinese communities are those of the
Yangshao culture (see Figure 11.2). The Yangshao covered the same approximate area as
did the earlier P’ei-li-kang culture, and the similarities between these two indicate cultural
continuity. Most of the Yangshao settlements were distributed along the banks of the
Huanghe and other river systems in central China. Bones of most of the larger animals native
to this part of China, from rabbits to rhinos, have been found in Yangshao settlements, but
millet probably provided most of the calories, while sorghum and a few other crops were
also cultivated. Like their counterparts in the forests of temperate Europe, early Chinese
farmers probably cleared land for farming by slashing down vegetation with stone axes and
then burning it off when it had dried.10
     And like other early cultivators they took full advantage of game animals, wild plants,
and ﬁshing—as evidenced by the hundreds of hooks, ﬁsh gorges, and net weights found.
Pigs, domestic fowl, and, later, cattle, sheep, and goats were favored sources of meat.
     In a real sense, the ﬁrst ancestors of the civilization we know imprecisely as “China”
were probably the sturdy peasants of the Yangshao period (radiocarbon-dated to
c. 5100–2950 b.c.,11 who lived in villages like Bampo (formerly “Pan-p’o”). Wearing rough
clothes made of hemp, bunkered down in houses with ﬂoors dug several feet below ground
(Figure 11.3) to shield themselves from winter snows and summer heat, the people of
Bampo followed the familiar agricultural cycle of China. Other Yangshao sites have
evidence for above-ground houses (Figure 11.4). Millet was the staple; pigs and ducks
recycled wastes into the basic meats of what was even then perhaps a world-class cuisine;
and cattle, sheep, and goats contributed their all in the form of meat, milk, draft power,
leather, and wool. The few hundred people at Bampo, like most of their neighbors, were
probably self-sufﬁcient in everything that really mattered except marriageable women.
     Another Yangshao village that has been extensively excavated is Jiangzhai, in Shaanxi
Province.12 Over an area of about 50,000 m2 the people here built a neatly organized
community that was surrounded by a defensive moat and was arranged in ﬁve complexes,
each with a large house surrounded by 10–20 smaller ones. Most of the houses were semi-

           438        PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                       subterranean with wood super-
                                                                                       structures. Like other early
                                                                                       farmers, the people of Jiangzhai
                                                                                       buried their dead with house-
                                                                                       hold objects, which suggests a
                                                                                       belief in a life after death that
                                                                                       was something like their life in
                                                                                       this world. Children were buried
                                                                                       in ceramic urns—an ancient
                                                                                       practice that still continues in
                                                                                       parts of Asia.
                                                                                             Yangshao villages seem
                                                                                       to have been abandoned
                                                                                       and reoccupied periodically—
FIGURE 11.3 This reconstruction of a Neolithic house at Bampo (Pan-p’o-ts’un)          probably because these people
illustrates how early Chinese farmers protected themselves against the harsh north     practiced slash-and-burn farm-
China winters by living in pithouses.                                                  ing, wearing out the soil in the
                                                                                       area around their commun-
                                                                                       ity, then relocating the village,
                                                                                       and eventually returning to
                                                                                       the abandoned areas when
                                                                                       the fertility was renewed by
                                                                                       regrowth of vegetation.
                                                                                             Already by the time of
                                                                                       Bampo the Chinese aesthetic
                                                                                       sense is evident in the designs
                                                                                       and color of pottery, jade
                                                                                       carvings, and other artifacts.
                                                                                       Stylized ﬁsh and animals grace
                                                                                       some of the burnished pottery,
                                                                                       and some pots were marked
                                                                                       with symbols that may be early
                                                                                       expressions of written Chinese.
                                                                                       Around the houses were
                                                                                       many deep pits, presumably
                                                                                       for storing millet and other
                                                                                       commodities. No doubt most
                                                                                       villagers were full-time agricul-
                                                                                       turalists, but some engaged in
FIGURE 11.4 The foundation of a Yangshao culture house at Dadiwan, China.              silkworm cultivation, pottery
                                                                                       manufacture, jade carving, and
                                                                                       leather and textile production.
                            Bampo has been converted into an impressive museum, and more than 200 of the
                       original inhabitants of this community are still there, their skeletons protruding from house
                       ﬂoors and pits. Most of the site has been enclosed in a building, with some of the most
                       important houses and artifacts left in place. At some Yangshao sites the bodies of people

                                              THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN CHINA         439


seem to have been reburied in groups. K. C. Chang notes that at Yuan-chun-miao, 57 graves
were arranged “in six north-south rows, the earliest being the ﬁrst and fourth rows, the
latest the third and sixth rows. . . . This layout and chronological order have led to the
reasonable speculation that the cemetery was divided into two moieties, reﬂecting the two-
clan composition of the village.”13
      In the middle of Bampo was a distinctive building, much larger than the typical house
and of different construction. To the Chinese excavators, this building seems most likely
to have been a communal meeting hall; but one might also suspect that a bit of capitalistic
inequality had infected the Yangshao culture and that this was the house of a “big man” or
chief.14 However, there are no evident signs of varying status in other artifacts at the site.
      There are, however, some indications that Yangshao peoples occasionally buried
individuals with grave goods and other furnishings that might be interpreted as indicat-
ing status differences. One example is found at the site of Xishuipo in Henan Province.
The site, which extends over 50,000 m2, contains house foundations, pits for storage, and
burials.15 In Tomb 45, an adult male is buried in an extended position. Surrounding him
are three younger individuals. The most signiﬁcant aspect of this burial, however, is the
presence of two animal mosaics made of mollusk shells, as well as a triangular mosaic of
mollusk shells and two human tibia—lower leg bones.16 The animal mosaics include a
dragon and a tiger (Figure 11.5). One interpretation of this burial is that the adult male
was a shaman—a ritual specialist—with the animal images representing helpers in
communicating with the supernatural.17
      More than a hundred Neolithic sites (c. 5000–3000 b.c.) have been found in the Lake
T’ai-hu area, southeast of Nanjing. Rice cultivation provided the main staple, but the range
of animals hunted was impres-
sive, including boars, elephants,
alligators, deer, and many
other species. One example of
an early southern Neolithic
community is at Hemudu, in
northern Zhejiang Province,
where excavations in 1973
through 1978 revealed a 7,000-
year-old village of wooden
houses built on piles along
the shore of a small lake
(Figure 11.6). The preservation
of objects at this site is
spectacular. Excavators found
bone hoes, wooden shuttles for
weaving, ivory carvings, and
many plant and animal remains,
including rice, bottle gourds,
water chestnuts, domesticated
water buffalo, pigs, dogs, and
wild animals such as tigers,         FIGURE 11.5 This Yangshao culture burial from the site of Yangshao, China, is
elephants, and rhinoceroses.         accompanied by shell mosaics of a dragon (top) and tiger (bottom).

          440       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                      The extension of pottery
                                                                                 styles over much of North China
                                                                                 during the period between
                                                                                 5000 and 3000 b.c. is probably
                                                                                 the clearest early sign that by
                                                                                 this time people were develop-
                                                                                 ing the integrated economic
                                                                                 and political institutions on
                                                                                 which the later Chinese states
                                                                                 were constructed.


                                                                                 EARLY COMPLEX
                                                                                 CHINESE SOCIETIES
                                                                                 (3000–1900 B.C.)
FIGURE 11.6 Good organic preservation yielded the wooden structural remains
from the site of Hemudu, China.                                                    In the early third millennium
                                                                                   b.c., the people of North and
                                                                                   Central China—at least on the
                    basis of our limited archaeological evidence—seem the very picture of egalitarian, peaceful
                    villagers; but by the beginning of the second millennium b.c., signs of social rank and
                    violence are everywhere.
                         Chinese legend relates that the ﬁrst Chinese emperor was Huang Di, a northern
                    Chinese warlord who is reputed to have established a dynasty in 2698 b.c. Whatever the
                    validity of this legend, the archaeological record indicates rapidly increasing social com-
                    plexity, with the emergence of the Longshan and related cultures (Figure 11.7). Longshan
                    cultures, like the Yangshao, are deﬁned on the basis of similar styles of artifacts—in the
                    Longshan case by highly burnished, wheel-made, thin-walled black pottery in many
                    different vessel forms; these pots are found, with minor stylistic variations, from the
                    southeastern coast of China to the northern provinces. Very early Longshan pottery and
                    other diagnostic artifacts are found over most of the old Yangshao heartland. And
                    while Yangshao communities in some places seem to have given rise almost directly to
                    Longshan communities, the linkages between these periods and peoples are still quite
                    obscure.18
                         As with the Yangshao, the Longshan peoples lived mainly in villages made up of
                    pithouses arranged around a central “long house,” and virtually every Longshan adult male
                    was probably still a millet farmer who supplemented the family fortunes with hunting,
                    collecting, and part-time craft production of pottery, jade, or another commodity. But
                    Longshan villages were, on the average, signiﬁcantly larger than those of the Yangshao
                    period, and were likely occupied for longer periods of time.
                         Like their counterparts in other early civilizations, ancient Chinese farmers eventually
                    made a momentous transition: Instead of the slash-and-burn agriculture practiced in the
                    Yangshao period, shifting ﬁelds from year to year, they began in Longshan times to cultivate
                    the same ﬁelds each year. The costs of doing this are high: One has to use animal manure,
                    clovers, and discarded plants to renew fertility, or else irrigation water must be led to the

                                              THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN CHINA        441




FIGURE 11.7 Archaeological sites of the Longshan and related cultures.


ﬁelds through canals to replenish soil fertility. In some places, of course, in China as in
Egypt, the annual ﬂoods renew soil fertility, but in all ancient civilizations a point was
eventually reached where intensiﬁcation of agriculture was required to sustain life.
Longshan agriculture, although still based on millet and a few domesticated animals, seems
to have been more intensive than that of the Yangshao. Domestic poultry, sheep, and cattle
became more important, and there is evidence of the increasing signiﬁcance of rice
agriculture in some southern areas.
     There are also signs of change in social organization. Compared with Yangshao graves,
Longshan burials seem to differ between those of richer and those of poorer people, at least
as reﬂected in the pots, metal implements, and other items buried with these people. One
of the best examples is from the Taosi cemetery in southern Shanxi.19 The excavators
identiﬁed three groups of burials—the “richest” were all males, each of whom had a
wooden cofﬁn, powdered cinnabar (a bright red mineral), and 100–200 grave goods. The
very largest of these rich tombs had alligator drums and jade ritual objects, suggesting trade
in exotic items among the elite members of Longshan culture.20 In contrast, the “poorest”
group of burials were only narrow vertical burial pits and contained few if any burial
goods.21
     Longshan pottery and jade ornaments are so technologically sophisticated and
beautiful that they suggest the existence of at least some semi-specialized craftsmen.
     Based on an analysis of pig skulls in burials at several Neolithic sites, Seung-Og Kim
has argued22 that pigs were used as important status and wealth markers. Pigs were
supremely adapted to Neolithic Chinese agriculture. Evidence suggests that pigs were even
kept in household latrine areas and subsisted in part on human waste products—an early

442   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      indication of the extraordinary practicality of Chinese cuisine and their ability to convert
      materials from every stage of the food chain into appealing foods. Kim found that the
      Chinese Neolithic graves with the most wealth in the form of ivory and jade ornaments,
      pottery, and other goods also, on average, had more pig skulls and carved pig tusks in
      them. Kim suggests that these interred pig bones reﬂect a society in which the great
      economic value of the pig as the most important domestic animal (in terms of its popular-
      ity as a food) was complexly linked to the social context of ritual, wealth, and political
      prestige. He hypothesizes that pigs could be used as a form of exchangeable wealth and that
      some individuals could have risen in wealth and prestige by using pigs to acquire exotic
      prestige goods such as jade and turtle shell through long-distance trade. As Kim notes,
      ethnographic studies of Melanesian and other societies show that pigs often are viewed as
      a form of wealth and that pig slaughtering and meat distribution are important parts of the
      competition for power, wealth, and prestige in these “big-man” or tribal societies. Kim
      argues that between about 4000 and 2000 b.c. the elites in many Chinese communities used
      pigs as “concentratable and productive internal wealth in order to establish political
      authority.”23
           Longshan people sought knowledge through scapulimancy, the art of writing signs on
      bones, applying heat to the bone to crack it, and then interpreting the pattern of cracking
      to foretell the future. Archaeologist K. C. Chang interprets the appearance of this art in
      Longshan times as a reﬂection of the rise of at least a semi-professional class of shamans—
      an interpretation made credible by the fact that the character meaning “book” already
      appears on these bones and may signify the existence of specialized scribes.
           Chang also notes that the ﬁrst traces of town walls—which became a standard feature
      of later communities—are found at the Longshan site of Ch’eng-tzu-yai. It was built with
      the “stamped-earth” technique, in which layer after layer of ﬁne loess silts and clays were
      stamped by workers into a compact wall. The wall at Ch’eng-tzu-yai has now largely
      deteriorated, but from its traces the excavators estimate it was 6 m high and 9 m wide at
      the top.
           Longshan and related communities were probably still largely self-sufﬁcient and
      independent. Researchers such as Li Liu,24 however, have described the medium and large
      sites of the Longshan period as possible regional centers. Some of these sites are fortiﬁed
      while others are not. Evidence for residential segregation within larger communities
      consists of large well-constructed buildings, some of which are associated with human
      sacriﬁce, and all of which are separated from the houses of commoners. And there appears
      to be craft specialization and production in items such as textiles, pottery, stone tools, and
      maybe metallurgy. Another key aspect—like the situation in Mesopotamia—is that these
      regional centers are often located near river channels that are important water transporta-
      tion routes.25
           The transition to life in permanent villages and established agricultural ﬁelds was made
      over much of North China in the Longshan period, from the western highlands into the
      northern Manchurian highlands and well into southern China.
           K. C. Chang has summarized the overall developments of China in the third
      millennium b.c. in terms of eight features that, taken together, indicate evolving cultural
      interaction and complexity: (1) the beginnings of copper metallurgy; (2) the widespread
      use of sophisticated potters’ wheels and presumably the emergence of a specialized class of

                                               THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN CHINA         443


potters; (3) the stamped-earth walls found at some sites, and their implication of the need
for civil defense; (4) burials of bodies in wells, mass graves, and other conditions that
suggest warfare; (5) the use of animal and other motifs in art works in ways that indicate
emerging status differences; (6) decorated jade masks and other objects that suggest an
emerging ritual system practiced over a large part of the country; (7) the widespread use of
scapulimancy, also suggesting ritual interaction over a large area; and (8) signs of social
ranking and wealth differences in burials.26
     We can easily draw parallels here with Egypt, Mesopotamia, and the Indus Valley: the
Chinese use of jade, scapulimancy, and so forth are distinctive in their speciﬁcs, but the
general pattern is one of emerging and evolving class-consciousness, functional specializa-
tion, and administrative complexity.27



ERH-LI-T’OU CULTURE (C. 1900–1500 B.C.)

After about 2000 b.c., large towns and cities began to replace or emerge from the tens of
thousands of villages that marked earlier, simpler times. During the second millennium
b.c. China really became “China,” in the sense that this period marked the ﬁrst widespread
use of the distinctively Chinese forms of writing, architecture, art, and ideology. Also dur-
ing this period all the correlates of cultural complexity—such as monumental architecture;
large population concentrations; occupational specialization; written records; gross
differences in wealth, power, and prestige; and large public-works projects—appeared in
full measure.
     Legends and early texts suggest that the ﬁrst Shang kings established seven or more
capital cities in the central area of the Huanghe River basin. One of the earliest sites of this
transitional period to complexity is Erh-li-t’ou (Yen-shih) (Figure 11.8). Here lies a vast
complex of ruins, scattered over an area about 1.5-by-2.5 km, and extending to a depth of
4 m in some places (Figure 11.9).
     Among the most impressive features at Erh-li-t’ou are the foundations of two buildings
that some have called “palaces”: One is 108-by-100 m and is associated with a large earthen
platform. In one area of its foundation was a group of burials, including one person who
seems to have been buried with his hands bound. The other, smaller palace was drained
with a system of pottery pipes and associated with a large earthen tomb—long since
plundered of most of its wealth. The richness of Erh-li-t’ou’s jade, bronze, pottery, and
other artifacts; the indications of human sacriﬁce; and the large buildings all suggest a level
of emerging cultural complexity greater than that of previous periods.
     The Erh-li-t’ou culture is important because it documents the advent of the Bronze
Age in China at a period earlier than the Shang, with which the earliest Bronze Age formerly
was associated.28 In fact, some Chinese scholars have attributed the Xia Dynasty to the
Erh-li-t’ou culture, perhaps with the site of Erh-li-t’ou as the Xia capital.29 More than 200
sites of the Erh-li-t’ou culture have been found, and the settlement pattern is suggestive of
a four-tiered hierarchy characteristic of civilizations elsewhere—such as Mesopotamia—
with a major center at Erh-li-t’ou, two smaller regional centers, several large villages, and
numerous small villages.30

444   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY




      FIGURE 11.8 K. C. Chang’s (1986) reconstructions of (A) major Erh-li-t’ou Culture sites and
      traditional Hsia Dynasty capitals; (B) traditional Shang Dynasty capitals.

                                                     THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN CHINA                   445


SHANG CIVILIZATION                                                 Luo                                      Rive
                                                                                                                r
                                               N
AND ITS
CONTEMPORARIES
(C. 1600–1046 B.C.)                                                                           Erlitou


                                       Beixu
The Early Shang phase (or Erh-
li-kang phase) is best docu-
mented archaeologically at the
cluster of settlements largely                                                              Palatial area

buried under the modern
city of Zhengzhou (formerly                                                                          Palace #2
                                                                                                                     Gedangtou
“Chengchou”). The central area
of Erh-li-kang phase settle-                                                                            Palace #1

ment was a roughly rectangular
arrangement of buildings ex-                    0     200 m                                     Bronze casting area


tending about 3.4 km2, much
                                              location of houses
of which was enclosed by a                    location of pits    site boundary
pounded-earth wall some 36 m                  location of burials pottery manufacture
                                              modern village      bone artifact manufacture                         modern road
wide at the base and 9.1 m in                 excavated area      bronze casting
height—as estimated from the
                                      FIGURE 11.9 A sketch map of the urban center at Erh-li-t’ou, China.
segments still remaining.31 The
northeastern area of the site is
thought to have been the residence and ceremonial center of the ruling elite,32 and around
it were thousands of pithouses, animal pens, shops, storage pits, and other features that
make it clear that many of the people of Shang China lived lives radically different from
those of Neolithic times. Hundreds of skilled, full-time craftsmen probably resided at
Zhengzhou. In one area thousands of pieces of animal and human bone were recovered,
much of it already fashioned into ﬁsh hooks, awls, axes, and hairpins. In another area were
more than a dozen pottery kilns, each surrounded by masses of broken and overﬁred
pottery.
      But the Zhengzhou craftsmen really displayed their skill in working bronze (Figure
11.10). Large areas were given over to workshops for casting ﬁsh hooks, axes, projectile
points, and various ornaments. A kind of mass-production was achieved by using multiple
molds, made by impressing a clay slab with the forms of six arrowheads, with each impres-
sion connected by a thin furrow to a central channel. A second clay mold was placed over
the ﬁrst, the two bound together, and then molten bronze was poured in. After cooling, the
individual points could be sawed off from the central stem.
      In Western societies especially, there is a tendency to think of cultural change as often
being driven by technological change. The invention of the locomotive, for example,
radically altered nineteenth-century Western society. When we look at ancient China, there
is a temptation to see a culture shaped and formed by the invention of bronze-working and
iron-working. Bronze-working seems to have been an indigenous development, probably
made possible by the high-temperature kilns ﬁrst used to ﬁre pottery. The requisite copper
and tin could be found within several hundred kilometers of the Shang homeland, and
various processes using clay models and the lost-wax process were known. The ﬁrst great

          446       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                diffusion of Shang culture, which probably marked both the
                                                rise of national consciousness and the ramifying of political
                                                and economic networks that underlay the emergence of
                                                Shang civilization, was also marked by the spread of bronze
                                                artifacts.
                                                     But the use of bronze seems to have been mainly a stylistic
                                                phenomenon rather than a great technological advance.
                                                Though lovely to look at, the myriad bronze Shang vessels
                                                offer few culinary advantages over ceramics, and there is no
                                                evidence that bronze weapons revolutionized Shang-period
                                                warfare. And for clearing forests—an important part of the
                                                Shang expansion—stone axes and hoes would probably have
                                                worked at least as well as bronze tools, which were, in any case,
                                                a luxury item.
                                                     Bronze-making may have been invented at different times
                                                by different people. Already by 4500 b.c. people in Southeast
                                                Asia, at sites like Ban Chiang, in Thailand, were using cast-
                                                bronze spearheads and ornaments.33 We know relatively little
                                                about these early Southeast Asian bronze-using cultures, but
                                                it seems likely that their precocious use of bronze was a result
                                                of the proximity of copper and tin deposits. Their evolution to
                                                cultural complexity followed that of the north in all essential
                                                elements and occurred much later.
FIGURE 11.10 A bronze axe from the early             Both archaeological evidence and ancient documents
Shang period.                                   written  after the Shang period indicate that Shang society was
                                                headed by a king, who ruled through a hierarchically arranged
                nobility. Commoners were conscripted for public works and military service, there were
                highly organized and incessant military campaigns, and many settlements were apparently
                integrated into an organized intervillage system of commerce.34 It has not been determined
                if there were large-scale irrigation systems, but at Zhengzhou at least a canal system was in
                use, perhaps to carry water to the settlement or else to remove drainage water or sewage
                from the complex.35
                       The great mass of Shang people, however, probably lived much as their ancestors had,
                in villages of pithouses located along river systems, subsisting on the same kinds of crops
                and agricultural technology as people of previous millennia.
                       The last and most brilliant phase of Shang civilization, the Yinxu phase, seems to have
                begun about 1300 b.c., when the Shang King P’an-keng is reported to have moved his
                capital to the city of Angang (formerly “An-yang”), in Henan Province.
                       Excavations at Angang and contemporary sites in this area have been conducted
                intermittently since the 1920s, but the publication of this research is far from complete.
                Scores of sites within an area of about 24 km2 have been tested, and the evidence suggests
                that the complex at Angang includes a large ceremonial and administrative center sur-
                rounded by smaller dependent hamlets and craft centers.36 True to tradition, most peasants
                still lived in small pithouses—not very different from those of 2,000 years earlier. Scattered
                throughout the settlement were granaries, pottery kilns, storage pits, bone and bronze
                workshops, animal pens, ditches, and other familiar features of ancient Chinese life.

                                              THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN CHINA        447


      No city wall has been found at Angang, but monumental buildings were constructed.
The largest of these was about 60 m long, rectangular in form, with large stone and bronze
column bases, and founded on a large platform of compacted earth. There were at least 53
structures of this type (though somewhat smaller) in one group at Angang, arranged in
three main clusters. Although not lavish in construction, these buildings were surrounded
by scores of human and animal sacriﬁcial burials, as well as many pits containing royal
records written on oracle bones and numerous small structures thought to be for service
personnel.37 Near the cluster of buildings a cemetery held 11 large graves, replete with
lavish, expensive burial goods and many human sacriﬁcial burials—the whole complex
surrounded by 1,200 smaller, much less lavish burials.
      Elsewhere, a complex of ceremonial buildings at Hsiao-T’un was dedicated with what
appears to have been the sacriﬁce of 852 people, 15 horses, 10 oxen, 18 sheep, 35 dogs, and
5 fully equipped chariots and charioteers.38 A recent bumper sticker declared “If I can’t take
it with me, I ain’t going”—a sentiment probably very agreeable to Shang rulers. Tomb after
tomb was stocked with everything from chariots to rice. Like the early Mesopotamian
peoples, the Chinese probably believed that burying a ruler’s wives, servants, guards, and
other staff with him would provide him with full services in the afterlife. The Shang may
also have employed that most efﬁcient of all incentives to a devoted domestic staff—the
ritual murder of a king’s staff on the occasion of his own death. Unlike feudal European
nobility, few Shang nobles probably feared poisoning by members of their households.
In some Shang tombs bodies were found decapitated or dismembered, and some of them
had been bound before they died. How others of these people were killed—if they were—
before burial is not clear, but their orderly arrangement in these and other tombs would be
certain to arouse the suspicions of a coroner.
      The Shang ceremonial and administrative structures are perhaps not as impressive in
size or cost as the temples of Mesopotamia or the pyramids of Egypt and Mesoamerica, but
the level of occupational specialization, the immense wealth of the burials, and the intensity
of organization of the agricultural and economic systems remind one of the Mesopotamian
city-states of the late fourth millennium b.c.
      Outside the immediate Shang region were other Bronze Age cultures that have been
less intensively excavated and studied. These include the site of Sanxigdui in Sichuan
Province. A walled city covering some 3 km2 was discovered here and extensive excavations
were undertaken beginning in the late 1980s.39 In the south part of the walled city, two
sacriﬁcial pits were found. These contain literally thousands of artifacts of all kinds—jade,
pottery, seashells, gold and bronze masks, bronze vessels, bronze human heads, elephant
tusks, and more. Study of the artifacts suggests that they were made locally, but some have
features that indicate contact with Erh-li-t’ou and Shang cultures.40
      Late in the Shang period (about 1200 b.c.), the written language had evolved (perhaps
quite rapidly) to the point that texts from this period give us a detailed portrait of Shang
life. Over 3,000 phonetic, ideographic, and pictographic characters were in use—of which
about 1,200 have been identiﬁed—and more than 160,000 inscribed shells (of which only
some have been translated) and numerous inscriptions in bronze or stone date to this
period.41
      According to the texts, the late Shang rulers held sway over a territory extending from
the Paciﬁc shore to Shensi Province in the west, and from the Yangtze River in the south
to southern Hupeh in the north. At the apex of Shang society was the king, who ruled

448   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      directly on many affairs of state and was assisted by a complex hierarchy of nobles
      possessing considerable local autonomy in their respective territories. These lords were
      charged with defending the homeland, supplying men for armies and public-works
      projects, and collecting and contributing state taxes. Toward the end of the Shang period,
      many nobles apparently achieved almost feudal status and were virtually independent in
      their own domains. But the king was still considered to have superior supernatural powers
      and to be the pivot of all ritual procedures. The kingdom was viewed in the traditional
      Chinese fashion, with itself as the center of the universe but ringed by non-Shang
      “barbarians,” whom the Shang kings manipulated through force and diplomacy.42
           On occasion, royal armies of up to about 30,000 men were conscripted and led by the
      nobles against insurgent “barbarians” and neighboring principalities. The basis of the army
      was the horse-drawn chariot, supported by infantrymen armed with powerful laminated
      wood and bone bows and bronze-tipped arrows and equipped with small knives and/or
      halberds, which were large knives or axes mounted on the end of a wood shaft about 6 feet
      long. Royal records indicate that military campaigns often incurred and inﬂicted frightful
      casualties. No doubt many hundreds of thousands of people died in ferocious wars of which
      history no longer has any record. Staggering quantities of plunder were often taken, along
      with thousands of prisoners, most of whom were apparently sacriﬁced or enslaved.43
           The agricultural system seems to have been essentially the same as previously, with
      millet, wheat, rice, and vegetables the major crops; cattle, sheep, pigs, and poultry the main
      livestock; and water buffalo the only “new” domestic animal. The proportions of these
      crops and animals may have shifted somewhat, with wheat and rice expanding their range
      at the expense of millet, but the evidence for this is questionable. There is little record of
      large irrigation systems anywhere in the Shang domain, and hunting and gathering still
      supplied a substantial part of the diet. The mammalian faunal remains from Angang
      include massive quantities of boar, deer, bear, and other hunted animals, including a few
      elephants, rhinoceroses, leopards, and even part of a whale.44 Apparently intravillage trade
      in foodstuffs was voluminous.
           Local occupational specialization was considerable. Many villages lacked one or more
      of the more important handicraft workshops, suggesting that products were exchanged
      among these settlements.45 The discovery of large caches of agricultural implements (3,500
      stone sickles, new and used, in a single pit at one site, for example) may indicate a degree
      of centralized management of both agriculture and craft production.46 The Shang even had
      a type of money, in the form of strings of cowrie shells.
           Toward the end of the Shang period, there were many walled towns and villages in
      North and Central China, and, compared to earlier periods, a much greater proportion of
      the populace lived in these semi-urban settings. But if we compare the settlement size
      distribution of late Shang China—or rather what we estimate it to have been—with those
      of Mesopotamia or Mesoamerica at a comparable level of development, it is clear that
      Shang China was a much less urbanized society. There were no settlements the size of Ur
      or Teotihuacán.
           We cannot know the minds of the Shang Chinese in any detailed sense, but their
      artifacts give us clues as to what they thought of the world. Like many ancient peoples, they
      seem to have sought a basic symmetry in all things. All temples and tombs were oblong or
      square and oriented to the four cardinal directions. Bronzes were always symmetrical, and
      even the messages inscribed on turtle shells for divinations were repeated on the right and

                                               THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN CHINA        449


left sides. The world was conceived of as square, the wind as blowing from four quarters,
and four groups of foreigners were thought to live on China’s borders. Throughout their
art, architecture, and literature, elements appear two by two, four by four, and in other
intricate but symmetrical arrangements.
      The texts and inscriptions tell us that the Shang nobles felt in constant and clear
communication with their ancestors, whom they consulted through oracles about the best
actions to take in multitudes of situations.


EARLY IMPERIAL CHINA (1046 B.C.–A.D. 220)

The early phases of Chinese civilization are often called the “Three Dynasties”—the
Erh-li-t’ou being the ﬁrst, the Shang the second, and the Zhou (formerly known as “Chou”)
the third. Yet these three dynasties overlapped somewhat, and, as K. C. Chang notes,
the developmental pattern was one of “Early Shang, interacting with Erh-li-t’ou, and
proto-Zhou, interacting with Shang.”47
     Chang goes on to quote a poem dating to the Zhou Dynasty that ascribes the dynasty’s
origins to divine will:
    August is God on high;
    Looking down, he is majestic;
    He inspected and regarded the [states of] the four quarters,
    He sought tranquillity for the people.
    These two kingdoms [of Hisa and Shang],
    Their government had failed;
    Throughout those states of the four [quarters] he investigated and estimated;
    God on high brought it to a settlement;
    Hating their extravagance,
    He looked about and turned his gaze to the West,
    And there he gave an abode.48
The “West” of this lyric, chosen by God, was the Zhou state. Had we the means to see it in
all its splendor, ancient imperial China under the Zhou and later states may well have
appeared to us as the most complex and colorful civilization of all antiquity. After 1046 b.c.,
the Zhou Empire (Figure 11.11) and its successors arranged much of China in a feudal
system that led to the growth of cities, great cycles of peace followed by warfare, and
minutely differentiated administrative hierarchies.49 Again and again particular families of
nobles or commoners would rise to power, make war on their neighbors, extend their
kingdoms, and then collapse under the onslaught of competing warlords. Through it all,
exquisite bronzes, porcelains, pots, and jewelry were made and lavished on the rich; untold
thousands of people were sacriﬁced to be buried with their rulers; and millions lived and
died in the eternal agricultural cycle of rural China (Figure 11.12).
      By 500 b.c. iron-working became widespread, and iron agricultural tools were in
common use. Iron weapons, mass burials, and military annals tell of a savage form of
warfare, not at all like the depersonalized modern combat of tanks, missiles, and automatic
weapons. Men in armor fought at close quarters with swords and knives on battleﬁelds
swarming with chariots, cavalry, and bowmen.

           450       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                       At about the time iron was
                                                                                  introduced, Confucius (551–
                                                                                  479 b.c.) lived and taught and,
                                                                                  together with the spread of
                                                                                  Buddhism in the third century
                                                                                  a.d., moved much of Chinese
                                                                                  thought beyond the reach of
                                                                                  the foreigner.
                                                                                       Amid the panoply of arts,
                                                                                  crafts, and religion, the prosaic
                                                                                  elements of agriculture were
                                                                                  also changing. After 500 b.c.
                                                                                  great irrigation works were
                                                                                  brought into use, allowing the
                                                                                  intensive cultivation of wet-
                                                                                  rice species as well as many
                                                                                  other crops. This in turn sup-
                                                                                  ported the tremendous popu-
                                                                                  lation densities of China. Along
                                                                                  with the introduction of the
                                                                                  ox-drawn plow and the evolu-
FIGURE 11.11 From the original Shang-period state, China evolved into true        tion of precise crop-rotation
empires during the Zhou and Han dynasties, whose extents are indicated here.      practices, Chinese agriculture
                                                                                  underwrote the impressive cul-
                                                                                  tural elaborations we associate
                                                                                  with the Qin (221–206 b.c.)
                                                                                  and Han (206 b.c.–a.d. 220)
                                                                                  dynasties.
                                                                                       The great richness and
                                                                                  opulence of the Qin Dynasty
                                                                                  is lavishly displayed in the
                                                                                  Museum of Qin Shi Huang, in
                                                                                  Shaanxi Province. In a project
                                                                                  worthy of Egyptian pharaohs,
                                                                                  the emperor Qin Shi Huang
                                                                                  drafted 700,000 people to build
                                                                                  a huge mausoleum and palace
                                                                                  complex. The work lasted for
                                                                                  39 years, and when it was
                                                                                  ﬁnished it was full of rare and
                                                                                  beautiful objects. Historical
                                                                                  records of the time say that the
                                                                                  complex was lighted with
FIGURE 11.12 Some bodies in Chinese tombs were so well preserved that auto-       lamps fueled by the fat of giant
psies can reveal causes of death. Here a Chinese radiologist X-rays Lady Dai, a   salamanders. In 206 b.c. the
Han Dynasty noblewoman who died in 141 b.c. of a heart attack.                    whole complex was burned in

                                                THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN CHINA           451


a popular revolt. When archaeologists excavated they found 56.25 km2 of buildings and
features, including “tombs of immolated slaves, table pits, stone material processing
workshops, tombs of criminals, pits for the execution of slaves, pits of life-size terra cotta
warriors and horses, and pits of bronze chariots and horses.”50 The site so far has revealed
thousands of life-size statues of warriors and horses, all rendered in exquisite detail.
     One of the world’s ﬁrst imperial censuses was conducted in China in a.d. 1–2 and
tallied 57.7 million people, at least 10 percent of whom lived in rectangular wooden
buildings in towns with populations of up to about 250,000. Coins circulated, schools
ﬂourished, and a rich store of literature was created.
     Through it all, along the northern and western frontiers, the nomadic horsemen and
herders of Asia pressed on the periphery of successive empires. The Great Wall, begun
during the Warring States period and uniﬁed under Qin Shi Huang (246–209 b.c.) was
meant to keep the nomad out and the farmer in, but it was probably not too successful.
Throughout Chinese history there was a constant interchange between sedentary and
nomadic cultures.
     Westerners tend to think of China as a static civilization with ancient and ﬁxed forms.
But from the long-term perspective, it has been a varied, ineffably complex cultural
pageant.



SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

If we look at Chinese civilization for the standard markers of early civilizations, as described
in chapter 7, they are all evident: (1) an initial spread of regional styles of ceramics and
artifacts reﬂecting increasing intensity and scope of cultural interactions among Neolithic
farmers; (2) the appearance of burials indicating inherited wealth, power, and prestige
(Figure 11.13); (3) the gradual development of towns and cities, often ringed with defensive
walls, in which administrative bureaucracies and craft-production facilities were
concentrated; (4) a rising level of regional and national warfare; (5) an elaboration over
time in monumental architecture, writing, and other arts and crafts and the development
of a national religion and
ideology; and, (6) throughout
the whole sequence, an overall
increase in the population
density, technological produc-
tion, and size of competing
nation-states.
     Chinese civilization also
offers some contrasts to other
civilizations. Compared to
Mesopotamia, for example,
early Chinese societies were          FIGURE 11.13 Like their contemporaries in Egypt and Mesopotamia, early
less urban than the Sumerian          Chinese complex societies expended enormous amounts of wealth in mortuary cults.
peoples, although in later            This Chinese princess of the late second millennium b.c. was entombed in a suit
Chinese history the country           made of 2,000 jade tiles tied together with gold wire.

452   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      became heavily urbanized. Many hypotheses have been suggested for why people aggregate
      in settlements of different sizes under different conditions. Unfortunately, the archaeological
      evidence from China during the critical periods is not sufﬁciently complete to evaluate the
      several possibilities. Some have thought that warfare was important in determining the
      settlement size distribution in ancient China, and in fact warfare did have a profound
      inﬂuence on Chinese developments. But warfare, too, seems to be simply another—and
      somewhat variable—expression of more fundamental changes going on within societies as
      their complexity and differentiation increase.
           One factor of continual importance in all Chinese developments was the great spread of
      the nomadic and semi-nomadic peoples who lived on the borders of the agricultural heart-
      land. Some of the earliest documents attesting to the rise of the Chinese state, for example,
      imply that the Zhou Empire was initiated by the movement of the warlord Tai Wang to the
      central Shaanxi Province under pressure from his nomadic neighbors.51 And Owen
      Lattimore’s comprehensive history of relationships between nomad and farmer in China
      illustrated the crucial role of this relationship in the formation of all later Chinese empires.52
           Chinese civilization also appears to have placed women in positions of power to a
      much greater degree than some other civilizations. In all known ancient civilizations
      women of elite and royal families had special status and prerogatives, but in ancient China
      women were important bureaucrats, served as royal envoys, and in at least one instance
      commanded an army.53
           K. C. Chang suggests that Chinese civilization was extraordinarily absorbed with
      shamanism—the connection to another world, a world of the gods and magical powers,
      through priests. Chang also offers this condensed hypothesis about Chinese cultural
      evolution: “[T]he wealth that produced the civilization was itself the product of concen-
      trated political power, and the acquisition of power was accomplished through the accumu-
      lation of wealth.”54 Chang suggests that Chinese civilization operated on a profoundly
      religious basis, with kings, nobles, and commoners arranged in a layered universe, under a
      pantheon of gods, with communication between the physical and spirit worlds channeled
      through priests. Hence the abiding concern with divining the will of the gods through
      oracles—the king himself was credited with oracular powers. And, as Chang notes, techno-
      logy has a reduced importance in such a fundamentally religious and abstract cosmology,
      which may explain even some of the contemporary differences between East and West.
           China eventually became locked in the same cyclical pattern of expansion and collapse
      we documented in other ancient civilizations. Indeed, the apparent cyclicity of Chinese
      history has been the basis for many general models of cultural complexity, ranging from
      Marx to Marvin Harris.55 In these ancient empires it is as if some internal limiting factors
      exist that restrain growth past a certain point, at least until certain evolutionary conditions
      are present. Perhaps these were primarily technological limits in these early empires.
      Without modern means of information collection, storage, retrieval, and dissemination,
      political systems have very deﬁnite limits in terms of the numbers of people, projects, and
      provinces they can successfully integrate.


      BIBLIOGRAPHY
      Akazawa, T., and C. M. Aikens, eds. 1986. Prehistoric Hunter-Gatherers in Japan. Tokyo: University Museum,
                University of Tokyo, Bulletin No. 27.

                                                       THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN CHINA                 453


An, Zhimin. 1994. “China During the Neolithic.” In History of Humanity, Vol. 1: Prehistory and the Beginnings of
             Civilization, ed. S. J. De Laet. New York: Routledge.
Anonymous. 1982. Neolithic Site at Banpo Near Xian. Trans. Du Youliang [sic]. Guide to the Banpo Museum,
             printing data written in Chinese.
Barnard, N. 1961. Bronze Casting and Bronze Alloys in Ancient China. Canberra: Australian National University.
Barnes, G. L. 1990. Bibliographic Reviews of Far Eastern Archaeology 1990: Hoabhinian, Jomon, Yayoi. Oxford,
             England: Oxbow Books.
———. 1993. China, Korea, and Japan. London and New York: Thames and Hudson.
Bayard, D. 1979. “The Chronology of Prehistoric Metallurgy in North-East Thailand: Silabhumi or
             Samrddhabhumil.” In Early South-East Asia, ed. R. B. Smith and W. Watson. London: Oxford
             University Press.
———. 1986. “Agriculture, Metallurgy, and State Formation in Southeast Asia.” Current Anthropology
             25(1):103–105.
Bellwood, P. 1986. The Prehistory of the Indo-Malaysian Archipelago. Sydney: Academic Press.
Chang, K. C. 1976. Early Chinese Civilization: Anthropological Perspectives. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
             Press.
———. 1977. The Archaeology of Ancient China, 3rd ed. New Haven: Yale University Press.
———. 1980. Shang Civilization. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
———. 1981. “In Search of China’s Beginnings: New Light on an Old Civilization.” American Scientist
             69:148–158.
Chang, S. 1963. “The Historical Trend of Chinese Urbanization.” Annals of the Association of American
             Geographers 53:109 –143.
Chang, T. 1957. Archaeological Studies in Szechwan. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
———. 1963. Archaeology in China, Vol. 3: Chou China. Cambridge: Heffer.
De, Zhou Shi. 1987. “Classical Chinese Contributions to Shipbuilding.” Endeavour NS. 11(1):2 – 4.
Harris, M. 1977. Cannibals and Kings . New York: Random House.
Higham, C. 1989. The Archaeology of Mainland Southeast Asia. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University
             Press.
Kim, S. O. 1994. “Burials, Pigs, and Political Prestige in Neolithic China.” Current Anthropology 35(2):119 –
             142.
Lattimore, O. 1951. Inner Asian Frontiers of China. Boston: Beacon Press.
Li, C. 1957. The Beginnings of Chinese Civilization. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
Liu, L. 2003. “‘The Products of Minds as Well as of Hands’: Production of Prestige Goods in the Neolithic and
             Early State Periods of China.” Asian Perspectives 42(1):1– 40.
———. 2004. The Chinese Neolithic: Trajectories to Early States. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Meacham, W. 1977. “Continuity and Local Evolution in the Neolithic of South China: A Non-Nuclear Approach.”
             Current Anthropology 18:419 – 440.
Nelson, S. M., ed. 1995. The Archaeology of Northeast China: Beyond the Great Wall. New York: Routledge.
Olsen, S. J. 1987. “The Practice of Archaeology in China Today.” Antiquity 61(232):282–290.
Skinner, G. W. 1964. “Marketing and Social Structure in Rural China.” Journal of Asian Studies 24:3 – 43.
Stanley, D. J., Z. Chen, and J. Song. 1999. “Innundation, Sea-Level Rise and Transition from Neolithic to Bronze
             Age Cultures, Yangtze Delta, China.” Geoarchaeology 14(1):15 –26.
Stover, L. E. 1974. The Cultural Ecology of Chinese Civilization. New York: Pica Press.
Toynbee, A., ed. 1973. Half the World. New York: Holt.
Triestman, J. 1972. The Prehistory of China. Garden City, NY: Natural History Press.
Trigger, B. G. 1993. Early Civilizations: Ancient Egypt in Context. Cairo: American University in Cairo Press.
———. 1999. “Shang Political Organization: A Comparative Approach.” Journal of East Asian Archaeology
             13(1):43–62.
Wangping, S. 2000. “The Longshan Period and Incipient Chinese Civilization.” Journal of East Asian Archaeology
             2(1–2):195 –226.
Watson, W. 1971. Cultural Frontiers in Ancient East Asia. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
———. 1974. Ancient China. Greenwich, CT: New York Graphic Society.
Wheatley, P. 1971. The Pivot of the Four Quarters. Chicago: Aldine de Gruyter.
Wittfogel, K. A. 1957. Oriental Despotism: A Comparative Study of Total Power. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Wu, Z. 1985. “The Museum of Qin Shi Huang.” Museum 147:140 –147.
Yang, X., ed. 2004a. New Perspectives on China’s Past: Chinese Archaeology in the Twentieth Century. Volume 1:
             Cultures and Civilizations Reconsidered. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, and Kansas City: The
             Nelson-Atkins Museum of Art.
——, ed. 2004b. New Perspectives on China’s Past: Chinese Archaeology in the Twentieth Century. Volume 2: Major
             Archaeological Discoveries in Twentieth-Century China. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, and
             Kansas City: The Nelson-Atkins Museum of Art.

454   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      NOTES
       1. De, “Classical Chinese Contributions to Shipbuilding.”
       2. Chang, The Archaeology of Ancient China, pp. 95 –99.
       3. Liu, The Chinese Neolithic: Trajectories to Early States, p. 22.
       4. Ibid., pp. 23 –24.
       5. Ibid., pp. 20 –21.
       6. Stanley et al., “Inundation, Sea-Level Rise and Transition from Neolithic to Bronze Age Cultures, Yangtze
          Delta, China.”
       7. Ibid., pp. 20 –24.
       8. Recent work appears to show that “transitional” cultures between the late Paleolithic and Neolithic have
          evidence for very early pottery, as well as rice and millet—these sites date between 10,000 to 14,000 years ago,
          depending on the speciﬁc site (see Yang, New Perspectives on China’s Past: Chinese Archaeology in the Twentieth
          Century. Volume 2: Major Archaeological Discoveries in Twentieth-Century China, pp. 34 –37). This is some of
          the earliest pottery in the world, comparable in age to Jomon in Japan, where pottery is found associated with
          complex hunter-gatherers about 12,000 to 13,000 years ago (see Akazawa and Aikens, Prehistoric Hunter-
          Gatherers in Japan).
       9. An, “China During the Neolithic”; Yang, New Perspectives on China’s Past: Chinese Archaeology in the
          Twentieth Century. Volume 1: Cultures and Civilizations Reconsidered, p. 12.
      10. Triestman, The Prehistory of China.
      11. Yang, New Perspectives on China’s Past: Chinese Archaeology in the Twentieth Century. Volume 2: Major
          Archaeological Discoveries in Twentieth-Century China, pp. 46 –59.
      12. Ibid.
      13. Chang, “In Search of China’s Beginnings: New Light on an Old Civilization,” pp. 152–153.
      14. Watson, Ancient China.
      15. Yang, New Perspectives on China’s Past: Chinese Archaeology in the Twentieth Century. Volume 2: Major
          Archaeological Discoveries in Twentieth-Century China, p. 53.
      16. Ibid.
      17. Liu, The Chinese Neolithic: Trajectories to Early States, p.155.
      18. The following discussion of early complex Chinese societies is taken mainly from Chang, The Archaeology of
          Ancient China.
      19. Liu, The Chinese Neolithic: Trajectories to Early States, p. 135.
      20. Ibid., p. 136.
      21. Ibid.
      22. Kim, “Burials, Pigs, and Political Prestige in Neolithic China.”
      23. Ibid., p. 120.
      24. See also Wangping, “The Longshan Period and Incipient Chinese Civilization.”
      25. Liu, The Chinese Neolithic: Trajectories to Early States, pp. 111–113.
      26. See Chang, The Archaeology of Ancient China, for a review of the archaeological record of these cultural
          elements.
      27. In addition to Chang, The Archaeology of Ancient China, see also Triestman, The Prehistory of China.
      28. Yang, New Perspectives on China’s Past: Chinese Archaeology in the Twentieth Century. Volume 2: Major
          Archaeological Discoveries in Twentieth-Century China, p. 114.
      29. Ibid.
      30. Liu, The Chinese Neolithic: Trajectories to Early States, p. 226.
      31. Chang, The Archaeology of Ancient China, pp. 286 –294.
      32. Yang, New Perspectives on China’s Past: Chinese Archaeology in the Twentieth Century. Volume 2: Major
          Archaeological Discoveries in Twentieth-Century China, p. 121.
      33. Bayard, “The Chronology of Prehistoric Metallurgy in North-East Thailand: Silabhumi or Samrddhabhumil.”
      34. Chang, Early Chinese Civilization: Anthropological Perspectives.
      35. Wheatley, The Pivot of the Four Quarters.
      36. Ibid.
      37. Chang, Early Chinese Civilization: Anthropological Perspectives, p. 10.
      38. Wheatley, The Pivot of the Four Quarters, p. 93.
      39. Limited excavations and surveys in the 1930s originally identiﬁed the site (Yang, New Perspectives on China’s
          Past: Chinese Archaeology in the Twentieth Century. Volume 2: Major Archaeological Discoveries in Twentieth-
          Century China, pp. 144 –146).
      40. Ibid., p. 145.
      41. Chang, Early Chinese Civilization: Anthropological Perspectives, p. 48.
      42. Wheatley, The Pivot of the Four Quarters.
      43. Ibid., p. 63.

                                                      THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN CHINA   455


44. Ibid.
45. Chang, The Archaeology of Ancient China, pp. 138 –139.
46. Wheatley, The Pivot of the Four Quarters, p. 76.
47. Chang, “In Search of China’s Beginnings: New Light on an Old Civilization,” p. 156.
48. Ibid.
49. Wu Zilin, “The Museum of Qin Shi Huang,” p. 141.
50. Chang, “In Search of China’s Beginnings: New Light on an Old Civilization.”
51. Lattimore, Inner Asian Frontiers of China.
52. Ibid.
53. Trigger, Early Civilizations: Ancient Egypt in Context, p. 37.
54. Chang, The Archaeology of Ancient China, p. 414.
55. See, for example, Harris, Cannibals and Kings.

