14
The Evolution of Complex Societies
in Andean South America

In the lands assigned to Religion and to the
Crown, the Inka kept overseers and
administrators who took care in supervising
their cultivation, harvesting the products and
putting them in storehouses. The labor of
sowing and cultivating these lands and
harvesting their products formed a large part of
the tribute which the taxpayer paid to the king.
. . . The people assembled to cultivate them in
the following way. If the Inka himself . . . or
some other high ofﬁcial happened to be present
he started the work with a golden [spade] . . .
and following his example, all did the same.
However the Inka soon stopped working, and
after him the other ofﬁcials and nobles stopped
also and sat down with the king to their
banquets and festivals which were especially
notable on such days.
       The common people remained at work . . .
each man put into his section his children and
wives and all the people of his house to help
him. In this way, the man who had the most
workers ﬁnished his suyu ﬁrst, and he was
considered a rich man; the poor man was he
who had no one to help him in his work and
had to work that much longer.
Father Bernabe Cobo (c. a.d. 1653)1




F      ather Cobo’s observations remind us of a point reviewed in detail in chapter 7 and
       other previous chapters: Ancient civilizations varied greatly in many respects, but
one of the fundamental ways in which they were all profoundly similar is that each and
every one evolved social institutions that not only permitted the pervasive exploitation of

                                               533

           534       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                    the many by the few, but also made that exploitation into a
                                                    religious and civil virtue. Few “artifacts” demonstrate this
                                                    “exploitation” more vividly than the well-preserved corpse
                                                    (Figure 14.1) of a seven-year-old Inka boy whose body was
                                                    found in the high Andes.2 He was dressed in beautifully woven
                                                    cotton clothes—embroidered with geometric and other
                                                    designs—and was wearing a plume headdress, a turquoise and
                                                    Spondylus shell necklace, and woven sandals. Ritual offerings
                                                    found nearby include six small statues of gold and carved
                                                    Spondylus shells. The statues of humans were clothed and
                                                    adorned with ornaments, while the others have camelid
                                                    features—likely representing animals such as the llama and
                                                    alpaca. Perhaps this was a ritual sacriﬁce to some deity asso-
                                                    ciated with the mountains. We simply shall never know—
                                                    but this boy and many similar ﬁnds in ancient civilizations
                                                    around the world exemplify behavior that we think of as
                                                    exploitation, but which the boy and his culture probably saw
                                                    as necessary and virtuous acts of faith that kept the cosmos
                                                    in order.
                                                         When European explorers reached Peru and the other
                                                    countries of Andean South America, they found a civilization
                                                    that was very strange to them in many ways, including ritual
FIGURE 14.1 An Inka mummy of a seven-
                                                    human sacriﬁce, but they recognized immediately that the
year-old boy, Mount Aconcagua, Argentina.           Inka were organized in a rigidly stratiﬁed class society under a
                                                    supreme monarch—just as the Europeans themselves of that
                                                    era were.
                           As with other New World political systems, one has to wonder how it would all have
                     turned out had the Spanish not beheaded this civilization in the sixteenth century through
                     murder, warfare, and the spread of European diseases. The Spanish themselves did not
                     know about the origins of smallpox and other diseases that so terribly afﬂicted aboriginal
                     Americans, but their imposition of slavery and intentional destruction of South American
                     civilizations (see later) seem particularly barbaric in retrospect, even in the context of the
                     bloody sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.
                           Andean South American civilizations paralleled other early complex cultures in
                     their intensive farming systems, massive pyramids and temples, large cities, powerful
                     armies, and hierarchies of wealth, power, and prestige. But they were different from other
                     early civilizations in interesting ways. The Inka Empire, for example, was the only one of
                     the six “primary” (see chapter 7) ancient civilizations that did not develop a written
                     language, despite the fact that it was the largest political system ever to evolve in the pre-
                     Columbian New World. The Inka and some of their predecessors compensated to some
                     extent for the lack of a written language by using the knot-system for transmitting
                     information (see later) and by building a massive system of roads that linked people to the
                     central government and to each other (Figure 14.2). Neither the Inka nor any other New
                     World people, however, ever developed the wheeled chariots, wagons, and other vehicles
                     that were a major reason why Old World civilizations were able to dominate the world
                     for centuries.

                                                 THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN ANDEAN SOUTH AMERICA                  535


                                                          SOUTH AMERICA

                        1900
                        1800
                        1700
                                                                                LATE
                        1600                                                   HORIZON
                                                                                                            Arrival of the
                        1500
                                                                                                  Inka         Spanish
                        1400
                                                                                                                 Chimú
                        1300
                                                                                 LATE
                        1200
                                                                             INTERMEDIATE
                        1100                                                    PERIOD

                        1000
                         900   New migration
                                and ceramic
                         800
                                   styles                                       MIDDLE
                         700                                                   HORIZON
                                                              Integration                                       Tiwanaku
                         600




MILLEINNIA CENTURIES
                                                                 period
                                                                                                         Wari
                         500
                         400
                                 Ballgame                   Regional
                         300     in Antilles              Development
                               new immigrants                period
                         200
                                                                                EARLY
                         100                                              INTERMEDIATE PERIOD
                                                     San                                        Moche
                           0                        Agustin                 EARLY HORIZON
                                                               Chorrera                         Chavín
                        1000                                                 INITIAL PERIOD
                                  Arawak
                        2000     migration                     Valdivia
                                 to Antilles                   culture
                        3000
                                           Ceramics at                        PRECERAMIC
                        4000
                                        Puerto Hormiga,
                        5000           Columbia c. 3000 B.C.

                        6000              Hunter-gatherers
                        7000
                        8000                   Paleoindians

                        9000
                       10000



                   20000

           536      PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                     THE ECOLOGICAL SETTING

                                                                          Ecological complementarity was a
                                                                          major human achievement, forged
                                                                          by Andean civilizations to handle a
                                                                          multiple environment, vast popula-
                                                                          tions, and hence high productivity. It
                                                                          helps us understand the unique place
                                                                          of the Andean achievement in the
                                                                          repertory of human histories; it may
                                                                          even point to future possibilities.
                                                                                                   John Murra3
                                                                     Like most other complex societies that
                                                                     developed independently, Andean South
                                                                     American civilization was possible because
                                                                     of—indeed, to an extent it can be deﬁned
                                                                     as—the economic integration of the
                                                                     resources from highly varied physical
                                                                     environments.4 Ancient Egypt (chapter 9)
                                                                     is something of an exception to this
                                                                     pattern, in that its resources were quite
                                                                     similar over the length of the Nile Valley
                                                                     and Delta, but in Andean South America
                                                                     there were great economic advantages to
                                                                     integrating the different natural resources
                                                                     of highlands and lowlands, ocean and farm.
                                                                     The Andes rise so sharply from the Paciﬁc
                                                                     that only a thin strip of land, less than
                                                                     about 60 km at its widest point, separates
FIGURE 14.2 A stone-lined trail that served as part of the Inka road
system.                                                              the mountains from the sea. And because
                                                                     the Andes shield the coast from the rain-
                  bearing air currents crossing the continent from the Atlantic, most of this coastal strip is
                  one of the world’s driest deserts, a region where rain falls only once or twice every ﬁve years.
                  In a few places winter fogs along the coast keep skies overcast and in most years this
                  phenomenon provides enough moisture through condensation to support vegetation
                  zones (called lomas). But most of the coastal strip is utterly dry, and when the wind blows,
                  dunes can quickly cover houses and choke irrigation canals.
                        This desert is habitable only because of the 50 or so small rivers that ﬂow down from
                  the mountains, across the plain, and into the sea. Many contain water during only part of
                  the year, but the larger, permanent ones support forests and shrubs and their attendant
                  wildlife, and in some areas the rivers keep the water table sufﬁciently high so that cultivation
                  is possible without irrigation. Near the mouths of the rivers are ﬁsh, freshwater shrimp, and
                  other resources, and in some valleys rivers have created broad alluvial plains of potentially
                  rich farmlands. The coast has extraordinarily rich concentrations of ﬁsh, birds, birds’ eggs,
                  sea mammals, mollusks, crustaceans, kelp, and other plant foods. Human life along the coast
                  is tied directly to these rivers and streams because they provide the only drinking water.

                            THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN ANDEAN SOUTH AMERICA            537


     These rich marine resources are produced by a fascinating interplay of wind and ocean
currents in which winds drive water north along the coast while the earth’s rotation from
east to west pushes the water westward, creating an upwelling of water from the ocean ﬂoor.
Carried with these deep waters are tremendous concentrations of phosphates and other
nutrients that support countless billions of microscopic plants, and these form the basis of
a complex food chain comprising anchovies and other small ﬁsh that eat the plants; larger
ﬁsh, birds, and sea mammals that eat the anchovies; and, ultimately, people, who exploit
many links in the chain.
     Occasionally, shifts in wind and water change the water temperatures and the plants
die, cutting off the base of the food chain. When this happens, rotting plant and animal life
ﬁll the air with clouds of hydrogen sulﬁde that can blacken ships and houses.5 Several years
may pass before the fertility of the sea is restored. The frequency in prehistory of el Niño (a
reference to the Christ child), as this disturbance is called, is unknown, but it has occurred
somewhat regularly in historical times, and recently it has been recurring about once
every two to seven years and usually lasts about a year. By late 1995 this area had been
experiencing el Niño continuously for nearly four years, which seems exceptionally long.
Recent research using sedimentary cores from land and lake deposits, however, indicates
that major el Niño events in prehistory were not that common. The work of Fontugne and
his colleagues, for example, documents a major el Niño at 8980 b.c. and another one
sometime after 3380 b.c.6 In the interval between these events were 10 humid episodes
separated by dry phases. During the humid periods, the upwelling was stronger and there
was increased moisture condensation in the form of fogs—these correlate with increased
evidence for human occupation.
     In the mountains are lush valleys, large basins, and high grassy plateaus (called punas).
Hunters and gatherers here were succeeded after 4000 b.c. by farmers of potatoes, maize,
quinoa, and other crops and by herders of llama and alpaca (domesticated New World
camels).
     The eastern slopes of the Andes, the montaña, are wet and heavily forested, and the
combination of steep slopes and intense rain apparently limited exploitation by prehistoric
peoples. East of the Andes is the Amazon Basin, a tropical rain forest from which feathers
and other products were harvested and brought into early Andean South American
economic systems, but which was never directly controlled by Andean peoples. The earliest
known pottery in the New World dates to between 6000 b.c. and 5000 b.c. and comes from
the lower Amazon Basin, in Brazil, where it was apparently made by hunter-foragers who
specialized in shellﬁshing.7 But ceramics were independently invented many times in the
New World, and the extent to which these tropical cultures may have inﬂuenced those of
the Andean regions remains unclear.



EARLY HUNTERS AND GATHERERS

A few South American sites have been dated (controversially) to 20,000–15,000 years ago,
but not until about 10,000 years ago is there substantial evidence of people in the mountains
and coasts of Andean South America. John Rick has surveyed large areas of these uplands,
and in caves and rock shelters he has found projectile points, scrapers, knife blades, and

538   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      other traces of these early Peruvians: They ate a lot of deer, guanaco, and vicuña (an animal
      related to the llama, both of which are New World forms of camels), and in some cases were
      perhaps even able to live year-round in small areas.8 In the beginning they also hunted giant
      ground sloths and a few other animals that became extinct about 10,000 years ago.
           Some of these people were probably “transhumant,” meaning that they moved up and
      down the mountains to exploit various resources as they came in season. Many people
      made these seasonal moves once alpacas and llamas were domesticated because these
      animals require constant tending and frequent moves to new pasturages, thus making it
      possible for people to exploit the different environments at different times of year. The
      “thin” air, intense cold, blizzards, and thick fogs of the highlands make movement difﬁcult,
      and over millennia of adapting to these conditions, natural selection has produced Andean
      peoples with extraordinary cardiovascular systems. Genetics and life-long exposure to the
      strains of life at high altitudes have produced people who can work hard in air extremely
      low in oxygen, while others unadapted to this environment can hardly function.
           We may never know if coastal Andean South America was occupied before or at the
      same early date as the mountains because long stretches of what were beaches and inland
      areas before 3000 b.c. have been ﬂooded by rising sea levels.9 In areas that escaped ﬂooding
      there is evidence of communities as early as 10,000 years ago, so some scholars suspect that
      coastal populations may have been substantial at an early date.10



      THE AGRICULTURAL BASIS OF ANDEAN CIVILIZATION

      As was discussed in chapter 6, maize phytoliths (the microscopic hard remains of some
      plant cells) and pollen have been found at a few South American sites that date earlier than
      1500 b.c. In reviewing the evidence, though, Deborah Pearsall concluded that maize
      probably did not become an important crop until after 1500 b.c.11
           Maize was just one of the important food crops in Andean South America, and in
      some areas potatoes, beans, and quinoa were the staffs of life. Quinoa seeds has one of the
      highest protein contents of any plant, and this plant was grown in many Andean regions.
      Domesticated potatoes were found in sites in Peru’s Casma Valley mountains in occupa-
      tions dating around 2250 b.c. to 1775 b.c.,12 and there are traces of cultivation that may go
      back as early as about 4400 b.c.13 This proliﬁc plant is well suited to wet, cold soils where
      cereals do not do well, and the ancient South Americans partially solved a major problem
      of any agricultural system based on tubers—speciﬁcally, that tubers do not store well for
      long periods—by developing a method of storing potatoes by freeze-drying them.
           The domestication of cotton between about 4000 b.c. and 1200 b.c. provided a
      relatively cheap source of textiles, and cotton textiles were complemented by a highly
      developed weaving craft in which reeds and other grasses were woven into sandals, clothes,
      and many other products. Ancient Andean cotton textiles are a lovely fusion of form and
      function. Many Andean textiles of various periods have survived because human corpses
      were frequently wrapped in them and buried in the coastal deserts, which desiccated and
      preserved both the textiles and the bodies. Using mineral and plant-derived dyes, ancient
      Andeans decorated many of their textiles with a wide variety of motifs, including geometric
      ﬁgures and stylized people and animals.

                            THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN ANDEAN SOUTH AMERICA              539


     The role of animal domestication in early Peru is unclear, but llamas and guinea pigs
were certainly domesticated in central Peru by 3500 b.c. As in Mexico, however, hunting
continued to play an important role in many areas until quite late.14 Evidence from several
highland sites suggests that by about 4000 b.c. guinea pigs had been domesticated—if they
were not domesticated by this time, then these Andean peoples were formidable hunters of
these rodents, for guinea pig bones are thickly spread through many layers of occupational
refuse. Guinea pigs do so well in captivity, are so proliﬁc and easy to feed, and are so suitable
in terms of size for the modern diet that one wonders why international food conglomerates
have not yet renamed and successfully marketed them.


THE FIRST COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN ANDEAN SOUTH
AMERICA

The formative period of Andean South American civilization can be thought of in terms
of two periods, the Late Preceramic period (c. 3200 b.c.–1800 b.c.) and the Initial period
(c. 1800 b.c.–900/600 b.c.).15
     Like their archaeological colleagues working on early civilizations in other parts of the
world, archaeologists in Peru have tried to identify when ancient Peruvian societies ﬁrst
made those fateful transitions in the direction of cultural complexity—complexity in the
sense of the evolution of the kind of society represented by the Inka, with its bureaucratic
hierarchies, class divisions, monumental architecture, economic differentiation and
integration, expansionistic militarism, and elaboration of arts, crafts, and ideology.
     As we have seen in other chapters, every early civilization around the world solved
similar problems of nutrition and adaptation. Each found a reliable and productive plant
to provide carbohydrates (rice, wheat, potatoes, maize, etc.), a legume to provide high-
quality vegetable proteins (beans, peas, vetch, etc.), an animal protein source (usually a
blend of hunting, ﬁshing, and herding), and a textile to provide clothing (wool, linen,
cotton, etc.). Not every society that evolved these adaptations became a great civilization
(e.g., Polynesian societies based on tubers, pigs, and bark cloth), but all that did converged
in their solutions to essentially the same problems of adaptation.
     Peru offers an interesting possible variation on this theme because its sea coasts offer
such a proliﬁc source of food, in the form of many species of birds, shellﬁsh, and ﬁsh—
particularly schooling ﬁsh, such as anchovies. Even without farming, or with some minimal
gardening, these coasts may have proffered enough reliable food to support many people—
people who could live for all or much of the year in the same communities.
     In the 1970s archaeologist Michael Moseley suggested that the initial stage of the rise
of Andean societies was based on people who lived in villages and began to evolve some
simple social stratiﬁcations on the basis of a ﬁshing and foraging economy along the marine
coasts rather than agriculture—at least at ﬁrst. At one level this suggestion might not seem
particularly radical. We know that all that is required for sedentary communities and the
ﬁrst appearances of complex societies is a highly productive and reliable blend of animal
and plant foods, and it is not important whether these foods are agricultural (chapter 6) or
not. Native Americans on the northwest coast of North America managed to live in non-
agricultural sedentary communities that were stratiﬁed by wealth and an elementary sense

540   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      of class, for example, as did many others, including the hunter-foragers of Southwest Asia,
      whose descendants became the denizens of the great Sumerian and Babylonian empires
      (chapter 8).
           Also, the Inka Empire managed to tie together a great diversity of upland and lowland
      environments in an economy that was fundamentally agricultural when the Spanish
      encountered it, so it is interesting to see what role maritime resources played in the overall
      cultural evolution of this area, both before agriculture became the dominant source of food
      and afterward.
           We know that by at least 6000 b.c. quite a few people lived on the Paciﬁc coast,
      probably moving between the river valleys, the lomas (fog-oases), and the coast.16 For
      several millennia thereafter, these societies seemed to change little as they adapted to this
      rich complex of environments. Anyone who has had the good fortune to live at the interface
      between sea, plains, and mountains, where oysters, clams, and ﬁsh can be combined with
      the wealth of terrestrial foods, can appreciate the stability and diversity of such economies,
      and the Andean coast is among the richest such zones in the world.

      The Late Preceramic Period in Andean South America
      (c. 3200 B.C.–2000 B.C.)
      Just prior to the beginning of the third millennium b.c., the appearance of sedentary,
      complex societies becomes a feature of both the coastal and highland areas. As we have seen
      in other areas of the world, one feature of such cultures is monumental construction–plazas,
      pyramids, and courts (discussed later). These sites also appear to be politically organized
      at a level above egalitarian villages.17
            Excavations at Paloma,18 on the coast of the Chilca Valley, 65 km south of Lima,
      illustrate some aspects of life in such regions (Figure 14.3). Paloma was located about 3.5 km
      from the ocean and 7.5 km from the Chilca River, on the edge of the lomas zone, where
      fogs supported some vegetation. Beginning about 8,000 years ago, people were living there
      in reed huts, probably already putting together a varied economy of plant collecting,
      hunting, and foraging. But shortly before 3000 b.c., some people apparently moved from
      the lomas in order to concentrate on the interface of coast and river valley, and small, dis-
      persed settlements began to appear in these zones.19 By about 2500 b.c., many small sedentary
      communities had appeared along the Andean coast. In some cases, the diet of these
      communities seems to have been based mainly on marine resources, with wild or domestic
      plants of only secondary importance,20 but there was great variability from site to site.
            At Alto Salaverry,21 which was occupied from about 2500 b.c. to 1800 b.c., people
      cultivated and subsisted mainly on plants, but a lot of the calories in their diet came from
      sharks, bonito, mussels, and many other types of marine foods. In several communities of
      this period, skeletons show a pattern of bone growth in the inner ear that is common among
      people who spend a lot of time diving in cold water.22
            At Chilca, the primary meat source appears to have been sea lions, but mussels, other
      invertebrates, and a variety of collected plants were also important. At other sites the
      remains of sharks, rays, cormorants, gulls, pelicans, and other animals attest to the
      importance of the resources of the coastal shallows, as does the presence of ﬁsh hooks, nets,
      and lines. No boats have been found at any of these sites, but the kinds of ﬁsh and
      invertebrates usually eaten along the coast are easily taken with simple nets.

                            THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN ANDEAN SOUTH AMERICA                   541



  P E RU                                                                             COLOMBIA
  0       150 mi                                       ECUADOR
  0   150 km




                                                                                                BRAZIL
                                          Alto Salaverry      La Galgada
                                                                     Chavin de Huantar

                                               Cevro Sechin      Sechin Alto
               Pacific                                                           Kotosh

               Ocean                Forteleza River                 Piedra Parada
                                     Patavilca River
                                                           el Paraiso   La Florida
                                                                          Cardal
                                                                          Asia


                                                                                                 BOLIVIA




FIGURE 14.3 Some sites of the Preceramic and Initial periods.



     By about 2000 b.c., numerous communities dotted the Andean coastline, many of
them on river deltas and bays. Most of these seem to have been quite simple foraging-based
communities, and few had more than several hundred inhabitants. At Chilca, examination
of the burials of 30 adults and 22 children and adolescents indicated only minor differences
in grave goods or positioning of the corpses. Some people were interned with spindles and
spindlewhorls, others with ﬁsh hooks and lines, still others with cotton and weaving tools
or a pointed stick and spatula kit that may have been used in shellﬁsh gathering.
     Once the Andean coast was fairly thickly settled, people here, like those in Egypt,
Mesopotamia, China, and other early developmental centers, began building monumental
architecture. It is absurd to think that people generally have some innate desire to build big
stone buildings, but in Andean South America, too, no sooner had people devised
economies of some reasonable reliability and richness than they began “wasting” massive
amounts of their wealth in temples, tombs, and pyramids.
     As was discussed in chapter 7 and other earlier chapters, the appearance of monumental
architecture was one of the earliest signs of social transformations of cultures around the
world. Andean South American civilization also followed this pattern. In the third
millennium b.c., people in dozens of communities along the coast began to build impres-
sive stone buildings and complexes of plazas, sunken pits, courts, truncated pyramids, and
other large and formally arranged architecture.

          542       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                   Many sites are known
                                                                              from the coastal area at this
                                                                              time—they are distributed in
                                                                              several ecological zones in the
                                                                              coastal valleys, and inland sites
                                                                              continue to have maritime
                                                                              resources as an important com-
                                                                              ponent of their subsistence. In
                                                                              the Pativilca and Fortaleza
                                                                              River Valleys in the Norte
                                                                              Chico region, for example,
                                                                              Haas and his colleagues have
                                                                              documented a minimum of
                                                                              16 sites with late Preceramic
                                                                              occupations.23 Each of these is
                                                                              characterized by monumental
FIGURE 14.4 A structure at el Paraiso, Peru.                                  architecture, large plazas, and
                                                                              large ceremonial structures.
                                                                              The rectangular, terraced
                  pyramids (mounds) range in size from 3,000 to 100,000 m2, and there are between one and
                  seven mounds present at each of the 16 sites.
                        Of the other early monumental buildings along the coast in the Preceramic period,
                  most seem to have had a clear ritual purpose. Their alignment with mountain peaks, small
                  inner rooms, internal burials, and other characteristics suggests ritual purposes, although
                  like other early ceremonial structures around the world, they probably were centers for
                  economic exchange and administration. Religion and economy, as we have noted, are
                  inextricably intertwined throughout human history.
                        At the end of the late Preceramic period, a new form of construction appears in the
                  coastal regions, the U-shaped mound complexes.24 An example of this development is El
                  Paraíso, on the banks of the Rio Chillón, about 2 km inland from the sea (Figure 14.4). This
                  site is dominated by seven mounds that form a U-shape covering some 58 hectares, with a
                  large plaza situated between the mounds. The structures were built over a period of several
                  centuries and contain some 100,000 tons of stone masonry; the two largest structures rise
                  to a height of over 5 m.25 One structure is reported to have been painted a bright red and
                  has evidence of burning on the ﬂoor, perhaps as a result of rituals.
                        There is much variability in early Andean South American monumental architecture,
                  but there are also regularities that suggest that the builders of these structures shared a
                  complex ideology and aesthetic. In previous chapters we have noted that early civilizations
                  seem to have been built around a core of fundamental beliefs that integrated peoples over
                  large areas and motivated them to work in concert within and between communities.
                  Traces of this ideology seem to be expressed at El Paraíso. As Jeffrey Quilter noted,26 the
                  principal mounds at both El Paraíso and another coastal site, Piedra Parada,27 are oriented
                  to north 25 degrees east. This orients the sites

                        toward the NE and SW maxima of the Milky Way, and the axis perpendicular to this
                        orientation is directed to the rising of the sun at the Summer Solstice (December) in the

                              THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN ANDEAN SOUTH AMERICA               543


    east and the setting of the sun [at] the Winter Solstice (June), as calculated for the years ca.
    [1450 b.c.].28 . . . This suggests that the astrocosmological concepts known to have been
    important for the Inka were established in Preceramic times.29

     Other complexes of this period have different orientations, but most of them have a
formal, almost stylized use of speciﬁc architectural elements and arrangements. Ancient
Peruvians used the interplay of rectilinear arrangements with circular or rounded elements,
as well as the placement of sunken courts, terraces, and other constructions at different
levels of elevation. These arrangements may have been intended, like those of Egyptian
temples, to take the individual who enters the complex through a progression of “sacred”
spaces.30 At El Paraíso, Huaca Florida, and other sites, people built complexes in a U
pattern, in which people presumably entered the open part of the U-shaped complex of
platforms and buildings and then proceeded through interior forecourts, sunken courts,
and other structures.
     People in the Andean highlands also built monumental structures. At Kotosh, at about
the 1,800-m level on the eastern slopes of the Andes, a large complex may have been begun
before 1800 b.c. The earliest structure—a temple—was built on a stone-faced platform
some 8 m high. At least 10 superimposed building levels were found. A good example of
one of these structures is the Temple of the Crossed Hands, which is approximately square
in shape—just over 9 m on a side—and about 2 m high. A stylized white serpent is painted
on the staircase leading to this temple, and its entrance is plastered and painted red. A cir-
cular ﬁrepit, built into the ﬂoor, has subﬂoor ﬂues to facilitate complete burning of materials
placed into the ﬁrepit. Other features include ﬁve wall niches, and just below the two niches
that ﬂank a large central niche are clay-sculpted pairs of crossed hands—the feature used
to name this temple.31 Richard Burger estimates that perhaps as many as 100 such chambers
are present at the site, and interestingly these chambers appear to have been deliberately
buried—for example, the Temple of the Crossed Hands was ﬁlled in with river cobbles.32
     Richard Burger and Lucy Salazar-Burger have suggested33 that much of the architecture
of Andean South America between about 1900 b.c. and 1000 b.c. expresses a common
religious ideology, the Kotosh Religious Tradition (named after the site of Kotosh). We will
never know precisely what this religion comprised, but an important element appears to
have been ritual ﬁres, placed in the ﬁrepits of the temple chambers. Quilter notes34 that El
Paraíso’s sunken pit, a rectangle about 4.5-by-4.25 m, shows evidence of considerable
burning. Benches around these pits are common in constructions of this period, and
Quilter suggests that in ritual use 10–12 adults sat around these ritual ﬁres and offered
marine shells, meat, quartz, or other goods in sacriﬁces—perhaps while under the inﬂuence
of coca or alcohol. As Charles Stanish35 points out, however, the architectural constructions
of the highlands and the coastal areas are considerably different. This makes it somewhat
unlikely that the Kotosh Religious Tradition was widely shared across this entire region,
especially in the context of little overall site planning or formal designs for sites in the
highlands as compared to those in the coastal areas.
     Contacts between highlands and lowlands, however, were important and included
marine ﬁsh and shellﬁsh. Another aspect appears to have been trade in salt. At the site of
La Galgada in the highlands, for example, one burial yielded a salt crystal that had been
placed under a woman’s head, while two other burials were underlain by a bed of salt
crystals.36

544   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      The Maritime Foundations of Andean South American
      Civilization?
      As noted earlier, Michael Moseley has argued that early Andean South American complex
      societies, as represented by El Paraíso and similar sites, were initially based on an essentially
      non-agricultural economy.37 If so, this would be interesting but would not alter our basic
      understanding of cultural complexity, for what is important in cultural evolution at this
      stage is the overall productivity of an environment rather than the speciﬁc ways in which
      it is productive.
            As Quilter and Stocker38 point out, ﬁsh can be dried or converted to a paste that has
      at least some shelf life. People who know anchovies only from the oversalted horrors on
      pizzas may underestimate the appeal and nutritive potential of this staple of Andean South
      American life. This ﬁsh was served fresh, dried, or as a kind of paste that, as every cook
      knows, is a marvelous addition to many tomato-based sauces. And anchovies are only one
      of many species of ﬁsh available in great numbers on the Peruvian coast. Sea mammals,
      too, can be rendered into storable oil, and they provided a reliable source of meat in ancient
      times.
            Although inhabitants in coastal sites relied heavily on marine resources, they also used
      wild and domesticated plant crops. These include gourds, legumes, squash, achira, beans,
      sweet and white potatoes, peanuts, and cotton.39 Sites that were a bit farther inland obtained
      marine resources through exchange, while cultivating agricultural crops and collecting wild
      plant foods. Trade with the highland sites allowed coastal groups to obtain potatoes, oca,
      and ullucu.40
            Moseley’s hypothesis for the maritime origins of Andean complex societies, however,
      is not applicable to developments in the highlands, where, as we saw earlier, sites with
      monumental architecture are of similar age to sites in the coastal region. While highlands
      inhabitants received some marine resources through trade, their subsistence economies
      were based on rainfall and small-scale irrigation agriculture—potatoes, oca, ullucu, quinoa,
      and some maize—as well as hunting of wild animals such as deer, guanaco, and vicuña.41
            As these various sites indicate, cultural evolution rests not on any particular form of
      economy—all that is required is sufﬁcient and reliable production.

      The Initial Period in Andean South America
      (c. 1800 B.C.–900/600 B.C.)
      During the Initial period, settlements in the coastal and highlands regions increased in size
      and complexity of architectural construction. U-shaped construction becomes a common
      feature along both the coast and in the central part of the highlands. In the south-central
      highlands—the Titicaca Basin—public architecture makes its ﬁrst appearance.42 Construc-
      tion of centers, changes in settlement patterning, and population growth appear to have
      resulted from the construction of irrigation systems in the upper coastal valleys.
           A particularly important Initial period area is the Casma Valley, located on the north-
      central coast. Eight important centers were present here during the Initial period, including
      Sechin Alto, Cerro Sechin, and Pampa de las Llamas-Moxeke. At about 1400 b.c. or earlier,
      Sechin Alto had the largest monumental architecture to be found anywhere in the New
      World.43 Its U-shaped construction is anchored by an adobe-block pyramid mound that

                           THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN ANDEAN SOUTH AMERICA               545


measures 250-by-300 m and stands 44 m high.44 Several large plazas, some of which have
sunken circular courts, are associated with the pyramid.
     Some 2 km away is the site of Cerro Sechin, with a three-tiered stepped platform with
two smaller buildings on each side.45 A possible sunken circular court is present in front of
the platform. As noted by several researchers, one of the most striking aspects at Cerro
Sechin are the 302 small and large basalt sculptures that were originally placed in alternating
sizes—large and small—along the outer wall of the platform-pyramid. These sculptures
depict military scenes of war, victims of captivity, and victors. Some of the defeated are
shown decapitated or cut so that their intestines are spilling out, while other sculptures
simply show severed heads, legs, arms, and so forth.46 There would seem to be little doubt
that some level of violence was a part of life during the Initial period, although Initial period
sites do not appear to have defensive constructions such as walls. Perhaps such gruesome
scenes were not the fabric of everyday life, but rather—as suggested by some archaeologists
—a record of a mythological event that helps establish and sustain the ceremonial or ritual
nature of these monumental constructions.47
     Farther inland in the Casma Valley lies the site of Pampa de las Llamas-Moxeke
(Figure 14.5). This site has two massive platform-pyramid mounds that are separated by
an enormous terraced plaza, as well as more than 70 smaller aligned platforms and buildings
that were likely residences. The two platform-pyramids are aligned along the site’s central
axis, and the larger of the two—the Moxeke mound—has painted clay sculptures and
geometric designs along the sides of the third platform terrace, about 10 m above ground
surface.48 The clay sculptures show humans wearing tunics, short skirts, and loose mantles
—some hold two-headed snakes with forked tongues in upraised hands—or massive
heads.49 This frieze would have been quite visible to people in the plaza below the platform-
pyramid, likely reinforcing the ideology common to Initial period culture in the Casma Valley.
     These developments in the Casma Valley have been variously interpreted. Jonathan
Haas and Sheila and Thomas Pozorski favor a relatively complex sociopolitical organization
—perhaps even a theocratic state—that features distinct, highly stratiﬁed social classes.50
Richard Burger,51 on the other
hand, believes that the evid-
ence best supports a variety
of small societies that have
social divisions that are weakly
developed. He points to a lack
of economic specialization, as
well as variability in the layout
of the ceremonial centers, as
indicative of independent local
groups rather than a single
political entity. Their religious
traditions are, however, well
developed, and may have served
to loosely connect the various
centers through shared symbols.
     Another example of Initial
period U-shaped constructions         FIGURE 14.5 Overview of Pampas de las Llamas-Moxeke, Peru.

546   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      comes from the coastal area site of Caral in the Lurín Valley. This ceremonial center was
      built and occupied in the late Initial period, from about 1300 to 900 b.c.52 It contains a
      ceremonial road that travels between two enormous enclosures and two sunken circular
      courts, leading to the raised central plaza. From the plaza level is a 34-step staircase leading
      to the top of the central pyramid. One of the most impressive decorations is arranged so
      that one would pass through it when reaching the top of the staircase and is described as a
      “massive mouth band with interlocking teeth and large upper fangs on either side of the
      entryway into the central atrium. This awesome motif is clearly visible from the central
      plaza.”53
           Caral also contains evidence for habitation, with most house structures located to the
      south of the ceremonial central area. The population is estimated to be no more than 300
      people.54 As Burger and Salazar-Burger observe, this is a relatively small number of people
      considering the size of the ceremonial complex and the labor required to build and
      maintain that complex. They hypothesize that most of the population served by this
      ceremonial center lived in scattered farmsteads around Cardal. A small number of
      residences and burials were also found on top of the platform-pyramid—these may have
      been the homes for people of elite status, but few burial goods are present, suggesting that
      inequities in access to resources were not signiﬁcant during the Initial period.
           In summary of the Initial period, we see clear evidences of important social changes in
      these monumental complexes in the highlands and along the coast, but it seems likely that
      these communities remained relatively simply organized compared to the cultures that
      followed them. When we look at mortuary practices, for example, the small amount of very
      sketchy evidence we have shows a certain formalization of burial practices and some
      elaboration of them, but there is no clear evidence of massive disparities in wealth, power,
      or prestige. At the site of Asia, for example, 49 funeral bundles were recovered in which
      bodies and a few utilitarian goods were wrapped in reed mats and placed below the ﬂoor
      of a rectangular compound.55 Differences in these burials may indicate some status
      differences, and there are a few “trophy heads” and headless bodies in this group that may
      indicate raiding or warfare, but overall the burial practices until about 900 b.c. suggest a
      society that is somewhat non-egalitarian, perhaps, but one that is not organized on the basis
      of class.
           More important, insofar as the scanty evidence indicates, while these people traded
      products and evolved common ideologies, these communities were not functionally
      integrated to any great extent. There is little evidence of functional specialization within
      and among communities.


      THE EARLY HORIZON (C. 900/600 B.C.–A.D. 1)

      It is a fallacy of historical analysis to assume that increasing complexity is a natural, inherent
      quality in human societies. The idea of “progress” is so much a part of Western culture that
      it sometimes blinds people to the ﬁts and starts of cultural evolution. Such is the case with
      the apparent collapse of many of the coastal complex societies just before the beginning of
      the Early Horizon.56 Yet at the same time, sites in the central highland areas show consider-
      able new investment in monumental construction, shared artistic and religious motifs, and
      perhaps power and inﬂuence.

                            THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN ANDEAN SOUTH AMERICA              547


      The monumental constructions at El Paraíso, Cerro Sechin, Cardal, Kotosh, and other
sites anticipate the cultural changes underway in this period, and there are many other signs
that the Andean world was changing after about 1000 b.c. As we saw in the cases of Egypt,
Mesoamerica, and elsewhere, “art” was not just a minor peripheral part of the rise of
ancient civilizations: Art was an integral part of this process. In all early states, the cities,
rank-wealth hierarchies, and functionally interdependent economies that arose were
presaged by the spread of an art style that was usually expressed mostly directly in pottery.
In the case of Andean South America, novel religious elements also appear to have been
quite pervasive in this process.
      Peru was no exception to this pattern. After about 900 b.c., people living at Chavín de
Huántar (Figure 14.6) and other sites in the highlands of northern Andean South America
began to use the same styles of decoration in their pottery, architecture, and other artifacts.
Over succeeding centuries, tens of thousands of people over a great area participated in the
Chavín Horizon, as this complex of stylistic elements is called.
      The main motifs of Chavín art include fantastic depictions of hybrid combinations of
people and jaguars, as well as snakes, bats, ﬁsh, crabs, and crocodile-like ﬁgures (Figure 14.7).
In its fusion of tropical forest elements, such as snakes, jaguars, and caiman, Chavín art
may reﬂect earlier cultural inﬂuences from the forests east of the Andes, but the “story” of
Andean South American civilizations is that of integrating different zones—coasts,
mountains, and lowland forests. The spread of Chavín styles is probably a harbinger of the
functional integration of these areas in later periods. In some areas these motifs spread at
about the same time as apparent increases in product exchange, activity specialization,
population densities, and investments in monumental buildings, but the general tenor of
the Chavín diffusion is reminiscent of the initial spread of Olmec art in Mesoamerica—a
relatively simple extension of aesthetic and perhaps religious traditions in the absence of
elaborate political hierarchies or economic elites.
      Chavín de Huántar, the site after which the art style is named (though it is probably
not the earliest or even most important Chavín settlement), was occupied for all or most
of the period between about 900 b.c. and 200 b.c.57 It boasts a ceremonial complex
composed of two low platform mounds, a massive terraced platform, and a sunken circular
plaza, 21 m in diameter and paved with stone. This complex is arranged in the U-form
(discussed earlier) that was established some centuries earlier at El Paraíso. The most
prominent feature of this complex is the Old Temple (remodelled during the Early Horizon
into the New Temple), which was built of alternating thick and thin slabs of granite,
sandstone, and limestone. These large stone blocks form the exterior of the temple, while
the interior was ﬁlled with earth and rock ﬁll into which were built numerous narrow
passageways, canals, ducts for ventilation, and underground rooms.58 The best known of
these galleries is the Lanzón Gallery—named after the granite sculpture with a lance-like
shape, carved as a fanged deity. Aspects of the sculpture’s position in the chamber and its
associated features—such as a vertical channel from the gallery above and a depression
located at the top of the Lanzón sculpture—have led to interpretations such as pouring the
blood of human sacriﬁces into the vertical channel and letting it drip into the depression
and run down the Lanzón sculpture, as well as the use of the Lanzón sculpture as an oracle.59
      By the fourth century b.c. as many as 2,000–3,000 people may have lived in and around
the monumental complex at Chavín de Huántar—a large number of people—and there
was probably some signiﬁcant craft-specialization. Gold was the medium of the ﬁnest art

548   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY




      FIGURE 14.6 As in other early civilizations, initial cultural complexity in Andean South America
      was prefaced by the rapid spread of particular styles of pottery and other artifacts. Chavín-style
      artifacts have been found throughout the area indicated here.


      in the Chavín era, as craftsmen cut, embossed, annealed, cast, and welded it into ear spools,
      nose ornaments, plaques, crowns, and face coverings for corpses. Copper and silver were
      also extensively used for making ornaments, and weaving became a ﬁne art as well.
           The central religious symbols of Chavín were widely distributed over the northern
      and central coasts, and Chavín-style ceramics and architecture are found even in small
      villages.

                            THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN ANDEAN SOUTH AMERICA           549


      The Chavín cult, like other early religions, may have been an effect-
ive means of stimulating people to act in coordinated ways. After all, the
expenses of large buildings and the “furs and feathers” of ofﬁce are cheap
compared to their power in directing the population toward speciﬁc
economic and political goals. The Amazonian animals typical of Chavín
designs and the distribution of these designs suggest that the center at
Chavín de Huántar may have been an intermediate point on routes
connecting the coasts with the exotic, rich world of the interior Amazon.
      But were Chavín and its contemporaries a state-level form of polit-
ical organization? Archaeologists have disagreed in their interpretations
on this point. Some see the large Early Horizon sites as well-organized
pilgrimage centers, regional cult complexes, or oracle centers. Others
believe that these Early Horizon polities represent complex chiefdoms.
Still others would attribute the classiﬁcation of “secondary state” to        FIGURE 14.7 An example of an
Chavín, in part, because these scholars think that earlier sites, such as     artistic motif from the Chavín art
                                                                              style.
Pampa de las Llamas-Moxeke, represent primary states.60


THE EARLY INTERMEDIATE PERIOD (A.D. 1–A.D. 600):
EARLY STATES

In the ﬁrst millennium a.d., Andean South American societies were transformed from
relatively simple, small political units that we might call chiefdoms into much larger and
more populous militaristic cultures that we can legitimately term states.61 Within this
period the population of Andean South America rose from a few hundred thousand to
approximately four or ﬁve million, large cities appeared in scores of places, armies
conquered thousands of square kilometers, irrigation systems brought rich harvests to the
desert and mountains, and the ceramic, architectural, metallurgical, and textile arts reached
great heights.62
     This transformation seems to have arisen out of the disintegration of the Chavín cult
at about 200 b.c., which was followed by the emergence of as many as 15 different centers
of regional development. Ceremonial centers can be found in many places in the southern
Andean South American highlands at this time, as well as in the Nazca Valley and other
coastal regions. Some of these were sizable towns, such as Tambo Viejo in the Acari Valley
(Nazca area), which contains hundreds of rectangular rooms, most of which seem to have
been residences. But the Nazca polity probably remained a mix of villages and towns.63 Also
numerous along the northern coast were great fortresses of terraced adobe platforms with
room complexes and defensive peripheral walls.
     One of the best known examples of Early Intermediate period cultures are the Moche
whose area appears to have contained two political units—one to the north and one to the
south. The Moche culture was concentrated in about a 400-km coastal strip that extended
about 50 km inland and used an elaborate irrigation system. The population of the Moche
Valley itself was likely more than 50,000 people (Figure 14.8). By 200 b.c. the community
at Cerro Arena, for example, contained hundreds of houses and public buildings that
extended over an area of about a square mile. The economic basis of this and other

          550       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY



  PE R U                                                                COLOMBIA
  0      150 mi                                 ECUADOR
  0   150 km




                                                 Pampa Grande
                                          Sipan    Galindo
                                         Moche                                              BRAZIL
                                  Huaca de la Cruz       Moche area
                                                             
                                  Pampa de la Incas        →

               Pacific
               Ocean



                                                                                             BOLIVIA




FIGURE 14.8 The Moche area of inﬂuence and several Moche sites.




                    communities was an irrigation system in which mud canals were built high in the hills,
                    diverting water through kilometers of canals that snaked along the mountainside and down
                    to the valleys. Because the Moche worked only with mud, the construction of these canal
                    systems had to be done with great precision; if the water ﬂowed too slowly, silt would
                    accumulate so rapidly as to make the canal a vast waste of effort, while if it ﬂowed too
                    quickly, the whole system could be eroded. Cleaning the wind-blown sand from these
                    systems probably required the annual orchestration of thousands of laborers.
                         In chapter 7 the premise that irrigation systems like these are primary determinants
                    of cultural evolution was discussed and, for the most part, rejected. Often in prehistory,
                    great irrigation systems seem more the products of states than their immediate cause. But
                    in the case of the Moche Valley and many other examples, irrigation agriculture and
                    cultural evolution are perhaps better viewed as closely interrelated, with an increase in the
                    complexity of administrative and economic systems going step by step with increases in
                    the complexity of irrigation systems.64
                         We know much about life in Andean South America during this period because the
                    people recorded their activities in great detail in ceramics, sculpture, paintings, and tapestries.
                    Pottery vessels depict people hunting deer with spears and clubs, ﬁshermen putting to sea
                    in small canoes, blowgun hunters taking aim at birds, weavers working under the direction

                           THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN ANDEAN SOUTH AMERICA            551


of a foreman, and many people engaging in war, human sacriﬁce, and violence. People are
also shown being carried on sedan chairs, seated on thrones, receiving tribute, and
presiding at executions.
      One of the most spectacular archaeological discoveries of the last decade of the
twentieth century was the Moche royal burial complex at Sipán, about 420 miles northwest
of Lima. These burials are particularly important because, unlike most known Moche sites,
they had not been completely looted (the tomb was rescued and protected from local
thieves by Walter Alva) and also because they express many elements of Moche culture. By
now the reader, having surveyed Egypt, Mesopotamia, Mesoamerica, and other early
civilizations in previous chapters, will not be surprised to learn that ancient Moche culture
was based on massive inequalities in wealth, power, and prestige; that warfare was gloriﬁed
and celebrated with the ritual executions of captives; that loving skill and precious materials
were lavished on making beautiful objects—many of which were buried with dead elites—
and that the entire society comprised an expansionistic and militaristic state.
      The Sipán burials that reﬂect these aspects of Moche culture were found in the interior
of a large mudbrick pyramid. In one burial a man identiﬁed by archaeologist Christopher
Donnan65 as a “warrior-priest” was found lying on his back in a wooden cofﬁn. He was
wearing gold nose and ear ornaments, turquoise bead bracelets, and copper sandals and
was surrounded by other exotic goods, including spears, war clubs, shields, atlatl darts,
seashells, feather ornaments, lovely cotton fabrics, hundreds of pots, a dog, two llamas, and
other goods (Figure 14.9). This man was also buried with what one might consider the most
valuable of all commodities, three young women and two men. As we have seen in other
ancient cultures, many of these societies were based on ideologies
that sanctioned these sacriﬁces and probably promised the
participants an eternal and joyful afterlife. Although we will never
know for certain what was going on in the minds of these
nonliterate peoples, it seems a reasonable speculation that the
Moche believed that by supplying this man with a few female and
male attendants, food, tools, and some personal ornaments, they
were assuring him of a reasonably comfortable eternity.
      Depictions on Moche pots provide a “text,” of sorts, for
hundreds of them show similar scenes, apparently recording
rituals in which warrior-priests slit the throats of war-captives,
distributed the blood to be drunk, and then dismembered the
bodies.
      Among the other ideological expressions in ceramics of this
period are the frank depictions of sexual practices. While every
conceivable sexual variation is amply illustrated, oral sex and
heterosexual coitus are common themes. Pots representing sexual
themes in the most explicit terms may have been used in ordinary
daily life, and to drink from them is to perform, symbolically at
least, acts still considered illegal in some states in the United
States. If the sexual practices depicted in pottery are in any way a
reﬂection of the proclivities of the people—and reports of the
Spanish and the Inka suggest this was the case—then the Moche             FIGURE 14.9 Some of the burial objects
may have devised a very efﬁcient system of birth control.66               from Sipán, Peru.

552   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


           If Moche pottery is an accurate reﬂection of daily life, men hunted, farmed, ﬁshed, and
      fought in wars, while women cooked food and performed other basic domestic services.
      Based on pottery representations and later ethnographic accounts, women also produced
      all or most of a primary kind of wealth in the form of textiles. Ethnographic evidence from
      the time of European contact to the present suggests that nearly all women wove textiles,
      and even the most elaborate fabrics may have been produced by peasant women working
      individually in villages.
           The overall archaeological record of the Moche reveals the central patterns of all early
      complex societies. The evidence of warfare, for example, in ceramic depictions is supported
      by settlement patterns: Every well-surveyed coastal valley has been found to have fortresses
      and fortiﬁed settlements dating to this period, and weapons are common in these sites,
      particularly along the southern coast. Trophy heads and mummiﬁed corpses showing signs
      of violence are frequently found in cemeteries.
           Occupational specialization was still at a rather simple level, but skilled craftsmen must
      have been full-time specialists to be able to produce the intricate objects in gold, silver,
      copper, and many other commodities found here.
           The economic productivity of the Moche, their class-based society, and their ideology
      were also expressed in monumental architecture. At various places in the Moche Valley they
      built large clay platforms, ramps, temples, pyramids, and other constructions. One Moche
      pyramid, Huaca del Sol, was 340-by-160 m at the base, stood 40 m high, and comprised an
      estimated 140 million mudbricks.
           In general, the Moche and other small states of this period appear to have been
      caught up in spirals of warfare, but they were also linked by trade mechanisms. Like other
      early states around the world, they seem to have expanded and contracted as the fortunes
      of war changed and as differences in the agricultural potential of various regions took
      effect.


      THE MIDDLE HORIZON (C. A.D. 600–A.D. 1000):
      COMPETING STATES

      At about a.d. 600, the many rival “states” and other competing polities of Andean South
      America began to give way to several larger competing political systems, one centered at
      Wari in the Manteco Basin; another at Tiwanaku, at the southern end of Lake Titicaca; and
      a third in the Moche-Chimú area. In these and perhaps other areas, wars of conquest may
      have brought large territories under the control of centralized, hierarchically-organized
      governments and lessened regional isolation.67
           Tiwanaku is one of the ﬁrst and largest “states” to be based in large part on potatoes,
      which were intensively cultivated with other crops on raised ﬁelds reclaimed from the lake
      marshes. The people of Tiwanaku also herded vast numbers of llamas—invaluable beasts
      of burden in this high country of thin air, and where in the classic Andean tradition the
      resources of highlands and lowlands could best be exploited via voluminous trade.
           The people of Tiwanaku included master stonecarvers, who produced monumental
      gates, statues, and other buildings that are some of the most impressive in all Andean South
      America. Tiwanaku itself—from a.d. 100 to 700 or later—is an enormous and planned

                            THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN ANDEAN SOUTH AMERICA              553


urban capital with state build-
ings, palaces, pyramids, temples,
and streets (Figure 14.10). At
its height, the population of the
Tiwanaku state may have been
approximately 100,000.68
      Unlike the wars of
conquest model (see earlier),
the work of Juan Albarracin-
Jordan 69 examines the rise
of the Tiwanaku state from
the perspective of how local
hierarchies became integrated
into a larger political entity. He
uses ethnohistoric information
to suggest that local hierarchies
were developed to manage the
exploitation of the resources
from multiple ecological zones.         FIGURE 14.10 Stone pillars at the North and East Sides of Agapana, Tiwanaku,
Through reciprocity relation-           Bolivia.
ships, shared ideologies, and
aggregation of population in
larger centers, leaders of these local hierarchies—which may have represented distinct ethnic
groups—began to participate in larger political organizations as intensiﬁcation in manage-
ment of the resources of the multiple ecological zones occurred. There is some evidence
that some of these groups concentrated on certain specializations, such as particular crafts
or the production of speciﬁc staples.
      Wari existed as a political system for only a century or two, but at its high point it
carried out political and economic activities over most of the coast and highlands between
Cajamarca in the north and Sicuani in the south. The evidence for the Wari “empire” comes
mainly from the distribution of speciﬁc art styles and religious symbols over a wide area of
the central highlands and from its roads and provincial centers. Signiﬁcantly, the art motifs
show up most frequently in the burials of individuals whose associated mortuary goods
appeared to reﬂect particularly high status. The city of Wari expanded to an impressive
15 km2—making it one of the largest residential sites in the ancient New World—and the
proportion of its domestic and nondomestic architecture along with its overall size are
similar to Tiwanaku.
      It is probably signiﬁcant that some of ancient Peru’s major roadways may have been
constructed during this period, for such roads would have been very important in
facilitating the exchange of goods and services over an area as large as the one apparently
administered from Wari.
      The worldwide pattern of early states is one in which ever-larger polities compete
with each other, with many expansions and contractions, but with a long-term increase in
the size of the polities and the scale of the conﬂict. Wari, Tiwanaku, and other early states
probably reﬂect this evolutionary paradigm, although Tiwanaku and Wari seem to have
had little interaction except for their shared ideology.

554   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      THE LATE INTERMEDIATE PERIOD (C. A.D. 1000–A.D. 1476):
      EARLY EMPIRES

      With the collapse of the Wari and Tiwanaku political systems between a.d. 800 and a.d. 1000,
      at least seven different areas in Andean South America became power centers, the best
      known and most developed of which was the Chimú state centered in the Moche Valley
      on the northern coast. A major center of the Chimú political system was the beautiful city
      of Chan-Chan, a partially planned settlement covering nearly 11 km2—one of the largest
      pre-Columbian cities in the New World. It contained 10 major compounds, each with
      houses, terraces, reservoirs, parks, roads, and public buildings. By the time Chan-Chan was
      built, Andean societies were rigidly stratiﬁed: Fiedel notes that in one area of Chan-Chan
      the skeletons of between 200 and 300 young women were found, “probably members of
      the royal harem, [who] were sacriﬁced either at the time of the deceased ruler’s funeral or
      at later commemorative ceremonies.”70
           Gold-working, silver-working, ceramics, weaving, and sculpture were all highly
      developed crafts. Chimú society seems to have been rigidly stratiﬁed according to wealth
      and prestige, and the extension of political and economic control appears to have been
      based on a highly efﬁcient army.71
           Perhaps the most signiﬁcant development in Andean South America during this period
      was the multiplication of urban centers. Much of southern Peru remained largely rural, but
      in the northern half of the country some of the greatest cities of the pre-conquest period
      were built.72


      THE LATE HORIZON (C. A.D. 1476–A.D. 1532): THE IMPERIAL
      TRANSFORMATION

      The largest and most highly integrated ancient political system ever to appear in the New
      World evolved in Andean South America within the space of only 87 years. Centered in
      the Cuzco Valley, the Inka Empire (more properly known as the Empire of Tawantinsuyu
      [“the four parts together”]) eventually stretched from Colombia to central Chile and from
      the Paciﬁc to the eastern jungles, tying together under the administration of a single royal
      lineage many diverse regional economic and political systems. At its height, as many as
      10–12 million people may have been living under Inka rule in one of the most intricately
      ordered societies of all time.73 Like Egypt, the Inka polity was a “hegemonic-territorial”
      state74—one that dominated other polities—with its population spread rather thinly over
      a large area but with effective government control over most aspects of life.
           Native and Spanish accounts say that the Inka began their rise to power out of the
      dissolution of the many small competing Andean South American states of the thirteenth
      and fourteenth centuries a.d. The people of Cuzco were attacked by a rival ethnic group—
      the Chankas—at about a.d. 1438 and managed to prevail. Succeeding monarchs at Cuzco
      added new provinces to the empire by conquest, treaty, and simple annexation. The Inkas’
      oral histories—recorded by the Spanish—speak of military campaigns in which Inka kings
      smashed the rival power of Chan-Chan in the 1460s, put down large-scale revolts in the
      1470s, and greatly expanded the empire in the 1480s.75

                           THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN ANDEAN SOUTH AMERICA          555


     The backdrop to this story of the development of the Inka as a state, however, is more
complex than these accounts, and likely took place over a greater period of time. Alan
Covey,76 for example, has recently proposed that the Inka began their rise to regional
domination in the period just after the fall of the Wari state—about a.d. 1000–1200. During
this time, the Inka strengthened their control of the Cuzco Basin and some of the areas to
the south of Cuzco. Using marriage alliances, they also established close relationships to
the north and west of the Cuzco Basin. Two beneﬁts were immediately available: Alliances
and warfare created a labor supply for tending agricultural ﬁelds and construction work,
and consolidation of the region opened opportunities for agricultural intensiﬁcation.
Another major factor was a dramatic population increase in the Cuzco Basin as people
migrated in from surrounding areas.
     As Covey77 points out, Cuzco Basin elites capitalized on the need for administration of
this growing polity, and these rulers began to practice nepotism—appointing their relatives
to various positions of power in the military, religious, and administrative hierarchy. The
Inka rulers also legitimized their rulership through control of commodities such as coca,
cloth, and precious metals; through feasting (see later); and through the redistribution of
some of these precious commodities to their allies and subjects. During the fourteenth
century a.d., the Inka continued to expand their territories and establish long-distance
diplomatic relationships. Eventually, the Inka began military campaigns against groups
outside their region as they sought to enlarge their empire.
     The economic basis of the Inka Empire was a highly integrated system of ﬁshing,
herding, farming, taxation, textile production, metallurgy, and so on. Rivers were channeled
through stone-lined canals, while lowland irrigation systems, which had existed for
thousands of years, were extended and brought under a centralized authority. Llamas and
alpacas were raised for wool, while dogs, muscovy ducks, and guinea pigs provided most
of the meat. But the staple foods were maize, beans, potatoes, quinoa, oca, and peppers.
     The food-storage methods used by the Inka were very important in establishing
imperial food reserves. Potatoes were alternately dried and frozen to produce a black, pulpy
product called chuño; meat was turned into jerky; and grain was brewed into chicha, a
nutritious beer. Archaeologists familiar with this combination say it is not as bad as it
sounds.
     Christine Hastorf and Sissel Johannessen have studied changes in the use of maize as
the political system of Andean South America changed between a.d. 500 and 1500,
particularly among the Inka. The Inka and their immediate predecessors converted maize
into beer and then deﬁned this beer as a prestige item and associated it with imperial power
and the theology of the Inka state. People were brought together in communal feasts in
which beer was consumed, and at these feasts the elites could reinforce their position: By
providing beer in this context they could underscore the indebtedness of the peasantry to
them and put the labor that the peasantry did for the elites in the context of the national
religion and the highly stratiﬁed class system.78
     The people of the empire were organized in a complex way according to a decimal
system in which there were administrators for every unit of taxpayer from 10 to 10,000.
Most people were members of large kin groups, called ayllu; marriages were between mem-
bers of the same ayllu. The ayllu were usually economically self-sufﬁcient units that held
land in common, and their members were bound together by complex patterns of reciprocal
obligations, such as requiring members to work in each other’s place when one was absent

           556        PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                       and to support widows and the inﬁrm. Farmers worked a
                                                       certain amount of time on state-owned plots, while craftsmen
                                                       and specialists such as runners, weavers, and goldsmiths
                                                       contributed according to their particular talents.
                                                            Records of taxes, transactions, and census ﬁgures were
                                                       kept with the aid of the kipu, a set of strings tied into knots at
                                                       different levels (Figure 14.11) and used by a special hereditary
                                                       class of accountants to memorize the information.79 A writing
                                                       system of the type used in early Mesopotamia would no doubt
                                                       have conveyed more religious and philosophical informa-
                                                       tion, but for simple information storage and retrieval, the kipu
                                                       appears to have been an adequate substitute for writing, when
                                                       complemented by the enormous Inka bureaucracy.80
                                                            Gold, fabrics, and other luxury goods were collected from
                                                       around the empire for distribution among the elites. Women,
                                                       too, were treated as commodities. Government agents visited
                                                       each village periodically and took selected girls of about age
                                                       10 back to provincial capitals where they were taught spinning,
                                                       weaving, and cooking. They were then apportioned out as
                                                       wives for the emperor and the nobles.
                                                            The Inka Empire both created and was created by its
                                                       system of roads (Figure 14.12).81 Most villages were largely
                                                       self-sufﬁcient, but the ﬂow of goods and information and,
FIGURE 14.11 The Inka never developed a
                                                       most important, armies required to create the empire were
written language, but administrators used the
kipu, a set of knotted strings, to keep records.
                                                       dependent on the road system, comprising an overall network
                                                       of about 40,000 km of paved roads. Road beds were excavated
                                                       through hillsides, swamps were crossed by drained causeways,
                        walls were built along roadways to protect the traveler from the ﬁerce gales of the uplands,
                        and wide rivers and ravines were crossed by suspension bridges made of woven vines hung
                        from stone towers. All along the roads were storehouses and administrative outposts, and
                        runners stationed about a kilometer apart were reputed to carry messages over distances as
                        great as 2,400 km in just ﬁve days.82
                             Although they were master builders, most Inka lived in rural villages, not great
                        metropolises. Typical Inka residential units were rectangular walled houses of stone or
                        adobe, subdivided into smaller units. Most public constructions were in the form of
                        palaces, temples, granaries, fortresses, barracks, and highway stations. The skill used in
                        these constructions is amazing, considering the simple tools employed. The Inka cut stones
                        into huge blocks simply by chipping and abrading them with harder stones, and they then
                        ﬁtted them together (without the use of mortar) so precisely that, as the cliché goes, a
                        knifeblade could not be inserted between them.
                             The cultural order and social structure of the Inka were expressed not only in its public
                        monuments, but even in its domestic architecture. Susan Niles has catalogued how, in one
                        particular case, the buildings constituting the ﬁfteenth-century estate of a noble family were
                        arranged to reﬂect the rigid class hierarchy of the Inka polity.83
                             The capital city of Cuzco was an orderly arrangement of houses, monumental
                        buildings, and streets, well-provided with a municipal water and drainage system. The great

                            THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN ANDEAN SOUTH AMERICA                557


temple of Qori Kancha here had exterior walls measur-
ing 68-by-59 m and a semi-circular annex that rose to a
height of more than 34 m. A gold frieze about a meter
wide ran along the exterior wall, and the entranceway
was heavily sheathed in gold plate. Many other struc-
tures at the capital were lavishly decorated with gold
and silver.
     The comparatively great internal security of the
empire made it unnecessary to defend most settlements,
except with occasional hilltop forts. The heart of the
Inka army was the common foot-soldier, who was
armed with club, mace, battle axe, or lance. Slings,
bolas, and spear throwers were used prior to the main
attack, but brutal hand-to-hand combat usually decided
the issue. One successful tactical innovation of the Inka
was the practice of holding back a large body of troops
who were thrown in at a critical juncture—a simple
tactic similar in a way to Napoleon’s successful use of
reserves.


THE EUROPEAN CONQUEST

Archaeological research in some areas of Andean South
America was interrupted in the 1980s and early 1990s
by peasant revolutions and armed conﬂict between the
government and rebels. The colonial history of Andean
South America explains a lot about the origins of these
conﬂicts.
     After sporadic, occasionally hostile contacts with
the Inka people in the a.d. 1520s, the Spanish under
Francisco Pizarro set out toward the provincial capital
at Cajamarca, the residence of Atawallpa, the Inka king.     FIGURE 14.12 The Inka road system connected
The Inka sent a reception force of 20,000 to meet            almost every settlement to two main north-south routes
the Spanish, but did not seem to have appreciated the        and facilitated voluminous transports of goods and effec-
                                                             tive administration.
threat that the Spanish represented. In any case, the
Andean South Americans soon had cause to regret their
difﬁdence. Pizarro and his men entered the city on November 15, 1532, and found it to be
surprisingly nearly deserted. After establishing himself with a couple of cannons and his
few score of soldiers, Pizarro and de Soto—accompanied by a troop—visited the Inka king
at Konoj. The next day the emperor came to Cajamarca, borne on a litter and preceded by
thousands of soldiers, attendants, and subjects. The ﬁrst Spaniard to approach the king was
the chaplain who, as part of Pizarro’s contract with the king of Spain and the Pope, was
charged with spreading the Christian faith. The chaplain immediately began to harangue
the king, through an interpreter, about the creation of the world, the fall of Adam and
Eve, the Virgin Birth, the establishment of the papacy, and other dogma, culminating his

558   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      speech with the announcement that the Pope had given the Inka Empire to King Charles
      of Spain.
           Not surprisingly, the Inka king took exception to parts of the chaplain’s speech. He
      wanted to know how the Pope could give away something that was not his, and how it
      had happened that the god of the Christians had died, since the Inka deity, the Sun, was
      immortal.84 When Atawallpa asked how the chaplain knew all these things, he was handed
      a breviary. The king looked brieﬂy and no doubt uncomprehendingly inside, and then
      threw it away. At this point the Spanish attacked, and then the inexplicable happened:
      Instead of killing the Spanish, the Inka ﬂed, dropping their weapons and killing themselves
      in their panicked ﬂight, and the Spanish were able to dispatch thousands and capture the
      king with little trouble. They remained in Cajamarca for some months, detaining the king,
      who tried to win his release by offering to ﬁll a room (supposed to have been 6.5-by-4.5 m
      in size) once with gold and twice with silver. The Spanish, meanwhile, took masses of gold
      and silver in ransom payments for the king, as well as from the sack of Cuzco, most of it in
      the form of exquisitely wrought ﬁgures, which they melted into ingots.
           Rumors of insurrections in the countryside convinced the Spanish to execute the
      Inka king. They did so, but considered themselves enlightened for giving him the option
      of being garroted rather than burned at the stake—a reward to the king for allowing himself
      to be baptized. Atawallpa’s death and the ensuing factionalism among rival claimants to
      the throne, as well as the devastation brought on by introduced diseases and the horror
      wrought on the populace through warfare and the destruction of the irrigation system,
      proved crippling. The population of Andean South America is thought to have dropped
      from 10–12 million to about six million within a 50 years of the conquest.



      SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

      The reader by now will not be surprised to learn that most scholars interpret the rise of
      civilization in Andean South America to be the result of a multiplicity of factors.
            Robert Carneiro’s hypotheses linking warfare, population growth, and environmental
      circumscription (chapter 7) to the rise of states seems particularly applicable to Andean
      South America. There are some suggestions that warfare was in fact an important “stress”
      that stimulated some kinds of complexity (though perhaps not in the manner suggested by
      Carneiro).85 But sustained warfare seems to have been more of an important factor well
      after the appearance of such things as monumental buildings, the coordination of regional
      economies, craft specialization, and the rise of great religious traditions.
            How, then, are we to account for Andean South American complex societies? Obviously,
      the rich maritime and agricultural resources were essential ingredients in this development.
      In only a few areas of the world is it possible to produce and gather enough food to run
      complex cultures on the basis of primitive technologies, and Andean South America is one
      of these regions.
            An important “negative” element in the evolution of Andean South America appears
      to have been the fact that, unlike ancient China, Egypt, Mesopotamia, or the Indus Valley,
      Andean South America was geographically isolated from other highly complex political
      systems. Evolving Old World civilizations soon came into contact with one another, and

                                  THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN ANDEAN SOUTH AMERICA                           559


their political, economic, and social interchanges appear to have transformed each of them
to some degree. But, except for Mesoamerica—which was very distant and cut off by ocean
and jungle—Andean South America evolved alone.
     The absence of a domesticable draft animal also was a limit on Andean South American
development. Llamas compensated for this to a degree, but they cannot compare with the
transport or plowing abilities of horses, mules, or oxen. It is difﬁcult to judge the effects the
presence of a domesticable draft animal in Andean South America would have had, but it
may be signiﬁcant that almost all agricultural areas of Andean South America today are
plowed.
     Thus, in summary of Andean South American prehistory, we see that cultural develop-
ments there paralleled those in other centers of independent complex society formation
in most important details, including the initial spread of a religious cult, the presence of
a highly productive economy, the widespread occurrence of monumental architecture,
and the gradual emergence of highly stratiﬁed, economically integrated state and imperial
political systems.



BIBLIOGRAPHY
Albarracin-Jordan, J. 1996. “Tiwanaku Settlement System: The Integration of Nested Hierarchies in the Lower
            Tiwanaku Valley.” Latin American Antiquity 7(3):183 –210.
Alva, W., and C. Donnan. 1993. Royal Tombs of Sipán. Los Angeles: Fowler Museum of Cultural History, UCLA.
Ascher, M., and R. Ascher. 1982. Code of the Quipu: A Study in Media, Mathematics, and Culture. Ann Arbor:
            University of Michigan Press.
Bauer, B. S. 1992. The Development of the Inca State. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
Bawden, G. 1995. “The Structural Paradox: Moche Culture as Political Ideology.” Latin American Antiquity
            6(3):255–273.
Bennfer, R. A. 1982. “The Lomas Site of Paloma (5000 to 7500 b.p.), Chilca Valley, Peru.” In Andean Archaeology,
            ed. R. Matos, pp. 27–54. New York: Academic Press.
———. 1984. “The Challenges and Rewards of Sedentism: The Preceramic Village of Paloma, Peru.” In
            Paleopathology and the Origin of Agriculture, ed. M. N. Cohen and G. J. Armelagos. New York:
            Academic Press.
Billman, B. R. 2002. “Irrigation and the Origins of the Southern Amoche State on the North Coast of Peru.” Latin
            American Antiquity 13(4):371– 400.
Browman, D. L. 1974. “Pastoral Nomadism in the Andes.” Current Anthropology 15:188 –196.
———. 1975. “Trade Patterns in the Central Highlands of Peru in the First Millennium b.c.” World Archaeology
            6:322–330.
Burger, R. L. 1992. Chavin and the Origins of the Andean Civilization. London and New York: Thames and Hudson.
Burger, R. L., and L. Salazar-Burger. 1980. “Ritual and Religion at Huaricoto.” Archaeology 33:26 – 32.
———. 1985. “The Early Ceremonial Center of Huaricoto.” In Early Ceremonial Architecture in the Andes, ed.
            C. B. Donnan. Washington, DC: Dumbarton Oaks.
———. 1986. “Early Organizational Diversity in the Peruvian Highland: Huaricoto and Kotosh.” In Andean
            Archaeology, Papers in Memory of Clifford Evans, Monograph 27, ed. M. R. Matos, S. A. Turpin, and
            H. H. Eling, Jr. Los Angeles: University of California, Institute of Archaeology.
———. 1991. “The Second Season of Investigations at the Initial Period Center of Cardal, Peru.” Journal of Field
            Archaeology 18(3):275 –296.
Burger, R. L., and N. Van Der Merwe. 1990. “Maize and the Origin of Highland Chavin Civilization: An Isotopic
            Perspective.” American Anthropologist 92(1):85 –95.
Carneiro, R. 1970. “A Theory of the Origin of the State.” Science 169:733 –738.
Cobo, Bernabe. 1990 (orig. c. a.d. 1639). Inca Religion and Customs. Trans. and ed. Roland Hamilton. Austin:
            University of Texas Press.
Collier, G. A., R. I. Rosaldo, and J. D. Wirth, eds. 1982. The Inka and Aztec States, 1400 –1800. New York: Academic
            Press.
Conlee, C. A. 2003. “Local Elites and the Reformation of Late Intermediate Period Socipolitical and Economic
            Organization in Nasca, Peru.” Latin American Antiquity 14(1):47– 65.

560   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      Covey, R. A. 2003. “A Processual Study of Inka State Formation.” Journal of Anthropological Archaeology
                   22:333–357.
      D’Altroy, T. N. 1992. Provincial Power in the Inka Empire. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
      Dillehay, T. D. 1990. “Mapuche Ceremonial Landscapes, Social Recruitment and Resource Rights.” Journal of
                   World Archaeology 22(2):223 –241.
      Dillehay, T. D., P. Netherly, and J. Rossen. 1989. “Early Preceramic Public and Residential Sites on the Forested
                   Slope of the Western Andes, Northern Peru.” American Antiquity 54(4):733 –758.
      Donnan, C. B. 1973. Moche Occupation of the Santa Valley, Peru. University of California Publications in
                   Anthropology, No. 8. Berkeley: University of California
      ———. 1976. Moche Art and Iconography. Los Angeles: UCLA Latin American Center Publications.
      ———. 1990. “Master Works Reveal a Pre-Inca World.” National Geographic Magazine 177(6):34 – 49.
      ———. 2001. “Moche Burials Uncovered.” National Geographic Magazine 199(3):58–73.
      Donnan, C. B., ed. 1985. Early Ceremonial Architecture in the Andes. Washington, DC: Dumbarton Oaks.
      Engl, L., and T. Engl. 1969. Twilight of Ancient Peru. Trans. A. Jaffe. New York: McGraw-Hill.
      Feldman, R. A. 1980. Aspero, Peru: Architecture, Subsistence Economy, and Other Artifacts of a Preceramic Maritime
                   Chiefdom. Ph.D dissertation, Department of Anthropology, Harvard University.
      Fernández, J., H. O. Panarello, and J. Schobinger. 1999. “The Inka Mummy from Mount Aconcagua: Decoding
                   the Geographic Origin of the ‘Messenger to the Deities’ by Means of Stable Carbon, Nitrogen, and
                   Sulfur Isotope Analysis.” Geoarchaeology 14(1):27– 46.
      Fiedel, S. J. 1987. Prehistory of the Americas. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
      Fontugne, M., P. Usselmann, and C. Hatté. 1999. “El Niño Variability in the Coastal Desert of Southern Peru
                   During the Mid-Holocene.” Quaternary Research 52:171–179.
      Haas, J. 1987. “The Exercise of Power in Early Andean State Development.” In The Origins and Development of
                   the Andean State, ed. J. Haas, S. Pozorski, and T. Pozorski. New York: Cambridge University Press.
      Haas, J., W. Creamer, and A. Ruiz. 2004. “Dating the Late Archaic Occupation of the Norte Chico Region in Peru.”
                   Nature 432:1020–1023.
      Haas, J., S. Pozorski, and T. Pozorski, eds. 1987. The Origins and Development of the Andean State. New York:
                   Cambridge University Press.
      Hastorf, C. A., and S. Johannessen. 1993. “Pre-Hispanic Political Change and the Role of Maize in the Central
                   Andes of Peru.” American Anthropologist 95(1):115 –137.
      Hoopes, J. W. 1994. “Ford Revisited: A Critical Review of the Chronology and Relationships of the Earliest
                   Ceramic Complexes in the New World, 6000 –1500 b.c.” Journal of World Prehistory 8(1):1– 49.
      Hyslop, J. 1984. The Inka Road System. New York: Academic Press.
      Idyll, C. P. 1973. “The Anchovy Crisis.” Scientiﬁc American 228:22 – 29.
      Isbell, W. H. 2004. “Mortuary Preferences; A Wari Culture Case Study from Middle Horizon Peru.” Latin
                   American Antiquity 15(1):3 – 32.
      Japanese Scientiﬁc Expedition to Nuclear America. 1979. Excavations at La Pampa in the North Highlands of Peru,
                   1975. Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press.
      Jennings, J., and W. Y. Alvarez. 2001. “Architecture, Local Elites, and Imperial Entanglements: The Wari Empire
                   and the Cotahuasi Valley of Peru.” Journal of Field Archaeology 28(1/2):143–159.
      Jennings, J., and N. Craig. 2001. “Politywide Analysis and Imperial Political Economy: The Relationship Between
                   Valley Political Complexity and Administrative Centers in the Wari Empire of the Central Andes.”
                   Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 20:479 –502.
      Jones, G. D., and R. R. Kautz, eds. 1981. The Transition to Statehood in the New World. Cambridge: Cambridge
                   University Press.
      Kaplan, L., T. Lynch, and E. E. Smith, Jr. 1973. “Early Cultivated Beans (Phaseolus vulgaris) from an Intermontane
                   Peruvian Valley.” Science 179:76 –77.
      Keatinge, R. W. 1974. “Chimú Rural Administration Centers in the Moche Valley, Peru.” World Archaeology
                   6:66 – 82.
      ———. 1988. Peruvian Prehistory: An Overview of Pre-Inka and Inka Society. New York: Cambridge University
                   Press.
      Lanning, E. P. 1967. Peru Before the Inkas. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
      Lathrap, D. W. 1973. “The Antiquity and Importance of Long-Distance Trade Relationships in the Moist Tropics
                   of Pre-Columbian South America.” World Archaeology 5:170–186.
      Lynch, T., ed. 1980. Guitarrero Cave: Early Man in the Andes. New York: Academic Press.
      MacNeish, R. S., R. K. Vierra, A. Nelken-Terner, R. Lurie, and A. G. Cook. 1983. Prehistory of the Ayacucho Basin,
                   Peru, Volume IV: The Preceramic Way of Life. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
      Masuda, S., I. Shimada, and C. Morris, eds. 1985. Andean Ecology and Civilization. Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press.
      Milliaire, J.-F. 2004. “The Manipulation of Human Remains in Moche Society: Delayed Burials, Grave Reopening,
                   and Secondary Offerings of Human Bones on the Peruvian North Coast.” Latin American Antiquity
                   15(4):371– 388.

                                 THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN ANDEAN SOUTH AMERICA                         561


Morris, C. 1985. “From Principles of Ecological Complementarity to the Organization and Administration of
             Tawantinsuyu.” In Andean Ecology and Civilization, ed. S. Masuda, I. Shimada, and C. Morris. Tokyo:
             University of Tokyo Press.
Moseley, M. E. 1975. The Maritime Foundations of Andean Civilization. Menlo Park, CA: Cummings.
———. 1985. “The Exploration and Explanation of Early Monumental Architecture in the Andes.” In Early
             Ceremonial Architecture in the Andes, ed. C. Donnan, pp. 28 –58, Washington, DC: Dumbarton Oaks.
———. 2001. The Incas and Their Ancestors. London and New York: Thames and Hudson.
Moseley, M. E., and K. C. Day, eds. 1982. Chan Chan: Andean Desert City. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico
             Press.
Murra, J. 1958. “On Inka Political Structure.” In Systems of Political Control and Bureaucracy in Human Society,
             ed. V. F. Ray. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
———. 1965. “Herds and Herders in the Inka State.” In Man, Culture and Animals. Washington, DC: American
             Association for the Advancement of Science.
———. 1985. “The Limits and Limitations of the ‘Vertical Archipelago’ in the Andes.” In Andean Ecology and
             Civilization, ed. S. Masuda, I. Shimada, and C. Morris. Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press.
Murra, J., and C. Morris. 1976. “Dynastic Oral Tradition, Administrative Records, and Archaeology in the Andes.”
             World Archaeology 7:269 –279.
Niles, S. A. 1988. Callachaca. Iowa City: University of Iowa Press.
Ortloff, C. R., M. E. Moseley, and R. A. Feldman. 1982. “Hydraulic Engineering Aspects of the Chimú/Chicama-
             Moche Intervalley Canal.” American Antiquity 47:572 –595.
Parsons, J. 1968. “An Estimate of Size and Population for Middle Horizon Tiahuanaco, Bolivia.” American
             Antiquity 33:243 –245.
———. 1977. Personal communication to Wenke.
Parsons, M. 1970. “Preceramic Subsistence on the Peruvian Coast.” American Antiquity 35:292 –303.
Patterson, T. C. 1971. “Central Peru: Its Population and Economy.” Archaeology 24:316 –321.
———. 1983. “The Historical Development of a Coastal Andean Social Formation in Central Peru, 6000 to
             500 b.c.” In Investigations of the Andean Past, Papers from the First Annual Northeast Conference on
             Andean Archaeology and Ethnohistory, ed. D. H. Sandweiss. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Latin
             Studies Program.
———. 1985. “The Huaca La Florida, Rimac Valley, Peru.” In Ceremonial Architecture in the Andes, ed. C. B.
             Donnan. Washington, DC: Dumbarton Oaks.
———. 1992. The Inca Empire. London: Berg.
Pearsall, D. M. 1992. “The Origins of Plant Cultivation in South America.” In The Origins of Agriculture. An
             International Perspective, ed. C. W. Cowan and P. J. Watson. Washington: Smithsonian Institution
             Press.
Pearsall, D. M., and D. R. Piperno. 1990. “Antiquity of Maize Cultivation in Ecuador: Summary and Reevaluation
             of the Evidence.” American Antiquity 55(2):324 – 337.
Pickersgill, B. 1969. “The Archaeological Record of Chile Peppers (Capsicum spp.) and the Sequence of Plant
             Domestication in Peru.” American Antiquity 34:54 – 61.
Pickersgill, B., and A. Bunting. 1969. “Cultivated Plants and the Kon-Tiki Theory.” Nature 222:225 – 227.
Pozorski, S. 1987. “Theocracy vs. Militarism: The Signiﬁcance of the Casma Valley in Understanding Early State
             Formation.” In The Origins and Development of the Andean State, ed. J. Haas, S. Pozorski, and
             T. Pozorski. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Pozorski, T. 1987. “Changing Priorities Within the Chimu State: The Role of Irrigation Agriculture.” In The
             Origins and Development of the Andean State, ed. J. Haas, S. Pozorski, and T. Pozorski. New York:
             Cambridge University Press.
Pozorski, S., and T. Pozorski. 1979. “Alto Salaverry: A Peruvian Coastal Preceramic Site.” Annals of the Carnegie
             Museum of Natural History 49:337–375.
———. 1986. “Recent Excavations at Pampa de las Llamas-Moxeke, A Complex Initial Period Site in Peru.”
             Journal of Field Archaeology 13(4):381–401.
———. 1987. “Chavín, the Early Horizon, and the Initial Period.” In The Origins and Development of the Andean
             State, ed. J. Haas, S. Pozorski, and T. Pozorski. New York: Cambridge University Press.
———. 1988. Early Settlement and Subsistence in the Casma Valley, Peru. Iowa City: University of Iowa Press.
———. 1990. “Huaynun, a Late Cotton Paraceramic Site on the North Coast of Peru.” Journal of Field Archaeology
             17(1):17–26.
———. 1994. “Early Andean Cities.” Scientiﬁc American 270(6):66 –72.
Prescott, W. H. 1908. History of the Conquest of Peru. London and New York: Everyman’s Library.
———. 1989. Life and Death at Paloma: Society and Mortuary Practices in Preceramic Peruvian Village. Iowa City:
             University of Iowa Press.
Protzen, J.-P. 1986. “Inca Stonemasonry.” Scientiﬁc American 254(2):94 –105.
Quilter, J. 1985. “Architecture and Chronology at El Paraíso, Peru.” Journal of Field Archaeology 12(3):274 –298.

562   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      ———. 1991a. “Late Preceramic Peru.” Journal of World Prehistory 5(4):387– 438.
      ———. 1991b. “Problems with the Late Preceramic of Peru.” American Anthropologist 93(2):450 –454.
      ———. 2002. “Moche Politics, Religion, and Warfare.” Journal of World Prehistory 16(2):145 –195.
      Quilter, J., and T. Stocker. 1983. “Subsistence Economies and the Origins of Andean Complex Societies.”
                    American Anthropologist 85(3):545–562.
      Ramenovsky, A. 1987. Vectors of Death. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
      Raymond, J. S. 1981. “The Maritime Foundations of Andean Civilization: A Reconsideration of the Evidence.”
                    American Antiquity 46:806 – 820.
      Reitz, E. J. 1988. “Faunal Remains from Paloma, an Archaic Site in Peru.” American Anthropologist 90(2):310–322.
      Richardson, J. B., III. 1981. “Maritime Adaptations on the Peruvian Coast: A Critique and Future Directions.” Paper
                    presented at the 47th Annual Meeting of the Society for American Archaeology, San Diego, California.
      Rick, J. W. 1980. Prehistoric Hunters of the High Andes. New York: Academic Press.
      Rodbell, D. T., G. O. Seltzer, D. E. Anderson, M. B. Abbott, D. B. Enﬁeld, and J. H. Newman. 1999. “A 15,000-
                    Year Record of El Niño-Driven Alluviation in Southwestern Ecuador.” Science 283:516 –520.
      Rowe, J. H. 1946. “Inka Culture at the Time of the Spanish Conquest.” Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin
                    143:183 –331.
      ———. 1967. “Form and Meaning in Chavín Art.” In Peruvian Archaeology: Selected Readings. Palo Alto: Peek
                    Publishers.
      Schreiber, K. J. 1987. “Conquest and Consolidation: A Comparison of the Wari and Inka Occupation of a
                    Highland Peruvian Valley.” American Antiquity 52(2):266–284.
      Scott, R. J. 1981. “The Maritime Foundations of Andean Civilization: A Reconsideration.” American Antiquity
                    46:806 – 821.
      Shady, R., and A. Ruiz. 1979. “Evidence for Interregional Relationships During the Middle Horizon on the North-
                    Central Coast of Peru.” American Antiquity 44:670 – 684.
      Silverman, H. 1988. “Cahuachi: Non-Urban Cultural Complexity on the South Coast of Peru.” Journal of Field
                    Archaeology 15(4):403 – 430.
      Stanish, C. 2001. “The Origin of State Societies in South America.” Annual Review of Anthropology 30:41–64.
      Ugent, D., S. Pozorski, and T. Pozorski. 1984. “New Evidence for Ancient Cultivation of Canna edulis in Peru.”
                    Economic Botany 38(4):417– 432.
      Von Hagen, V. W. 1952. “America’s Oldest Roads.” Scientiﬁc American 187:17–21.
      Willey, G. R. 1962. “The Early Great Art Styles and the Rise of Pre-Columbian Civilizations.” American
                    Anthropologist 64:1–14.
      Wilson, D. J. 1981. “Of Maize and Men: A Critique of the Maritime Hypothesis of State Origins on the Coast of
                    Peru.” American Anthropologist 83:93 –114.
      ———. 1983. “The Origins and Development of Complex Prehispanic Society in the Lower Santa Valley, Peru:
                    Implications for Theories of State Origins.” Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 2:209–276.
      Wing, E. S. 1977. “Animal Domestication in the Andes.” In Origins of Agriculture, ed. C. A. Reed. The Hague:
                    Mouton Publishers.



      NOTES
       1. Father Cobo’s description here is from various sections of his Inca Religion and Customs.
       2. Fernández et al., “The Inca Mummy from Mount Aconcagua: Decoding the Geographic Origin of the
          ‘Messenger to the Deities’ by Means of Stable Carbon, Nitrogen, and Sulfur isotope Analysis,” pp. 30 –32.
       3. Murra, “Andean Ecology and Civilization,” p. 11, in Masuda et al., eds., Andean Ecology and Civilization.
       4. Masuda et al., eds., Andean Ecology and Civilization.
       5. Idyll, “The Anchovy Crisis.”
       6. Fontugne et al., “El Niño Variability in the Coastal Desert of Southern Peru During the Mid-Holocene.”
       7. Hoopes, “Ford Revisited: A Critical Review of the Chronology and Relationships of the Earliest Ceramic
          Complexes in the New World, 6000 –1500 b.c.,” p. 41.
       8. Rick, Prehistoric Hunters of the High Andes.
       9. Richardson, “Maritime Adaptations on the Peruvian Coast: A Critique and Future Directions,” pp. 140 – 45.
      10. Quilter and Stocker, “Subsistence Economies and the Origins of Andean Complex Societies,” p. 547.
      11. Pearsall, “The Origins of Plant Cultivation in South American,” p. 192.
      12. Ugent et al., “New Evidence for Ancient Cultivation of Canna edulis in Peru.”
      13. Reviewed in Pearsall, “The Origins of Plant Cultivation in South America,” p. 190.
      14. Rick, Prehistoric Hunters of the High Andes.
      15. See Quilter, “Late Preceramic Peru,” p. 387, for a discussion of these dates; see also Stanish, “The Origins of
          State Societies in South America,” and Haas et al., “Dating the Late Archaic Occupation of the Norte Chico
          Region in Peru.”

                                  THE EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN ANDEAN SOUTH AMERICA                          563


16. Patterson, “Central Peru: Its Population and Economy.”
17. Stanish, “The Origins of State Societies in South America,” p. 45.
18. Benfer, “The Challenges and Rewards of Sedentism: The Preceramic Village of Paloma, Peru”; Reitz, “Faunal
    Remains from Paloma, an Archaic Site in Peru.”
19. Quilter and Stocker, “Subsistence Economies and the Origins of Andean Complex Societies,” p. 545.
20. Parsons, “Preceramic Subsistence on the Peruvian Coast,” p. 297.
21. Pozorski and Pozorski, “Alto Salaverry: A Peruvian Coastal Preceramic Site.”
22. Benfer, “The Challenges and Rewards of Sedentism.”
23. Haas et al., “Dating the Late Archaic Occupation of the Norte Chico Region in Peru,” p. 1021.
24. Ibid., p. 1022.
25. Quilter, “Architecture and Chronology at El Paraíso, Peru.”
26. Quilter, “Late Preceramic Peru,” p. 417.
27. Quilter, “Late Preceramic Peru,” citing Feldman, Aspero, Peru: Architecture, Subsistence Economy, and Other
    Artifacts of a Preceramic Maritime Chiefdom, p. 89.
28. Quilter, “Late Preceramic Peru,” citing Urton, personal communication, 1991.
29. Quilter, “Late Preceramic Peru.”
30. Moseley, “The Exploration and Explanation of Early Monumental Architecture in the Andes.”
31. Burger, Chavin and the Origins of Andean Civilization, pp. 46–48.
32. Ibid., p. 48.
33. Burger and Salazar-Burger, “Ritual and Religion at Huaricoto,” and “The Early Ceremonial Center of
    Huaricoto.”
34. Quilter, “Late Preceramic Peru,” pp. 420 – 421.
35. Stanish, “The Origins of State Societies in South America,” p. 47.
36. Burger, Chavin and the Origins of Andean Civilization, p. 32.
37. Moseley, The Maritime Foundations of Andean Civilization.
38. Quilter and Stocker, “Subsistence Economies and the Origins of Andean Complex Societies.”
39. Moseley, The Maritime Foundations of Andean Civilization, p. 105.
40. Burger, Chavin and the Origins of Andean Civilization, pp. 28–33.
41. Ibid., pp. 42–43.
42. Stanish, “The Origins of State Societies in South America,” pp. 48–50.
43. Ibid., p. 49.
44. Burger, Chavin and the Origins of Andean Civilization, p. 80.
45. Ibid., p. 77.
46. Ibid., p. 78.
47. Ibid., p. 79.
48. Stanish, “The Origins of State Societies in South America,” p. 49; Burger, Chavin and the Origins of Andean
    Civilization, p. 82.
49. Burger, Chavin and the Origins of Andean Civilization, p. 83.
50. Haas, “The Exercise of Power in Early Andean State Development”; Pozorski and Pozorski, “Early Andean
    Cities.”
51. Burger, Chavin and the Origins of Andean Civilization, pp. 75, 87– 88.
52. Ibid., pp. 66–68; Burger and Salazar-Burger, “The Second Season of Investigations at the Initial Period Center
    of Cardal, Peru.”
53. Burger, Chavin and the Origins of Andean Civilization, p. 68.
54. Burger and Salazar-Burger, “The Second Season of Investigations at the Initial Period Center of Cardal, Peru,”
    p. 278.
55. Quilter, “Late Preceramic Peru,” p. 414.
56. Stanish, “The Origins of State Societies in South America,” p. 51.
57. Burger, Chavin and the Origins of the Andean Civilization.
58. Ibid., pp. 130–135.
59. Ibid., pp. 135–137.
60. Stanish, “The Origins of State Societies in South America,” p. 52.
61. Reviewed in Keatinge, Peruvian Prehistory; also see Haas, Pozorski, and Pozorski, The Origins and Development
    of The Andean State; Donnan, ed., Early Ceremonial Architecture in the Andes. But see Quilter, “Moche Politics,
    Religion, and Warfare,” for a viewpoint that questions whether or not the Moche can be considered a state-
    level society.
62. Lanning, Peru Before the Inkas, pp. 114 –115.
63. Silverman, “Cahuachi: Non-Urban Cultural Complexity on the South Coast of Peru.”
64. Although see Billman, “Irrigation and the Origins of the Southern Moche State on the North Coast of Peru,”
    who argues that canals and their construction early in the Moche would not have required organization above
    the level of the village or community. Billman instead contends that it was the production of subsistence

564   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


          surplus brought about by the use of irrigation that gave certain individuals the opportunity to accumulate
          wealth and power.
      65. Donnan, “Master Works Reveal a Pre-Inca World.” Additional unlooted tombs were located at Dos Cabezas,
          about 40 miles south of Sipán. A description of these can be found in Doonan, “Moche Burials Uncovered.”
      66. Donnan, Moche Art and Iconography.
      67. Lanning, Peru Before the Inkas, p. 127.
      68. Stanish, “The Origins of State Societies in South America,” pp. 53 –54.
      69. “Tiwanaku Settlement System: The Integration of Nested Hierarchies in the Lower Tiwanaku Valley.”
      70. Fiedel, Prehistory of the Americas, p. 333.
      71. Keatinge, “Chimú Rural Administration Centers in the Moche Valley, Peru,” p. 79.
      72. Moseley and Day, Chan Chan: Andean Desert City.
      73. Collier et al., The Inka and Aztec States, 1400–1800.
      74. D’Altroy, Provincial Power in the Inka Empire.
      75. Lanning, Peru Before the Inkas, pp. 159 –160.
      76. Covey, “ A Processual Study of Inka State Formation.”
      77. Ibid.
      78. Hastorf and Johannessen, “Maize and Politics in the Pre-Hispanic Andes.”
      79. Lanning, Peru Before the Inkas, pp. 166 –167.
      80. Ascher and Ascher, Code of the Quipu: A Study in Media, Mathematics, and Culture.
      81. Hyslop, The Inka Road System.
      82. Von Hagen, “America’s Oldest Roads.”
      83. Niles, Callachaca.
      84. Engl and Engl, Twilight of Ancient Peru, p. 119.
      85. Carneiro, “A Theory of the Origin of the State”; see also Wilson, “The Origins and Development of Complex
          Prehispanic Society in the Lower Santa Valley, Peru.”

15
Early Cultural Complexity in North
America

You must explain to the natives of [North
America] that there is only one God in heaven,
and the emperor on earth to rule and govern it,
whose subjects they must all become and they
must serve.
Instructions of the viceroy to Fray Marcos de Ninza
(a.d. 1538)




A          s Europeans invaded North America in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries,
           they encountered what looked to them like the relics of ancient civilizations:
hundreds of large earthen mounds, some nearly as large as the Egyptian pyramids,
dominated the Ohio and Mississippi river valleys; and in Arizona, Colorado, and New
Mexico large, neatly planned but abandoned towns that had obviously once been inhabited
by hundreds, if not thousands, were found along the major rivers and even in the arid
highlands (Figure 15.1).
      The Europeans of this age were, like the citizens of all world powers, highly ethnocentric.
It is not surprising, therefore, that they assumed that these impressive works had been
constructed by their own ancestors—the Celts, Romans, or perhaps the Vikings; they
simply could not believe that the ancestors of the poor and “degenerate” Native Americans
they saw about them might have had something to do with these great monuments. Some
Europeans even blamed the Native Americans for massacring what the Europeans believed
to be an ancient and extinct “superior” American race—the ultimate in adding insult to
injury, given the Native Americans’ eventual fate.
      The truth, of course, is that these mounds and abandoned settlements had indeed been
built by Native Americans many centuries before the Europeans arrived, and we now know
that these ancient Americans had a rich culture history going back more than 10,000 years
in the New World.
      Some of the people of “pre-Columbian” North America were inﬂuenced by contact
with the complex cultures of ancient Mesoamerica, and it is also true that, according to some
criteria, aboriginal American cultures never reached the level of complexity attained in
“independent” ancient centers of cultural evolution, such as Mesoamerica and Mesopotamia.

                                                      565

566   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                              NORTH AMERICA

                              1900
                              1800
                                                                           Great Plains
                              1700                                     Coalescent tradition
                                                                         • Introduction of
                              1600                                         horse-mounted
                                                                           nomadism
                              1500
                              1400
                              1300
                              1200                               Eastern
                                                                Woodlands       Great Plains
                                                                                                                           Mesa Verde
                              1100                              Mississippi    Plains Village
                                                                                                                          cliff dwellings
                                                                 Culture           period
                                                                                                                           constructed
                              1000
                               900
                               800                                                                     Southwest
                                     Eskimo
                                                                                                       Hohokam
                               700   culures
                                                                                       Desert West      tradition
                                     Stage V
                                                                                      and Southwest                                         Development
                               600




       MILLENNIA CENTURIES
                                                                                     Fremont culture                                        of Northwest
                                                                                                                                            Coast Indian
                               500                    Adena                    Plains                        Southwest                         cultures
                                                      culture                 Woodland                       Mogollon
                               400                                             period                         tradition              California
                                                                Hopewell                                                              cultures
                                                                                                                      Ancestral
                               300                               culture
                                                                                                                       Pueblo
                                                                                                                      tradition
                               200                   Eastern
                                                    Woodlands
                               100                           Eastern
                                                            Woodlands           Great
                                               Eskimo                                                                Southwest
                                 0                                              Plains                                              Emergence
                                             cultures
                                             Stage IV                                                                              of California
                              1000                                                                                                     tribes
                                     Eskimo
                                     cultures
                              2000   Stage III

                              3000             Eskimo
                                               cultures
                              4000             Stage II

                              5000                                                                                                     Northwest Coast
                                                                                                                                       Archaic cultures
                              6000                                                                                                      established by
                                                                                                                                           7700 B.C.
                              7000
                              8000   Eskimo                                                              Archaic
                                     cultures                                                          Paleoindian
                              9000    Stage I

                             10000



                         20000

FIGURE 15.1 Betatakin, an Ancestral Puebloan settlement in Arizona, was inhabited for only about
50 years before being abandoned.

568   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      But the native North Americans did develop some aspects of cultural complexity, and
      they did so largely independently. Moreover, the ecological and cultural reasons North
      American cultures did not exactly parallel those of Mexico or Peru provide some insights
      into all of these cultures.
           For more than a century archaeologists have been systematically digging North
      American sites, from Alaska to southern Texas, and we should know more about develop-
      ments here than virtually anywhere else in the world, given the high ratio of archaeologists
      per square kilometer. But, unfortunately, early American archaeologists also yielded to the
      temptations of excavating mainly rich tombs and large towns, resulting in a very biased
      view of the American past. And because of decades of turning ancient Native American
      cultural resources into parking lots and hamburger stands and because of the looting that
      continues today, so much of the archaeological record of North America has been destroyed
      that much of the American past will forever remain a mystery.
           The old, sometimes pejorative myths about “Indians” are now giving way in some
      circles to new ones stressing the social harmony, ecological purity, and superior metaphysics
      of ancient Native Americans. As with all cultures, there is much to admire about ancient
      North Americans. But the evidence suggests that for much of their antiquity, aboriginal
      Americans were like prehistoric peoples in every other part of the world—harried small-
      time foragers or farmers, worrying about this year’s drought and next year’s deluge, shifting
      their crops from year to year as they exhausted the resources in one place after another, and
      as enmeshed in slavery, exploitation, and warfare as any ancient Chinese, Egyptian, or
      European.
           The term “Native American” is gradually replacing the wildly imprecise “Indian” of
      bygone years, but it is well to remember that all Americans are immigrants, and rather recent
      ones at that. The people who colonized the New World and became “Native Americans”
      were, in fact, northern Asians who came in several episodes of colonization (chapter 5)—
      the ﬁrst of many waves of immigration to the New World.



      THE ECOLOGICAL SETTING

      We saw in chapter 5 that about 12,000 years ago the huge glacial ice sheets that once covered
      much of eastern North America retreated into Canada, and the distribution of plant and
      animal species in this region became similar to that of the recent past. Between about 8000
      and 6500 b.c., the annual temperature of much of the North American East was probably
      2.5°C cooler than at present, and after that time aboriginal Americans were likely directly
      affected by a number of climate ﬂuctuations. Subtle shifts of climate and effective rainfall
      may have had important effects on the distribution of nut-bearing trees, which were a very
      important food source, and also on the size and stability of rivers and lakes—rich environ-
      ments around which early Americans often built their hunting-foraging economies.
           Temperate eastern North America is a rich niche for hunter-foragers, but its abundant
      agricultural potential can only be realized with technologies such as draught animals and
      the plow. The American Southwest and West also include some very rich areas, but none
      of these areas has the same agricultural potential—given primitive technologies—as that,
      for example, of the Nile Valley or Mesopotamia. The modern u.s. agricultural economy is

                                              EARLY CULTURAL COMPLEXIY IN NORTH AMERICA          569


so productive that it is somewhat surprising just how poor a place it was for pre-industrial
subsistence farmers. First, most of it is far from the equator and therefore has less solar
radiation and fewer frost-free days, and thus lower absolute agricultural potential, than
more southern environments—such as the one in Mesoamerica. Second, those areas of
North America that are today the fertile ﬁelds of Iowa, Missouri, and other areas of the
Plains and Middle West were for the most part unavailable to the Native American farmer
because they lacked the plows and draft animals that can rip through thick grasses and other
vegetation to reveal these fertile soils and the other machines that are needed to suppress
the competition to crops from weeds. Third, much of the area between the Atlantic Coast
and the western reaches of the Mississippi River drainage were thickly forested and
relatively cool, “closed-canopy climax forests,” which could be exploited for nuts and a few
other resources but were in most areas an unprepossessing place for the maize-beans-
squash farming that became the basis for Native American cultivation in North America.
Fourth, the areas of California and other parts of the West that are today food suppliers to
the world were far too arid for anything but basic subsistence agriculture until modern
irrigation systems were installed.


THE NORTH AMERICAN EAST

The most complex ancient cultures in North America evolved in the great river valleys of
the North American East, especially the Mississippi and Ohio Rivers and the lands they
drain (Figure 15.2).


Agricultural Origins: The Late Archaic Period
(c. 4000– 800 B.C.)
Untangling the processes by which many Native Americans became farmers is difﬁcult. One
might consider maize and beans to be the most important domesticated plants in North
America because they were the basis of the largest and most complex cultures in this area.
But maize was a late introduction and only became an important source of food over most
of eastern North America after about a.d. 1000. Maize pollen found in sediments of Lake
Shelby in coastal Alabama seems securely dated to about 1500 b.c., but it is not clear that
this plant was an important food resource at this time. One of the earliest and securely dated
samples of maize in eastern North America is a collection of carbonized maize kernels
found at the Icehouse Bottom site in eastern Tennessee and directly dated by radiocarbon
methods to about a.d. 75; but until well into the ﬁrst millennium a.d. maize remained a
minor source of food.
     The productive patches of maize, beans, and squash that eventually allowed Native
Americans to live in great numbers all over North America were only the last, most pro-
ductive stages of a long, slow shift—away from simple plant collecting and hunting and
toward an ever-growing reliance on fewer and fewer kinds of plants. Long before maize
reached temperate North America, people there had specialized in exploiting several kinds
of plants in early forms of agriculture. So, the questions about North American agriculture
are the same as those we asked about other areas. Why did agricultural economies appear

FIGURE 15.2 Adena-Hopewell and related cultures. The Adena culture was centered in Ohio, but Adena
trade networks reached as far away as New York. Adena culture appears to have peaked at about 100 b.c.
and was waning by a.d. 400. By about 100 b.c. Adena cultures in Ohio were being replaced by Hopewell
cultures and for the next nine centuries the Hopewell cultures spread over much of the East.

                                               EARLY CULTURAL COMPLEXIY IN NORTH AMERICA           571


when and where they did, through what processes, and with what results? And what was
the long-term relationship between local domesticates and those introduced from
elsewhere?
     It was the oil- and starch-rich seeds of a variety of plants that formed the basis of
initial agriculture in eastern North America. Among the primary domesticated plants were
goosefoot (Chenopodium), sumpweed (Iva annua), sunﬂowers (Helianthus annus), wild
gourds (Cucurbita), maygrass (Phalaris), little barley (Hordeum pusillum), and knotweed
(Polygonum erectum). Until late in the ﬁrst millennium b.c., hunting and foraging continued
to be the way of life for most people, but through these many millennia after the Ice Age,
the overall trend was toward increasing numbers of sedentary communities that specialized
ﬁrst in hunting and intensive plant collecting and later in maize and bean agriculture.
     As in all other areas of early agriculture, climatic changes cannot be disregarded.
Complex climatic changes between about 5000 and 2000 b.c., for example, changed the
ﬂow characteristics of streams and rivers across the eastern woodlands so that backwater
swamps and lakes created by obstructions in river channels greatly expanded the abundance
and accessibility of shellﬁsh and other aquatic resources; and they also produced greater
and more varied “disturbed” habitats—areas of the ﬂoodplain where ﬂoodwaters dis-
turbed vegetation—which offered ecological niches for “pioneer” plants such as goosefoot,
sumpweed, sunﬂowers, marsh elder (Sambucus), wild gourds, and other plants,1 which
Native Americans exploited. They could have encouraged the growth of hickory trees, for
example, by “girdling” (cutting through the bark and growth layers) other species of trees
in stands of hickory, and they could have burned off other areas to encourage the growth
of chenopods, sunﬂowers, and other edible plants.2
     Among the earliest domesticates found in the North American woodlands are gourds
and squash, which appear shortly after 3,500 years ago.3 Species of gourds may have been
introduced from Mexico or washed ashore—for example, in Florida—and eventually
become locally domesticated. They were probably used as containers and for seeds, and
occasionally eaten directly, and we may suppose that their use goes back many millennia
before we have archaeological evidence of them. There is also a problem in distinguishing
between species of gourds based on their few traces in the archaeological record.4
     The ﬁrst clear evidences of changes in the direction of domestication of native food
plants in North America, however, appears in the period between about 2050 and 1050 b.c.
The primary evidence is in the form of changes in the morphology of the seeds of sunﬂowers,
goosefoot, and other disturbed-habitat plants. As we saw in chapter 6, one of the ways
in which people all over the world domesticated plants was to increase their usefulness by
increasing seed size and number (for example, from two-row to six-row barley) and by
altering the dormancy cycle of plants. When sunﬂowers, goosefoot, and other plants
germinated in the spring, they would have faced tremendous competition because these
plants release many seeds in a small area. In such conditions, plants that are the earliest to
sprout and are larger and more vigorous than others would be at an advantage. One key to
early sprouting is the thickness of the seed coat, the testa. As Bruce Smith notes,5 the average
testa thickness on goosefoot seeds shows marked decline over a large area of the eastern
woodlands after about 2,500 years ago, based on specimens retrieved from cave sites and
other occupations in Illinois, Arkansas, Kentucky, and adjacent areas. Other changes
indicative of domestication appeared at about this same time in a variety of plants, but, as
Smith notes, “it also appears likely that indigenous cultigens and domesticates did not

572   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      become substantial food sources, and food production did not play a major economic role
      until . . . a full 1,000 years after their initial domestication.”6
           Nonetheless, various scholars have tried to explain how the transition to initial
      agriculture might have occurred. Michael O’Brien has developed a “Coevolutionary”
      model to account for the transition to agriculture in one area, near the Illinois/Missouri
      border.7 Based on David Rindos’s work on plant domestication,8 O’Brien suggests that the
      consistent but low-intensity use of sunﬂower seeds, goosefoot, marsh elder, and other
      native annuals during the period up to about 300 b.c. created a relationship between these
      plants and people that resulted in a form of domestication and agriculture. He argues that
      initial exploitation of these plants would not have been of great signiﬁcance in the overall
      economy, but the costs of exploiting them were very low, since they did not conﬂict with
      other activities and one could carry these seeds as a minor food without too much effort.
      But then he says, “by 200 b.c. the interaction between human groups and their resource
      base had reached the point that sedentism became a viable option.”9 He notes that the risks
      of concentrating on these plants were considerable, in the way of droughts and ﬂoods. But
      they also had potential for supporting increased population densities.
           Many of the seeds of native North American domesticates could be eaten simply by
      drying and cracking them, but they also appear to have been staples in processed foods
      (Figure 15.3). David Braun has shown that during the Middle and Late Woodland periods




      FIGURE 15.3 In the prehistoric American Middle West the transition to the agricultural way of life
      was a process in which native crops and wild plant foods were replaced by maize, beans, and squash
      (the thickness of the shaded and black areas reﬂects relative importance of the different resources).

                                               EARLY CULTURAL COMPLEXIY IN NORTH AMERICA          573


people began to make more and more pottery in ways that seem particularly designed to
cook starchy seeds, such as those of goosefoot.10 Such pottery has to withstand high heat
and sudden temperature changes, and all over the world people making these kinds of pots
invented the same globular shapes and kinds of tempering and wall thicknesses that
facilitate the long, slow simmering of seeds and other foods in liquids. Stews and soups are
extraordinarily nutritious—and, more than that, they make excellent foods out of things
that normally people cannot proﬁt from much, such as dry goosefoot seeds and a picked-
over rabbit skeleton: The best way to increase the nutrition of these annuals is to boil them,
which “may increase palatability as well”.11
      The collection and domestication of these various plant species seem always and
everywhere to have been combined with relentless hunting, ﬁshing, and nut gathering.
There is little evidence that much energy was invested in modifying the environments of
sunﬂowers and these other plants through hoeing, watering, or weeding, although
cultivation must have been practiced at least in the sense that seeds were selected and
planted. Melvin Fowler noted that most of the native plants apparently domesticated in the
East are species that prefer open, disturbed areas, such as would have been provided by the
refuse piles that must have become increasingly available as hunters and gatherers cluttered
the landscape with snail and clam shells, ﬁsh bones, and other debris.12 When and to what
extent the kind of natural association between these plants and human disturbances was
converted into farming, in the sense of people planting and caring for these crops, will
probably always be difﬁcult to measure.


EARLY CULTURAL COMPLEXITY IN THE NORTH AMERICAN EAST
Like other hunter-foragers around the world, the people of the North American East began
to show signs of increasing social differentiation as they intensiﬁed their exploitation of
plants and as they became less mobile and spent more time in particular places.13 One
of the earliest signs of these changes is in burials. Beginning at about 2000 b.c., people all
over the East began burying their dead with exotic items, such as copper, marine shells,
and ground stone jewelry—often covering the corpse with red ocher, a mineral pigment.14
Yerkes suggests that these “individuals would go to their graves with the exotic materials
that they had accumulated, but it is unlikely that they were able to pass their achieved status
on to their descendants.”15 As we noted in chapter 4, even the Neandertals of 100,000 years
ago may have had at least some slight sense of death as a transition to another plane of
existence, so it is not surprising that some burials in the North American East after 2000
b.c. contain exotic commodities and that cremation was practiced in some areas. But, as in
many other areas of the world, this early sense of ceremonialism was transmuted over time
into elaborate mortuary cults in which social differentiations and other signs of increasing
complexity are evident.
     One of the earliest and most dramatic indications that American cultures were
becoming more complex than those of the previous millennia is the Poverty Point culture
of the lower Mississippi Delta. This culture is named after the Poverty Point site in
Louisiana (Figure 15.4), where large earthworks were constructed sometime between 1200
and 600 b.c. The six nested ranks of earthen mounds at Poverty Point average about
25 m wide and 3 m high and are set about 40 m apart. Near them stands an artiﬁcial mound
more than 20 m high and more than 200 m across.16 It is estimated that more than three

           574        PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                      million man-hours of labor
                                                                                      were required to build this com-
                                                                                      plex, with hundreds, perhaps
                                                                                      thousands, of people hauling
                                                                                      dirt in baskets in an organized,
                                                                                      planned effort. If each basket
                                                                                      contained a cubic foot of dirt,
                                                                                      about 1,236,007 loads would
                                                                                      have been required.17 Burials
                                                                                      suggest that this complex was a
                                                                                      mortuary cult, but its overall
                                                                                      signiﬁcance is difﬁcult to assess.
                                                                                      Some of the Poverty Point
                                                                                      people were skilled artisans who
                                                                                      made vessels out of steatite and
                                                                                      sandstone, pipes out of clay
                                                                                      and stone, and axes, adzes, saws,
FIGURE 15.4 One of the most impressive Archaic sites in North America is the          and weights from hard kinds of
complex of earthworks at Poverty Point, Louisiana. Between about 1500 and 700 b.c.    stone—importing these raw
hunter-gathering peoples in this area built six nested octagons of piled earth. The   materials, in some cases, from
outer octagon is about 1,300 m in diameter. Part of this complex was later eroded     sources more than 600 miles
away by a river. A small mound near these earthworks and other occupations pro-       away. In fact, trade in exotic
duced many beautiful artifacts, as well as thousands of ﬁred clay balls that were     commodities and the produc-
apparently heated and then dropped into containers to boil foods.
                                                                                      tion of craft goods from them
                                                                                      may be the reason for Poverty
                                                                                      Point’s prominence, since it is
                      located at the conﬂuence of six major rivers. Like any other large earthworks, those of
                      Poverty Point offer points for astronomical observation: A person standing on the large
                      mound at Poverty Point can see the vernal and autumnal equinoxes on a line across the
                      center of the mound, looking east.18 But, as with Stonehenge, any large monument offers
                      a great array of possible observation points, and it is not difﬁcult to ﬁnd some astronomical
                      regularity that may or may not have been the object of constructing that particular
                      observation point.
                           As we have seen elsewhere in the ancient world, at sites such as Jericho and el Paraíso,
                      agriculture is not a prerequisite for substantial architecture—all that is required is sufﬁcient
                      productivity. The Poverty Point people may have practiced some limited agriculture with
                      native plants, but it was probably a rich blend of hunting and foraging that supported these
                      mound-builders.
                           In any case, the people of Poverty Point did what people at a similar level of cultural
                      organization around the world did: They built monumental architecture, they expanded
                      and intensiﬁed regional trade in exotic commodities (and probably subsistence ones as
                      well) and apparently used these to mark differences in social status and other social and
                      ethnic identiﬁcation, and then, again like these other cultures, their culture began to decline
                      in importance as that of other cultures began to increase. The Poverty Point culture began
                      to contract at about 650 b.c. and went into decline as other areas to the northeast became
                      more powerful.

                                              EARLY CULTURAL COMPLEXIY IN NORTH AMERICA           575


Evolving Cultural Complexity: The Early, Middle, and
Late Woodland Periods (c. 800 B.C.–A.D. 750)
Between about 800 b.c. and a.d. 750, population densities in many parts of eastern North
America increased sharply, thousands of gigantic earthworks were constructed, inter-
regional trade expanded, and large villages were built. This era of change, usually referred
to as the Woodland period, is associated with two major cultural manifestations: the Adena
(centered in southern Ohio, and extending into Indiana, Kentucky, Pennsylvania, and West
Virginia), and the Hopewell (centered in southern Ohio but extending widely over much
of eastern North America). These cultures overlapped in time, with the Adena somewhat
earlier than the Hopewell in some areas. Both are deﬁned on the basis of styles of pottery,
engraved stone tablets, textiles, and worked bone and copper.


THE ADENA CULTURE
Adena mound-building and artifact styles seem concentrated in the interval between about
500 b.c. and a.d. 700, and the richness of some of these sites, in the burial goods found in
the mounds as well as the scale of the mounds themselves (Figure 15.5), originally led some
scholars to suppose that these people already lived in chiefdoms, built on the sweat and
labor of exploited farmers.
     But the Adena seem to have been still mainly hunter-forager peoples who moved
seasonally. Maize may have been cultivated on a small scale, but it was probably not very
important.19 And as impressive as the mounds are, they could easily have been built by small
groups adding a layer or two each year, without much supervision,20 perhaps as bodies were
interred in layers that covered
earlier burials.
     Many of the mounds were
mortuary centers in which one
or more corpses were placed in
log tombs or clay pits in com-
munal burials, sometimes with
beautiful stone tools and other
goods, and then covered with
earth. If the relative richness of
these burials accurately reﬂects
social differentiation in Adena
society, then there were elites
who could command in death
special treatment in the form of
log tombs, ocher and graphite
decorations of their bodies,
and expensive grave goods in
copper, stone, and shell. Lower-
status individuals appear to
have been cremated with little
ritual. These mounds may have        FIGURE 15.5 Great Serpent Mound, an Adena construction near Cincinnati, Ohio.

576   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      been ceremonial sites or centers for the exchange of goods, but they also could have served
      as territorial markers.21
           Stone tobacco pipes are found in some Adena sites, and smoking probably played an
      important role in rituals. The native strains of tobacco were much more powerful than
      modern strains and could have produced narcotic effects much stronger than modern
      cigarettes.22
           It is unfortunate that so many Adena sites were destroyed by modern constructions,
      and also that archaeologists excavated scores of mounds but almost no ordinary Adena
      settlements. Those few settlements that have been excavated suggest simple, somewhat
      temporary structures, probably made by setting series of posts in the ground and covering
      them with hides or wood—the wigwam.23


      THE HOPEWELL CULTURE
      The Hopewell culture—which was riverine in its adaptation—dominated parts of the
      Middle West from about 200 b.c. to a.d. 750. The Ohio Hopewell was centered in southern
      Ohio, and the Havana Hopewell dominated the central and lower Illinois River Valley,
      while various Hopewell groups extended up the Missouri River as far west as Kansas City.
      Hopewell religious traditions were practiced as far north as Wisconsin, south into
      Louisiana, and east into New York.
           While grave goods are not usually profuse in Adena mounds, Hopewell tombs often
      contain ﬁnely worked copper, pipestone, mica, obsidian, meteoric iron, shell, tortoise shell,
      shark and alligator teeth, bear teeth, ceramics, and other commodities; there is also
      evidence of the ultimate grave good—sacriﬁced humans. Hopewell settlements and
      mounds increased in size and number in the centuries before about a.d. 400, and major
      earthworks were often built near the burial mounds.
           These burials may reﬂect something about the dead person’s rank and status within
      the community—though burials are an uncertain guide to the actual prestige and power
      relationships of any community. Joseph Tainter carried out a statistical analysis of more
      than 500 Hopewell burials and concluded that there were six discrete levels of status within
      the Hopewell community, corresponding to six different forms of burial, ranging from
      simple holes in the ground to massive mounds in which the corpse was accompanied by
      the ﬁnest goods.24 In some Adena and Hopewell mounds, infants and juveniles were found
      buried with great ceremony and rich goods, suggesting the inheritance of rank and prestige
      and the control of the society’s resources by a limited number of its people.
           To understand these mound complexes we need to place them in the context of a local
      economy—and about this we know comparatively little. Because many later Hopewell build-
      ings and earthworks were precisely planned and relatively expensive to construct, we must
      suspect that at least some people had become specialized labor-organizers and engineers
      of sorts, perhaps even constituting a privileged social group. But one of the many puzzling
      things about these mound complexes is that in many areas they do not seem to have any
      associated domestic houses. Some archaeologists assumed that any society capable of build-
      ing such impressive works must certainly have been composed of sedentary agriculturalists,
      but Hopewell peoples for the most part probably hunted and gathered essentially the same
      plant and animal species as did their ancestors, with deer, ducks, small mammals, ﬁsh, snails,
      mussels, pigweed, lambsquarter, sunﬂowers, and nuts providing much of their nutrition.

                                                  EARLY CULTURAL COMPLEXIY IN NORTH AMERICA             577


     In any case, the Hopewell heartland was in no sense so poor that hunters and gatherers
were desperately trying to become full-time maize farmers. Estimates of resources around
the Hopewell settlement at Scoville, in the lower Illinois Valley, indicate that “within a half-
hour’s walk . . . there would annually be from 182,000 to 426,000 bushels of nuts and 48,000
to 484,000 bushels of acorns, 100 to 840 deer, 10,000 to 20,000 squirrels, and 200 turkeys.
Not computed were seeds, fruits, smaller animals, ﬁsh, mussels, and migratory birds
(6 million mallards were estimated to be in the Illinois River Valley in 1955).”25 Given these
abundant resources, it is not surprising that maize agriculture apparently appeared ﬁrst in
poorer, more marginal environments and displaced hunting and gathering in the lushest
environments only much later.
     Hopewell peoples traded extensively in exotic commodities, such as obsidian and
grizzly bear teeth from Montana, silver from Ontario, copper from northern Michigan, and
shark teeth and many marine shells and products from the Gulf Coast. By the ﬁrst few
centuries a.d., people all over eastern North America were participants in a great trading
network, and by “consuming” these goods by lavishing them on the dead and burying them
deeply in mound-tombs, the demand for these treasures was kept high and the trading
system in constant operation.
     Although the conspicuous consumption of the Hopewell era, with its great mounds,
rich burials, and wide variety of arts and crafts, indicates that Archaic egalitarian social
structures were changing, these societies seem to have been less complexly organized than,
for example, Mesoamerican cities like Teotihuacán.26 Most of the Hopewell and Adena
communities were small sedentary groups of hunter-collectors who built the burial
mounds and ceremonial complexes for reasons that may fundamentally have had to do
with distributing resources. Whereas Archaic hunters and gatherers met their needs by
following seasonal rounds and exploiting a diversity of resources, Hopewell communities
probably accomplished the same thing by exchanging products among themselves. Like the
Adena mounds, however, these constructions could have also been territorial markers.
     But we know comparatively little about daily life for the mass of the Hopewell or Adena
peoples. The few houses excavated seem to be rectangular or ovoid constructions supported
on posts and covered with bark or mats. Most people apparently lived in small hamlets
composed of a few such houses and a few storage pits and garbage dumps. Some people
were obviously specialists in ﬂint working and a few other arts and crafts, and some of these
communities may have been organized around a “big-man” and his favored lineage. But at
the Murphy site, in Licking County, Ohio—one of the few Hopewell sites that has been
excavated and analyzed for evidence of functional specialization—William Dancey and
Paul Hooge found little evidence of complex economic or social organization. This site was
occupied in the ﬁrst few centuries a.d., probably intermittently or annually during the
summer and fall.27 They found no evidence of craft-specialization or farming, although
these people did use pottery.


THE LATE WOODLAND PERIOD
After about a.d. 400 there is some evidence of a decline in mound-building and other changes
in settlement patterns that used to be considered evidence of a Hopewellian “collapse.” But
it is not at all certain that there was, in fact, a collapse, at least in the sense of disintegrating
economic relationships and declining productivity and population densities.

578   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


           Richard Yerkes has reviewed studies by David Braun and others that suggest that
      although the people who lived toward the end of the Hopewell era, indeed, seem to have
      invested comparatively little effort in rich burials, pottery decoration, and trade of exotic
      goods, these cultural changes may be reﬂections of evolving—not disintegrating—cultural
      complexity.28 At this time populations seem to have increased, people began producing
      more of their food through cultivation of native plants, and they seem to have moved into
      most of the major river valleys and established small settlements, perhaps in small nuclear
      family groups. As we have seen elsewhere, monumental architecture may be a response to
      stress and a device to control societal growth, rather than just an expression of societal
      wealth and extravagance.


      The Mississippian Culture (A.D. 800–1650)
      From about a.d. 600 to about 1650, the agricultural way of life spread over much of eastern
      North America, and in the North American East the Mississippian culture appeared—the
      high point of cultural evolution in aboriginal North America, particularly in terms of
      geographical extent of inﬂuence, ceremonialism, public works, technology, population
      density, and social stratiﬁcation.29
           Stoltman has listed some characteristics that deﬁne Mississippian culture, including
      (1) intensive maize-beans-squash agriculture; (2) apparent complex social organization—
      perhaps with chiefs and elites who could expropriate great amounts of societal wealth and
      power; (3) a theocratic social organization, with elites having both religious and political
      power; (4) towns in which 100, or in some cases 1,000 or more, people lived year-round,
      often behind fortiﬁcations; (5) monumental architecture, including mounds and tombs;
      (6) some occupational specialization in farming, trading, ritual, and administration; (7)
      mortuary cults involving certain patterns of burying the dead with “status goods” under
      earthen mounds; (8) distinctive pottery in shell-tempered wares, sometimes in the form of
      animals, and often beautifully incised, polished, or in other ways decorated; (9) use of the
      bow and arrow, with distinctive small, triangular stone arrowheads; and (10) certain kinds
      of houses, built by digging wall trenches and then using clay and thatch to form rooms.30
           The ﬂorescence of Mississippian culture may have been linked with the continuing
      domestication and improvement of maize. The sensitivity of maize to daylight duration
      and temperature is vividly demonstrated each summer along the northern fringe of its
      present range—such as in Seattle, where except in the warmest summers few maize varieties
      can be coaxed into production. But in more suitable environments, maize is a proliﬁc
      source of food. Maize probably ﬁrst became an agricultural staple in North America only
      in those southern zones where there are at least 200 frost-free days a year, but during the
      Mississippian era newer strains appeared that could be farmed productively with just 120
      frost-free days. And so adaptable is the plant that it was a staple as far north as Ontario,
      Canada, by the time the Europeans arrived in the sixteenth century. Primitive strains of
      maize had such small cobs when ﬁrst introduced from Mexico that considerable selective
      breeding was required before it was worthwhile to do all the work of clearing land, weed-
      ing, and harvesting necessary for successful maize agriculture here. Once domesticated
      beans were combined with maize in North American ﬁelds, thereby supplying the critical
      amino acids lacking in maize, people could live in dense concentrations all over the North
      American East. The spread of maize farming has been detected by analyzing carbon isotope

                                            EARLY CULTURAL COMPLEXIY IN NORTH AMERICA         579


concentrations in the skeletons of ancient Native Americans. Maize contains relatively high
amounts of 13C, so people who eat maize also have high concentrations of this isotope.
Several studies have shown that in Missouri, Arkansas, and other areas, skeletons of people
who lived before about a.d. 1000 tend to have little 13C, but beginning at about a.d. 900
to a.d. 1000, this isotope is found in radically higher concentrations.31
     But to identify maize agriculture as an economic foundation of the Mississippian
culture does not explain its emergence: Here, too, as in every other case of early complex
societies considered in this book, we must consider how elite groups manage to appropriate
a society’s resources and perpetuate their domination. And for the Mississippian culture,
as for other complex societies, there are many well-worn and largely unsatisfactory ideas
about how this happened, ranging from the presumed economic beneﬁts that would be
provided by a “redistributor-chief ” who could facilitate the circulation of goods to the
effects of increasing occupational specialization.32
     Artifacts and mounds of the Mississippian type ﬁrst appeared in the lower Mississippi
Valley, but they soon spread into the Tennessee River drainage and by a.d. 800–a.d. 900
occurred over much of the Ohio and Missouri river valleys. Between a.d. 900 and a.d. 1600,
large towns with impressive ceremonial centers were built from Florida to northern Illinois,
and from Ohio to eastern Oklahoma, but the heartland of this culture was in the central
Mississippi Valley (Figure 15.6).
     The largest prehistoric settlement north of Mexico was Cahokia, in East St. Louis,
Illinois. Beginning at about a.d. 600 the people of Cahokia began building mounds and
other features, and by about a.d. 1250 there were over 100 mounds within the 13 km2 of
the site. Monk’s Mound, an earthen pyramid in the center of Cahokia, is over 30 m high,
241-by-316 m at the base, and covers an area of more than 6.5 hectares (Figure 15.7). Thirty
to forty thousand people are estimated to have lived in the environs of Cahokia at about
a.d. 1200 in several large towns, a few smaller towns, and more than 40 villages; no doubt
people living within a large
surrounding area had some
contact with Cahokia.33
     The beginnings of a
class-based society in which
elites could control community
wealth is evident at Cahokia.
One adult male was buried
with 20,000 shell beads, 800
arrowheads, and sheets of mica
and copper.34 In addition, there
were many burials, includ-
ing 4 mutilated men and 118
women, many of whom appear
to have been ritually strangled;
we can only surmise that, like
their Chinese, Mesopotamian,
Mesoamerican, and other
counterparts, these ritual kill-     FIGURE 15.6 Mound B at Etowah, Georgia, is an example of a Mississippian
ings and entombments were            structure.

           580       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                     attempts to provide elites in
                                                                                     death with the same personal
                                                                                     services they enjoyed in this
                                                                                     life.
                                                                                           Some elite groups were per-
                                                                                     manent residents of Cahokia,
                                                                                     but most of the people who
                                                                                     built and sustained this center
                                                                                     were probably maize farmers
                                                                                     who lived in surrounding
                                                                                     hamlets and who supplemented
                                                                                     their farm incomes with hunt-
                                                                                     ing and gathering.
                                                                                           The mounds and burials
                                                                                     at Cahokia and other sites
                                                                                     are impressive monuments to
                                                                                     status and power, but like
FIGURE 15.7 This reconstruction of Cahokia shows the palisade that enclosed          other early complex societies,
the center of the site and some of the other major structures that existed at about  Mississippian society expressed
a.d. 1200. The base of Monk’s Mound, the largest pyramid, is larger than the Great   these social dynamics in many
Pyramid at Giza, Egypt.                                                              ways. Timothy Pauketat and
                                                                                     Thomas Emerson, for example,
                        have argued that a particular kind of Mississippian pottery, called Ramey Incised (which is
                        incised with ﬁgures of eyes, ﬁsh, arrows, abstract objects, and various designs), served to
                        legitimize and communicate the authority of rulers:

                          [These] pots were imbued with symbolism of order, hierarchy, and religiosity. . . . In the
                          context of the rites of intensiﬁcation, like the Green Corn ceremony, the Ramey Incised jar
                          would have been a vehicle not only for the “redistribution” of comestibles, but also for the
                          diffusion of elite ideas. Even the rudimentary actions of commoners, using Ramey Incised
                          pots (after they had been ceremonially distributed from the administrative center[s]) may
                          have provided a living metaphor of the role of elites—the source of the pots—as mediators
                          of cosmic forces.35

                     Archaeologists have long debated the kind of sociopolitical entity that Cahokia represents.
                     Some think Cahokia was a highly centralized, densely populated polity that can be thought
                     of as a “chiefdom” (see chapter 7), perhaps even an embryonic state. Others think it was much
                     less complex. George Milner, for example, suggests it was a “comparatively decentralized,
                     geographically and socially segmented, less populous, and more dynamic cultural
                     system.”36
                          Cahokia is an impressive site, but it was probably not functionally similar to
                     Teotihuacán or similar cities in prehistoric complex societies, at least in the degree of
                     occupational specialization or the volumes and diversity of products produced, the class-
                     stratiﬁcation of the society, or the overall productivity of the economy.
                          At another great Mississippian site—Moundville, Alabama—a central earthen mound
                     was the focus of a settlement in which elaborate burials, fortiﬁcations, and other structures
                     were found. Christopher Peebles’s statistical analysis of the grave goods unearthed with

                                              EARLY CULTURAL COMPLEXIY IN NORTH AMERICA          581


these burials suggests a society with considerable internal ranking.37 Moundville had a
complex history, and one gets the impression that here was a society with the potential to
become a true urban metropolis, the center of a state.38 Here too, however, the straight
ecological arguments are quite convincing as to why this never happened: In a temperate
forested environment, with an economy based on extensive cultivation of maize and a few
other plants and on considerable hunting and foraging, there was not the stimuli of
irrigation agriculture, interactions with nomads, and the other features of life present in
early agricultural Mesopotamia, Egypt, or China. The environment simply does not permit
or allow agricultural intensiﬁcation on the scale possible in the tropical Olmec river basins,
the Nile Valley, and other areas of advanced complexity.
     Many late Mississippian and later period mounds and burials contain ornaments,
pottery, and other artifacts decorated with motifs almost identical to some Mesoamerican
motifs, including plumed serpents, eagles, jaguars, and warriors carrying trophy heads, as
well as the 52-year calendar round. Collectively, they are taken as evidence of a southern
(Mesoamerican) religious cult. Opinions differ on their signiﬁcance in terms of contacts
with Mesoamerica; some consider them evidence of quite direct and sustained contacts,
while others see them as minor borrowings with little more than an accidental connection
to Mesoamerican cultures. The southern cult, as well as the Adena and Hopewell mortuary
ceremonialism, likely achieved importance in North America only after cultural complexity
in the north had reached a stage where these elements “made sense” for northern societies.
     Outside the great ceremonial centers, Mississippian villages were dispersed settlements
of a few score of wattle-and-daub structures, supported by internal wooden beams, with
ﬂoors of packed earth.39 The highest Mississippian population densities were along the rich
river bottoms where it was possible to combine maize and bean farming with waterfowl
exploitation.40 In some areas the river annually renewed the fertility of the soil through
alluviation, and permanent ﬁeld agriculture was possible. Without plows or an advanced
technology, the Native Americans in many areas relied on a form of swidden cultivation in
which they burned off the vegetation on rich, well-drained alluvial plains, then planted
maize and a few other crops, invested some effort in weeding and cultivation during the
growing season, and then harvested and stored as much maize as they could. After one or
two seasons a given plot of swidden land would lose its fertility, and the areas of
cultivation—and perhaps the whole village—would have to be shifted elsewhere.
     Where maize was most productive the people probably planted two crops a year in the
richest lands, with beans planted next to the maize and encouraged to grow up its stalks.
Squash, sunﬂowers, and other crops were interspersed among the maize ﬁelds. The
Mississippians were more gardeners than farmers compared to, for example, the wheat
farmers of Southwest Asia. There is little evidence that Mississippian peoples ever did much
in the way of ﬂood control or irrigation, but they certainly used hoes and intensive weeding
to boost crop yields.
     Warfare among competing Mississippian chiefdoms may have been frequent and
brutal, particularly as the best lands were overexploited and fertility began to fall.41
     Our view of Mississippian life comes from both archaeological and ethnological
sources, as Mississippian communities were still extant when the Europeans arrived in the
sixteenth century. Initial accounts of the aboriginal Americans by Europeans must be
viewed with suspicion because there is every reason to believe that European diseases sped
quickly through aboriginal populations—far faster in fact than the spread of the Europeans.

           582        PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                        Moreover, it was to the advant-
                                                                                        age of the Europeans to portray
                                                                                        Native Americans as savages
                                                                                        who could be legitimately dis-
                                                                                        placed and to suggest that they
                                                                                        had a moral duty to subdue
                                                                                        and instruct these savages in
                                                                                        the mores of civilized life.
                                                                                             Ethnographic accounts of
                                                                                        Mississippian communities as
                                                                                        they existed in the sixteenth
                                                                                        and seventeenth centuries—
                                                                                        long after the culmination of
                                                                                        Mississippian culture—describe
                                                                                        an intensely class-conscious
                                                                                        society in which nobles and
                                                                                        warriors alternately exploited
                                                                                        and abused the “stinkards,”
FIGURE 15.8 A sixteenth-century illustration by Jacques le Moyne of the burial          commoners and slaves who
of a Florida Indian chief. Arrows have been driven into the ground around the grave,    made up most of these societies.
and the chief’s houses (upper left) are being ceremonially burned.                      The upper classes were slavishly
                                                                                        obeyed and respected. They
                                                                                        frequently married the lower
                        classes, but the aristocrat could divorce or kill the lower-ranking spouse, given even minor
                        cause. In a.d. 1720 the French explorer Le Page du Pratz witnessed the funeral of “Great
                        Sun,” a ruler of the Natchez Mississippian people. On the occasion of his death, Great Sun’s
                        wives, servants, and relatives were drugged and then clubbed to death and buried with him42
                        (Figure 15.8).
                             In contrast to most other ancient cultures, there is little question about the immediate
                        cause of the decline of Mississippian culture. These people had no natural immunities to
                        measles, smallpox, and cholera, and the densely settled Mississippian areas provided an ideal
                        medium for the rapid spread of these highly contagious diseases.43 Le Page du Pratz, who lived
                        with the Natchez from 1718 to 1734, found that even “minor” diseases were devastating:

                          Two distempers, that are not very fatal in other parts of the world, make dreadful ravages
                          among them; I mean small-pox and a cold, which bafﬂe all the arts of their physicians, who
                          in other respects are very skillful. When a nation is attacked by the small-pox, it quickly
                          makes great havock; for as a whole family is crowded into a small hut, which has no
                          communications with the external air, but a door about two feet wide and four feet high,
                          the distemper, if it seizes one, is quickly communicated to all. The aged die in consequence
                          of their advanced years, and the bad quality of their food; and the young, if they are not
                          strictly watched, destroy themselves, from an abhorrence of the blotches on their skin. . . .
                          Colds, which are very common in winter, likewise destroy great numbers of the natives. In
                          that season they keep ﬁres in their huts day and night; and as there is no other opening but
                          the door, the air within the hut is kept excessively warm without any free circulation; so
                          that when they have occasion to go out, the cold seizes them, and the consequences of it
                          are almost always fatal.44

                                              EARLY CULTURAL COMPLEXIY IN NORTH AMERICA         583


Ann Ramenofsky has analyzed the archaeological evidence from several regions of the
North American East and found that in each area there are signiﬁcantly fewer settlements
that date to the decades just prior to European invasion of these areas, which suggests that
epidemic European diseases spread rapidly inland from the ﬁrst physical encounters
between most Native Americans and Europeans.45 Native Americans died by the hundreds
of thousands from diseases introduced by people they never saw.
     Within a few decades of European contact in the sixteenth century, the once highly
integrated and proud Mississippian people, and other cultures as well, were a much-
reduced and poverty-stricken group, living amid thousands of abandoned settlements
and eroding mounds attesting to their former greatness.
     In summary of cultural developments in the North American East, we see the familiar
script of cultural evolution. From a hunting-and-gathering base, specialized hunting and
minor plant exploitation gradually gave way to intricate hunting-foraging economies in
which ﬁshing, nut collecting, shellﬁshing, and other activities were added to the subsistence
repertoire according to what was probably a largely unrecognized but very precise “cost-
beneﬁt” analysis; then, after centuries of manipulation and selection, maize-based
agriculture displaced less-productive economies in many areas, with consequent increasing
population densities and the establishment of large sedentary communities. Once food-
production reached certain levels, the familiar harbingers of increasing cultural complexity,
such as the spread of religious and stylistic traditions, monumental architecture, mortuary
cults, and increasingly diverse and interdependent arts and crafts, also appeared. Social and
religious hierarchies emerged as “efﬁcient” ways to make the decisions necessary for the
perpetuation of these increasingly complex economies, and the institutionalization of
prestige and privilege may have arisen as an effective way of reducing competition between
these populations and of maximizing administrative efﬁciency.
     In these essentials, little differentiates the sequence of cultural evolution in North
America from that in Mesoamerica, except that, given the available domesticates and
technology, most of eastern North America had less agricultural potential than Mesoamerica,
causing these northern cultures to stabilize at a much lower level of complexity. Had the
Europeans not invaded and introduced their diseases, true state-level societies might well
have evolved from the remnants of the Mississippian climax, but only if food-production
could have been increased drastically through technological, agricultural, or administrative
innovations.


THE NORTH AMERICAN SOUTHWEST

The dramatic mountains, crystal skies, and primary colors of the Southwest make it an
attractive place to live—especially if one has access to a municipal water system and a
modern market and transport system. But from the perspective of a hunter and gatherer
or subsistence farmer, most of the Southwest is not a lush environment: There are few large
rivers or streams, and the combination of low rainfall and high elevation renders much of
the Southwest a land of searing summers and bitterly cold winters.
     In some prehistoric periods the Southwest was wetter than it is today, but for most of
the last 10,000 years the Southwest has usually been at least as hot and dry as it is today,
and there were short periods of extreme drought.

584   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


           As a consequence, although people have lived here for at least 10,000 years, and
      although they eventually adopted maize-based agriculture, aggregated into large towns, and
      evolved some occupational and administrative specialization, they never produced class-
      structured, hierarchically organized, economically differentiated societies. Periodic food
      shortages stimulated the development of small-scale cooperation among groups, but
      neither the economic inducements nor basic productivity were there to make such
      elaborate cultural forms necessary or possible.46
           Yet the archaeological record of the American Southwest is an extraordinary cultural
      resource. Its proximity to major universities and excellent aridity-related preservation has
      meant that the archaeology of this region is among the best known in the world. Many
      important methodological advances in archaeology have developed in part out of research
      in the Southwest, including tree-ring dating, regional statistically based sampling designs,
      analyses of site formation processes, and paleobotanical and paleoenvironmental research.
      Contemporary Native Americans living in the Southwest are in some cases direct
      descendants, both physically and culturally, of ancient groups, and thus the archaeology of
      the Southwest can be related to a well-studied ethnographic record.47 Also, the fact that
      early Southwest cultures developed political and economic systems that, while less
      “complex” than those of, for example, Maya Mesoamerica, had sufﬁcient complexity to
      offer an opportunity to study the kinds of cultural changes that in more productive
      environments are obscured archaeologically by the great states and empires that followed.48
      Moreover, there are some clear indications of cultural contacts between Southwest cultures
      and those of Mesoamerica, providing a “test case” in a sense for varying ideas about the
      nature of cultural contacts between more- and less-powerful groups in the ancient world.49
      And as Steadman Upham has shown, the American West provides an example of one of
      the enduring themes of human history, the relationship of nomads and agriculturalists. For,
      as people in some areas became farmers, they developed complex economic and social
      relationships with the many groups around them that continued to pursue the ancient
      hunting-foraging way of life.50


      Agricultural Origins: The Late Archaic Period
      As we saw in chapter 6, people have been in the Southwest for at least 12,000 years, and up
      to about a.d. 1, people here worked out a marvelous array of arid-land adaptations based
      on hunting and foraging. Late Archaic foragers, heirs to a tradition thousands of years old
      of desert plant collecting, may have been exploiting maize for a long time. The apparent
      presence of maize pollen in samples dated to about 2000 b.c. suggests that this plant may
      have been used for some millennia before it became the staple food crop,51 but the earliest
      evidence for substantial use of maize—at Sheep Rock Shelter, Bat Cave, numerous sites in
      the Tucson and Tonto Basins, as well as several sites in the Mogollon highlands and on the
      Colorado Plateau—seems to cluster around 1000 b.c.52 Domesticated varieties of beans and
      squash also appear in the archaeological record at about this time, but the diet was still
      probably based on a broad range of other plants and animals. Even today Native Americans
      in the Southwest still hunt deer, rabbits, and other animals and augment their farm produce
      with high-calorie nuts, berries, and seeds.
           The earliest maize variety used in the Southwest was the Chapalote variant found much
      earlier at Tehuacán, and thus there was a long time lag before it was in signiﬁcant use in

                                              EARLY CULTURAL COMPLEXIY IN NORTH AMERICA         585


the Southwest. It used to be thought that early varieties of maize had to be adapted to local
Southwest environments, but as Paul Minnis notes, the recent recovery of Archaic maize
from the deserts around Tucson does not support this idea. He suggests that the modern
maize variety morphologically closest to Archaic maize, Chapalote, was well adapted to
high and low environments and could be grown under many conditions.53 In any case, just
as we have seen prehistoric people in the Middle East, Mesoamerica, and other parts of the
world combine cultivated and wild food resources, so did the people of the Southwest adapt
maize to their lifestyle and combined it with beans, squash, and a wide variety of other
resources in an economy with sufﬁcient productivity to permit the village-farming way of
life and the beginnings of cultural elaboration.


The Hohokam Culture: 1000 B.C.–A.D. 1450
The Hohokam peoples ﬂourished in southern Arizona—particularly in the Salt and Gila
river valleys, as well as secondary river systems54 (Figure 15.9). For many decades,
archaeologists wrestled with the question of the origins of the Hohokam. Were they local
peoples whose culture was transformed by contacts with the high civilizations of Mexico?
Or, on the basis of similarity in styles of architecture, construction, ceramics, turquoise
ornaments, and other artifacts, were they were so similar to Mesoamerican examples that
they could only be the result of an immigration of Mexican people who transplanted their
way of life directly to the Hohokam area?55 The considerable amount of research that has
been undertaken in the Hohokam area since the 1990s has put to rest some of the intensity
of this debate because it indicates that local origins for the Hohokam are the more plausible
explanation.56 Additionally, those traits that appear to have derived—at least in part—from
Mesoamerican inﬂuences are most notable in Hohokam society only after about a.d. 80057
Sedentary villages and reliance on maize agriculture were present in this region long before
Hohokam culture.
     One of the most interesting aspects of the Hohokam is their agricultural system. Their
homeland is set in some of the driest deserts of North America, where summer tempera-
tures have impressed even archaeological veterans of the Middle East. Canal irrigation is
known from sites as early as 1200–1100 b.c.,58 although the large, impressive networks of
canals that channeled water from the Salt and Gila rivers to irrigate gardens of maize and
other crops were mainly built after a.d. 700. Modern buildings have erased much of the
Hohokam irrigation system, but two canals near Phoenix were over 16 km long, several
meters wide, and about 60 cm deep when ﬁrst constructed. Tightly woven grass mats were
probably used as gates to open and close canal segments, and earthen dams on the rivers
in some places diverted water through canals for more than 50 km across the desert ﬂoor,
with many small branches serving individual ﬁelds.
     In the recent past, Southwestern Native American irrigation systems, as well as
comparable agricultural systems elsewhere in the world, have been operated by a few
thousand people in relatively simple tribal organizations in which no coercion, permanent
authorities, or police agencies were necessary, and this might well have been the case among
the Hohokam.
     In areas away from the major rivers, Hohokam groups used akchin—ﬂoodwater—
farming, taking advantage of natural events that irrigated areas alongside small seasonal
streams, or farmed alluvial fans where moisture essential for plant growth was retained for

586   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY




      FIGURE 15.9 Major cultural traditions of the North American Southwest. These cultures are
      shown at their maximum extent, which they did not reach simultaneously.



      longer periods of time. Ethnohistoric and ethnographic accounts document akchin farming
      among some groups of the Tohono O’odham,59 who may be descendants of the Hohokam.
          Although the largest irrigation systems were apparently built sometime after a.d. 800,
      by about a.d. 300 there were already indications of minor increases in the complexity of
      Hohokam cultures. Some low platform mounds, about 29 m long, 23 m wide, and 3 m

                                               EARLY CULTURAL COMPLEXIY IN NORTH AMERICA           587


high, were built at the Snaketown site, and here and elsewhere people built large sunken
ball courts like those found in Mesoamerica. The Hohokam ball courts were east-west
oriented oval depressions about 60 m long, with 4.5- to 6-m-high sloping earth embankments
on a side. Apparently the objective of the game, played by two opposing teams, was to try
to get a rubber ball (several of which have been found in the Southwest) through a goal,
probably not by throwing or batting it, but by using knees, elbows, or torso. The ball appar-
ently could not be held in the hands when it was in play. As played by the Mesoamericans,
this activity was not a sport: The ball may have represented the sun, and the court and play
were imbued with ritual and cosmological imagery. Losing players were sometimes
executed (see chapter 13).
     The Southwestern ball courts were probably not stops on the northern road trips of
the Mexican major leagues, but they do indicate very close southern afﬁnities, as do the
platform mounds. And between a.d. 900 and a.d. 1200, many other Mesoamerican elements
were imported, including cotton textiles, certain ceramic motifs, pyrite mirrors, efﬁgy vessels,
cast copper bells, ear plugs, etched shell ornaments, and even parrots and macaws—kept
and prized for their feathers.
     Generally, however, there is little evidence in subsistence practices, settlements, or
mortuary ceremonies of evolving rank and wealth differences. Most of the Hohokam lived
in small square pithouses roofed with clay and grass domes supported by a wooden pole
framework. Early dwellings appear large enough for several families, but single-family
residences became more popular in later periods. This is not to say, however, that elites did
not exist in Hohokam society, particularly during the Classic period from a.d. 1150–1450.
Platform mound burials clearly show that some individuals were differentially treated—
including, at times, a few women.60 The degree to which these elites managed labor and
resources or established political connections within the Hohokam area or with other
groups remains an open and vigorously debated question.
     Research in the last two decades of the twentienth century, particularly by cultural
resource management (CRM) ﬁrms investigating areas prior to the building of roads,
housing developments, pipelines, and other modern projects, has greatly expanded our
understanding of Hohokam settlement patterns. While there are few indications of a master
plan in village layouts or of economic specialization of villages, by a.d. 700 and later,
patterns in intracommunity and intercommunity organization emerge. Within village sites,
domestic houses are arranged around courtyards, and these groupings have communal
cemeteries, cooking ovens, and trash areas.61 On a larger scale, villages along the same
irrigation canal may have been grouped into “irrigation communities” and linked together
in terms of social organization, economies, labor efforts related to canal construction, and
maintenance and shared public ceremonies at ball court sites.62 After a.d. 1150, irrigation
communities appear to have been linked to a series of major platform mound sites—
ball courts are no longer the integrative ceremonial mechanism—and at some sites, such
as Casa Grande, “great houses” were constructed (Figure 15.10). Most villages, however,
probably repeated all the economic activities of other villages, except that some favored
locations allowed a greater reliance on maize, beans, squash, and other crops. Nonetheless,
many atlatl dart points and arrowheads have been found at each Hohokam site, and
botanical remains indicate that almost every community supplemented its diet with wild
mustard, amaranths, chenopods, cactus fruits, mesquite, screwbeans, and other wild
products.63

           588       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                         Artifacts in the Hohokam
                                                                                    style have been found over
                                                                                    a wide area—73,000 km 2 —
                                                                                    encompassing a core Hohokam
                                                                                    area (centered on the Salt and
                                                                                    Gila rivers) and its surround-
                                                                                    ing regions (such as the Tucson
                                                                                    and Tonto basins), as well as
                                                                                    more peripheral areas such
                                                                                    as the Papagueria (the south-
                                                                                    western corner of Arizona)
                                                                                    (Figure 15.11). This interac-
                                                                                    tion sphere included groups of
                                                                                    people who were Hohokam,
                                                                                    those who were new immigrants
                                                                                    into the region, as well as those
                                                                                    who participated only margin-
FIGURE 15.10 The “Great House” at Casa Grande, Arizona, is an example of            ally in Hohokam social life.
large-scale construction by the Hohokam. The large shelter over the Great House     Evidence for supra-political
was built in the 1930s.                                                             control over this region—for
                                                                                    example, along the lines of
                                                                                    Moche, Tiwanku, or Maya—is
                                                                                    lacking, making it likely that
                                                                                    the Hohokam were sociopolit-
                                                                                    ically organized along less
                                                                                    complex lines.
                                                                                         The archaeological signa-
                                                                                    ture of the Classic Hohokam
                                                                                    fades from the record after
                                                                                    about a.d. 1450. Archaeologists
                                                                                    have struggled with various
                                                                                    explanations for this “dis-
                                                                                    appearance,” and it will come
                                                                                    as no surprise that the most
                                                                                    favored causes are ecological—
                                                                                    particularly ﬂooding episodes
                                                                                    along the major rivers—and
                                                                                    European diseases spreading in
                                                                                    advance of the actual arrival of
FIGURE 15.11 Prehistoric peoples in the American Southwest left many                the Spanish.
examples of petroglyphs (pecked images). Some appear to represent animals, while
others are more enigmatic. These are from an outcrop on a ridge above the Classic
period Hohokam site of Verbena Village, Arizona.                                    The Mogollon:
                                                                                    A.D. 200–1450
                     The Mogollon peoples (pronounced something like “Mug-ee-yone”), who also were heirs
                     to the Archaic desert foraging cultures of the last several millennia b.c., lived mainly in the

                                              EARLY CULTURAL COMPLEXIY IN NORTH AMERICA           589


mountains of east central Arizona and west central New
Mexico. Sedentary villages and ceramics of the Mogollon type
may have already been established by the last few centuries
b.c., but the distinctive Mogollon red-and-brown pottery is
securely dated to about the third century a.d., at which time
villages of about 15 pithouses each were scattered along ridges,
bluffs, and terraces. Like their contemporaries in much of the
Americas, they relied on the maize-beans-squash complex,
supplemented by many wild plants and game. Mogollon
burials of this period were often simple inhumations in house
ﬂoors, accompanied by a few pottery vessels, turquoise
ornaments, and stone tools typical of unstratiﬁed societies.
     At the important Mogollon site of Swarts Ruins, in the
Mimbres Valley, New Mexico, river boulders set in adobe were
used to construct a large complex of conjoined rectangular
rooms, access to which was apparently possible only through
the roof, since there were no exterior doors. Inside walls were
plastered with mud, and doorways led from one room to
another. Storage bins, shelves, ﬁreplaces, and benches con-
                                                                      FIGURE 15.12 Some of the most beautiful
stituted the essential furnishings. Corpses were frequently           painted pottery in the American Southwest is
interred in the ﬂoors of abandoned rooms, in occupied rooms,          from the Mimbres Mogollon culture in New
or within the village compound; most burials were very                Mexico and Arizona.
simple.
     The Mogollon built no pyramids, ball courts, or major
irrigation systems, but they did produce an extraordinarily beautiful array of ceramics.
Their “Mimbres” ceramic forms, decorated with vivid ﬁgures of frogs, insects, ﬁsh, deer,
and other animal life painted against black backgrounds, are particularly notable (Figure
15.12). Stephen Jett and Peter Moyle have shown that many of the ﬁsh species illustrated
on Mimbres pottery are marine species that could be found no closer to the Mimbres area
than 1,500 km southwest, in the Gulf of California.64 The beauty of Mogollon pottery has
resulted in widespread looting, a sickening destruction of yet another Native American
culture.
     Mogollon settlement patterns show some evidence of minor emerging social ranking.
Mogollon villages seem to be of two types: a small cluster of fewer than 5 pithouses, without
any large ceremonial kivas-pithouses-and larger collections of 100 or more pithouses
associated with “great kivas.” The largest pithouses in these communities tend to have the
greatest amount of storage space, larger numbers of exotic trade items, and evidence of
greater consumption of agricultural products. Lightfoot and Feinman interpret this
evidence and other data to mean that a “suprahousehold” decision-making organization
had developed among the Mogollon, perhaps as a result of competition among rival
political leaders.65 But it is hard to link changing distributions of artifacts like these to the
fairly subtle social changes that would have been involved in the rise of suprahousehold
administrative positions. In any case, there is little about the Mogollon to suggest profound
social changes in the direction of complexity. Natural limitations on agricultural
intensiﬁcation seem to have restricted the complexity of social and political organization
here.66

           590       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                       One of the major
                                                                                  settlement pattern transi-
                                                                                  tions in Southwestern cultural
                                                                                  history occurred during the
                                                                                  ﬁrst millennium a.d., when
                                                                                  people gradually, generation
                                                                                  by generation, stopped living
                                                                                  in relatively small villages of
                                                                                  semi-subterranean pithouses
                                                                                  and began building their
                                                                                  communities in the “pueblo”
                                                                                  style of blocks of contiguous
                                                                                  above-ground rooms (Figure
                                                                                  15.13).
                                                                                       For the archaeologist,
                                                                                  of course, such a change is
                                                                                  immediately seen in adaptive
FIGURE 15.13 A small pueblo structure of the Mogollon period at the Powers        terms: What conditions would
Ranch Ruin, Arizona.                                                              induce this sort of long-term,
                                                                                  regional change? In a considera-
                                                                                  tion of this question from
                     the perspective of Mogollon settlements in western Texas, Michael Whalen notes that the
                     change is associated with an increase in regional population densities, the appearance of
                     larger community size, a growing reliance on plant cultivation as the main subsistence
                     source, and an increasingly elaborate ceremonialism, as expressed in the design and
                     contents of structures.67
                          Whalen suggests that as populations grew, climates ﬂuctuated, and settlements spread
                     into different microenvironments, people tried to maintain their traditional way of life by
                     extending agriculture into the margins of basins where water was more available. The
                     greater productivity of these basin margins fostered certain kinds of economic agricultural
                     specialization in which the community rather than the family was the basic social and
                     economic unit. McGuire and Schiffer show that the transition from pithouses was the
                     outcome of a long period of experimentation.68
                          Some Mogollon sites, such as Paquimé—a.d. 1250–1450—in northern Mexico, have
                     what appear to be Mogollon-style artifacts along with Mesoamerican items, such as ball
                     courts, platform mounds, and jewelry in turquoise and shell. As Stephen Lekson69 notes,
                     Paquimé is one of the best candidates in the Southwest for status as politically complex, and
                     few archaeologists have disputed this attribution. The degree of this complexity, however,
                     has been debated, ranging from a Mesoamerican central authority who controlled trade to
                     a Mesoamerican authority based on ritual and religion to a local elite using ritual as a power
                     base.70
                          Like the Hohokam, the “disappearance” of the Mogollon as an archaeological culture
                     has been variously explained, with emphasis on ecological factors, particularly droughts.
                     Other researchers have stressed a shift to a more dispersed settlement pattern characterized
                     by small hamlets71 or the relocation of some Mogollon people to puebloan communities
                     and a subsequent restructuring of society.

                                                EARLY CULTURAL COMPLEXIY IN NORTH AMERICA              591


The Ancestral Pueblo: A.D. 100–1300
Like the Mogollon and Hohokam, the Ancestral Pueblo 72 developed out of desert-
foraging cultures, and their earliest pre-pottery representatives are widely known as the
Basketmaker cultures. It is not entirely certain how mobile early Ancestral Pueblo groups
were, but by the ﬁrst few centuries a.d. they were apparently living in many sedentary
settlements located on old river terraces and mesa tops or in river valleys in the high
plateau country of the central Southwest.73 The earliest houses were circular structures
of wattle and daub set on log bases, or semi-subterranean houses. These early Ancestral
Pueblo did not use pottery and, although they ate maize, beans, and squash, they invested
little labor in cultivating these crops, relying instead on wild foods, such as roots, bulbs,
grass seeds, nuts, acorns, berries, cactus fruits, sunﬂowers, deer, rabbits, antelopes, and
wild sheep.
      After about a.d. 400, the Ancestral Pueblo began to use pottery and to build large
pithouses, most of which were circular or rectangular, from 3 to 7.5 m in diameter, and
covered by log and mud roofs supported on center posts. Interior walls were plastered with
mud or faced with stone, access was through a descending passageway, and ﬁreplaces and
benches were standard furnishings. At some sites, large ceremonial pithouses, or kivas, were
built. After about a.d. 700, above-ground masonry houses were erected in some Ancestral
Pueblo communities, but the pithouse and kiva combination continued to be the basic
village type until the end of the thirteenth century a.d. (Figure 15.14).
      Defensive considerations, greater exploitation of more productive strains of maize, and
climatic changes beginning about a.d. 700 may have spurred the Ancestral Pueblo into
constructing the “cliff cities” for which they are famous74 (Figure 15.15). Pollen and
geological studies suggest that
summer rainfall, in the form of
torrential storms, increased
after a.d. 700, while winter
rainfall decreased, and the
resulting changes in water
tables and stream ﬂows may
have forced the Ancestral
Pueblo to congregate around
larger, permanently ﬂowing
rivers.75 Hillsides were terraced
to control erosion, and diver-
sion canals and dams were con-
structed to control and store as
much of the vital summer rain-
water as possible. On Chapin
Mesa, for example, in the Mesa
Verde area, the older agricul-
tural ﬁelds were extended by          FIGURE 15.14 Small pueblo structures were also typical of the Ancestral
an elaborate checkdam system          Puebloan culture. This room from a site on Black Mesa, Arizona, was used to store
that added 8 or 12 hectares of        corn. When the room burned, the corn cobs were preserved when they carbonized.
cultivable land.                      Note the evidence of burning on the slab walls.

592   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY




      FIGURE 15.15 Cliff Palace, Mesa Verde, Colorado, is one of the most impressive settlements built
      under massive cliffs in the American Southwest.

                                              EARLY CULTURAL COMPLEXIY IN NORTH AMERICA            593


     In some areas erosion
forced frequent settlement
relocations, and some com-
munities met the changing
agricultural conditions by
scattering into small family
groups; but the prevailing
response was to aggregate into
large towns along the major
rivers. By about 1100 a.d., pro-
sperous enclaves were estab-
lished at Mesa Verde, Chaco
Canyon, Canyon de Chelly,
and elsewhere, and in some
ways these communities repres-
ent the high point of South-
                                     FIGURE 15.16 Reconstruction of Pueblo Bonito, as it may have appeared at about
western culture.
                                     a.d. 1050.
     The developments at
Chaco Canyon are often cited
as the best example of
sociopolitical complexity in the Ancestral Pueblo region, a not surprising outcome given
the many unusual features found here and throughout the greater Chacoan interaction
sphere. There were 12 large towns (“Great Houses”) in Chaco Canyon, of which Pueblo
Bonito was the largest, with almost 700 rooms (Figure 15.16)—built over a period of almost
300 years (a.d. 850–1125). The Great Houses were relatively elaborate, planned elements
in the landscape of Chaco Canyon, and it is of some interest that sites such as Pueblo
Bonito, with its hundreds of rooms, appear to have been the residence for only a small
number of families.76 In addition to these large, multi-story pueblos, there were smaller
pueblo units and many single-story and apparently unplanned villages—these are the likely
residences for most of Chaco’s population.
     Vivian77 has shown that the Chaco Canyon was part of a large organized system that
included a uniﬁed irrigation system (using rainfall runoff from the canyon cliffs, as well
as water from the Chaco wash) and about 600 km of roads that linked scores of Chacoan
outliers—smaller-sized Great Houses built in the Chaco style—and other small com-
munities. Some 150–200 outlying Great Houses are linked by this road system to Chaco
and sometimes to other Chacoan outliers, reaching as far as 140 km away from Chaco
Canyon, and perhaps as far as southern Utah, some 240 km away.78
     The roads were long and straight constructions, sometimes cut into bedrock as
stairways when obstacles to the most direct route were encountered—analogous perhaps
to how we construct tunnels through hills and mountains to maintain the shortest distances
for roads. These ancient roads facilitated movement of people between the various Chacoan
settlements, as well as the transport of resources into Chaco Canyon. The hundreds of
thousands of pine logs79 used as roof beams and ceilings in the pueblos there, for example,
came from mountain areas at least 60 km away and represent a relatively major transport
labor investment. Other resources that entered Chaco Canyon include most of the
pottery—made at various Chacoan outliers—associated with the Great Houses, as well as

594   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      exotic items from much farther away, including copper bells and macaws from Mexico, and
      turquoise, likely from mines near Santa Fe.80
           Whether sociopolitical complexity is associated with the Chacoan “phenomenon” is a
      subject, as Barbara Mills81 observes, that is of less interest to archaeologists today than in
      past decades. As she notes, Chacoan research has instead posed new and interesting
      questions about how complexity may have been organized rather than seeking to simply
      determine its presence. Chief among the recent explanations have been models stressing
      prestige-good economies (elite dominated consumption of exotic materials), ritual
      leadership (Chaco as a pilgrimage center), and communal feasting (rather than competitive
      feasting).
           Sometime around a.d. 1125 or shortly thereafter, the Chaco system seems to
      disintegrate (possibly due to a prolonged drought), although some people continue to live
      in Chaco Canyon and a number of the outlier sites become more important, for example,
      Aztec Ruin—its name does not, however, denote contact with the Aztec. There are, in fact,
      many indications of continuity with the earlier Chaco “phenomenon,” although the social
      structure of Ancestral Pueblo communities after a.d. 1125 undergoes reorganization.82
           As beautiful as many Ancestral Pueblo settlements were, they do not appear to have
      been the work of a highly complex society. There may have been minor occupational
      specialization in ceramic manufacture, weaving, and turquoise carving, but most if not all
      of the people were subsistence farmers. Nor is there much evidence of differential rank
      expressed in domestic architecture or in grave goods—one exception being the burial of
      two possible elite males at Pueblo Bonito.83 Even the irrigation system, while intricate and
      efﬁcient, was probably administered through simple kinship systems.
           Shortly before a.d. 1300, many once-prosperous Ancestral Pueblo communities began
      to be abandoned, and when the Spanish arrived in the sixteenth century, they found some
      of the descendants of the Ancestral Pueblo living along the Rio Grande in small villages,
      each a largely autonomous political and economic unit. The Hopi, Zuñi, and Rio Grande
      pueblos are the descendants of the Ancestral Pueblo peoples.


      SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

      Illegal aliens have always been a problem in the
      United States. Ask any Indian.
      Robert Orben

      The New World was truly a “second earth,” where long millennia of indigenous cultural
      development produced a rich spectrum of peoples and cultures unaffected by contact with
      European and Asian peoples. The spectacular Mississippian and Southwestern sites
      dominate the North American archaeological record, but all over North America there were
      divergent cultural traditions, many of them interacting economically, but also remaining
      distinctive in essential ways, from language to social organization. To the northeast, the
      Iroquois peoples adapted maize-beans-squash farming to the colder uplands of New York
      State, New England, and southeastern Canada. Their shifting pattern of swidden
      agriculture seems to have created land shortages and recurrent warfare, forcing people to
      live in well-fortiﬁed villages. To the west, marginal cultivators lived in the richer river

                                                         EARLY CULTURAL COMPLEXIY IN NORTH AMERICA                     595


valleys of Nebraska, South Dakota, and the other north-central states, with bison-hunting
groups on the grasslands, where maize agriculture could not be practiced until the
introduction by Europeans of deep-bottom plows. The horse-mounted nomadic hunters
who range through thousands of Hollywood epics have some basis in reality, but only after
the Europeans reintroduced the horse in America. Most of the desert regions of the west
were thinly settled by hunter-foragers until European colonization, but rich and sedentary
communities were established along the Paciﬁc Northwest Coast and areas of California,
where marine and terrestrial resources were so naturally productive that low-level complex
societies could be sustained by simple ﬁshing-foraging-hunting.
     In some ways it is less than satisfying to conclude that the temperate latitudes of North
America never produced states and empires because of the simple absence of draft animals,
developed metallurgy, extensive warm arid alluvial plains, and a few other techno-
environmental factors—but this conclusion seems inescapable. From the perspective of the
present, the violent collision between Old and New World cultures also seems an inevitable
outcome of the competition dynamic of evolutionary processes and the demographic,
techno-environmental, and other conditions of both areas. But to rank Old and New World
cultures in this sense of an evolutionary scale is only a useful research device; it should not
obscure the great richness of the ancient cultures of both areas.


BIBLIOGRAPHY
Anderson, D. G., and G. T. Hanson. 1988. “Early Archaic Settlement in the Southeastern United States: A Case
             Study from the Savannah River Valley.” American Antiquity 53(2):262–286.
Baby, R., and S. Langlois. 1977. “Prehistoric Agriculture: A Study of House Types in the Ohio Valley.” Ohio
             Historical Society Echoes 16(2):1–5.
Barker, A. W., and T. R. Pauketat, eds. 1992. Lords of the Southeast: Social Inequality and the Native Elites of
             Southeastern North America. Washington, D.C.: Archeological Papers of the American
             Anthropological Association Number 3.
Baugh, T. G., and J. E. Ericson. 1995. Prehistoric Exchange Systems in North America. New York: Plenum Press.
Bayman. J. M. 2001. “The Hohokam of Southwest North America.” Journal of World Prehistory 15(3):257–313.
Betancourt, J. L., J. S. Dean, and H. M. Hull. 1986. “Prehistoric Long-Distance Transport of Construction Beams,
             Chaco Canyon, New Mexico.” American Antiquity 51:370–375.
Blitz, J. H. 1999. “Mississippian Chiefdoms and the Fission-Fusion Process.” American Antiquity 64(4):577–592.
Braun, D. P. 1983. “Pots as Tools.” In Archaeological Hammers and Theories, ed. A. Keene and J. Moore. New
             York: Academic Press.
———. 1987. “Comment on M. J. O’Brien, ‘Sedentism, Population Growth, and Resource Selection in the
             Woodland Midwest: A Review of Coevolutionary Developments.’ ” Current Anthropology
             28(2):189–190.
———. 1988. “The Social and Technological Roots of ‘Late Woodland.’” In Interpretations of Culture Change in
             Eastern Woodlands During the Late Woodland Period, ed. R. W. Yerkes. Department of Anthropology,
             Ohio State University, Occasional Papers in Anthropology 3:17–38.
Brose, D. S., and N. Greber, eds. 1979. Hopewell Archaeology: The Chillicothe Conference. Kent, OH: The Kent State
             University Press.
Brown, J. A. 1985. “Long-Term Trends to Sedentism and the Emergence of Complexity in the American Midwest.”
             In Prehistoric Hunter-Gatherers: The Emergence of Cultural Complexity, ed. T. D. Price and J. A. Brown.
             Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
Bush, D. E. 1975. “A Ceramic Analysis of the Late Adena Buckmeyer Site, Perry County, Ohio.” Michigan
             Archaeologist 21:9–23.
Cleland, C. E. 1966. The Prehistoric Animal Ecology and Ethnozoology of the Upper Great Lakes Region. Ann Arbor:
             Museum of Anthropology, Anthropological Papers, University of Michigan, No. 29.
Cobb, C. R., and P. H. Garrow. 1996. “Woodstock Culture and the Question of Mississippian Emergence.”
             American Antiquity 61(1):21–37.
Coe, M., D. Snow, and E. Benson. 1986. Atlas of Ancient America. New York: Facts on File.
Cordell, L. S. 1984. Prehistory of the Southwest. New York: Academic Press.

596   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      Cordell, L. S., and G. J. Gumerman, eds. 1989. Dynamics of Southwest Prehistory. Washington, DC: Smithsonian
                   Institution Press.
      Crown, P. L. 1990. “The Hohokam of the American Southwest.” Journal of World Prehistory 4(2):223–255.
      ———. 1995. Ceramics and Ideology: Salado Polychrome Pottery. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico
                   Press.
      Crown, P., and S. Fish. 1996. “Gender and Status in the Hohokam Pre-Classic to Classic Transition.” American
                   Anthropologist 98:803–813.
      Crown, P. L., and J. W. Judge. 1991. Chaco and Hohokam: Regional Systems in the American Southwest. Santa Fe,
                   NM: School of American Research.
      Dancey, W. S. 2005. “The Enigmatic Hopewell of the Eastern Woodlands.” In North American Archaeology, ed.
                   T. R. Pauketat and D. D. Loren, pp. 108–137. Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing.
      Dickson, D. B. 1975. “Settlement Pattern Stability and Change in the Middle Northern Rio Grande Region, New
                   Mexico: A Test of Some Hypotheses.” American Antiquity 40:159–171.
      ———. 1981. “The Yanomamo of the Mississippi Valley? Some Reﬂections on Larson . . . Gibson . . . and
                   Mississippi Period Warfare in the Southeastern United States.” American Antiquity 46:909–916.
      Diehl, M. W. 1997. “Changes in Architecture and Land Use Strategies in the American Southeast: Upland
                   Mogollon Pithouse Dwellers, A.C. 200–1000.” Journal of Field Archaeology 24(2):179–194.
      Ericson, J. E., and T. G. Baugh, eds. 1995. The American Southwest and Mesoamerica. New York: Plenum Press.
      Fagan, B. M. 1995. Ancient North America, 2nd ed. New York: Thames and Hudson.
      Farnsworth, K. B., and T. E. Emerson, eds. 1986. Early Woodland Archaeology. Kampsville Seminars in Archae-
                   ology, No. 2. Kampsville, IL: Kampsville Archeological Center, Center for American Archeology.
      Fiedel, S. J. 1992. Prehistory of the Americas, 2nd ed. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
      Fish, S. K. and P. R. Fish. 1994. “Prehistoric Desert Farmers of the Southwest.” Annual Review of Anthropology
                   23:83–108.
      Ford, R. I. 1981. “Gardening and Farming Before a.d. 1000: Patterns of Prehistoric Cultivation North of Mexico.”
                   Journal of Ethnobiology 1(1):6 – 27.
      Fowler, M. L. 1969. Explorations into Cahokia Archaeology. Illinois Archaeological Survey Bulletin 7. Urbana:
                   University of Illinois.
      ———. 1971. “Agriculture and Village Settlement in the North American East: The Central Mississippi Valley
                   Area, a Case History.” In Prehistoric Agriculture, ed. S. Struever. Garden City, NY: Natural History Press.
      ———. 1975. “A Pre-Columbian Urban Center on the Mississippi.” Scientiﬁc American 233(2):93–101.
      Fritz, G. 1990. “Multiple Ways to Farming in Precontact Eastern North America.” Journal of World Prehistory
                   4(4):387–436.
      Glassow, M. A. 1980. Prehistoric Agricultural Development in the Northern Southwest: A Study in Changing Patterns
                   of Land Use. Socorro, NM: Ballena Press.
      Gumerman, G. J., ed. 1988. The Anasazi in a Changing Environment. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
      Haury, E. W. 1976. The Hohokam Desert Farmers and Craftsmen. Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
      Hegmon, M. 2005. “Beyond the Mold: Questions of Inequality in Southwest Villages.” In North American
                   Archaeology, ed. T. R. Pauketat and D. D. Loren, pp. 212–234. Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing.
      Hill, J. N. 1970. Broken K Pueblo: Prehistoric Social Organization in the American Southwest. Tucson: University of
                   Arizona Press.
      Hines, P. 1977. “On Social Organization in the Middle Mississippian—States or Chiefdoms?” Current
                   Anthropology 18:337–338.
      Houart, G. L. 1971. Koster—A Stratiﬁed Archaic Site in the Illinois Valley. Springﬁeld: Illinois State Museum
                   Reports of Investigations, No. 22.
      Iseminger, W. R. 1996. “Mighty Cahokia.” Archaeology 49(3):30–37.
      Jennings, J. D. 1974. Prehistory of North America, 2nd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill.
      Jett, S. C., and P. B. Moyle. 1986. “The Exotic Origins of Fishes Depicted on Prehistoric Mimbres Pottery from
                   New Mexico.” American Antiquity 51(4):688–720.
      Kantner, J. 1996. “Political Competition Among the Chaco Anasazi of the American Southwest.” Journal of
                   Anthropological Archaeology 15:41–105.
      Keegan, W. F., ed. 1987. Emergent Horticultural Economies of the Eastern Woodlands. Occasional Paper No. 7.
                   Carbondale, IL: Center for Archaeological Investigations, Southern Illinois University.
      Lekson, S. H. 2005. “Chaco and Paquimé: Complexity, History, Landscape.” In North American Archaeology, ed.
                   T. R. Pauketat and D. D. Loren, pp. 235–272. Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing.
      Lightfoot, R. G., and G. M. Feinman. 1982. “Social Differentiation and Leadership Development in Early Pithouse
                   Villages in the Mogollon Region of the American Southwest.” American Antiquity 47:64–81.
      Lynott, M. J., T. W. Boutton, J. E. Price, and D. E. Nelson. 1986. “Stable Carbon Isotopic Evidence for Maize
                   Agriculture in Southeast Missouri and Northeast Arkansas.” American Antiquity 51(1):51–65.
      Madsen, D., and D. Rhode, eds. 1995. Across the West: Human Population Movement and the Expansion of the
                   Numa. Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press.

                                                         EARLY CULTURAL COMPLEXIY IN NORTH AMERICA                     597


Marquardt, W. H. 1985. “Complexity and Scale in the Study of Fisher-Gatherer-Hunters: An Example from
              the Eastern United States.” In Prehistoric Hunter-Gatherers: The Emergence of Cultural Complexity, ed.
              T. D. Price and J. A. Brown. Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
Mathien, F. J., and R. H. McGuire, eds. 1986. Ripples in the Chichimec Sea: New Considerations of Southwestern-
              Mesoamerican Interactions. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press.
Mabry, J. B. 1999. “Las Capas and Early Irrigation Farming.” Archaeology Southwest 13:14.
McGuire, R. H. 1992. Death, Society, and Ideology in a Hohokam Community. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
McGuire, R. H., and M. B. Schiffer. 1982. Hohokam and Patayan: Prehistory of Southwestern Arizona. New York:
              Academic Press.
McGuire, R. H., and M. B. Schiffer. 1983. “A Theory of Architectural Design.” Journal of Anthropological
              Archaeology 2:277–303.
Mehrer, M. W. 1995. Cahokia’s Countryside: Household Archaeology, Settlement, Patterns, and Social Power.
              Dekalb: Northern Illinois University Press.
Milanich, J. T., and C. H. Fairbanks. 1987. Florida Archaeology. New York: Academic Press.
Mills, B. J. 2002. “Recent Research on Chaco: Changing Views on Economy, Ritual, and Society.” Journal of
              Archaeological Research 10(1):65–117.
Milner, G. 1990. “The Late Prehistoric Cahokia Cultural System of the Mississippi River Valley: Foundations,
              Florescence, and Fragmentation.” Journal of World Prehistory 4(1):1– 44.
Minnis, P. E. 1985. Social Adaptation to Food Stress. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
———. 1992. “Earliest Plant Cultivation in the Desert Borderlands of North America.” In The Origins of
              Agriculture, ed. C. W. Cowan and P. J. Watson. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
Morse, D. F., and P. A. Morse. 1983. Archaeology of the Central Mississippi Valley. New York: Academic Press.
Muller, J. 1986. Archaeology of the Lower Ohio River Valley. New York: Academic Press.
Nassaney, M. S. 1992. “Communal Societies and the Emergence of Elites in the Prehistoric American Southeast.”
              In Lords of the Southeast: Social Inequality and the Native Elites of Southeastern North America, ed.
              A. W. Barker and T. R. Pauketat, pp. 111–143. Washington, D.C.: Archeological Papers of the
              American Anthropological Association, No. 3.
Nelson, M. C., and M. Hegmon. 2001. “Abandonment Is Not as It Seems: An Approach to the Relationship
              Between Site and Regional Abandonment.” American Antiquity 66(2):213–235.
O’Brien, M. J. 1987. “Sedentism, Population Growth, and Resource Selection in the Woodland Midwest: A Review
              of Coevolutionary Developments.” Current Anthropology 28(2):177–197.
Pauketat, T. R. 2004. Ancient Cahokia and the Mississippians. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Pauketat, T., and T. Emerson. 1991. “The Ideology of Authority and the Power of the Pot.” American
              Anthropologist 93(4):919–941.
Peebles, C. S. 1977. “Moundville and Surroundings Sites: Some Structural Considerations of Mortuary Practices,
              II.” In Approaches to the Social Dimensions of Mortuary Practices, ed. J. A. Brown. Washington, D.C.:
              Society for American Archaeology Memoir, No. 25.
Phillips, J., and J. Brown, eds. 1983. Archaic Hunter-Gatherers in the Midwest. Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
Porter, J. W. 1969. The Mitchell Site and Prehistoric Exchange Systems at Cahokia: A.D. 1000–300. Illinois
              Archaeological Survey Bulletin, No. 7. Urbana: University of Illinois.
Powell, S. 1983. Mobility and Adaptation: The Anasazi of Black Mesa, Arizona. Carbondale: Southern Illinois
              University Press.
Price, T. D., and G. M. Feinman, eds. 1995. Foundations of Social Inequality. New York: Plenum Press.
Prufer, O. H. 1964. “The Hopewell Cult.” Scientiﬁc American 211:90–102.
Ramenofsky, A. F. 1987. Vectors of Death: The Archaeology of European Contact. Albuquerque: University of New
              Mexico Press.
Redman, C. L. 1993. People of the Tonto Rim: Archaeological Discovery in Prehistoric Arizona. Washington, DC:
              Smithsonian Institution Press.
Reid, J. J., and D. E. Doyel, eds. 1986. Emil W. Haury’s Prehistory of the American Southwest. Tucson: University
              of Arizona Press.
Rice, G. E. 1975. “A Systemic Explanation of a Change in Mogollon Settlement Patterns.” Unpublished doctoral
              dissertation, University of Washington.
Riley, T. J., R. Edging, and J. Rossen. 1990. “Cultigens in Prehistoric Eastern North America.” Current
              Anthropology 31(5):525–541.
Rindos, D. 1984. The Origins of Agriculture: An Evolutionary Perspective. New York: Academic Press.
Rothschild, N. A. 1979. “Mortuary Behavior and Social Organization at Indian Knoll and Dickson Mounds.”
              American Antiquity 44:658–675.
Simmons, A. H. 1986. “New Evidence for the Early Use of Cultigens in the American Southwest.” American
              Antiquity 51(1):73–89.
Smith, B. 1974. “Middle Mississippi Exploitation of Animal Populations—A Predictive Model.” American
              Antiquity 39:274 – 291.

598   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      ———. 1985. “The Role of Chenopodium as a Domesticate in the Pre-Maize Garden System of the Eastern United
                  States.” Southeastern Archaeology 4:51–72.
      ———. 1986. “The Archaeology of the Southeastern United States: From Dalton to de Soto, 10,500–500 b.p.”
                  Advances in World Archaeology 5:1–92.
      ———. 1992. “Prehistoric Plant Husbandry in Eastern North America.” In The Origins of Agriculture: An
                  International Perspective, ed. C. W. Cowan and P. J. Watson, pp. 101–119. Washington, DC:
                  Smithsonian Institution Press.
      Smith, B. D., ed. 1990. The Mississippian Emergence. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
      ———. 1992. The Rivers of Change: Essays on Early Agriculture in Eastern North America. Washington, DC:
                  Smithsonian Institution Press.
      Spielmann, K. A., M. J. Schoeninger, and K. Moore. 1990. “Plains-Pueblo Interdependence and Human Diet at
                  Pecos Pueblo, New Mexico.” American Antiquity 55(4):745–765.
      Steponaitis, V. P. 1983. Ceramics, Chronology, and Community Patterns: An Archaeological Study at Moundville.
                  New York: Academic Press.
      Stoltman, J. B. 1983. “Ancient Peoples of the Upper Mississippi River Valley.” In Historic Lifestyles of the Upper
                  Mississippi River Valley, ed. J. Wozniak. New York: University Press of America.
      ———. 1986. Prehistoric Mound Builders of the Mississippi Valley. Davenport, IA: Putnam Museum.
      Struever, S., and K. D. Vickery. 1973. “The Beginnings of Cultivation in the Midwest-Riverine Area of the United
                  States.” American Anthropologist 75:1197–1220.
      Tainter, J. 1975. “Social Inference and Mortuary Practices: An Experiment in Numerical Classiﬁcation.” World
                  Archaeology 7:1–15.
      Upham, S. 1994. “Nomads of the Desert West: A Shifting Continuum in Prehistory.” Journal of World Prehistory
                  8(2):113–168.
      Upham, S., K. G. Lightfoot, and G. M. Feinman. 1981. “Explaining Socially Determined Ceramic Distributions
                  in the Prehistoric Southwest.” American Antiquity 46:822–836.
      Utah Museum of Natural History. 1995. Treading in the Past: Sandals of the Anasazi. Salt Lake City: University of
                  Utah Press.
      Vivian, G. 1990. The Chacoan Prehistory of the San Juan Basin. San Dicgo: Academic Press.
      Vogel, J. C., and N. J. Van Der Merwe. 1977. “Isotopic Evidence for Early Maize Cultivation in New York State.”
                  American Antiquity 42:238–242.
      Washburn, D. R. 1975. “The American Southwest.” In North America, ed. S. Gorenstein et al. New York:
                  St. Martin’s Press.
      Watson, P. J. 1974. Archeology of the Mammoth Cave Area. New York: Academic Press.
      Webb, C. H. 1977. The Poverty Point Culture. Baton Rouge: The School of Geoscience, Louisiana State University.
      Whalen, M. 1981. “Cultural-Ecological Aspects of the Pithouse-to-Pueblo Transition in a Portion of the
                  Southwest.” American Antiquity 46:75–91.
      Willey, G. R. 1966. An Introduction to American Archaeology, Vol. 1: North and Middle America. Englewood Cliffs,
                  NJ: Prentice-Hall.
      Wills, W. H. 1996. “The Transition from the Preceramic to Ceramic Period in the Mogollon Highlands of Western
                  New Mexico.” Journal of Field Archaeology 23(3):335–359.
      Wills, W. H., and R. D. Leonard, eds. 1995. The Ancient Southwestern Community: Models and Methods for the
                  Study of Prehistoric Social Organization. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
      Woosley, A. I., and J. C. Ravesloot, eds. 1995. Culture and Contact: Charles C. DiPeso’s Gran Chichimeca.
                  Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
      Yerkes, R. W. 1988. “The Woodland and Mississippian Traditions in the Prehistory of Midwestern North
                  America.” Journal of World Prehistory 2(3):307–358.



      NOTES
       1. Smith, The Rivers of Change: Essays on Early Agriculture in Eastern North America, pp. 102–106.
       2. Ibid., p. 106.
       3. Smith, “Prehistoric Plant Husbandry in Eastern North America,” p. 106.
       4. Fritz, “Multiple Ways to Farming in Precontact Eastern North America,” p. 399.
       5. Smith, The Rivers of Change: Essays on Early Agriculture in Eastern North America, p. 107.
       6. Smith, “Prehistoric Plant Husbandry in Eastern North America,” pp. 107–108.
       7. O’Brien, “Sedentism, Population Growth, and Resource Selection in the Woodland Midwest: A Review of
          Coevolutionary Developments.”
       8. Rindos, The Origins of Agriculture.

                                                       EARLY CULTURAL COMPLEXIY IN NORTH AMERICA                    599


 9. O’Brien, “Sedentism, Population Growth, and Resource Selection in the Woodland Midwest: A Review of
    Coevolutionary Developments,” p. 186; also see Keegan, ed., Emergent Horticultural Economies of the Eastern
    Woodlands.
10. Braun, “Pots as Tools,” and “Comment on M. J. O’Brien, ‘Sedentism, Population Growth, and Resource
    Selection in the Woodland Midwest: A Review of Coevolutionary Developments.’ ”
11. Braun, “Comment on M. J. O’Brien, ‘Sedentism, Population Growth, and Resource Selection in the
    Woodland Midwest: A Review of Coevolutionary Developments,’ ” p. 189.
12. Fowler, “Agriculture and Village Settlement in the North American East: The Central Mississippi Valley Area,
    a Case History.”
13. Price, and Feinman, eds., Foundations of Social Inequality.
14. Stoltman, Prehistoric Mound Builders of the Mississippi Valley; Marquardt, “Complexity and Scale in the Study
    of Fisher-Gatherer-Hunters”; Rothschild, “Mortuary Behavior and Social Organization at Indian Knoll and
    Dickson Mounds.”
15. Yerkes, “The Woodland and Mississippian Traditions in the Prehistory of Midwestern North America,”
    p. 315.
16. Fiedel, Prehistory of the Americas, p. 111.
17. Fagan, Ancient North America, p. 331.
18. Ibid.
19. Murphy, An Archaeological History of the Hocking Valley, pp. 161–163; Yerkes, “The Woodland and
    Mississippian Traditions in the Prehistory of Midwestern North America,” p. 317.
20. Yerkes, “The Woodland and Mississippian Traditions in the Prehistory of Midwestern North America,”
    p. 317.
21. Brown, “Long-Term Trends to Sedentism and the Emergence of Complexity in the American Midwest,” p. 219.
22. Coe, Snow, and Benson, Atlas of Ancient America, p. 50.
23. Bush, “A Ceramic Analysis of the Late Adena Buckmeyer Site”; Baby and Langlois, “Prehistoric Agriculture,”
    p. 3.
24. Tainter, “Social Inference and Mortuary Practices: An Experiment in Numerical Classiﬁcation.”
25. Jennings, Prehistory of North America, p. 232.
26. Brose and Greber, Hopewell Archaeology: The Chillicothe Conference.
27. Yerkes, “The Woodland and Mississippian Traditions in the Prehistory of Midwestern North America,”
    p. 323.
28. Braun, “The Social and Technological Roots of ‘Late Woodland.’ ”
29. For varied considerations of Mississippian America, see Smith, ed., The Mississippian Emergence.
30. Stoltman, “Ancient Peoples of the Upper Mississippi River Valley,” pp. 232–233.
31. Lynott et al., “Stable Carbon Isotopic Evidence for Maize Agriculture in Southeast Missouri and Northeast
    Arkansas.”
32. Reviewed by Brown, Kerber, and Winters, in Smith ed., The Mississippian Emergence. See also Nassaney,
    “Communal Societies and the Emergence of Elites in the Prehistoric American Southeast.”
33. Porter, The Mitchell Site and Prehistoric Exchange Systems at Cahokia: A.D. 1000–300. See also Yerkes, “The
    Woodland and Mississippian Traditions in the Prehistory of Midwestern North America.”
34. Iseminger, “Mighty Cahokia,” pp. 34–35.
35. Pauketat and Emerson, “The Ideology of Authority and the Power of the Pot,” p. 935.
36. Milner, “The Late Prehistoric Cahokia Cultural System of the Mississippi River Valley: Foundations,
    Florescence, and Fragmentation,” p. 2; also see Smith, “The Archaeology of the Southeastern United States:
    From Dalton to de Soto, 10,500–500 b.p.”
37. Peebles, “Moundville and Surrounding Sites.”
38. Steponaitis, Ceramics, Chronology, and Community Patterns: An Archaeological Study at Moundville.
39. Ramenofsky, Vectors of Death.
40. Smith, “Middle Mississippi Exploitation of Animal Populations—A Predictive Model.”
41. Dickson, “The Yanomamo of the Mississippi Valley? Some Reﬂections on Larson . . . Gibson . . . and
    Mississippi Period Warfare in the Southeastern United States.”
42. Fagan, Ancient North America, p. 338.
43. Mehrer, Cahokia’s Countryside: Household Archaeology, Settlement Patterns, and Social Power; Pauketat,
    Ancient Cahokia and the Mississippians.
44. Le Page du Pratz.
45. Ramenofsky, Vectors of Death.
46. Minnis, Social Adaptation to Food Stress.
47. See, for example, Redman, People of the Tonto Rim: Archaeological Discovery in Prehistoric Arizona.
48. For example, Cordell and Gumerman, eds., Dynamics of Southwest Prehistory; Wills and Leonard, eds., The
    Ancient Southwestern Community: Models and Methods for the Study of Prehistoric Social Organization.

600   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      49. Woosley and Ravesloot, Culture and Contact.
      50. Upham, “Nomads of the Desert West.”
      51. Cordell, Prehistory of the Southwest; Simmons, “New Evidence for the Early Use of Cultigens in the American
          Southwest.”
      52. Fish and Fish, “Prehistoric Desert Farmers of the Southwest,” p. 85.
      53. Minnis, “Earliest Plant Cultivation in the Desert Borderlands of North America,” pp. 128–129.
      54. Bayman, “The Hohokam of Southwest North America.”
      55. Haury, The Hohokam Desert Farmers and Craftsmen.
      56. Bayman, “The Hohokam of Southwest North America,” p. 266.
      57. See Bayman, “The Hohokam of Southwest North America,” for a discussion of the competing deﬁnitions of
          what constitutues “Hohokam Culture.”
      58. Mabry, “Las Capas and Early Irrigation Farming.”
      59. These Native Americans were fomerly called the Papago in various publications.
      60. Crown and Fish, “Gender and Status in the Hohokam Pre-Classic to Classic Transition”; Hegmon, “Beyond
          the Mold: Questions of Inequality in Southwest Villages.”
      61. Bayman, “The Hohokam of Southwest North America,” p. 271.
      62. Ibid.
      63. Ibid., pp. 275–276, 283–284.
      64. Jett and Moyle, “The Exotic Origins of Fishes Depicted on Prehistoric Mimbres Pottery from New Mexico.”
      65. Lightfoot and Feinman, “Social Differentiation and Leadership Development in Early Pithouse Villages in the
          Mogollon Region of the American Southwest,” p. 81.
      66. Minnis, Social Adaptation to Food Stress.
      67. Whalen, “Cultural-Ecological Aspects of the Pithouse-to-Pueblo Transition in a Portion of the Southwest.”
      68. McGuire and Schiffer, “A Theory of Architectural Design.”
      69. “Chaco and Paquimé: Complexity, History, Landscape.”
      70. Ibid., p. 264.
      71. See, for example, Nelson and Hegmon, “Abandonment Is Not as It Seems: An Approach to the Relationship
          Between Site and Regional Abandonment.”
      72. The “Ancestral Pueblo” classiﬁcation has been used by some scholars in recent years to replace the
          term “Anasazi,” which is regarded by many modern Puebloan groups as an inaccurate descriptor for their
          ancestors.
      73. Powell, Mobility and Adaptation: The Anasazi of Black Mesa, Arizona.
      74. Dickson, “Settlement Pattern Stability and Change in the Middle Northern Rio Grande Region, New Mexico:
          A Test of Some Hypotheses.”
      75. Washburn, “The American Southwest,” p. 114; but see Rice, “A Systematic Explanation of a Change in
          Mogollon Settlement Patterns.”
      76. Lekson, “Chaco and Paquimé: Complexity, History, Landscape,” p. 243.
      77. Vivian, The Chacoan Prehistory of the San Juan Basin.
      78. Lekson, “Chaco and Paquimé: Complexity, History, Landscape,” pp. 247–248.
      79. Betancourt et al., “Prehistoric Long-Distance Transport of Construction Beams, Chaco Canyon, New
          Mexico.”
      80. Ibid., pp. 244–246.
      81. “Recent Research on Chaco: Changing Views on Economy, Ritual, and Society.”
      82. Ibid., p. 97.
      83. Lekson, “Chaco and Paquimé: Complexity, History, Landscape,” p. 247.

16
Prehistory in Perspective

[W]hat’s past is prologue.
Shakespeare1




H        aving followed in this book our past, from the three-million-year-old hominin
         footprints of Laetoli through the sixteenth-century a.d. European invasion of the
Americas, the reader is invited to return to the questions posed in the ﬁrst chapter: Does
the world’s archaeological record tell us why history has turned out as it has? Can we predict
our future from our past? Does the human past appear to have some “meaning” that
transcends the sum of the individual lives of the billions of people who have comprised
humanity? Who “owns” the past, in the sense of who gathers evidence about it and
interprets it, and decides how the past is preserved and presented?
     These are, of course, ancient questions, and by now the reader will not expect an
ultimate answer from this book. It is perhaps a bad pedagogical tactic to raise questions,
review the evidence, and then conclude weakly that “we don’t really know,” but most
contemporary archaeologists ﬁnd themselves in this predicament. The world’s archae-
ological record seems to provide a general sense of potentially important causes of various
ancient cultural changes, but there is no single, powerful, comprehensive explanation of
the past. Thus, rather than demonstrating the power and accuracy of any speciﬁc models
of culture and history, we have simply explored the limitations and potentials of some of
the more obvious ideas about the past. Moreover, as we have seen, the very possibility of a
uniﬁed, objective, “scientiﬁc” understanding or explanation of the past has been rejected
by some archaeologists and questioned by most.


OUR INTELLECTUAL HERITAGE

One of the earliest casualties of our review here was the Enlightenment and nineteenth-
century view of mechanical cultural evolutionism, with its belief in the gradual improve-
ment of people and their societies, generation after generation, as we “progressed” from rude
savagery to the better, brighter world of industry, liberalism, and democracy. The Victorian
proponents of cultural evolutionism—who number among their ranks some of the greatest
intellects of all time—can be forgiven, perhaps, for this belief in progress because they lived
in an age of marvelous change. Just Darwin’s insights alone revolutionized the way people

                                             601

602   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      viewed the world and themselves. It is not surprising that people of the nineteenth century
      believed in the possibility of a science of history, for throughout their lives they saw
      “progress” in almost every kind of human endeavor. Consider, for example, the changes in
      both technology and dominant ideologies witnessed by someone like Oliver Wendell
      Holmes (1841–1935), father of the great American jurist: Holmes wrote his senior thesis
      at Harvard in the provincial America of the decade before Abraham Lincoln’s election
      to the presidency; he then served in the Civil War; in later life he broadcast on the radio
      during Franklin Roosevelt’s presidency.2 Holmes and others of his generation saw a world
      transformed by science and technology in a way few other generations have experienced.
           But, as Simone Weil said: “The great mistake of the nineteenth century was to assume
      that by walking straight on one mounted into the air.” Two of the nineteenth century’s
      greatest proponents of progressive evolution, Herbert Spencer and Karl Marx, today lie
      across from each other in death, on opposites sides of a gravel path in London’s Highgate
      Cemetery. Herbert Spencer is now remembered by only a few, and even Karl Marx—whose
      ideas transformed the twentieth century—will probably soon join Spencer in being more
      cited than read, and increasingly unregarded.

      “Change” is scientiﬁc, “progress” is ethical;
      change is indubitable, whereas progress is a
      matter of controversy.
      Bertrand Russell3


           It is difﬁcult to discard entirely the notion of history as describing a “progressive”
      trajectory, leading to ourselves, and this idea is embedded in many cultures. Our review of
      the archaeological records reveals, however, that instead of a smooth rising curve of social,
      physical, technological, and moral evolution, our past has been a series of ﬁtful cycles,
      where social forms and technologies have reached their limits of growth and then failed, to
      be replaced by new social forms and technologies, more complex in some ways than their
      predecessors, but neither permanent nor “better” in any evident moral or philosophical
      sense. Clearly, there is nothing in the archaeological record to indicate that we are on a
      straight path to an earthly paradise. Today, many people are “involuntary vegetarians,”4
      whose diet, morbidity and mortality rates, and general standard of living probably compare
      poorly with those of most ancient hunting-and-gathering bands. Even in the most
      industrialized countries, the vast majority labors longer for sustenance than did many of
      the people of prehistory. Moreover, the misery, poverty, wars, and generic atrocities of our
      current world make it difﬁcult to argue that our past is one of “moral evolution.”5
           But this lack of “progress” in the Victorian sense should not be taken as a complete
      indictment of the general notion of history as reﬂecting long-term directional change.
      Despite repeated local reversals and long plateaus, the past three million years can be seen
      as directional change in many aspects of humanity, from average brain size to the com-
      plexity of cultures, as measured by changes in the size, differentiation, and interdependence
      of social, political, and economic systems—and by such basic dynamics as the ability to
      divert energy to human use, and the degree of economic interdependence of the world’s
      people.
           Perhaps nowhere in the human past is there more convincing evidence of powerful
      general determinants of cultural evolution operating than in the appearance of early

                                                                    PREHISTORY IN PERSPECTIVE     603


civilizations. As noted in chapter 7, the six earliest civilizations seem independently to have
evolved in extraordinarily similar ways and with nearly identical characteristics. All were
based economically on comparatively productive agricultural systems, the “surplus”
production of which was expropriated by elites. All evolved national religious cults,
monumental architecture, complex bureaucratic hierarchies, and many other character-
istics in common.
      Given this, the world’s archaeological record cannot be understood accurately as the
reﬂection simply of the vagaries of human intentions or of unrelated and random cultural
constructs. We have identiﬁed many patterns and parallels. Cross-cutting cultural
developments all over the world are the same essential expressions of religion, warfare,
population growth, emerging social stratiﬁcation, and evolving economic productivity.
      But when we try to dissect the causal processes that produced the past, our explanations
seem incomplete and simplistic. We have seen, for example, that human population growth
has been correlated with almost every cultural transformation, from initial tool use to the
appearance of industrial empires. This relationship may even be thought of as possibly
causal: The rate of technological change might be linked simply to the number of minds
available to solve problems and produce innovations. But this is clearly an incomplete
explanation of our past. Time and time again the archaeological record discloses that the
relationship between population growth and cultural change is neither consistent nor
direct, and it remains for archaeologists to demonstrate the direct causal connections—if
there are any—between the world’s increasing population size and the speciﬁc, crucial
transformations of prehistory and history.
      This inability even to understand the impact of basic demographic factors on cultural
change does not augur well for a deterministic science of culture and history, for basic
demography would seem to be potentially the most easily understood aspect of change over
time in the human past, compared to changes in technology, society, and ideology.
      To consider another example of the complexity of unraveling the causal patterns of the
past, the recurrent nature of human interspecies violence—from the cannibalism of some
of our early hominin ancestors to the war in Iraq—clearly suggests that conﬂict is an
evolutionary mechanism of considerable power; conﬂict must do something for societies,
or it would be difﬁcult to explain its depressing ubiquity in human affairs (Figure 16.1).
But here, too, the actual mechanisms in most past societies whereby conﬂict interacted with
other variables to produce cultural change are unknown.
      It is the nature of evolutionary patterns that they only appear to have a direction when
one looks backward. As many have observed, “real life seems to have no plots,” and in the
same sense, evolutionary accounts have no plots, except in retrospect. The ﬁrst hunter-
gatherers who made wild wheat part of their diet, for example, could have had no inkling
their activities would eventually lead to vast stretches of North America being devoted to
highly mechanized cultivation of distant genetic descendants of those wild Southwest Asian
cereals.
      We can look back and discern many similar evolutionary sequences in the past. To
identify a long span of connections that link developments, however, is not the same as
explaining history—no general theory has won universal acceptance. Most archaeologists
employ a vaguely evolutionary perspective: They assume that cultural innovations are
constantly arising in human societies and that some of these innovations confer an adaptive
advantage and are “ﬁxed” within cultural systems and perpetuated until they too are

           604       PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


                                                                                   outmoded and replaced. Many
                                                                                   archaeologists also adopt a
                                                                                   rather “vulgar” materialist
                                                                                   determinism in that they
                                                                                   assume that cultural forms and
                                                                                   dynamics are to some extent
                                                                                   constrained and shaped by
                                                                                   technological, environmental,
                                                                                   and economic variables. Great
                                                                                   cities like Babylon could not
                                                                                   have arisen in pre-industrial
                                                                                   Alaska, and there seems to
                                                                                   be no great mystery that the
                                                                                   ﬁrst productive agricultural
                                                                                   economies appeared in fertile,
                                                                                   easily farmed river valleys close
                                                                                   to the natural habitat of the
a)                                                                                 wild ancestors of domesticated
                                                                                   plants. Similarly, contrasting
                                                                                   cultural forms, such as the
                                                                                   social egalitarianism of hunters
                                                                                   and gatherers in the Pleistocene
                                                                                   and the rigid social stratiﬁca-
                                                                                   tion of emerging states, are
                                                                                   generally understood in part
                                                                                   as results of their respective
                                                                                   economic bases. Nonetheless,
                                                                                   many contemporary archae-
                                                                                   ologists see such links between
                                                                                   primary economics and envir-
                                                                                   onments and socioeconomic
                                                                                   and political systems as only
                                                                                   the starting points of analysis.
                                                                                   Most now recognize that even
                                                                                   if they are able to demonstrate
                                                                                   a strong correlation in time
                                                                                   and space between, say, popu-
                                                                                   lation growth, warfare, and
                                                                                   urbanism, they will still not
b)                                                                                 have explained in a powerful
FIGURE 16.1 Examples of violence throughout time a) a stone point embedded         way any of these factors or their
in human bone; b) a depiction of a human sacriﬁce; c) a suicide bomber.            relationships to each other.
                                                                                        In the face of these ana-
                     lytical ambiguities, many contemporary archaeologists have become profoundly
                     sociological and behavioral in their theoretical approach, in the sense that they have focused
                     on the ways people and societies have culturally constructed the speciﬁcs of their

                                                                   PREHISTORY IN PERSPECTIVE    605


socioeconomic and political
systems and ideologies. In pre-
vious chapters we have reviewed
many attempts to analyze and
interpret the social structures,
dynamics, and ideologies of
extinct societies. A great variety
of sociological and political
theories have been developed
to explain how different cul-
tures used the same organiza-
tional mechanisms to produce
the worldwide and historical
patterns we see in power rela-
tions, ethnicity, gender rela-
tionships, social reproduction,
and so on.
     In contrast to these ap-       c)
proaches, as we noted in pre-       FIGURE 16.1 (cont’d)
vious chapters, other scholars
have argued that it is not possible to formulate a true science of the behavior of extinct
peoples and that the long chains of inference that must be constructed to link the existing
archaeological remains with such concepts as “class conﬂict” and “political domination”
cannot be measured in the archaeological record and treated scientiﬁcally. Robert Dunnell
argues that archaeology can never be a science of behavior because behavior does not
exist—artifacts exist—and because any science must deal with phenomena, a scientiﬁc
archaeology must deal with artifacts, not with inferred behavior. Yet such a science of
artifacts cannot be like physics, Dunnell has argued, because the artifactual record is
primarily one created by evolutionary processes, in contrast to the uniform timeless laws
that govern the physical universe.
     Dunnell and numerous other scholars6 are investigating applications of Darwinian
evolutionary theory to history and humanity, and recent advances in such related ﬁelds
as “complexity theory” and “chaos theory,” and in studies of artiﬁcial intelligence, may
eventually have great impact on the theory of archaeology. One interesting current trend
in these forms of evolutionary analyses involves nonlinear systems analyses and the
“emergent properties” of complex systems.7 The most vivid example is that of biological
organisms, such as ourselves, in which somehow there is a complete set of information in
our genes such that as we are formed from the division of a single cell, subsequent cells are
formed into skin, hair, bones, blood, and all the other tissues and organs that comprise us.
We cannot, however, draw an accurate and direct analogy between the formation of a
human being and the evolution of an ancient state. In each of these systems there is a
growing complexity that seems in some sense inherent in the simpler earlier stages of these
processes of evolution—a “Lamarckian” sense of evolution, in other words, instead of simply
a Darwinian one.
     But, as we have noted (chapter 1), attempts to make archaeology into a Darwinian or
positivist science of any kind have been dismissed by other archaeologists, who reject the

606   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      entire notion that “science” has any application to the explanation of the past—arguing that
      archaeology can never be a neutral, value-free, empirical science of artifacts. As discussed
      in chapter 1, the post-processualists8 and others have contended that, just as one cannot
      assign a deﬁnitive single meaning to a text, one cannot make an empirically veriﬁable and
      deﬁnitive interpretation of the archaeological record. We create the past, they argue, and
      our interpretations of the past are limited by, and arise out of, our own cultural context.
      As discussed in chapter 1 and elsewhere, some contemporary archaeologists believe that
      there is no one “past;” rather, there is a continuing dialectical process in which each person
      confronts the past and comes to a unique understanding of it.
           The general perspective taken in this book—a “holistic” approach, to use Bruce
      Trigger’s phrase (chapter 1), or “cognitive processualism,” to use Colin Renfrew and John
      Bintliff ’s term9 (chapter 1)—may seem like a sensible moderate course. In this kind of
      archaeology one can use any analytical techniques that seem to increase understanding of
      the past, and one need not shrink from nonscientiﬁc interpretations of ancient ideologies,
      on the one hand, or abandon scientiﬁc rigor in evaluating evidence and competing
      hypotheses, on the other. But to many post-processualists, positivist science has no place
      in archaeology beyond technical applications (for example, radiocarbon dating), and to
      Darwinian evolutionists and other scientiﬁcally inclined archaeologists, the nonscientiﬁc
      interpretations of ancient ideologies and “meanings” may be a form of personal expression
      or art, but it is not scientiﬁc analysis.
           These theoretical debates will no doubt continue for many years to come. In the
      meantime most archaeologists will do what they have always done, whatever their
      theoretical perspective, and that is to study the remains of the past—struggling to
      understand what they meant to the people of the past as well as what they mean to the
      archaeologist.
           Bill Nye described Wagner’s music as “better than it sounds,” and in a way archaeology
      is like this: Its limitations are obvious, but its achievements are also obvious—we
      understand human antiquity today to an extent unimaginable just a century ago.


      LESSONS OF PREHISTORY

          To think of time—of all that retrospection,
          To think of to-day, and the ages continued henceforward.
          Have you guess’d you yourself would not continue?
          Have you dreaded these earth-beetles?
          Is to-day nothing? is the beginningless past nothing?
          If the future is nothing they are just as surely nothing.
                                                      Walt Whitman 10
      It would be gratifying if we could extract from our review of world prehistory some
      important predictions about the future of humankind, but, as we have noted, archaeology
      should not be considered a predictive science. It is not that we cannot look at the past and
      extrapolate trends we see into the future. It is that there is no necessity to these trends:
      Evolutionary histories are what happened, not what had to happen or what has to happen,
      and they are unique.

                                                                       PREHISTORY IN PERSPECTIVE       607


      This is especially true when we consider the long-range
future, particularly now that humanity has instruments with
which to terminate all life on this planet. But even should we
survive as a species for millions of future generations, the
virtuosity of culture as an adaptive device makes extrapolation
into the far future an act of either ignorance or hubris. None
of the human ancestors who strolled through Olduvai Gorge
some Sunday morning two million years ago could have
had even the dimmest vision of the gaudy technology and
kaleidoscopic social and political forms of twentieth-century
                                                                      FIGURE 16.2 An eyed bone needle from the
civilization, and this civilization was not a necessary outcome
                                                                      Upper Paleolithic site at Creswell Crags, England.
of our Olduvai forebears.
      No student of the past, however, can overlook the
persistent, powerful trends that tie the present—and perhaps the future—to the past. These
trends extend beyond the simple cumulative increases in world population density and the
technology of energy capture. The increasing functional differentiation and integration of
the world’s economies and societies can be seen in any food market, any airport. It may
seem like a tenuous link between the development of, say, tailored clothing in the Upper
Paleolithic (chapter 4) (Figure 16.2), which allowed human radiation into more demanding
environments, and today’s rapidly mutating and world-invading Internet, but they are both
part of an increasing “complexity” of human society and adaptation.
      Nor are these changes just technological. In chapter 1 the Darwinian revolution in
world-views and life-views was discussed, but there is no reason to suspect that any ideology
will be the ﬁnal, deﬁnitive perspective for all humanity. Consider, for example, religion. We
will let those with more conﬁdence in their omniscience than we have pronounce upon the
ultimate nature of human religiosity; it is always sobering to recollect that neither the study
of world prehistory nor any other art or science has much to offer in the way of a reason
why we are out here, on a small planet in an incomprehensibly inﬁnite universe, and to all
evidence very much alone.


Religion and Cultural Values
    I remember, I remember
    The ﬁr-trees dark and high;
    I used to think their slender tops
    Were close against the sky:
    It was a childish ignorance,
    But now ‘tis little joy
    To know I’m further off from heav’n
    Than when I was a boy.
                             Thomas Hood
Taken solely on the level of its effects on other aspects of culture, religion appears to operate
principally as a highly adaptable, thermodynamically efﬁcient mechanism of social control.
We have in the archaeological and historical record an irrefutable demonstration that there
is no act so repellent—be it sacriﬁcing thousands of one’s own countrymen to the gods or

608   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      incinerating hundreds of thousands of one’s “enemies”—that it cannot be made not only
      acceptable, but entirely virtuous within the context of religious systems. The exploitation
      of the many by the few to build massive pyramids, the complete catalogue of sexual
      “perversions,” the avoidance of this or that food—all have been incorporated into state
      religions with no more difﬁculty than Christian faith, hope, and charity.
           Recent wars illustrate that, despite the apparent decline of formal theistic religions in
      some parts of the industrialized world, the power of ideology to set societies into conﬂict
      has not changed. These conﬂicts may stem in part from long-term underlying economic
      forces, but no observer of modern politics can help but be profoundly impressed by the
      awesome power of ideas about history and ethnicity to stimulate both genocide against
      one’s perceived enemies and identiﬁcation with one’s kin.
           The late-twentieth-century societies of the West are almost obsessed with social and
      economic inequalities, and it would be signiﬁcant if the study of world prehistory had
      anything to tell us about the future of differences in class, gender, and ethnicity. But the
      lessons of the archaeological record concerning the origins and signiﬁcance of social and
      economic inequalities are not as clear as they might seem at ﬁrst glance. It is inescapable
      that there has never been an economically powerful, sociopolitically complex society—
      especially the supposedly “classless” societies of Marxist Russia and China—that was not
      also stratiﬁed into groups having differential access to wealth, power, and prestige. It
      remains to be demonstrated, however, that cultural functional complexity and integration
      are inextricably linked to social stratiﬁcation. It would appear that in the past the
      complexity of managing an economy based on agriculture, and later agriculture in
      combination with fossil fuels, could work effectively only through administrative and social
      hierarchies and class-structured societies. These social and cultural forms allowed great
      stability and predictability because people’s functional roles in society and their
      contributions and consumption of goods and services were largely determined by the class
      into which they were born. But if in future centuries population densities are stabilized and
      perhaps reduced, if control of energy and food sources is decentralized and the production
      of material wealth made highly automated, it would seem at least possible that human
      societies will someday approximate the “social justice” of the late Pleistocene.
           Perhaps the archaeological record’s bleakest implication concerning our short-term
      future has to do with that ambiguous concept, “the quality of life.” We have already noted
      that today most of the world’s people have a diet and standard of living in many ways
      inferior to that of Pleistocene hunters and gatherers, and although medical technology,
      solar power, and contraceptives may change this by bringing the Western industrial
      standard of living to all parts of the world, this is by no means a certainty. Even given
      sufﬁcient energy and rapid industrialization, fundamental questions remain about the
      short-term prospects for the quality of life on this planet. In the wealthiest countries today
      the abundance of luxury goods seems to convey a sense of ease and fulﬁllment, but modern
      economies work only because the vast majority of the population are coerced or induced
      to spend most of their lives at hard labor. And it is not only the poorer, laboring class whose
      quality of life is questionable. It has been observed that a citizen of Athens in the ﬁfth
      century b.c. would consider today’s professionals—physicians, politicians, professors, and
      football players alike—to be in the main incomplete, undeveloped people whose “success”
      has required them to devote so much of their lives to their specialty that they are grotesquely

                                                                     PREHISTORY IN PERSPECTIVE     609


incompetent at the oratorical, conversational, athletic, philosophical, agricultural, and
aesthetic skills that the ancient Greeks, for example, would insist on as necessary com-
ponents of a “whole” person.11


THE FUTURE OF ARCHAEOLOGY

When I was a boy of fourteen, my father was so
ignorant I could hardly stand to have the old
man around. But when I got to be twenty-one, I
was astonished at how much the old man had
learned in seven years.
Mark Twain

The energy produced by the breaking down of
the atom is a very poor kind of thing. Anyone
who expects a source of power from the
transformation of these atoms is talking
moonshine.
Ernest Rutherford (1871–1937), physicist, after he had
split the atom for the ﬁrst time12

History teaches us that it is often a fundamental mistake to extrapolate immediate
experience and situations far into the future. Contemporary archaeology and the historical
disciplines are in such a state of ﬂux and ideological rivalry that we may have no sense of
what these ﬁelds of inquiry will be like in a century or two.
     In any case, the archaeological record is disappearing at such a rapid rate that the future
of ﬁeld archaeology on the problems of prehistory is very much in doubt. The worldwide
wave of industrialism—the major destroyer of archaeological materials—seems destined to
expand at ever-increasing speed.
     Dismal as the loss of the archaeological record is, it may be that the major progress in
archaeology in the next several generations will come not so much from the discovery of
new bones and stones, but rather from a reconsideration of theoretical and methodological
approaches and a reanalysis of existing data. We have recounted in this book the prospects
of current analytical approaches, and these and other perspectives are likely to increase
considerably our knowledge about our past. Does this mean that the general problem of,
for example, the origins of cultural complexity will someday be as precisely solved as the
formulae for making plastics? Probably not. These are very different kinds of questions with
different criteria for solution. Yet, the history of science is replete with examples in which
a seemingly impossible problem was not only solved but made routine: The general
problems of prehistory we have discussed here may well fall into this category, to be solved
in succeeding centuries in terms and with techniques that we now only dimly perceive.
After all, people of only a few centuries ago no doubt would be astounded not only by our
science and lush technology, but also by our knowledge of prehistory and the dynamics of
culture.

610   PATTERNS IN PREHISTORY


      Requiem aeternam dona eis, Domine, et lux
      perpetua luceat eis (Grant them eternal rest, O
      Lord, and may perpetual light shine on them)
      Mozart Requiem
      Requiem Mass in D. Minor (K. 624)



      BIBLIOGRAPHY
      Alexander, R. D. 1987. The Biology of Moral Systems. Hawthorne, NY: Aldine de Gruyter.
      Bintliff, J. 1986. “Archaeology at the Interface: An Historical Perspective.” In Archaeology at the Interface, ed.
                   J. L. Bintliff and C. F. Gaffney. Oxford: BAR International Series 300.
      ———. 1993. “Why Indiana Jones is Smarter Than the Post-Processualists.” Norwegian Archaeological Review
                   26(2):91–100.
      Diamond, J. 2004. Collapse: How Societies Choose to Fail or Succeed. New York: Viking.
      Dunnell, R. C. 1982. “Science, Social Science, and Common Sense: The Agonizing Dilemma of Modern
                   Archaeology.” Journal of Anthropological Research 38:1–25.
      ———. 1992. “Is a Scientiﬁc Archaeology Possible?” In Metaarchaeology, ed. L. Embre, pp. 73–97. The
                   Netherlands: Kluvwer.
      Durham, W. H. 1990. “Advances in Evolutionary Culture Theory.” Annual Review of Anthropology 19:187–242.
      Gamble, C. 1994. Timewalkers: The Prehistory of Global Colonization. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
      Harris, M. 1977. Cannibals and Kings: The Origins of Cultures. New York: Random House.
      Hern, W. M. 1993. “Is Human Culture Carcinogenic for Uncontrolled Population Growth and Ecological
                   Destruction?” Bioscience 43(11):768–773.
      Hodder, I., M. Shanks, A. Alexandri, V. Buchli, J. Carman, J. Last, and G. Lucas. 1995. Interpreting Archaeology:
                   Finding Meaning in the Past. New York: Routledge.
      Lansing, J. S., and J. N. Kremer. 1993. “Emergent Properties of Balinese Water Temple Networks.” American
                   Anthropologist 95(1):97–114.
      Neiman, F. D. 1995. “Stylistic Variation in Evolutionary Perspective: Inferences from Decorative Diversity and
                   Interassemblage Distance in Illinois Woodland Ceramic Assemblages.” American Antiquity 60(1):7–36.
      Palgrave, F. T. 1965. The Golden Treasury, p. 234. NY: Oxford University Press.
      Pile, S. 1979. The Book of Heroic Failure. London: Macdonald Futura Publishers.
      Russell, B. 1950. Unpopular Essays. New York: Simon & Schuster.
      Trigger, B. 1991. “Distinguished Lecture in Archaeology: Constraint and Freedom.” American Anthropologist
                   93(3):551–569.
      ———. 1993. Early Civilizations: Ancient Egypt in Context. Cairo: American University in Cairo Press.
      Waldrop, M. M. 1992. Complexity. New York: Touchstone.



      NOTES
       1. Clear for 10 Shakespeare, The Tempest, Act II, Scene I.
       2. Brief Lives.
       3. Unpopular Essays, “Philosophy and Politics.”
       4. Harris, Cannibals and Kings, p. x.
       5. Trigger, Early Civilizations: Ancient Egypt in Context, p. 110.
       6. See, for example, Dunnell, “Science, Social Science, and Common Sense: The Agonizing Dilemma of Modern
          Archaeology,” and “Is a Scientiﬁc Archaeology Possible?”; also see Neiman, “Stylistic Variation in
          Evolutionary Perspective: Inferences from Decorative Diversity and Interassemblage Distance in Illinois
          Woodland Ceramic Assemblages.”
       7. Lansing and Kremer (“Emergent Properties of Balinese Water Temple Networks”), for example, have
          published one of the ﬁrst applications of these ideas to an anthropological problem, the evolution of Balinese
          economic systems.
       8. See, for example, Hodder et al., Interpreting Archaeology: Finding Meaning in the Past.
       9. See, for example, Bintliff, “Archaeology at the Interface,” and “Why Indiana Jones Is Smarter Than the Post-
          Processualists.”
      10. From Whitman’s “To Think of Time.”
      11. Kitto.
      12. Quoted by Pile, The Book of Heroic Failure, p. 216.

