Chapter 5

Reclamation Processes





Introduction





Artifacts, once deposited, do not always remain in archaeological context. Cultural materials in the environment are potential resources that most societies exploit in one way or another. Hunter-gatherers revisit abandoned camps and make use of previously deposited items; farmers refurbish and plant old terraces; looters rob tombs, graves, and abandoned structures for salable artifacts; scavengers rummage through dumps for usable materials; and archaeologists make surface collections and dig up artifacts. Transformations of artifacts from archaeological context back into systemic context are known as reclamation processes. (Discussion of archaeological procedures as cultural formation processes is deferred until Chapter 13.)





Since the late 1960s, archaeologists have taken an interest in documenting the prevalence and effects of various reclamation processes such as pothunting. Ethnoarchaeologists have described a variety of these processes, mostly in non-industrial societies. Nevertheless, scant effort has been devoted to formulating and evaluating the general principles of reclamation, and so this chapter is primarily descriptive.





At times the clearcut distinctions between the major types of cultural formation processes, such as reuse and reclamation, become blurred; indeed, several processes discussed below as reclamation have already been mentioned in previous chapters. In addition, many reclamation processes also have disturbance and depositional effects: pothunting returns artifacts to systemic context, disturbs the artifacts and deposits left behind, and creates new deposits. Some processes, such as provisional





Page 100





discard, are properly categorized within reuse, discard, and reclamation. This is not surprising, since the latter processes are intertwined in a society's strategies of resource use and material conservation. From the standpoint of archaeological methodology, what matters most is the nature, prevalence, and effects of various formation processes, not the term that is affixed to any one process; the label merely facilitates communication among archaeologists.





Occupational Variability and Reoccupation





Although reclamation of artifacts is the principal focus of the present chapter, previously utilized places also reenter systemic context. Such reclaimed places have been subjected to reoccupation. Occupational patterns are of great interest because they influence the occurrence of other cultural formation processes. Regrettably, archaeological concepts for describing variability in mode of occupation are not well developed.





In North America, component is often used to denote occupational patterns, for example, single- versus multicomponent sites. As originally defined by cultural historians (McKern 1939), however, component actually refers to the occurrence at a site of a particular culture-historical unit, such as a phase or period. Because the behavioral referent of the component concept is so limited, its use can lead to ambiguities and nonsensical pronouncements, as Baker (1975b) observes. For example, a site that shows occupation from two sequential phases would be designated multicomponent, even if the occupation were continuous and of short duration. Similarly, a site created by several independent occupations in the same phase would be regarded as single-component. In order to overcome these problems, a behaviorally relevant system is needed for describing occupational patterns. A trial formulation, based on the duration of each occupational episode, is now proposed. When combined with functional and social-unit designations, this system can lead to precise descriptions of occupational patterns. For present purposes, an occupation is defined as the continuous and uninterrupted use of a place by a particular group.





The shortest unit of occupation is the visitation. A brief visitation consists of a short stay, less than a day, and involves no overnight camping. The killing and butchering of game is often carried out by means of a brief visitation. An extended visitation lasts from one to several days and includes camping.





A brief encampment is an occupation that ranges from several days to several weeks. Many !Kung San base camps were occupied as brief encampments (Yellen 1977a), as were some historic sheepherder camps (Hof-





Page 101





man 1982). An extended encampment lasts from several weeks to less than a year. An example of extended encampments comes from the historic Papago, where a number of communities alternated seasonally between winter well villages and summer field villages (Castetter and Underhill 1935).





Occupations having a continuous duration of more than a year are termed habitations. A brief habitation lasts from more than a year to less than a decade. Many societies that practice slash-and-burn agriculture occupy sites in this manner. An extended habitation is the next longest unit of occupation, involving stays of more than a decade but less than a century. Many medium-to-large Southwestern pueblos were occupied for a period lasting several generations (see Dean 1969; Schiffer 1976a). A supra-extended habitation endures in excess of a century. Walpi Pueblo, occupied continuously since about 1680 by the Hopi on First Mesa (Ahlstrom et al. 1978), is a case of supra-extended habitation.





These terms comprise the basic building blocks for describing the occupational history of any site. To complete the framework, one must be able to describe how the basic occupational units can combine to create sites. When a location is used just once, it is called a unique occupation. Repeated occupations of the same kind are modified by the term recurrent. An example of a common type of recurrent occupation is provided by a lithic quarry site, a location that may be used repeatedly by brief visitations. Similarly, many tell sites (Fig. 5.1) were formed by a sequence of supra-extended habitations. Recurrent occupations also have durations, since a location may be used in a particular manner for decades, centuries, or even millennia. For present purposes, no labels will be affixed to recurrent occupations of varying lengths.





A mixed occupation consists of two or more occupations of any type, singular or recurrent. Binford (1982) furnishes an account of a regular pattern of alternation between different types of recurrent occupation among the Nunamiut Eskimo. A location would be used for a period as a residential camp. When the area was fouled by wastes and resources in the immediate vicinity had been depleted, the residential camp would be moved elsewhere. The old residential camp site might be reoccupied for camping or extraction activities but, after a lapse of some decades, the place could be used again as a residential camp. Binford also describes occupational sequences that are less regular and more complex, such as one site that was used as a residential camp, a hunting camp, and a transient camp. As Binford notes, these higher-level occupational patternshere termed mixed occupationshave important and sometimes counterintuitive implications for the accumulation of debris.





In some cases changes in type of occupation form a long-term trend.





Page 102





Fig. 5.1.

Many tell sites, such as Tel Miqne in Israel

(Dothan and Gitin 1985), were formed by

recurrent extended and supra-extended habitations.





An example is provided by Bayham's (1982) analysis of Ventana Cave. This site was used for millennia as a base camp (and probably for other purposes) by mobile hunter-gatherers. As societies in southwestern Arizona became more sedentary and increased their reliance on agricultural products during the last one or two millennia, Ventana Cave appears to have become used exclusively by hunting parties and cactus-gathering camps. This type of succession from recurrent base camps to recurrent staging areas or extractive loci may be a widespread phenomenon in sites that are on the margins of agricultural settlement.





Techniques for sorting out the occupational history of any site are not well developed at present. Recognition of individual occupations is most readily accomplished when rates of noncultural deposition are rapid and lead to clearcut stratification of cultural and noncultural sediments. Koster, a deeply stratified site in Illinois (Struever and Holton 1979), exemplifies this favorable situation, where many occupations are separated by layers of colluvium (see Chapter 9). If processes of environmental deposition are slow, however, occupations can accumulate one upon the other, forming complex palimpsests. Much of Ventana Cave consists of such an accumulation. In still other sites, such as caves containing Middle and Upper Paleolithic occupations in Western Europe, one finds stratification,





Page 103





apparently caused by relatively infrequent environmental processes. The nature of the occupational pattern that formed each ''couche" or stratum, however, remains unclear (Villa and Courtin 1983). Such layers could represent intervals of hundreds or even thousands of years and probably consist of complex sequences of recurrent and mixed occupations. Needless to say, it is doubtful whether long-standing problems of interassemblage variability will be resolved without some understanding of the occupational history of the sites and depositional units yielding the problematic assemblages.





Mixed occupations are sometimes reliably indicated by variability in temporally sensitive artifact types. That is, sites traditionally regarded as multicomponent are often of mixed occupation and sometimes these patterns show up horizontally. At the Windy Ridge site in South Carolina, House and Wogaman (1978) were able to isolate distinct occupation areas on the basis of the distribution of temporally sensitive artifact types. In the American Southwest, Sullivan (1980; Schreiber and Sullivan 1984) has been developing promising analytic techniques for separating occupations, making use of what he calls "nonassemblage variability" as well as attributes of lithic technology. Kroll and Isaac (1984) have grappled with the difficult problem of understanding occupational patterns of early hominid sites in East Africa.





At a regional scale, occupational patterns, especially probabilities for reoccupation of sites in specific microenvironments, can contribute much to an understanding of long-term processes of behavioral change. Goodyear et al. (1979) furnish an example of this type of study in South Carolina using basic culture-historical units.





The fine-grained identification of the occupational history of sites and occupational patterns in regions is a research area of signal importance. Additional progress can be expected as we are able to use variability in cultural formation processes as evidence of different occupations. For example, Chapter 4 notes that de facto refuse depositionas in site furnitureis strongly affected by occupational patterns. Occupational variability probably also influences reuse, reclamation, and disturbance processes. Let us now turn to some of the specific processes of reclamation.





Reincorporation and Salvage





When a settlement is reoccupied by the same people who abandoned it, as in recurrent visitations, many items of de facto refuseincluding facilities and structureswill be reincorporated into the systemic inventory. For example, the Tarahumara seasonally alternate their settlements, depositing at each location cooking pots and grinding stones as de facto





Page 104





refuse to be reincorporated when the settlement is reoccupied (Pastron 1974). Extensive reincorporation should be practiced by all nonsedentary societies that create sites with recurrent occupations. Moreover, reincorporation can also be expected at sites recurrently occupied by sedentary peoples, such as resource extraction and processing localities, agricultural camps, and even archaeological field stations. Artifacts in addition to de facto refuse can be reclaimed when a settlement is reoccupied by those who abandoned it; such behaviors should be regarded as a special case of scavenging (see below).





Reoccupation can also involve the use of a place by another group; manyperhaps mostmixed occupations are of this kind. Such reoccupation occurs because certain locations have characteristics that favor their repeated use by many peoples for many purposes. A likely spot for mixed reoccupations by diverse groups is one in close proximity to a resource that occurs in limited distribution, such as a natural shelter, a reliable spring, arable land, or a location along an important trail or trade route. Ventana Cave, for example, provides shelter from the desert heat and contains a spring; it was reoccupied countless times by Paleoindian, Archaic, Hohokam, and historic Papago peoples (Haury 1950). In limited places of high ground in flood-prone areas, such as the lower Mississippi Valley, one is apt to encounter many sites formed by mixed occupations (see Schiffer and House 1975); along the edges of some river terraces there is a nearly continuous scatter of debris from many occupations. Tells of the Near East were probably reoccupied because of their defensive potential as well as the nearby exploitable resources (e.g., olive groves and building materials in abandoned structures). Indeed, because abandoned sites are resource areas, their presence may influence the settlement decisions of later peoples. DeBoer and Lathrap (1979:111) furnish an interesting case from the Shipibo-Conibo: "ancient ceramics are said to be softer and easier to pulverizeand the presence of an archaeological midden is one factor governing settlement location. The modern settlements . . . all rest upon sherd-bearing archaeological deposits."





The process of reclaiming artifacts, including structures, from occupations by earlier peoples at a site can be termed salvage. As one might expect, salvage processes act frequently on building materials. In tells, the many foundation trenches without corresponding foundations or walls testify to the presence of salvage (or some similar process). Reisner et al. (1924:40) described methods of stone robbing at the tell of Samaria:





The removal of stone in ancient times was effected by simply following down a wall the top of which was exposed, for instance Israelite walls in S7, S8, S11; or by removing a slope and its supporting wall, as in S3. In Roman and modern





Page 105





Fig. 5.2.

At Nottingham Castle, England, variability in wall stones indicates

the salvage of wall remnants and building materials from earlier castles.





times, besides these methods, a large pit was sometimes dug through to a lower stratum, and all the stones over a considerable area removed down to rock, as in H.S. 1-3.





Needless to say, the disturbance effects of salvage for building materials are often considerable (see Chapter 6).





Shell middens are a type of archaeological deposit that is frequently quarried; Ceci (1984) provides a depressing account of the worldwide uses of shell midden material for purposes ranging from paving roads to feeding poultry.





Another common pattern is for ancient walls to be used as a part of new structures. In modern Peru, one can find the massive, closely fitted stones of Inca walls forming the base of colonial buildings. Similarly, in England a succession of Nottingham castles was built with salvaged wall stubs and earlier building materials (Fig. 5.2).





Salvage of buildings and other facilities sometimes requires only minor refurbishing. At Kourion in Cyprus, a Roman amphitheatre has been reclaimed and restored, and today it hosts concerts by the sea. Another dramatic example of this process took place in the Phoenix basin of





Page 106





southern Arizona. Hohokam farmers built many hundreds of miles of irrigation canals between about A.D. 700 and 1400, supporting a thriving society, but in the fifteenth century they totally abandoned the area. When settlers reoccupied Phoenix in the late 1800s, they found the remains of the Hohokam irrigation system; some of the canals were still serviceable and formed the nucleus of a new network. In the Near East, previously abandoned terraces have been incorporated into new field systems. The salvage of long-abandoned agricultural features still occurs in many parts of the world, as people attempt to unlock the secrets of agricultural technologies that were successful in marginal areas.





Reoccupation, especially as mixed occupations by different groups, does not necessarily entail salvage. In some cases, earlier debris might provide little in the way of usable resources for later occupants; deposits may be disturbed, but little if any salvage takes place. For example, Anasazi cliff dwellings such as Antelope House (Rock and Morris 1975) are sometimes reoccupied without substantial salvage by Navajos who use the places as sheep corrals. And modern cities in the American sunbelt sprawl indifferently over prehistoric and historic sites. Indeed, much work in urban archaeology has shown the remarkable extent to which earlier deposits in cities remain reasonably intact (Staski 1982). In addition, when cultural deposits are separated by noncultural sediments, the probability of salvage is greatly reduced.





Scavenging





Accumulations of previously deposited artifacts in a settlement are frequently exploited by that settlement's inhabitants. The generic term for such behavior is scavenging. One of the first ethnoarchaeological accounts of scavenging was furnished by Ascher (1968) who, in an important and influential article, briefly described how the Seri Indians of Sonora, Mexico, reclaimed deposited items. He comments that





serviceable material gradually catches up with the movement of the community, leaving in its wake rock, fishbone, and scraps of rubber and metal too small to be of use. In general, those materials that are adaptable, or potentially adaptable, tend to. . . accumulate in the more recent areas of the community (Ascher 1968:51).





Ascher (1968) attributes this great intensity of scavenging and cycling of materials to the general conditions of environmental scarcity under which the Seri live. The same economic factors that promote reuse evidently foster reclamation as well (see Chapter 3).





It should be noted that ''environment" must also include the national





Page 107





and world systems into which the Seri and so many other marginal groups are tenuously integrated. Societies on the fringes of the world system, which include many Third World peoples as well as poorer classes in industrial states, are avid reusers and reclaimers (Staski and Wilk 1984). These phenomena are not new nor are they limited to the modern world. Nevertheless, the great social inequality present in many of today's nationstates along with vast amounts of available materials perhaps promote reuse and reclamation on an unprecedented scale. For example, in Third World nations, entire settlements are sometimes constructed of reclaimed materials. In Mexico City, hundreds of people daily retrieve usable materials from the municipal dump. In attenuated form, such processes can be expected in the past settlements archaeologists excavate.





It is useful to distinguish several varieties of scavenging, depending on the types of deposit that are exploited. The secondary refuse areas of a settlement provide countless opportunities for gleaning, the reclamation of discarded items. Gleaning is especially likely in village settlements where extensive use is made of provisional refuse areas. Refuse is most likely allowed to remain in proximity to activity areas so as to facilitate gleaning as part of an overall resource-use strategy. For example, the Coxoh Maya communities studied by Hayden and Cannon (1983:131) made extensive use of provisional refuse areas within tofts:





Since almost all implements in sedentary communities are curated and represent some significant investment of time, labor, or money, broken artifacts of all kinds tend to be kept around for varying lengths of time in the event that the fragments might still be useful for something. The greater the potential future value, the longer it is kept.





In other settlements, secondary refuse areas provide opportunities for gleaners, especially if the material is reasonably dispersed. Even large mounds of refuse are subject to gleaning. In Tucson, gleaners dig for salable materials in old dumps along the Santa Cruz River.





Opportunities for gleaning are sometimes provided by waste products discarded by specialized workshops. An intriguing example of this process comes from Brandon, England, the town where generations of craftsmen have chipped gun flints. The exhausted cores from this activity have been extensively gleaned by masons and used as a building material (Gould 1981:271). Indeed, "The Flintknappers," a famous pub in Brandon that is a favorite haunt of visiting archaeologists, has walls made partly of flint cores.





The Hohokam and Maya used secondary refuse as fill for platform mounds and temples, thus making the materials inaccessible to gleaning. In both societies, gleaning was probably practiced in provisional refuse





Page 108





areas. Similarly, when refuse is thrown into abandoned rooms, as happened in most prehistoric pueblos occupied for several decades or longer, the materials in such deposits cannot be gleaned easily; doorways to the abandoned rooms are usually closed up with masonry, leaving only a roof entrance. A study at the Joint site revealed differences in the use-intensity of chipped-stone materials between secondary refuse in abandoned rooms and those in extramural areas (Schiffer 1976a:170-171). Perhaps scavenging of stone from the extramural dumps contributed to the more intensive use of artifacts discarded in the rooms. Although other explanations might account for these patterns, the study did indicate that stone artifacts were extensively used and reused before they were committed to the oblivion of disposal in abandoned rooms.





Deliberate disposal of refuse in pits, old wells, and landfills also reduces the availability of artifacts for gleaning. Indeed, many historic wells reveal the remarkably clear-cut stratification that is found only in undisturbed deposits. Again, though, the waste streams leading to pit and well discard might have included provisional refuse where gleaning did take place. Studies of the restorability of glass and ceramic artifacts (Chapter 10) provide the best line of evidence for assessing the extent that materials in a deposit had been subjected to gleaning (and reuse). For example, highly restorable vessels indicate a short and direct waste stream, unencumbered by material conservation processes (Hill 1982). Today, secondary refuse in major U.S. cities is quickly covered by earth in sanitary landfills, thereby sealing in glass, metal, and other materials that could be readily reclaimed. Nonetheless, increases in the costs of natural gas and petroleum have led to some rather specialized instances of reclamation from materials discarded in sanitary landfills. For example, wells have been sunk to extract methane gas produced by the decay of organic matter.





Although the limited research on gleaning has not yet provided general principles, several working hypotheses can be offered to orient future research. As Ascher (1968) and Stanislawski (1969b) have noted, the overall intensity of material conservation processes, of which gleaning is a major strategy, should be a function of a community's relative wealth and access to resources. In addition, if gleaning does take place regularly, one would expect it to be facilitated by the use of toft disposal or provisional discard areas (Siegel and Roe 1984). Moreover, gleaning will occur to some extent in any settlement where discarded items are readily accessible.





Artifacts laid down by other processes of cultural deposition are in some cases assiduously scavenged. Scavenging of de facto refuse, especially parts of structures, is a widespread and reasonably predictable process that has been documented repeatedly in ethnoarchaeological, historical, and archaeological settings. Lange and Rydberg (1972:422), for





Page 109





example, note that the abandoned house they studied in Costa Rica "was being slowly dismantled by the neighbors for firewood."





Several variables influence the likelihood that particular artifacts of de facto refuse will be scavenged. For example, all other variables being constant, intact artifacts and those with greater remnant uselives have a higher probability of being scavenged. One also expects replacement cost to directly influence scavenging probabilities. Although artifact size and weight most likely have an effect on scavenging probabilities, large and heavy items with great potential utility are usually scavenged.





Stone, wood, and metal are the construction materials most amenable to scavenging, but other components, including glass and even earth, are at times reclaimed. The Hohokam of Snaketown, for example, frequently built a hard floor for their pithouses out of a calcareous material known as caliche. Caliche was quarried, ground up, and mixed with water in pits; after hardening it assumed the character of a hard plaster. The many floor fragments found at Snaketown testify to the scavenging of this eminently reworkable material from abandoned houses (Seymour and Schiffer 1987).





The scavenging of construction material is closely related to factors of availability, demand, and potential utility of the material. Some materials, like wood and stone, have many possible uses, and are more likely to be scavenged (see Ahlstrom et al. 1978). Concrete, on the other hand, has few prospects for use and, even today, rarely finds its way back into systemic context.





Both availability and demand are strongly influenced by patterns of settlement growth and decline. A structure abandoned while a settlement is still large or growing will, if the material is suitable, be scavenged. On the other hand, in a settlement with a rapidly dwindling population, availability of building materials will probably exceed the demand, leaving many abandoned structures reasonably intact. For example, rapid boom-and-bust cycles in metals markets created many ghost towns in the western United States that contain unscavenged structures (Fig. 5.3). Settlements that have intact structures could have undergone a very rapid growth and, perhaps, an equally rapid decline.





Scavenging of portable artifacts of de facto refuse from abandoned structures and tofts is probably common, but ethnoarchaeological observations of this process are sparse. As in the case of construction materials, one would expect the overall occurrence of this process to be a function of supply and demand. In large or growing settlements, there is probably sufficient demand to promote scavenging of any portable artifacts left as de facto refuse. Under these conditions, however, lateral cycling may lead to little de facto refuse in the first place. One important exception, of course, is furnished by ritual abandoment. Artifacts deposited in such





Page 110





Fig. 5.3.

Abandoned structure, largely unscavenged, in the "ghost town" of Sneffels, Colorado.





structures make an irresistable target for the scavenger, but the social costs may be high. Ritually abandoned structures are usually left alone initially, but scavenging may eventually occur if the structure remains somewhat intact and accessible. Without ritual abandonment, portable artifacts having any remnant uselife or potential for use as raw materials are scavenged.





As implied above, ritual deposits have a much reduced probability of being scavenged, at least within the first years or even decades of their placement. Perhaps the most consistent and conspicuous example of this phenomenon is burials. As is well known, most archaeological sites (occupied long enough to have had deaths) contain burials, the majority of which are apparently unscavenged. The sanctity of sepulture is a commonly held belief that has a clear and direct influence on the formation of the archaeological record. However, the passage of time, material rewards, and even changes in political and belief systems are sometimes sufficient to outweigh the threat of social sanctions. One fascinating case of scavenging of graves is described by Pyddoke (1961:110):





Page 111





At Lindholm, in Denmark, Viking settlers used to outline graves with stones set into the ground in curved rows to resemble the shapes of ships, but in places only 'ghosts' of these ship graves show up; for when the stones were stolen, no doubt to surround a later burial, sand blew into the sockets, which now survive as white patches in darker soil.





The ancient Egyptians and Mayans themselves eventually scavenged many tombs, leaving them vacant. That is why the discovery in 1922 of King Tutankhamen's tomb was so sensational: it was the only unlooted Pharaoh's tomb in Egypt's Valley of the Kings. Most complex societies, in fact, probably experience some grave robbing and looting.





Scavenging and Displaced Refuse





As noted previously, deposits themselves are sometimes reclaimed and used for construction fill or other purposes. This process may be regarded as a specialized kind of scavenging. South (1977:297) refers to such materials as "displaced refuse," although his concept, which allows for noncultural transport, is somewhat broader. It should be noted that when previously deposited artifacts are merely moved and not used for some purpose, as in trampling and plowing, the process is properly considered as an instance of disturbance (see Chapter 6).





Although obvious cases, such as Maya temples that incorporate refuse fill, come readily to mind, the process of reclaimingand displacing refuse deposits in this manner is probably very widespread but, unlike Maya temples, the traces are not quite as clearcut. In an ethnoarchaeological account of a village in Western Iran, Watson (1979:119) observed that adobe for construction was quarried in "the area around the village, which is littered with various kinds of trash," thus structure walls contain refuse. She also notes that in some places in the Near East, a source of clean dirt is sought for construction. Deal (1985:266) reports that sherds, and presumably other refuse, are included in clay used for wall construction in several Highland Maya settlements (for an African case, see McIntosh 1974). It may be supposed that whenever earth is used in the construction and maintenance of buildings, there is a likelihood of deliberate and inadvertent refuse reclamation. Throughout the temperate zone, where earth-wall and earth-loaded dwellings were commonly constructed, one could seek traces of reclaimed and displaced refuse (Fig. 5.4, Fig. 9.3).





In the Mogollon and Anasazi regions of the American Southwest, true pithouse dwellings were widely used for habitation prior to about A.D. 800-900. These structures were semisubterranean and had wooden superstructures with earth loading. The earth placed initially on the wooden framework was probably derived from the excavation of the pit itself





Page 112





Fig. 5.4.

Reclaimed sherds in a mudbrick wall,

Episcopi Village, Cyprus.





(Glennie and Lipe 1984). Clearly, the longer a settlement was occupied, the more likely it was for a new pithouse to be placed in an area containing refuse deposits; thus, the latter materials may have been incorporated into the structure itself. In addition, some pithouse floors were quite shallow, and their excavation would have provided insufficient material for loading the structure. In that case, nearby refuse deposits, if available, might have been quarried. Because of erosion, repair of the earth covering would have been performed frequently. Thus, in a settlement occupied for at least a few years, it is very likely that earth used for repair contained previously deposited artifacts. Moreover, I believe that refuse would have been deliberately sought for incorporation into the earth covering of pithouses; the sherds and other materialsorganic and inorganic might have strengthened the earth and improved its erosion resistance.





This scenario can explain some puzzling aspects of the artifact inventories of pithouses. Pithouse "fills," the materials found above the floors, nearly always contain artifacts, even when the abandoned structures were not used as secondary refuse receptacles. Although reassembly of such fill materials is not normally carried out, there is a common pattern of a few sherds representing each of a number of types, suggesting that vessels are very fragmentary, and not likely to be de facto refuse from the





Page 113





floor or roof (Schiffer 1983). These artifacts are readily accounted for by the refuse reclamation hypothesis for pithouse construction and maintenance. If this process frequently contributed to pithouse artifact contents, as seems likely, then the analytical procedures Southwestern archaeologists use for behavioral inferenceincluding dating of pithouseswill have to be substantially revised.





The extent of earth loading of structures and the likely operation of this refuse reclamation process is not widely enough appreciated. For example, Southwestern pueblos are earth loaded, the dirt providing a layer of insulation and a surface for activity performance. Obviously, in some instances, pueblo room-fill contents might be influenced by reclaimed refuse incorporated into the roof. Perhaps many of the artifacts usually attributed to roof activities (Wilcox 1975) or to refuse of an unknown nature deposited on the roof (Schiffer 1976a:139) were actually reclaimed refuse used in the roof. In future studies of pueblos, archaeologists should strive to identify the formation processes of the ubiquitous sherds that occur in room fills (see Chapters 10 and 12) before they are used as evidence for various inferences.





Reclaimed refuse also finds other uses in settlements, for example as ''landscaping, erosion control, and filling of depressions such as old wells, privy holes, cellar holes, and construction trenches" (South 1977:298). At times, abandoned structures are razed and the debris leveled to serve as a surface for new construction and other activities (for interesting historic cases, see Faulkner [1982] and White and Kardulias [1985]). In prehistoric sites, one is apt to find reclaimed refuse used for leveling grades and filling in abandoned pits. Note that the process of using reclaimed refuse for filling in depressions and pits differs from the use of these features as initial discard locations. It should be relatively easy to distinguish between the two in-filling processes by observing various characteristics of the artifacts and deposits, such as stratification and artifact condition (see Chapters 8 and 10).





The use of reclaimed refuse for these purposes depends, of course, on the availability of refuse and on the need for filling in depressions and pits. In settlements occupied for a few years or more, one would expect both conditions to be met, unless discarded materials are inaccessible (as in wells and landfills).





Finally, reclaimed refuse may be applied to agricultural fields. This use of discarded materials (without reclamation) has already been mentioned in Chapter 4. But it is necessary to raise the possibility that reclaimed refuse can be employed in the same manner. Sullivan (1984:96) suggests that a sherd-and-lithic scatter near Flagstaff, Arizona, may have been a field to which refuse was applied as fertilizer. It is possible that many other problematic sherd-and-lithic scatters, so ubiquitous in the South-





Page 114





west, were formed by similar discard and reclamation processes in agricultural fields (for related cases, see Wilkinson [1982] and Roberts and Barrett [1984]).





The scavenging and displacement of previously deposited refuse (and any subsequent disturbances) lead to new deposits of a complex, "mixed" character. Materials used and deposited originally at vastly different points in time can come to be associated in such deposits. For a thoughtful treatment of the chronological implications of these processes, see Crummy and Terry (1979).





Collecting and Pothunting





Scavenging activities, by definition, are carried out by the inhabitants of the settlement from which materials in archaeological context are reclaimed. Many other processes result in the immediate transfer of materials from an archaeological site to an occupied settlement elsewhere. Collecting processes are those that involve the disturbance, removal, and transport of surface materials; pothunting refers to the disturbance, reclamation, and transport of subsurface materials.





There are two important reasons for distinguishing between intrasite reclamation processes (e.g., scavenging) and intersite processes (e.g., collecting and pothunting). The first is that collecting and pothunting, like curate behavior, affect the formation processes of two sites, and thus have a very different scale of impacts. Secondly, intrasite processes generally have different specific effects because they operate with no transportation constraints; thus, virtually any objectregardless of mass can be scavenged. On the other hand, before the development and widespread adoption of wheeled transport, intersite processes were generally hindered. Pyddoke (1961:110) provides a commentary on this point:





There are indeed historical records of the demolition of the Cathedral at Old Sarum and the use of the materials in the building of a new one in the early thirteenth century at Salisbury. But it was not until the introduction of the horse-drawn cart that any large-scale robbing of materials from one building for the construction of another at any distance could even be considered.





In societies where transportation was limited to what people could carry, collecting and pothunting of large or heavy objects was probably constrained.





Today, collecting and pothunting are prevalent in the United States and other countries where archaeological resources are poorly protected by laws or enforcement policies. These activities and their deleterious impacts on sites and monuments have been documented extensively in the ar-





Page 115





chaeological literature during the 1970s and 1980s. In many Third World countries, cadres of professional looters make a living by sale of their booty. Even in the United States one finds professional pothunters, many of whom use power equipment, thereby retrieving artifacts (and inflicting damage) on a scale never before encountered. Regrettably, the extent of commercial pothunting has increased in the past two decades.





The principal cause of commercial collecting and pothunting is the demand for antiquities in the developed, capitalist countries, where archaeological artifacts serve socio-functions and ideo-functions, primarily for members of the upper classes. Thus, most objects reclaimed by these processes, which are often judged to have artistic merit, reside in the collections of private individuals. Eventually, such collections make their way through lateral cycling into the holdings of less scrupulous U.S. and Western European museumsthose not abiding by international agreements that prohibit acquisition of undocumented, often illegally obtained collections. In this manner some museums do contribute indirectly to the processes of collecting and pothunting. On the other hand, museums in the Third World countries can perform a valuable service by intercepting these collections before they are exported and dispersed.





In prior decades, museum demands for displayable specimens caused great damage to the archaeological record, and helped to train generations of pothunters. In the American Southwest between the 1880s and early decades of this century, a seemingly endless stream of freight cars loaded with poorly documented or undocumented whole pots made their way to museums, mostly in the eastern United States. During that period, the distinction between archaeological recovery and pothunting was not as clear as it is now; many "scientific" expeditions secured collections of artifacts unencumbered by even modest records.





Much pothunting and collecting has been carried out by hobbyists seeking personal collections of artifacts. These behaviors are not stimulated by demands of the international antiquities trade. Most amateur pothunters do not consider their activities to be harmful or destructive; instead, many regard "relic" collecting as a proper avocation for rural folk. These people often voice the argument that the artifacts they retrieve stay within the local community, in contrast to the collections of professional archaeologists that are taken to a distant museum, never to be seen again by residents. Hobbyist pothunters usually work in restricted territories, often on their own land or that of their friends and neighbors, and tend to visit the same sites repeatedly. Sometimes hobbyist collectors and pothunters make the transition to amateur archaeologist, contributing data and analyses to the archaeological literature.





Although the actions of unmechanized, hobbyist collectors and pothunters follow reasonably predictable patterns (see Claassen 1975), these





Page 116





are apt to vary from region to region. In the Soutwest, large, conspicious ruins are exploited, especially those near roads. Lightfoot (1978) and Francis (1978) have shown that proximity to roads and vegetation density seem to influence the severity of surface collecting; for example, sites closer to roads have lower artifact densities and smaller sherds. These regularities, it should be noted, are very gross; one can find many small, relatively inaccessible sites in the Southwest that show much evidence of collecting and pothunting. Nevertheless, the experience of cultural resource management archaeologists demonstrates that when sites are made more accessible as a result of new roads, rates of collecting and pothunting rise perceptibly (Schiffer and Gumerman 1977:295).





As is well known, collectors and pothunters ''go for the goodies"; for example, decorated pottery and formally made tools, such as projectile points, are more likely to be removed than undecorated pottery and debitage or casual tools (F. Plog 1981:138). In the Southwest, manos and metates are also collected. Although collectors and pothunters seek goodies, the definition of what constitutes a "keeper" is highly relative; and what is collected depends in part on what is available. Under conditions of abundance, only whole pots are apt to be saved; in contrast, at a severely depleted site, small plainware sherds are removed. Not uncommonly, the pothunter will leave behind a collection of sherds near a pothole after discovering whole vessels. Moreover, collectors and pothuntersunlike scavengersremove broken artifacts and those lacking any remnant uselife.





The behavior of collectors is at times influenced by artifact size. Larger artifacts have a greater probability of protruding through the surface (House and Schiffer 1975; Baker 1978), thus becoming susceptible to collecting behavior and other processes (Lewarch and O'Brien 1981a). On the other hand, collectors are sometimes on foot and cannot remove large artifacts.





Recurrent collecting badly biases the surface remains at a site, especially depleting the artifacts, such as projectile points and decorated sherds, that archaeologists use for chronological control. In severely collected sites, such as many "protected" by inclusion in national monuments, the surface remains from site to site become undesirably monotonous: a few small, undecorated sherds and lithic flakes.





Obviously, the cumulative impacts of collecting and pothunting are influenced by the size and depth of site deposits. On the one hand, the absolute quantity of artifacts removed from a large, deep site is potentially greater than that taken from a small surface scatter. On the other hand, the total effects of artifact removal can be somewhat larger at smaller, more surficial sites. The severest artifact drains occur at shallow sites subjected to plowing. This latter activity renews the surface by bringing





Page 117





up formerly buried artifacts, making them visible to collectors. Persistent collecting at such sites leaves behind a biased and depleted artifact inventory.





Pothunters know that whole and restorable pots, as well as other goodies, are to be found in burials, and they concentrate on finding those deposits. In the southeastern United States where the soil is usually damp, pothunters often use long metal probes to feel for human remains and grave goods. A proficient prober can locate and remove burial pottery quite quickly. In the American Southwest, cemetery areas are sought in extramural areas of pueblos. When these deposits have been sufficiently despoiled, pothunters systematically excavate rooms, seeking de facto refuse and subfloor burials. For example, in the late 1960s, a pothunter using the published map of Carter Ranch Pueblo (Martin et al. 1964) methodically continued the excavations.





In view of the widespread occurrence of collecting and pothunting, archaeologists need to consider the possible effects of these processes on sites they are investigating. If pothunting took place decades or even a century ago, the traces might be quite subtle or might be attributed inadvertently to other processes. It is surprising that so few archaeologists have invoked pothunting to explain aspects of the archaeological record. A rare example is provided by James Ford's work at the Menard site in Arkansas. In comparing the quantity of burial goods per burial in his excavation sample with that obtained from the same site in 1908 by C. B. Moore, Ford found a significant increase in the number of burials without grave goods. He attributed this discrepancy to pothunting that occurred in the interim (Ford 1961a:156).





Recognizing the effects of recent pothunting is somewhat easier. Indeed, many archaeologists have eschewed the excavation of obviously pothunted sites in the often mistaken belief that few intact deposits remain. In most cases, however, the spoil heaps of unmechanized pothunting usually cover untouched deposits. One should make the best out of a bad situation by taking advantage of pothunters' labor; much can be learned by simply facing up the sidewalls of extant holes and trenches.





However distasteful it may seem, archaeologists should treat the artifact collections of hobbyists as an important archaeological resource (Charles 1983; Morse 1973). Most hobbyists willingly share information with archaeologists and can recount where many specific objects were obtained. When possible, such collections should be photographed. A few days spent perusing the collections of local hobbyists will provide a gross outline of an unstudied area's occupational history and may call attention to potentially significant research problems (Charles 1983). Familiarity with local hobbyists will also make it possible to assess much of the unseen damage produced by collecting. Indeed, one can scarcely place





Page 118





much confidence in the findings of a regional survey that does not strive to document and take into account the occurrence of collecting and pothunting (see Nunley and Hester 1975). Finally, study of hobbyist collections will provide an empirical basis for refining our mostly impressionistic generalizations about collecting and pothunting processes.





It is convenient for archaeologists to believe that collecting and pothunting are behaviors strictly carried out in or stimulated by modem, complex societies. This facile belief is false. Pothunting or "early archaeology" has been documented as far back as Roman times and may have been practiced occasionally in the ancient Near East. The severity of these practices is not easily ascertained.





Persons in simpler societies do little pothunting, but collecting behavior has been recorded ethnoarchaeologically and is surprisingly common. Gould et al. (1971:163) report that Australian Aborigines in the Western Desert collect and use stone tools from ancient sites. In Costa Rica, prehistoric metates are collected and then sold for household use (Lange and Rydberg 1972:430-431). Stanislawski (1978:222, 1969b) has assembled various references to collecting behavior by Indians in the American Southwest. The Hopi, among others, collect sherds from prehistoric sites for various purposes. For example,





at least six of the women interviewed from both Hopi and Tewa villages said that they collected ancient potsherds from local ruins.... They then copied the designs of these potsherds directly onto their own pottery, or first into a book, and then onto their new pottery pieces.... In addition, some of the women also excavated for complete pots in the nearby ruins, and used these as design guides (Stanislawski 1969b:13).





The collection of potsherds for use as temper is apparently very widespread (Stanislawski 1978:222). Home (1983:18) describes how villagers in Baghestan collected "a miscellany of ground stone tools" from archaeological sites, which were used in a variety of tasks. Each household had such tools, and most apparently were collected (for a Maya case, see Deal 1985). Kelley (1984) has found archaeological evidence, supported by informants, that Navajo collected building stone from Anasazi sites for use in sweathouses. In the process of obtaining the stone with shovel and pickup, the Navajo also acquired and deposited near their sweatlodges a number of Anasazi sherds. The Navajo are also reported to collect prehistoric chipped-stone artifacts (Kent 1984:160-161).





Collected objects sometimes serve socio- and ideo-functions. Weigand (1970) reported the ceremonial use and ritual redeposition by the Huichol of a fluted point that had been collected. The Zuni use collected projectile





Page 119





points as fetishes, and turquoise is avidly collected from prehistoric ruins by the Western Apache.





It is not surprising that modern groups in addition to archaeologists and pothunters view archaeological sites as resources. One can expect that artifact collecting was also practiced in prehistory. Evidence to support this claim is not difficult to come by. In many prehistoric pueblos in the American Southwest, archaeologists have found examples of Archaic and Basketmaker points (Martin et al. 1964, 1967). The lack of suitable debitage and well-developed patinas sometimes strongly support the collecting hypothesis. DeBoer (1983:23-24) provides additional examples of aboriginal collecting behavior and argues that they should be "viewed as the collection of curios [rather] than the utilitarian reuse of ancient artifacts." He suggests that the "salience" of an objectits ability to stand out as unique and interestingaffects its probability of being collected (DeBoer 1983:23). On the other hand, Simms (1983) has presented evidence that late prehistoric inhabitants in western Utah collected and reused grinding stones from Archaic sites. Meighan (1980) documented the collecting of structural wood from the Guatacondo site in the Atacama Desert of northern Chile. It is apparent that collected materials can perform a variety of symbolic and utilitarian functions.





The possibility that prehistoric peoples engaged in collecting behavior has the potential to resolve some long-standing puzzles in the Southwest. For many decades, Southwestern archaeologists believed that trade in ceramics was not especially widespread. Often a small number of clearly foreign sherds, such as Hohokam sherds in Mogollon sites, would be regarded as "intrusives" or "trade sherds." These pieces seldom made up more than a few percent of the ceramic assemblage, and fit comfortably with the prevailing view that prehistoric communities were largely self-sufficient. Although Shepard (1942) cast doubt on this view with petrographic analyses, showing in one instance that the majority of pottery at a pueblo had been manufactured elsewhere, only in the past decade have archaeologists accepted the fact of widespread trade in ceramics (see, e.g., S. Plog 1980). It is now time to reevaluate the behavioral significance of the sherds earlier thought to be traded. It is my impression that many of these sherds are small and often heavily abraded. The pottery types represented by those sherds occur rarely as de facto refuse or in burials, and the sherds often appear as isolatesone sherd of a type at an extensively excavated site. For example, at Ventana Cave, which was almost completely excavated, very small numbers of some Hohokam ceramic types were recovered (Haury 1950). It may be time to reconsider the hypothesis, originally advanced by Gladwin (1942, 1948), that such sherds could have been collected. If so, their presence can help to document the extent of a community's geographical domainthe territory





Page 120





encompassed by its social and economic activities, in which curios were collected from sites. Because archaeologists routinely build trade models to account for foreign sherds, even those occurring in very low relative frequencies, the possibility that such sherds were collected should be studied closely.





Other Processes





The processes enumerated above scarcely exhaust the domain of reclamation. There are a host of specific activities, involving reclamation, that are not as widespread as scavenging or collecting but do have appreciable impacts on affected sites. One relatively common example is provided by deposits of discharged ship ballast formed along coasts. In one Florida ballast site, ceramic artifacts spanning two centuries indicated that gravels from the Thames River, which apparently included secondary refuse, had been obtained for ballast (Jones 1976). Useful generalizations may emerge as more work is done on some of these lesser-known processes.





Conclusion





Although the principles of reclamation remain largely unknown, it is evident that these processes areand werewidespread. In some cases, the recognition of a reclamation process, as in the collecting of earlier hunter-gatherer projectile points by sedentary farmers, is relatively straightforward. In other casesincluding the possible collecting of sherds that most archaeologists still regard as trade itemsthe pinpointing of reclamation as the responsible process is more problematic. Approaches must be devised for recognizing the traces of reclamation processes so that these processes can be taken into account in inference.





Page 121





Chapter 6

Disturbance Processes





Introduction





The archaeological record is not a safe haven for artifacts. Plowing, excavation of pits and foundations, land clearance and leveling, and a host of other disturbance processes transform materials from state to state in archaeological context. Disturbance processes are distinguished from reclamation, which they superficially resemble, by one fundamental characteristic: disturbed artifacts do not really reenter systemic context. Their locationand sometimes formare altered, but the artifacts themselves are not used. Disturbance usually results from an activity that has another purpose; artifacts and deposits just happen to be modified or moved along the way.





Thorough understanding of many disturbance processes requires one to consider not just cultural behavior but also changes in the environmental formation processes to which disturbed artifacts and deposits are subjected. For example, plowing brings upward into the plowzone artifacts previously undisturbed by plowing, some of which may be well preserved. Once in the plowzone or on the surface, however, these artifacts undergo higher rates of deterioration as the result of exposure to a greater variety of noncultural agents, such as freeze-thaw cycles and ultraviolet radiation (see Chapter 7). As a result, in the eastern United States, one sometimes finds animal bone primarily in the deposits that underlie the plowzone. Similarly, the construction and use of reservoirs make cultural materials vulnerable to the environmental processes that operate in lakes, such as wave action and waterlogging (Lenihan et al. 1981). In the present chapter, emphasis is placed on the direct disturbance





Page 122





effects of cultural behavior, but mention is also made of the environmental processes that affect disturbed artifacts and deposits.





Like reclamation processes, disturbance processes have come under closer scrutiny as a result of cultural resource management in the 1970s (Wildesen 1982). In particular, federal archaeologists have undertaken experiments to investigate the effects of various modern activitiessuch as agricultural practiceson artifacts and deposits. Although the majority of these studies remain unpublished, several works attempt to synthesize their findings (e.g., Wildesen 1982; Lewarch and O'Brien 1981a). Regrettably, little progress has been made in explaining the occurrence of various disturbance processes.





Earth-Moving Processes





Any activity that modifies the surface of the groundby moving or removing earthdisturbs previously deposited artifacts. Earth-moving processes are not confined to industrial societies, but are found in virtually every habitation settlement. For example, archaeologists have documented a seemingly endless variety of pits throughout the worldfrom cooking pits to burial pitsand many of these were excavated originally into earlier cultural deposits. Construction of houses and specialized structures often requires digging and earth moving; common examples include foundation trenches for masonry temples, pits for pithouses, and borrow areas for earthen mounds. Examples of earth-moving processes from modern society range from building a backyard swimming pool to constructing a toxic waste dump.





Although impressive earth-moving projects predate the industrial age, it is in the last two centuries that land-modification projects have disturbed the archaeological record on a grand scale. Beginning in the early nineteenth century, for example, building of canals and railroads led to substantial displacements of dirt. Mining also took its toll, as in the case of the '49ers whose hydraulic technology reshaped the landscape near many rivers in California (Fig. 6.1) and, eventually, elsewhere (Ritchie 1981). One need only examine the foundation pit of a skyscraper, the bed of a superhighway, or an earthen dam to appreciate that today's industrial activities can disturb large segments of the archaeological record. As Harris (1975, 1977) has emphasized, every time a pit or other place is found where earth has been removed, the archaeologist can be certain that the transportation of the fill material created other deposits, usually elsewhere at the site.





Artifacts displaced by earth-moving processes often contribute to deposits that exhibit "reverse" stratification. This term is an unfortunate misnomer, for it implies that the law of superposition has been suspended





Page 123





Fig. 6.1.

This bleak cultural landscape near Placerville, California,

illustrates the impacts of 19th century hydraulic mining.





in those cases. In fact, the law of superposition applies only to the order in which the deposits were laid down and not to the ages of any artifacts contained in them. Frequently, earth-moving processes do give rise to deposits whose order of deposition is not matched by the order of manufacture or use of the constituent artifacts (Drucker 1972; Matthews 1965; Medford 1972). For example, a Woodland burial mound is leveled by a farmer to make way for soybean fields; the debris is spread over an area of several acres, creating a new deposit of Woodland artifacts above the remains of a Mississippian hamlet. Such displacements of cultural material conform to the Law of Upward Migration, where upward means through time and not always vertically through space (Schiffer 1977;





Page 124





Fig. 6.2.

Archaeologist Barbara Roth surveys the mounds of backdirt left

by pothunters at Four Mile Pueblo, Taylor, Arizona (1984).





Rathje and Schiffer 1982:123). That is, disturbance of a deposit, as by digging a pit or leveling the ground, brings up previously deposited objects (usually of an earlier period of manufacture) and deposits them above later-manufactured artifacts. Pothunting is the modern earth-moving process that archaeologists are most familiar with, and it is responsible for much upward migration (Fig. 6.2).





The extent to which one can expect instances of reverse stratification in accord with the Law of Upward Migration at any site should be a function of three sets of factors: (1) the prevalence of earthmoving processes themselves, (2) the overall intensity of space use, and (3) the duration of occupation and extent of reoccupation. Thus, societies that dig many pits will produce instances of reverse stratification at high rates. Moreover, in intensively occupied settlements, such as those-like caves-whose boundaries are constrained by cultural or natural barriers, one would expect that any earthmoving processes would have a greater probability of encountering previously deposited materials. This effect is intensified in settlements with considerable longevity and in reoccupied sites.





Page 125





Fig. 6.3.

Aerial view of a portion of the large Hohokam site of Snaketown, Arizona.

Overlaps of posthole patterns as well as pithouse floors indicate that house

construction often disturbed previously deposited materials. (Photo by Helga

Teiwes; reproduced with permission of the Arizona State Museum)





In some types of sites, like caves and tells, the causal factors usually converge, producing much disturbance and upward migration (Kirkby and Kirkby 1976). The few detailed studies of caves that sought evidence for upward migration have found it (see, e.g., Matthews 1965; Rowlett and Robbins 1982; Siiriäinen 1977). In those cases, however, earthmoving is probably just one of several processes responsible for the displacements. Thoughtful discussions of tell stratification usually take note of extensive earthmoving disturbances (e.g., Reisner et al. 1924; Dever and Lance 1978). Because tells consist almost entirely of cultural debris, foundation trenches for new buildings inevitably disturb and displace earlier deposits.





The digging of many pits in open-air settlements, especially of long duration, also provides very favorable conditions for earthmoving. In the American Southwest it is not uncommon to find pithouses that have been excavated into previous deposits (and into earlier pithouses). For example, a complex pattern of house intruding house at Snaketown is shown in Figure 6.3. One can surmise that the excavated materials at Snaketown were eventually reclaimed for use in the artifical mounds (see below). Thus, whenever one finds evidence of earthmoving, the probability must be considered that both disturbance and reclamation processes were at work.





Page 126





Surficial Disturbances





Trampling





In the course of performing various activities, human movementespecially walkingdisturbs previously deposited artifacts on and near the ground surface. The best studied process of this type is known as trampling. Trampling (by people and their animals) is a ubiquitous process that can be expected in every settlement.





Because people tend to walk in patterned ways, often forming distinctive paths, one finds sharp gradients in tramplingespecially in extramural areas. For example, within a short distance, paths and off-path zones usually vary greatly in their extent of trampling (Wilk and Schiffer 1979).





The effects of trampling depend upon (1) the occurrence of cultural materials on the ground, (2) the intensity of trampling, and (3) the nature of the surface sediments. Factors 1 and 2 are not independent, and their influences are reciprocal. In the most heavily used areas, there should be few deposited artifacts (as primary and loss refuse) available for trampling; nevertheless, any such artifacts will be heavily trampled. In places of considerable deposition, such as secondary refuse areas, one would expect a low intensity of trampling. Areas that are intermediate in cultural deposition and in use intensity should exhibit considerable variability in trampling. For example, heavily traveled parts of provisional discard areas are trampled, whereas other parts are not.





The nature of the surface or substrate strongly influences the specific effects of trampling. Surfaces vary in their resistance to an applied force, such as a foot or penetrating object; some are hard and rigid, others are soft and penetrable. This property, termed penetrability (Schiffer 1983:690), is a product of many factors, including sizes and shapes of sedimentary particles, moisture content, chemical constituents, and vegetation. The cultural components of a sediment also contribute to its penetrability; for example, penetrability is reduced by the presence of much lithic or ceramic debris. Deal (1985) notes that penetrability varies seasonally in extramural areas: high in the wet season, low in the dry season.





The specific effects of trampling on the form and location of objects are determined primarily by penetrability, intensity of trampling, depth of artifacts below surface, and by properties of the objects themselves (Villa and Courtin 1983; Gifford-Gonzalez et al. 1985). Several experiments have contributed to an understanding of some of these effects.





In one study, Stockton (1973) was able to demonstrate that trampled artifacts are displaced vertically in the sandy deposit of an artificial site. His results, obtained from excavating six arbitrary levels containing glass that were trampled for a day, indicate that large objects tend to be dis-





Page 127





placed upward whereas small objects are pressed downward (as much as 16 cm). Explanations for these effects were offered in terms of the horizontal (scuffage) and vertical (treadage) actions of the human foot during walking (Stockton 1973:116-117). Villa and Courtin (1983) considered a wider range of artifacts over a longer time period in a slightly less penetrable substrate. In these experiments, objects moved both upward and downward, with likelihood of movement attenuated at initial depths greater than 2-4 cm. Vertical displacements did not exceed 7-8 cm, whereas horizontal displacements reached 85 cm. They also found that smaller artifacts (less than 50 g) are more mobile. Gifford-Gonzalez et al. (1985) report trampling experiments involving obsidian artifacts placed on the surface of two artificial sites having substrates of (1) compact sandy silt and (2) loose sand. In accord with previous findings, they documented slight downward displacements of up to 4 cm in the firmer substrate, although most pieces were displaced less than 1 cm. In the sandy site, there was a near uniform dispersal of artifacts from the surface to a depth of 10 cm.





Wilk and Schiffer (1979) observed trampled artifacts in the vicinity of paths on vacant lots. They found that larger artifacts were displaced away from paths, which tend to be low-penetrability substrates. Apparently, the mix of vertical and horizontal displacements is influenced by the penetrability of the substrate. Although Gifford- Gonzalez et al. (1985) did not specifically address this issue, their distribution maps provide support for this contention.





Lateral displacements of trampled artifacts can contribute to patterned artifact distributions that could be mistaken for activity areas. The flow of objects from areas of heavy trampling to nearby zones of low trampling sometimes forms artifact concentrations that I call woogleys, which are common along walls of structures (inside and outside) and in proximity to features such as fences and paths. In such locations woogleys form fringes (Wilk and Schiffer 1979), but the latter can be created by other processes, such as primary refuse deposition, or may be a composite of several processes. Thus, by itself, a fringe does not necessarily indicate a woogley. Woogleys also occur in modern road intersections. In certain ''dead'' spots, often in the center of the intersection, lost and discarded items accumulate that have been laterally displaced by automobile traffic. Because woogleys appear archaeologically as artifact concentrations, they can be discovered by most analytical techniques designed to find activity-related artifact clusters. Clearly, one must also examine the formal properties of artifacts in order to ascertain the formation processes of each cluster (see Chapter 10). In places where woogleys are not apt to form, such as open areas, generalized trampling contributes to a dispersal of artifacts (Ascher 1968; Stevenson 1985).





Page 128





Fig. 6.4.

Sandy "surfaces" in very arid places create occupation zones,

such as this extramural activity in Tulor Ayllu, Chile.





Vertical displacements, caused by variability in penetrability, also have implications for spatial analysis. Penetrability varies over the surface of any site owing to the differential contributions of cultural and noncultural materials to substrate composition. Moreover, in few settlements is penetrability apt to be uniformly low. Thus, the concept of occupation surface should be replaced by that of occupation zone (Schiffer 1977; Gifford 1978); the greater the penetrability at a location, the thicker the occupation zone (Fig. 6.4).





The formal properties of trampled artifacts are also modified. For example, Mobley (1982:84) found that surface lithic artifacts at a site crossed by a trail show "a higher incidence of fresh breaks and fresh retouch" (for a similar archaeological study, see Bouey [1979]). Tringham et al. (1974) demonstrated experimentally that trampling results in the detachment of small flakes from the edges of chipped-stone tools, but the placement of





Page 129





scars exhibits less patterning than those produced by tool use (see also Clark and Kurashina 1981:312-313; Flenniken and Haggarty 1979; Gifford-Gonzalez et al. 1985). Keeley (1980:35) notes that trampled lithics are characterized by certain microflake types. Trampling also produces randomly oriented striations on prominent surfaces of lithic, glass, and ceramic artifacts (Keeley 1980:35; Knudson 1979; Flenniken and Haggarty 1979), causes the breakage of sherds and other frangible materials such as shell (Muckle 1985), and can even lead to spiral fractures in bone (Binford 1981b:77-80; Myers et al. 1980). Many formal traces of trampling are quite distinctive and should permit unambiguous identification of trampled deposits and deposits containing trampled artifacts. Wilk and Schiffer (1979) suggest that penetrable surfaces reduce trampling damage (see also Muckle 1985). However, Gifford-Gonzalez et al. (1985) found that such effects might be mediated by artifact size. Moreover, they suggest that there could be greater damage in sandy substrates because artifacts are more likely to come in contact with each other.





Although size reduction of frangible artifacts is an expectable result of trampling, the process does not continue indefinitely. For example, Justice (cited by Pyszczyk 1984:74) found in a study of clay pipe fragmentation that size reduction ceases after a certain point; stable sizes (and thus shapes) are apparently produced that resist further breakage.





Finally, it should be noted that trampling is one of many processes that can affect the penetrability or compaction of sediments (see also Chapter 8). Wildesen (1982:63-64) has summarized various compaction studies and noted the many variables that affect the process. Heavy foot traffic demonstrably increases the density of sediments, but the density seems to stabilize after several years. Denser sediments usually show reduced penetrability. Specific effects of compaction vary with "soil moisture, initial bulk density, and soil texture" (Wildesen 1982:63). Gifford-Gonzalez et al. (1985) found that extensive trampling can sometimes create a shallow, less compact zone in already firm substrates.





Plowing





Today, various cultivation practices are gradually altering a significant portion of the archaeological record throughout the world. In some areas of intensive agriculture, nearly every site has been plowed, usually many times. In documenting the massive effects of modern agriculture on sites, archaeologists sometimes lose sight of the great antiquity of many cultivation practices and overlook the impacts of cultivation in nonstate societies. In many nonindustrial societies people do cultivate previously occupied areas. For example, Heider (1967) reports that the Dani of Highland New Guinea put gardens into former habitation areas, disturbing





Page 130





Fig. 6.5.

Shell middens, North Island, New Zealand. a. no evidence of major cultural

disturbance; b. extensive cultural disturbance by Moari cultivation.





cultural deposits. The Maori also sometimes gardened in earlier deposits; in the case of the field illustrated in Fig. 6.5b, the cultivation had disturbed a shell midden.





In the early literature of cultural resource management, many archaeologists offered sweeping generalizations about the impacts of various cultivation practices on sites. In an effort to remedy the dearth of actual knowledge about these processes, a period of observation and experimentation soon followed. It has become clear that agricultural activities and their impacts on sites are quite varied. This chapter cannot present a detailed account of agricultural practices and their effects but concentrates on outlining a few of the more general principles.





The most important variable in cultivation is the intensity with which the field is prepared for planting. The extremes in this process are striking. On the one hand, after burning the cleared vegetation, many slashand-burn horticulturists simply dig a small hole to receive the seeds. On the other hand, in many heavily farmed areas of the United States,





Page 131





monstrous tractors pull plows that reach 30 cm below the surface. In the former instance, the deposits are disturbed in limited areas to limited depths; in the latter case, the top 30 cm of sediment is churned throughout the entire field.





Although the effects of mechanical tillage are not understood in detail, some overall patterns are well established. Like trampling, both discing and plowing have a size-sorting effect. Generally, larger objects are more likely to be brought to the surface and are less likely to be reincorporated into the deposit.





In one ambitious series of experiments Lewarch and O'Brien (1981b) attempted to evaluate a number of propositions about tillage effects by plowing artificial sites. The investigators placed real lithic artifacts into several patterned distributions and subjected them to plowing. Three size classes of lithic artifacts were used (more than 1", 1/2-1", and less than 1/2"), which permitted "size effects'' (Baker 1978) to be monitored. As expected, recovery percentages after plowing showed a steep fall-off with decreasing artifact size: 22.2, 8.6, and 3.9 percent (Lewarch and O'Brien 1981b:18). Regrettably, this experiment involved only a small number of passes with the disc, precluding the discovery of long-term recovery patterns.





The tendency of larger artifacts to be overrepresented on the surface of plowed sites is a finding that has been firmly established in a number of experimental studies (Ammerman 1985; Lewarch and O'Brien 1981a, 1981b). Moreover, Ammerman and Feldman (1978) have shown that, because of size effects in archaeological recovery, repeated collections from the same site will exhibit a downward trend in the proportion of large items as these become depleted on the surface. Thus, in sites plowed and collected many times, the plowzone will gradually give up most of its larger artifacts, retaining nondiagnostic lithic debris and small sherds.





Another major effect of tillage, also illuminated by the experiments of Lewarch and O'Brien (1981a), is lateral displacementthe disruption of horizontal spatial patterns. The investigators found that longitudinal displacements (in the direction of equipment movement) were greater than transverse displacements. Another size effect was discernible in the longitudinal displacements: larger artifacts showed greater movement. In view of these findings, Lewarch and O'Brien (1981a:45) properly emphasize that the use of small artifacts is to be preferred for discerning spatial patterns. For other studies of lateral displacement, see Roper (1976), Redman and Watson (1970), and Ammerman (1985). Clearly, more experiments are needed in order to establish the regularities of long-term tillage so that correction factors can be devised.





The cultivation of trees and the provision of livestock forage involve a number of specialized agricultural practices that disturb archaeological





Page 132





sites. Several studies have examined these impacts experimentally. In the American Southwest, juniper trees are removed from pasture land by chaining. Two tractors drag an enormous anchor chain between them, pulling over any trees in their path. De Bloois et al. (1975) seeded an area with artifacts and monitored the displacements after chaining. They found highly variable impacts, depending in part on the distribution of trees in relation to sites. In some cases, the chain totally jumps a treeless site; in others, the uprooting and movement of a tree causes artifact displacement. Other processes studied experimentally include scarification, a procedure for preparing soil for regenerating a stand of trees (Gallagher 1978); use of the Marden brush crusher for removing undesirable shrubs from grazing areas (Wood 1979); and tractor yarding of logs (Wildesen 1982:59).





Much of the literature on agricultural impacts merely reports current land uses in a study area, providing percentages of each kind of agricultural activity (e.g., Feagins 1975). Such data are also sometimes furnished in survey reports (e.g., Schiffer and House 1975). These studies are important in documenting the extent and intensity of impacts in an area at one point in time. The next step is to employ such data from several areas to build diachronic models of land use and impacts to archaeological sites. For example, one can use land use/impact data from intensively farmed parts of the Lower Mississippi Valley (e.g., Ford and Rolingson 1972; Medford 1972) to predict, generally, the scale of impacts that will take place in other parts of the Lower Mississippi Valley where new federal projects, such as channelization, will make more intensive cultivation possible (cf. Schiffer and House 1977c).





The Consideration of Impacts





There is, of course, a great number of specific agricultural practices, most of which have not been thoroughly examined for archaeological impacts. Moreover, countless other activities of modern and ancient societies damage sites, and no one could possibly catalog all of them or study their impacts in detail. For many activities and processes, individualized treatment is not really necessary, because their impacts can be predicted using knowledge of similar processes. From the standpoint of predicting impacts, it does not matter whether a site is impacted by construction of a missile silo or a freeway interchange, so long as the archaeologist appreciates the specific land-modification activities that will be carried out, and these are usually knowable from previous projects and general principles. Wildesen (1982:61) properly emphasizes the importance of isolating regularities in impacts to provide a reliable basis for prediction. Drawing upon soil science, she notes that all specific impact





Page 133





types can be classified as either burial, transfer, removal, or alteration regardless of the nature of the impact agent (Wildesen 1982:61). Thus, one can handle any complex land-modification activity by breaking it down into a series of specific disturbances that are illuminated by the general principles enumerated above.





Schiffer and Gumerman (1977:293-296) have provided a framework for considering the impacts of a particular land-modification project, either one that has been proposed or one that may have impacted a site in the past. This framework makes it possible to orient the search for specific disturbances in archaeological cases.





Planning Stage Impacts





Most large-scale projects involve a considerable number of preparatory engineering studies that take place before construction actually gets underway. Engineering studies can involve specific impacts to archaeological sites, as for example, when new roads are bulldozed in forests to permit the operation of a surveying crew. Smith (1983) describes some severe impacts of mineral exploration activities in Alaska. He reports that "Two camps and an airstrip inspected in 1979 and 1980 had all adversely affected archaeological sites" (Smith 1983:122). One can expect drill holes to be a potential source of archaeological impacts in the planning stages of many projects, including mine, dam, and channel construction. In nonindustrial societies, one can expect planning stage impacts to be less severe.





Construction Stage Impacts





The potential impacts brought about by construction-stage activities of a project may be divided into primary, secondary, and tertiary.





Primary impacts are those resulting directly from construction activities; for example, digging the footings of a dam, bulldozing trees in advance of channel straightening, and removal of material from a storage pit. Each of these specific activities may affect archaeological remains in the immediate vicinity in accordance with the general principles of disturbance. Thus, the digging of dam footings and borrow pits in sites, as in all cases of pit excavation in cultural deposits, involves displacements of cultural materials and leads to mixed deposits.





In cultural resource management projects, the usual source of information about primary impacts is the engineering plans, which generally can be secured from the sponsor in the form of area maps with intended modifications noted. In evaluating these data, it is useful to have some knowledge of construction procedures; one should almost be able to visualize the spatial organization of people in their usual and unusual activities, as well as the flow of traffic in construction areas. When infor-





Page 134





mation about a project is available in this kind of detail, it may sometimes hold surprises about impacts. For example, Toney (1975) learned that, at least in one area, clearing of the transmission line corridor and the stringing of the power lines create a far greater disturbance than the pit excavations for transmission pole footings.





Secondary impacts are those brought about by the support activities of a project, such as the building of an access road, the establishment of a tent or trailer camp for the temporary housing of the construction crew, and the excavation of pits for disposal of construction debris. Information on secondary impacts is far more difficult to obtain from sponsorspartly because such activities are not considered to be impact producing, and partly because decisions about their exact nature and locations may not be made until a project is in progress. Persistent questioning of the sponsor, especially project engineers, and a general familiarity with the logistic and support requirements of similar types of projects will often provide satisfactory data.





Tertiary impacts are those that occur during the project construction stage but are not the direct result of construction or support activities. Examples of such impacts include the collecting of artifacts by construction personnel and the use of construction equipment for pot hunting. Tertiary impacts are necessarily more difficult to deal with; ironically, the sponsor is probably much better able to prevent than predict them. There is ample support for the generalization that construction personnel will vandalize archaeological sites unless strong negative sanctions are maintained against such activities by the sponsor and various contractors (Price et al. 1975:277; Schiffer and Gumerman 1977:294). It is a safe bet that unless such precautions are taken, accessible sites will be impacted by construction and support personnel. In addition, as Price (1977) notes, local land owners may rent heavy equipment from the contractor during lulls in construction and carry out land leveling or other potentially destructive procedures. Presumably, one can learn from the sponsor whether they or their contractors permit the equipment to moonlight.





Operating Stage Impacts





Once construction has concluded and use of a facility begins, other activities and processes that may disturb archaeological resources need to be considered. Operating-stage impacts are readily grouped into basic typesprimary, secondary, and tertiaryand in principle can be accurately predicted.





Primary impacts are those directly related to the basic function of the facility. For example, reservoirs serve to impound water and regulate its flow downstream. Impacts to sites in reservoirs are caused by various





Page 135





natural and cultural processes occurring in bodies of fresh water, such as waterlogging of deposits and erosion of shoreline sites caused by fluctuating pool levels (Garrison 1975, 1977; Lenihan et al. 1981; Gramann 1982). The activity of strip-mining, of course, produces marked primary impacts by bulldozers, draglines, and explosives. In other projects, primary impacts of the operating stage are subtle. Pilles and Haas (1973:44) suggest, for example, that stack emissions from a coal-fired power plant in northeastern Arizona may, if they combine with water in the air to form acids, attack nearby calcareous sandstones (into which petroglyphs have been pecked). Operating stage primary impacts also include disturbances resulting from maintenance processes. For example, coal-fired generating stations must regularly dispose of vast quantities of fly ash, which may be deposited on archaeological sites. Knowledge about primary impacts depends upon securing from the sponsor detailed information on the functioning and maintenance of the proposed facility and on observations of similar facilities already in use.





The use of most facilities also results in the exposure of cultural materials in and near the facility to various environmental processes. Nearby artifacts and deposits may be affected by the natural processes set in motion by a project. For example, Wildesen (1982:64) notes "that 38% of the historic and prehistoric trail system in Death Valley National Monument has been destroyed by sheet and gully erosion since 1910, when the first roads were constructed near the trails." Groundwater pumping and overgrazing have contributed to accelerated erosion in the Santa Cruz River Valley, leaving behind deflated sites as well as sites deeply buried. The impacts caused directly by natural processes are not readily classified, but should be considered in any assessment.





Secondary impacts usually result from other intended uses of a facility or from other uses that might reasonably be expected. For example, although reservoirs do impound water for irrigation, flood control, and hydroelectric generation, they also are used frequently for recreation. In considering impacts of this sort it is well to keep in mind not only mechanical effects on sites but also the long-term damage that results from greater accessibility of the noninundated archaeological resource base. For example, the boaters who use reservoirs have easy access to archaeological sites along the entire shoreline, sites that formerly were reachable only by arduous hikes. Under most circumstances it is safe to predict that when sites become more accessible, they will experience greater rates of collecting, pothunting, and vandalism (Chapter 5). When fire roads are built in rugged areas of a forest, one can be reasonably certain that they will be used regularly by artifact collectors and pothunters. The prediction of secondary impacts related to the intended use of a facility is usually based on information supplied by the sponsor. Impacts





Page 136





caused by unintended or unauthorized uses of a facility or related areas can be predicted from general principles, such as the effect of greater accessibility on rates of artifact collecting.





The last category of operating stage impacts, tertiary impacts, includes an enormous range of processes that could themselves be profitably subdivided. Tertiary impacts are not caused directly by the use of a facility but are the result of project-induced changes in demography and land use (see King et al. 1977). For example, construction of a dam may make it possible for housing developers to obtain floodplain insurance for downstream areas, thus leading to increased construction and a host of specific disturbances. Schiffer and House (1977c) describe an anticipated trend toward greater intensity of agricultural usage of the Cache River basin in northeastern Arkansas as a consequence of the flood-control benefits of a proposed channelization project. It is sometimes surprisingly easy to obtain information on tertiary impacts from the sponsor, for in many situations changes in land use and demography are listed among the intended benefits of a proposed land-modification project. Ethnoarchaeological fieldwork in an area can provide additional information that might be useful in forecasting tertiary impacts. For example, Padgett (1976) administered a questionnaire to a sample of land owners to learn if the construction of Dierks Reservoir in western Arkansas would lead them to change their patterns of land use. Some familiarity with principles of regional planning and growth may help to complete the roster of tertiary impacts.





On a large, complex project the diversity and magnitude of impacts during planning, construction, and operating stages can be considerable. Nonetheless, although it is unique in some respects, every large project consists of specific, recurrent activities that cause predictable disturbances to impacted archaeological remains. The key to predicting these impacts is breaking down large projects into their constituent impact-producing activities, such as excavation of pits and changes in traffic patterns, and focusing on the impacts of those activities (Wildesen 1982).





Inferring Impacts at Sites





The present framework for organizing the consideration of impacts also has utility in the context of understanding the formation processes of specific sites. Indeed, the land-modification activities of earlier peoples are readily handled in this framework of impacts. In the example that follows, I shall also make reference to reclamation processes. The residents of Snaketown, a large Hohokam site on the Gila River occupied for about a millennium (Haury 1976), engaged in a variety of large-scale public





Page 137





works projects, each of which disturbed earlier deposits at that site. Of these, I shall treat canals, mounds, and the plaza.





The Hohokam are noted for their massive irrigation systems, and some canals have been investigated in and near Snaketown (Haury 1976). During construction of a canal, primary impacts derive from the hand excavation of the canal and the removal of spoil. The latter apparently was usually deposited as a continuous bank along both sides of the canal. Thus, earlier materials encountered by canal digging would be displaced in banks, sometimes coming to overlie later deposits in accord with the Laws of Superposition and Upward Migration. Secondary and tertiary impacts during the construction stage of canals would probably be minimal.





The operation stage of a canal system also involves considerable impacts on previously deposited materials. Primary impacts include the displacement by fluvial transport of artifacts and sediments. Archaeological excavation of canals usually reveals heavily abraded sherds, some of which were probably transported by flowing water and deposited as channel lag. Their source was apparently earlier deposits exposed by canal construction. During maintenance, sediments that contain artifacts and ecofacts are removed and piled on the banks. An earthen canal system undergoes hydrological changes produced by flooding and siltation just like natural drainages. Thus, some canals become unusable and new ones are built nearby, renewing a variety of construction-related disturbances (Dart 1986). Sometimes repair is possible using displaced or reclaimed refuse. For example, in one erosion-prone spot near a diversion structure at Snaketown, the Hohokam deposited 250 kg of sherds and several metates to reduce damage (Haury 1976:126). A gully formed by the washout of one treacherous section of a lateral canal was filled ''with soil that contained a liberal amount of pottery" (Haury 1976:128). "Dipping pools" found in Snaketown canals testify that the latter were also sources of drinking water (Haury 1976:135); use of a canal in this manner would create some secondary impacts in the form of altered trafficand hence tramplingpatterns. Haury (1976:136) also suggests that child's play was responsible for some artifacts found in canals. Artifacts tossed into canals, such as discarded stone tools and sherds, could have been displaced from nearby refuse deposits.





Canal operation also leads to other impacts on artifacts by various natural processes. For example, artifacts in the canals would be subject to fluvial abrasion and edge rounding. In addition, mineral deposits can form on artifacts (Haury 1976:138); in one case, sherds were cemented by natural processes into the calcareous lining of a canal (Haury 1976:132).





A second major type of land-modification project at Snaketown was the construction of 50 artificial mounds. Although many of the mounds





Page 138





Fig. 6.6.

Section in Mound 39 of Snaketown. Note lighter streaks, which are

traces of caliche capping. Differences in the dip of strata indicate that the

remodeling of this mound was a complex sequence of events. (Photo by

Helga Teiwes; reproduced with permission of the Arizona State Museum.)





contain considerable amounts of refuse (Haury 1976:81), in few cases do they appear to have been formed by the gradual day-to-day deposition of household trash. Profiles of some larger mounds indicate that they grew by major accretions. Moreover, their patterned deployment in the village during the Sacaton phase (Wilcox et al. 1981) and the evidence that some were capped (Haury 1976:83-85) demonstrate that mounds were built to serve social functions and were periodically refurbished (Fig. 6.6).





During the construction stage, primary impacts would have been widespread. Both "clean" fill and refuse were used in mound construction; thus, considerable displacement and moving of earlier deposits took place (Haury 1976:200). It is likely that mound construction at times involved the deliberate reclamation of previously formed refuse deposits, perhaps leaving behind badly disturbed areas. As in the case of canals, secondary and tertiary construction stage impacts probably were inconsequential





Page 139





with the possible exception of trampling and compaction of sediments crossed in the transport of mound fill.





Additional impacts took place in the operation stage of mounds. If these places were foci of ritual activities, as is likely, then new traffic patterns would lead to trampling and compaction of deposits in heavily traveled areas. Maintenance and refurbishing of mounds involved additional reclamation and displacement of refuse as well as the disturbance of quarry locations. The capping material for mounds was caliche, a substance that was sometimes reclaimed from floors of abandoned pithouses, with attendant disturbances to artifacts in those houses.





Although it is difficult to envision many secondary and tertiary impacts of mound use, some can be expected as a result of the altered drainage patterns that mounds produce. Since they are sometimes steep artificial elevations, moundsespecially those without cappingare subject to erosion. Materials can be removed from the slopes of mounds and deposited at their foot, creating an apron of sediments extending over any nearby, previously abandoned features. Such processes, of course, would continue after the mound itself fell into disuse.





A third land modification at Snaketown is the plaza. At some point, probably in the Sacaton phase (ca. A.D. 1000-1175), a large area was cleared and leveled (Wilcox et al. 1981). Primary impacts during the construction stage of the plaza were great. Test excavations disclosed very little in that area, suggesting that most refuse and the remains of structures had been displaced, possibly ending up in mound fill. As in the case of mounds, secondary and tertiary impacts of plaza construction would probably include trampling and compaction of sediments traversed when materials removed by leveling were carried to other places on the site.





During the operating stage of the plaza, primary impacts would be limited to trampling of artifactsmostly residual primary refuseand compaction of sediments. Trampling would take place in the plaza itself and along new paths that arise in the village. Other secondary and tertiary impacts include child's play in the plaza, which would disturb any artifacts present, such as residual primary refuse.





A consideration of these (and other) land-modification projects at Snaketown leads to a number of clear-cut expectations regarding the formation processes of several deposit types. For example, as Haury (1976) forcefully notes, the prevalence of displaced refuse, particularly that contributing to mound fill, indicates that at times a great deal of mixing of formerly discrete deposits took place, when ceramic types made centuries apart were brought together in the same mound levels. Some investigators have overlooked these processes, taking ceramic associations in mounds at face value (see Chapter 11).





Similarly, an appreciation for the impacts of canals underscores the





Page 140





difficulty of dating the construction and use of these facilities. For example, sherds deposited on the bottom of the canal probably had diverse origins, including displacement from earlier deposits cut by the canal. The best evidence for dating the use of the canal comes from uneroded sherds at the bottom of dipping pools (Haury 1976). Other sherds directly associated with the canal permit one to state only that canal use is contemporaneous with or later than the period of pottery use.





Although the examples drawn from the Hohokam at Snaketown are sketchy and incomplete, they do underscore the need to view land-modification activities as an important source of disturbance and reclamation processes in prehistoric sites. The framework presented here can contribute to a well-rounded modeling of the formation processes of any site, particularly ones having large-scale land-modification projects.





Conclusion





A great many activities, ancient and modern, transform artifacts from state to state within archaeological context. Although poorly studied, these disturbance processes are known to have many and sometimes drastic effects on archaeological deposits. As more is learnedthrough experiment and ethnoarchaeologyabout the regularities of the simpler processes, such as trampling and plowing, it will become possible to model in detail the impact of complex land-modification processes. Because the artifacts in so many deposits experienced disturbance processes at some point after their use ended, the failure to consider the impacts of past disturbances will hinder efforts to make reliable inferences.





Although fully appreciated by skilled field archaeologists, the effects of disturbance processes are commonly overlooked when projects reach the analysis stage. A refreshing exception to this generalization is furnished by Deagan's (1983) work at St. Augustine. Her major interest was in eighteenth-century Spanish occupation. This town, however, was settled for many centuries by Spanish as well as other ethnic groups, with the result that mixed deposits of refuse from different occupations dominated in the archaeological record. Drawing upon archaeological as well as historical evidence, Deagan (1983:249-250) identified the major processes responsible for the extensive disturbances, which included natural and cultural disasters, rebuilding and refurbishing of structures, gardening, and the keeping of animals. More importantly, Deagan was careful not to place great inferential weight on the deposits identified as disturbed, concentrating instead on those capable of providing information of higher resolution. Deagan's model of judicious analysis, informed by an appreciation for basic formation processes, should be widely emulated.





Page 141





