Chapter 10

The Identification of Formation Processes





The preceding chapters have presented a panorama of formation processes, from de facto refuse deposition to the burial of sites by creeping sand dunes. Emphasis has been placed in those discussions on specifying the individual causal variables that influence the operation of particular processes. In this and the following chapters, the perspective shifts to the activities of the archaeologist as they relate to identifying the formation processes of specific deposits, taking formation processes into account in inference (Chapters 11 and 12), and treating the archaeological process itself as a complex and distinctive set of cultural formation processes (Chapter 13). In the present chapter (adapted from Schiffer 1983), familiar material from earlier parts of this book is resynthesized to highlight the attributes of artifacts and the characteristics of deposits that allow the practical identification of formation processes.





To identify a formation process is to infer that it occurred. As a prerequisite for making virtually all inferences, the archaeologist must identify the processes that created the deposits to be used for relevant evidence. In this way, the investigator can (1) assess the fit between inferential goals and available evidence and (2) set the stage for taking into account the transformations wrought by formation processes on that evidence (Reid 1985). In principle, formation processes are identifiable because they have regular and predictable physical effects (Chapters 1 and 2).





The Deposit





The appropriate analytical unit for identifying formation processes is the deposit (see Gifford 1981; Schiffer 1983; Stein n.d.). A deposit is a three-dimensional segment of a site (or other area of analytical interest) that is





Page 266





distinguished in the field on the basis of observable changes in sediments and artifacts. It is widely believed that a depositsuch as a layer of trash, the fill of a pit, or the floor of a structureis an entity created by some minimal unit of deposition, either cultural or noncultural. According to this view, the boundaries of a deposit can be delineated in the field so as to ensure that the materials it contains are the product of a discrete depositional event or process. Regrettably, this concept of deposit has grave theoretical and operational defects.





In the first place, a single depositional process can give rise to materials in different deposits. For example, the exact same event of de facto refuse deposition by a household can place materials on the floor of a structure, on its roof, and in an adjacent plaza. Archaeologically, these items of de facto refuse will be contained in separate deposits (e.g., house floor, house fill, and extramural surface). Similarly, items originally deposited together by one process can be divided up subsequently among several deposits. For example, part of a discrete deposit of secondary refuse may be removed and laid down elsewhere as construction fill. Moreover, the excavation process itself may retrieve only part of a given deposit.





Second, a single deposit can contain the products of many different depositional processes. In the simplest case, the fill of a pit could have come about through a mixture of cultural and noncultural deposition. This would not be immediately evident if subsequent earthworm activity had destroyed the boundaries between cultural and noncultural layers. An even more telling example is that of materials contained within the floor deposit of a structure, which could consist of artifacts laid down by primary refuse deposition, de facto refuse deposition, secondary refuse deposition, as well as a host of other processes (see below).





In view of these possibilities, one must acknowledge that manyperhaps mostdeposits do not neatly bound the products of a discrete depositional event or process. Although in the field one attempts to delineate deposits in a manner conducive to isolating minimal units of deposition (Dever 1973; Dever and Lance 1978; Kenyon 1962; Schiffer 1976a; Schiffer and Reid 1975; Wheeler 1956; Wilcox 1975), the starting point of laboratory analysis is the recognition that given deposits were probably formed by a "mixed bag" of processes. Thus, one also strives to divide up the artifactsusing the diverse traces enumerated belowinto categories according to their various formation processes.





In theory, identification is facilitated because each formation process usually has more than one physical consequence. For example, repeated trampling of sherds should lead, minimally, to the following set of traces: reduction in size, crushing or chipping of edges, and abrasion of surfaces. In contrast, sherds subjected to water transport by streams acquire the following traces: reduction in size, rounding of edges, and uniform abra-





Page 267





sion of all surfaces in a manner that creates protruding temper particles (Skibo n.d.). A single trace, such as sherd size, might not serve to segregate artifacts by process, whereas multiple attributes permit easier differentiation.





At times, the investigator will not be able to separate artifacts by formation processes. This can come about for any of the following reasons: (1) there has been insufficient (experimental and ethnoarchaeological) work done on delineating the traces of specific processes, (2) several different processes produce very similar sets of traces, or (3) the traces of later processes obliterated those of earlier ones. Incomplete or insecure identifications still yield useful information, because materials produced by mixed or unidentified processes cannot serve as a strong line of evidence for many kinds of inferences.





In general, the principles and techniques for identifying specific formation processes are not yet well developed (Nash and Petraglia 1984). Although in a few cases it might be possible to provide a process-by-process listing of traces, for most processes the available information is just too incomplete. In addition, the actual combinations of processes that could have given rise to specific deposits is nearly infinite, and so one cannot expect to find many simple correspondences between a priori lists of traces and the characteristics of specific deposits. In view of these difficulties, the remainder of this chapter furnishes a listing of the principal tracesattributes of artifacts and characteristics of depositsthat have demonstrable relevance for identifying many formation processes.





The Traces of Formation Processes





Simple Properties of Artifacts





Size





Artifact size is one attribute consistently implicated in studies of formation processes (DeBoer 1983). Size effects come about because formation processes can (1) reduce the size of artifacts and (2) sort or winnow artifacts by size.





A host of cultural processes have size effects, which can be exploited as one line of evidence for identifying formation processes. The size-sorting effects of clean-up activities and refuse disposal, described by the McKellar Principle (McKellar 1983), are now well documented in diverse ethnoarchaeological settings, and archaeological applications have even begun to appear (e.g., Abbott and Lindauer 1981; Bradley and Fulford 1980; Ferguson 1977; Lightfoot 1984; Lindauer and Kisselburg 1981; Matthews 1984; Rosen 1985; Thomas 1983). Small artifacts, especially microartifacts, on occupation surfaces often indicate primary refuse.





Page 268





Nevertheless, in activity areas not habitually cleaned, such as some lithic quarry-workshops, abandoned structures (e.g., Carrillo 1977), and vacant lots (Wilk and Schiffer 1979), larger items can accumulate as primary refuse. The McKellar Principle, it should be stressed, applies only to residual primary refuse in regularly maintained activity areas.





Loss is usually the process responsible for the deposition of small, still usable items in activity and refuse areas (Ferguson 1977:62; Gifford 1980:98). Recycling also may be indicated by artifact size (Ascher 1968:51). In accord with the Frison Effect (Jelinek 1976:22), which notes that a variety of behaviors can transform lithic tools into different forms, recycled lithic artifacts become progressively reduced.





Curate behavior and de facto refuse deposition also have at times size-sorting effects. Ethnoarchaeological studies of recently abandoned structures (e.g., Lange and Rydberg 1972) have shown that easily replaced large items are more often deposited as de facto refuse, whereas smaller, more costly artifacts tend to be curated (see Gould 1980). Ebert (1979:68) also suggests that among mobile groups, tools likely to be curated may be made smaller in anticipation of their travels (see also Schiffer 1975d:269).





Many studies have shown that trampling (by people, animals, and machines) reduces artifact size in predictable ways (Kirkby and Kirkby 1976:236-238) and, in loose substrates like sand, sorts artifacts by size (Behrensmeyer and Boaz 1980:80; DeBoer and Lathrap 1979:133; Gifford 1978:82, 1980:101; Schiffer 1977). Several archaeological investigations have exploited sherd size distributions as a trace of trampling (e.g., McPherron 1967; Rosen 1985). Other cultural disturbances, ranging from plowing to use of the Marden brush crusher, have known size reduction and/or size-sorting effects (Baker 1978; Lewarch and O'Brien 1981; Schiffer 1977; Wildesen 1982; Ammerman 1985). In particular, plowinglike tramplingcauses greater upward and lateral movement of larger artifacts. It is also likely that certain reclamation processes, such as collecting and scavenging, preferentially operate on specific size ranges of artifacts (Lightfoot 1978; Schiffer 1977, 1985; Wildesen 1982).





A remarkable array of noncultural formation processes also have size effects, as shown in the following examples.





The basic laws of hydrology developed for sedimentary particles apply to artifacts and ecofacts affected by flowing water (Behrensmeyer and Hill 1980; Gifford 1980, 1981; Shackley 1978; Shipman 1981). For example, the size of sedimentary particles that are eroded and deposited varies with the velocity of the water (Butzer 1971, 1982; Gladfelter 1977; Limbrey 1975; Selley 1976). Thus, in moderately rapid flows, only the larger, heavier artifacts may remain.





Wind is an especially potent sorting force and operates in a manner





Page 269





similar to that of flowing water (Limbrey 1975; Pyddoke 1961). Gentle winds remove or deposit only clay, silt, and sand-sized particles, whereas heavy winds transport larger particles. Smaller artifacts are also apt to be buried first by eolian deposition (Behrensmeyer and Boaz 1980:80).





Several other natural processes have demonstrable size effects. Smaller bones suffer greater carnivore damage (Behrensmeyer and Boaz 1980:80; Pastron 1974:98), experience higher rates of surface weathering (Behrensmeyer and Boaz 1980; Gifford 1978:81), and undergo accelerated chemical changes in aqueous environments (Lenihan et al. 1981:149; Von Endt and Ortner 1984). Worms and other burrowing animals size-sort artifacts in several ways (Wood and Johnson 1978; Bocek 1986). For example, only small artifacts can be brought to the surface or be trapped in the burrows of small animals (Limbrey 1975:315, see also Wood and Johnson 1978). Some of the less widespread processes that have size effects include freeze-thaw cycles (Pyddoke 1961:52; Wood and Johnson 1978) and the shrinkage and swelling of clay soils (Wood and Johnson 1978:356).





Although artifact size is an important indicator of formation processes, relevant information is too rarely collected or reported, as Bradley and Fulford (1980:85) point out. For example, sherds too small to be placed into the type-variety systems of Mesoamerica and the Southwest are often discarded. In most regions, the smallest artifact constituents of a matrix, such as microdebitage (Fladmark 1982), are seldom recovered, despite the availability of suitable sampling techniques that have been around for decades (for references see Heizer 1960). If we are to use artifact size as a trace of various formation processes, then standard recording procedures will have to be modified to handle the smallestbut often high-frequencyfinds (Wilk and Kosakowsky 1978). Work in Israeli tell sites by Rosen (1985) has demonstrated the feasibility of recovering and analyzing microartifacts. Sediment samples were wet-sieved through nested screens, and the percentage composition of bone, charcoal, sherd, flint, and other constituentsas small as .2 mmwas recorded through a stereomicroscope. This information was helpful in identifying formation processes of the deposits and established a basis for behavioral inference.





That so many formation processes have size effects may, in the final analysis, be a liability, for this trace alone can seldom permit definitive identification. To distinguish among the possible alternative processes, one must turn to other traces of formation processes.





Density (or Specific Gravity)





In conformity with the principles governing the movement of particles by water and air, we may expect such processes to sort artifacts by density or specific gravity (holding constant other variables). It has been shown experimentally that density influences the hydraulic behavior of bone





Page 270





(Shipman 1981:30-31). Density can also indicate the rate, duration, and prevalence of other environmental processes. For example, in the case of faunal remains, experiments and ethnoarchaeological investigations have demonstrated that resistance to decay and weathering is in part a function of the specific gravity of the bone (Binford and Bertram 1977; Brain 1980:117, 1981). Lyman (1984) has called attention to inconsistencies in past definitions and measurements of bone density. To remedy these problems, he proposed and evaluated a more robust measure of density, reaffirming the sensitivity of this variable to a variety of formation processes.





Shape





Holding constant size and density, movement by wind and water will sort artifacts by shape. Shipman (1981:26) furnishes several measures of bone shape that seem applicable to any artifacts. This variable will most likely be useful in studying sites where fluvial processes are already known to have been at work, such as early hominid localities in East Africa, but more detail is desired on their specific effects.





Orientation and Dip





Orientation and dip are two additional characteristics of artifacts potentially relevant to identifying formation processes. Experiments have shown that fluvial (and sometimes eolian) processes can align artifacts relative to their long axes (see Shipman 1981 for various ways to measure orientation). Generally, the discovery of a patterned orientation is ample grounds for inferring the occurrence of a noncultural process, such as flowing water (Isaac 1967). Although materials in abandoned constructions, such as walls, are markedly oriented (see, e.g., Shackley 1981:20), most cultural formation processes, we might suppose, randomize artifact orientations (see Limbrey 1975:299 on plowing). However, experiments are needed to investigate the possible orienting effects of various kinds of trash-dumping behavior.





Muckle (1985) has shown in a series of discard experiments that tossed mollusk valves tend to land with their concave surface oriented upward. He suggests that departures from this expected orientation in shell middens could indicate postdiscard disturbances.





Dip is sensitive to a number of cultural and natural processes. For example, frost heave creates vertical orientations (Wood and Johnson 1978). Behrensmeyer and Boaz (1980:87) also suggest that trampling in loose substrates can create vertical or near-vertical dips of long bones and presumably other artifacts of similar shape and size. Trampling of smaller artifacts with less extreme shapes is likely to produce a more nearly random distribution of dips (see Butzer 1971:102; Isaac 1977:61). On the other hand, in compacted substrates, trampling is apt to form an occu-





Page 271





pation surface containing artifacts that are more uniformly oriented with their flat axes parallel to the surface.





The potential of dip to inform on a variety of cultural processes has not been sufficiently exploited. One can readily appreciate, for example, that artifacts laid down one at a time on an occupation surface generally lie flat, whereas those deposited in quantity at once, such as from a basketload of trash, have much more varied dips. Further experiments are needed ''because the factors contributing to dip are not well understood'' (Shipman 1981:76).





Uselife Factors





Artifact types ordinarily go through predictable life cycles (Schiffer 1972, 1975b; Rathje and Schiffer 1982), from procurement through manufacture and use to deposition in archaeological context. Especially during use and subsequent stages, traces are formed that furnish evidence on cultural formation processes. One of the simplest, most frequently observed traces is whether the artifact is fragmentary or whole. Determining if an artifact was usable at the time of cultural deposition helps to indicate the responsible processes (see Rubertone 1982:130). Burials, caches, other ritual deposits, and floors of structures, for example, often contain complete or restorable items with much of their uselife remaining (Shawcross 1976:297). This contrasts markedly with many deposits of secondary refuse, where scarcely an intact item is found. A lack of completeness can sometimes point toward reuse or reclamation processes (Fig. 10.1). Indications of use-wear or measures of remnant uselife are essential for some studies (Schiffer 1985). For example, by investigating use-wear on a series of Mimbres burial pots from southwestern New Mexico, Bray (1982) showed that the vessels were not manufactured exclusively as "mortuary wares." As noted previously, replacement cost is another life-cycle characteristic that influences the operation of many formation processes, such as loss, abandonment, scavenging, collecting, curation, and reuse (e.g., Binford 1976; Ebert 1979; Gifford 1978; B. Hayden 1976; Rathje and Schiffer 1982; Schiffer 1985). Uselife characteristics have long been employed to distinguish among gross types of formation processes and will continue to be important in the more refined studies that are now required.





Damage





A vast number of cultural and noncultural formation processes acting on artifacts leave behind recognizable patterns of damage (Goodyear 1971). South (1977:217-218) has called attention to the importance of considering condition when interpreting artifacts, a position underscored here. Although damage patterns on lithic and bone items have been





Page 272





Fig. 10.1.

Abandoned and discarded automobiles rarely contain wheels or engines; this

incompleteness demonstrates the occurrence of reuse or reclamation processes.





vigorously investigated, there is as yet little to be said about other artifact materials.





Speculation about the natural or cultural origin of particular types of bone fractures, long a pastime of Early Man students in the Old and New Worlds, has recently generated a sizable body of taphonomic, experimental, and ethnoarchaeological evidence, primarily on the effects of natural processes (Brain 1981; Johnson 1985; Shipman 1981). Binford (1981b:4449), for example, attributes four types of damagepunctures, pits, scores, and furrowsto the action of carnivore teeth (see also Brain 1981). Several other traces of carnivore bone processing are also documented, including spiral fractures and polish (Binford 1981b:49-58), but not all are produced uniquely by carnivores. As Johnson (1985) notes, spiral fractures are caused by many processes, including trampling (Binford 1981b:77-80; Myers et al. 1980) and hominid bone breaking (Bonnichsen 1979), because certain fresh bones break in a spiral manner. Effects of bone gnawing by domestic dogs are mentioned by Pastron (1974:98-100) and, in a related study, Behrensmeyer and Boaz (1980:87) tabulate the skeletal elements likely to be consistently damaged by predators. Other lists of bone dam-





Page 273





Fig. 10.2.

Archaeological bison bone shows traces of weathering,

indicating considerable exposure before burial.





age types and their definitions are supplied by Johnson (1985), Lyman (n.d.), Bonnichsen (1979), Hill (1980:137-143), and Morlan (1980). Regarding "cut marks" on bone, Shipman and Rose (1983a) have shown by experiments that one can use a scanning electron microscope (SEM) to distinguish various processes that leave marks on bone, such as carnivore chewing, rodent gnawing, and hominid use of stone or bone tools. (For an application at Torralba and Ambrona, two Lower Paleolithic sites in Spain, see Shipman and Rose 1983b.)





More generalized types of bone damage are linked by Shipman (1981:41, 100) to the responsible processes (see also Gifford 1981). For example, cracking, crumbling, and exfoliation are caused by weathering (Fig. 10.2), whereas eolian transport leads to pitting. Behrensmeyer (1978) has defined and illustrated characteristic stages of weathering, and Shipman and Rose (1983a) illustrate the traces of fluvial abrasion. Dendritic etching of bone is a frequently observed phenomenon caused by the action of carbonic acid secreted by roots in contact with the bone (Binford 1981b:4951; Pyddoke 1961:82). When such etched bone is found in caves where plants did not grow, some type of transport process is indicated (Brieur





Page 274





1977:60). Other chemical changes undergone by buried bone are discussed in Chapter 7 and by Parker and Toots (1980) and Goffer (1980).





The progress made thus far in linking bone damage patterns to specific agents makes it possible in many cases for the analyst to separate the bones in a given deposit according to the different environmental processes involved Johnson 1985; Shipman 1981:99). The knowledge that the bones in a single deposit have heterogeneous histories (e.g., some weathered, some not) is itself a significant finding (Gifford 1981). For example, if most rodent bones are little weathered in comparison to others found at a site, one might infer the former had a noncultural rather than cultural origin (Szuter 1984).





Many formation processes leave recognizable, if subtle, traces on stone. For a general treatment on how to distinguish the traces of several different formation processes from use-wear, see Keeley (1980:28-35). Odell (1982:22-23) also discusses recent work on damage other than that caused by use (see also Sala 1986).





Patinas are a family of damage patterns that have long been recognized, but remain poorly understood (Hurst and Kelly 1961). Part of the problem is that the term patination describes a set of phenomena produced by various causes (Rottländer 1975; Keeley 1980:29). Some patinas, such as desert varnish, are formed by deposition (see below), whereas others arise through chemical changes and erosion of the stone (e.g., leaching in acidic or alkaline environments). In still other instances, a combination of effects can occur (Goffer 1980:248-249). The diverse causes and effects of patination make it likely that specific patinas can be related, eventually, to the responsible environmental condition(s). The need for experimental work on other processes of natural weathering is clearly indicated.





Cultural formation processes, too, can sometimes be implicated by patinas. For example, on a single artifact, differences in patination between original and later flake scarsknown as "double patination" (Goodwin 1960:301)point to scavenging or collecting for reuse (J. Hayden 1976; Villa 1982:282). These same processes are also suggested by variations in the patinas of different artifacts in the same deposit. Similarly, differences in degree of patination sometimes make it possible to distinguish prehistoric retouch from that produced by recovery processes. As available technology is applied to measure minute differences in the degree and kind of patination, more fine-grained analyses of other formation processes may become feasible.





Patterns of damage on lithics (and other artifacts) can also be produced mechanically by wind-borne particles, especially in deserts (Fig. 10.3). Borden (1971) investigated the wind erosion and polish on a lithic assemblage from a site in the Mohave Desert of California. His microscopic observations suggest that even short exposures to sandblasting leave





Page 275





Fig. 10.3.

As a result of sand-blasting, a Late

Acheulian biface from the Great Sand

Sea, Egypt, exhibits much polish as

well as rounding of edges and ridges.





perceptible traces on some materials, a finding that could be used for determining if (or perhaps even how long) artifacts had been on the surface.





Another familiar process with potentially dramatic effects is water transport. The battering and abrasion resulting from the contact of waterborne materials are easily recognized. As Keeley (1980: 30) notes, "the heavier abrasions usually cover extensive areas of the implement (if not the whole surface), but especially affect the edges and ridges. The striations on these abraded surfaces are numerous and usually randomly oriented." Wymer (1976:329) stresses the development of facetsthe smoothing of ridgeson stone tools that were stream rolled, and presents a scale for representing the amount of rolling. Shackley (1974) supplies an abrasion index that is sensitive to lesser degrees of damage, such as that which occurs when a stationary artifact is abraded by moving particles. Olorgesailie, a Lower Paleolithic site in Kenya, furnishes an example of how traces of water transport influence the interpretation of specific deposits (Isaac 1977).





Recycling and secondary use often produce microflakes and chipping that differ from previous use-wear patterns (Frison 1968). Goodyear (1974), for example, has shown how the late Paleoindian Dalton bifacial knife is resharpened until it is eventually recycled as an awl or drill. Scavenged





Page 276





or collected lithic artifacts can also be modified in distinctive ways. And, of course, plowing damages lithic artifacts (Mallouf 1982).





Keeley (1980:31) calls attention to a little-discussed phenomenon, "soil movement effects." He notes that stresses (imposed by various disturbance processes) in a deposit can cause artifact movement and contact leading to abrasion and microflaking. "White scratches" (Keeley 1980:32), which are striations visible to the naked eye that have rough topography and are often found on bulbar scars, are thought to be a distinctive trace of sediment movement. The whiteness of these scars is the result of patination; similar unpatinated scratches can also be found (Keeley 1980:34).





Trampling, as might be expected, leaves abundant traces, some of them perhaps distinctive. Tringham et al. (1974) found that trampling caused microflaking of tool edges but the scars were less patterned than those produced by tool use (see also Clark and Kurashina 1981:312-313). Keeley (1980:35) notes that certain microflake types characterize trampled artifacts. In addition, he also discovered shallow striations, set back from the edges, on dorsal and ventral surfaces (Keeley 1980:35; Flenniken and Haggerty 1979). These randomly oriented striations, also noted by Knudson (1979) on trampled glass artifacts, can help to differentiate trampled items from those bearing flake scars of retouch or use.





Glass and ceramics, as types of culturally produced stone, exhibit many of the same traces of formation processes as do lithic artifacts. Glass, for example, patinates, especially in alkaline environments (Goffer 1980:249)in some cases after just decades. Microflaking and abrasion are produced on glass sherds by trampling (Knudson 1979); water transport creates light abrasion overall and, in extreme cases, considerable edge rounding of both glass and ceramics (Fig. 10.4a). Sandblasting and salt erosion also leave traces on ceramic sherds (Figs. 10.4b and 10.4c). The latter are also abraded by trampling; striations are visible on hard pastes, whereas generalized abrasion, erosion of the surface, and edge rounding may be found on softer wares. Barker (1977:177-178) suggests that degree of sherd damage can help to separate out "residual" sherds in a depositi.e., those manufactured, used, and deposited at an early time but which were redeposited (after much abuse) in association with later ceramics. Studies along those lines could appreciably reduce problems of chronological analysis encountered with heterogeneous deposits of secondary refuse (Schiffer 1982). As noted in Chapters 3 and 4, use-wear patterns on ceramic and glass artifacts are a principal line of evidence for inferring reuse (see, e.g., Bray 1982; Fontana 1968).





Although damage patterns on sherds (glass and ceramics) are likely to furnish a relatively robust indicator of formation processes, the possible contributions of use-wear and the formal properties of the artifacts them-





Page 277





Fig. 10.4.

Several types of damage on ceramic artifacts: a, fluvial transport; b,

sandblasting; c, salt erosion.





Page 278





selves (e.g., vessel thickness, hardness of paste and slip) to the observed traces must also be assessed. In general, much experimentation is needed on breakage (see, e.g., Lindauer and Kisselburg 1981), use-wear, and other patterns of damage to glass and ceramic items.





Damage resulting from formation processes is found on virtually all other artifact materials but such modifications have seldom been systematically studied. A few additional examples illustrate the potential offered by these often conspicuous traces, especially of natural processes. Exfoliation of adobe walls near the ground, visible in archaeological structures (e.g., J. Hayden 1957), is caused by rising dampespecially salt erosion. Pollen grains exhibit degradation caused by a variety of processes, such as alternate wetting and drying (Bryant and Holloway 1983). Gasser and Adams (1981) describe the effects of rodent gnawing on seeds using archaeological data from Walpi Pueblo in Arizona. Thus, even in sites with excellent preservation of organic materials, one must look for the traces of rodent processing that have biased the assemblage. Fire is a widespread occurrence often associated with certain formation processes, such as abrupt, unintentional abandonments of structures (as well as their planned destruction), burning of refuse heaps, and forest fires. Traces of burning or exposure to fire are material-specific, often easily recognized, and can aid in identifying formation processes (South 1979:217). For example, uncharred seeds in open-air sites most likely have a noncultural origin (Minnis 1981; Miksicek n.d.). Shipman et al. (1984) discuss the effects of burning on bone and teeth. Finally, pH, salt content, and other factors of the depositional environment can be learned from corrosion products on metals (see Geilmann 1967; Goffer 1980; Tylecote 1979).





Patterns and degree of damage unquestionably furnish highly salient information about formation processes. To realize this potential fully, experiments on new materials and continued work on bone and stone are needed. In addition, along the lines of Behrensmeyer's index of weathering for bone, material and process-specific indices of damage should be developed (e.g., Skibo n.d.). I hasten to add that initially such indices need not be elaborate or fine-grained to be effective.





Accretions





Other potentially informative modifications of artifacts are accretionsthe accumulation of substances on an artifact's surface. Thus, caliche, desert varnish, lichens, and similar accretions indicate past processes, especially natural processes. For example, various conditions of the depositional environment are thought to promote the growth of caliche on artifacts, whereas others lead, subsequently, to its dissolution (J. Hayden 1982). In dry caves or rockshelters one sometimes finds matted hair cling-





Page 279





ing to animal bone, indicating that the latter had traveled at least part way through the alimentary canal of a carnivore (Brieur 1977:60; Brain 1981). Ash or sediments adhering to items can supply information on a variety of formation processesespecially those that took place in settings before artifacts reached their recovery locations. For example, in secondary refuse in pueblo rooms one sometimes finds in the same depositional unit sherds with and without ash coatings. One may surmise that the ash accumulated on the sherds in a previous depositional setting, such as a heap of trash and ash swept up from a room floor. Pavlish and Alcock (1984) have employed sediments adhering to a caribou bone to demonstrate redeposition (for a similarly interesting case, see Stehberg and Nilo 1983). Reuse or reclamation of construction material, such as bricks, is sometimes indicated by traces of mortar that differ in kind or placement from the structure's pattern (for an example, see Faulkner 1982:213). The systematic examination of accretions, especially those representing traces of cultural formation processes, has scarcely begun.





For some research problems, observation and recording of many traces mentioned in this section may be carried out on a sample of artifacts. Obviously, if a recovery unit contains 6,000 sherds that are to be placed into a number of size, abrasion, and edge-rounding categories, a sample of several hundredat mostwill suffice (Seymour 1980).





Complex Properties of Artifacts





Many traces of formation processes can be derived from abstract properties of artifacts as they relate to each other in space. I now turn to some of these more complex properties.





Artifact Quantity





A multitude of formation processes affects the total quantity of artifacts in a deposit and the frequencies of constituent types. To take the simplest example, decay processes diminishsometimes to zerothe number of "perishable" artifacts. Processes of cultural deposition vary in their rates and duration, and thus produce different artifact totals. For example, the de facto refuse assemblages of a settlement have few items compared to the amount of refuse deposited over several decades in that settlement's dumps. Although the archaeological literature overflows with quantitative analyses, the capability of simple variables such as total quantity, ratios, and frequency distributions to supply insights into formation processes has been insufficiently explored. Because it is a trace of so many formation processes, artifact quantity will be involved to varying degrees in the examination of most other traces. However, quantities must be interpreted with great care because they are also affected by a host of systemic behaviors.





Page 280





Artifact Inventory





A comparison of artifact inventories among deposits can sometimes pinpoint particular formation processes. In the simplest case, one can infer that deterioration occurred in some deposits when certain artifact materials are absent relative to comparable deposits. For example, Lumbreras (1974b) argued that organic materials were lacking in one burial chamber in the Ayacucho region of Peru owing to deterioration caused by its higher moisture content. Artifact inventories are also sensitive to major differences in processes of cultural deposition. For example, the limited artifact inventory of the Kauri Point Swamp site in New Zealand, relative to expected inventories of secondary refuse, was a principal line of evidence used by Shawcross (1976) to identify the site as a sacred spring used for ritual deposition. Behavioral differences and sample sizes contribute to variability in artifact inventories, and so must be considered.





Vertical Distribution





Stratigraphers have long made use of vertical patterns to discern various formation processes. As a result, a great deal of relevant information is already well known and need not be repeated here (e.g., Harris 1975, 1977, 1979, 1984; Holladay 1978; Kenyon 1962; Wheeler 1956). Several points, however, deserve emphasis. Whereas the intent of stratigraphic studies is primarily to establish a chronological sequence of depositional units, the present perspective emphasizes the need to identify the processes responsible for each depositional unit. The most skillful stratigraphers, of course, strive to do both (see Holladay 1978).





In addition, traditional stratigraphic interpretation has been insufficiently concerned with vertical effects within depositional units (see Bunn et al. 1980:116) and with formation processes that can confound the usual visual criteria for distinguishing discrete strata (e.g., Butzer 1982:107-112; Foley 1981a:168-172; Gifford 1978; Limbrey 1975; Villa 1982; Wood and Johnson 1978; Bocek 1986). In short, refinements of stratigraphic interpretation, including microstratigraphy, are badly needed (Schiffer 1976a:137). For empirical studies of vertical artifact movement in stratified sites, see Matthews (1965), Rowlett and Robbins (1982), and Siiriäinen (1977).





Horizontal Distribution





The horizontal distribution of artifacts within deposits (and sites) is a line of evidence on formation processes that has been employed only rarely. Unquestionably, many formation processes (especially cultural) have appreciable spatial effects. Major differences in patterns of cultural deposition can sometimes be discerned using distributional data (Rice





Page 281





1985; Ward 1985). For example, South (1977:47-80) used information on artifact distribution patterns relative to structures on historic sites to distinguish several varieties of refuse (see also Deagan 1983). In another study, Goodyear et al. (1979:80) used the ''intrasite distribution of temporally diagnostic artifacts'' on a shallow Archaic site to identify separate episodes of occupation (for related studies, see House and Wogaman 1978; Schreiber and Sullivan 1984). Other discussions of spatial analysis, especially of surface remains, are supplied by Lewarch and O'Brien (1981a).





Many seemingly sophisticated spatial studies in archaeology are actually flawed because, in the analysis, evidence on activity distributions and on formation processes has been conflated. Remarkably, even recent compilations of techniques of intrasite spatial analysis fail to consider the contributions of formation processes to artifact distributions (e.g., Orton 1980:142-155; several papers in Hietala 1984). Much attention has been devoted to recognizing spatial clusters of artifacts on "occupation floors," on the assumption that such clusters denote activity areas (e.g., Versaggi 1981). But clustering is also created by refuse disposal patterns (see Andresen et al. 1981:24), with degree of concentration of refuse varying directly with the intensity of settlement occupation (Murray 1980; Rathje and Schiffer 1982:116; Schiffer 1972). De facto refuse can also be deposited in clusters, depending on whether or not return is anticipated (Stevenson 1982), as can provisional refuse (Deal 1985). Artifact clustering can also be produced by various disturbance processes, either cultural or noncultural (Wilk and Schiffer 1979; Sivertsen 1980). Statistically covarying sets of artifacts that usually have spatial configurations can also be generated by cultural formation processes (Carr 1984; Schiffer 1974, 1976a). Spatial models that take into account a variety of formation processes are now being developed in ethnoarchaeology (Deal 1985).





Artifact Diversity





Artifact diversity is a characteristic of deposits particularly sensitive to cultural formation processes. It is easily measured with a host of available techniques that can be applied to material types or to techno-functional types. Coefficients of variation, measures of entropy, and even simple ranges can serve to compare artifact diversity among deposits. For an especially useful way to assess diversity that controls for differences in sample size, see Kintigh (1984). In the remainder of this discussion, I use "diversity" to mean range of types or richness (Kintigh 1984).





In accord with the Clarke Effect (Schiffer 1975d; Rathje and Schiffer 1982:119), artifact diversity is responsive to variations in the occupation span of settlements (see also Yellen 1977a; Schiffer 1978a:244). Because differences in settlement and activity area functions as well as sample





Page 282





size also influence artifact diversity, one must employ this measure with care (for an example, see Thomas 1983). Nevertheless, artifact diversity is a strong line of evidence that can be used in many cases to differentiate various refuse sources (see Chapter 12; London 1985). For example, highly specialized activities, such as ceramic or lithic manufacture, contribute a low-diversity stream of refuse. Thus primary refuse or discrete deposits of secondary refuse from such activities exhibit very low diversity. On the other hand, great diversity is found in secondary refuse deposits containing refuse streams from a settlement's entire range of activities (Boone 1980; Schiffer 1976a). Moreover, in sites occupied for at least several years, deposits containing secondary refuse generally exhibit the greatest artifact diversityunless there is a substantial amount of reuse or reclamation.





Artifact Density of Deposits





The overall artifact density in a deposit is a direct trace of the concentrating and dispersing effects of various formation processes (Green 1961a:51). For example, similar secondary refuse deposits that differ only in artifact density might have formed at different rates, consisting of different ratios of cultural materials to noncultural sediments (Heizer 1960). In some cases, comparisons based on densities for each type of material (e.g., sherds, lithics, animal bone, shell) might be useful. The term "concentration index" is usually applied to artifact densities specific to certain types of materials (Heizer 1960:100; Willey and McGimsey 1954:54). Densities can also be computed by surface area of recovery unit, and this measure is especially suited for many cultural formation processes (see Chapter 12; Reid 1973; Schiffer 1976a). As more experiments are carried out, new applications of artifact density measures are likely to be devised.





Measures of Disorganization





Cultural formation processes often produce deposits containing associated artifacts that were not intimately related in systemic context. Alyawara secondary refuse areas, for example, include the remains of myriad activities ranging from meal preparation to car repair (O'Connell 1979b). To see this process in action, one need look no farther than one's own household refuse. Not only do many processes bring together unrelated items, but they can also separate items used together as well as parts of the same artifact, leading to their occurrence in different deposits. Of the many characteristics that monitor disorganizing effects, those mentioned below seem to have promise.





The completeness index (CI) is very sensitive to variations in formation processes. To illustrate how it is calculated, ceramic items will be used,





Page 283





but implications are also drawn for other artifact materials. The appropriate unit of analysis is the once-whole individual artifact (e.g., a pot or bottle), as determined from the remnants that survive in a deposit. For each deposit, sherds are sorted into the vessels from which they came. (The number of such vessels, of course, is analogous to the minimum number of individuals in faunal analysis and may itself be a useful characteristic.) After groups have been formed consisting of sherds from the same original vessel, one computes the CI by determining the fraction of each pot represented by the sherds. This is accomplished by dividing the total weight of sherds by the weight of a similar whole vessel. To summarize the composite CIs for all vessels in a deposit, the investigator can employ various averages as well as the range, frequency distributions, and the cumulative frequency graph. High mean values of the CI, approaching the maximum of 1.0, should be found in some types of de facto refuse, grave goods, caches, and certain kinds of secondary refuse (e.g., sanitary landfills). Low mean values of the CI (near 0) are expected, for example, in residual primary refuse and in various deposits that have been extensively reworked. For an application of the CI, see Lightfoot (1984).





It should be evident that deposits with a high mean CI could exhibit a range from large numbers of small fragments to small numbers of large fragments (Hulthén 1974). This potentially interesting variation is monitored by the fragmentation index (FI). To compute the FI, the researcher returns to the piles of fragments, each of which represents a once-complete object. For each of the latter, the investigator counts the number of pieces (P) and inserts it into the following equation:





The fragmentation index ranges in value from 1.0an artifact represented by one pieceto numbers approaching 0, which indicate intense fragmentation. Formal properties of the ceramics, such as vessel size, will influence to some degree the FI. Experiments are needed to determine the conditions under which corrections need to be introduced.





It should be recalled that the appropriate analytic unit for calculating these indices is the deposit (e.g., contents of a room floor, a layer in a trash mound, a segment of construction fill). Obviously, in many cases one is dealing not with an entire deposit, but a sample. Herein lies the advantage of the CI and FI: results are probably relatively insensitive to all but the most severe sampling problemspresuming that the sample





Page 284





size (i.e., number of fragments) from each unit is sufficiently large. Although experiments are required to determine the minimum acceptable sample sizes under various conditions, I anticipate that they will be mercifully small.





Ceramic and glass artifacts are well suited to calculation of the CI and Fl. More importantly, the indices for these types of artifacts monitor primarily formation processes, as opposed to the systemic processes that complicate their applications to lithics and animal bone. By examining attributes of ceramics and glass, such as sherd thickness and curvature, color of slip and paste, and nature of the temper (Sullivan 1980:265), the sherds from individual vessels can be segregatedassuming that individual vessels have some unique attributes. When the latter condition is not met, as in mass-produced pottery, computation of the indices is more problematic. One possibility is to divide the number of sherds by the minimum number of vessels; the latter could be calculated on the basis of specific diagnostic parts, such as rims, necks, or bases (Millett 1979). Under the more favorable conditions encountered in many prehistoric settings, it may be possiblegiven a sufficiently large artifact sample to base the indices entirely on rim sherds (Orton 1982:10-11). Other potentially useful discussions of pottery quantification are furnished by Orton (1975), Chase (1985), Vince (1977), and Hally (1983).





For a variety of reasons, the CI and Fl are not well suited for use on chipped stone and animal bone. When it is possible to determine without reassembly (see below) which flakes came from the same core or which bones came from the same animal, the indices might furnish useful information, subject to the same limitations as those of reassembly. For example, deliberate animal burials and intrusive rodents that died in their burrows will exhibit high values of the CI (Olsen and Olsen 1974; Thomas 1971; Bocek 1986).





If the investigator is willing to aggregate specimens by species (or higher taxon), then the "corrected specimens per individual" (CSI) may provide information on faunal completeness. Thomas (1971:367) supplied the formula for the CSI, but to reduce ambiguities the symbols are modified here:





in which NISP is the number of identified elements for that species (Grayson 1979:201) and E is a species-specific constant approximating the number of recognizable elements (Thomas 1971:367-368). The CSI varies from less than 1.0 (highly incomplete animals) to about 100 (whole





Page 285





animals) and permits one to compare different species. A quick-and-dirty approximation to the CSI, not valid for interspecific comparisons, is simply NISP/MNI, which (based on data in Thomas 1971:368) varies from 1.0 to numbers ranging from about 15 (small species) to about 125 (larger species). Intraspecific comparisons are more apt to indicate differences in formation processes than simply variability in procurement, butchering, and distribution patterns. In any event, one must recognize that completeness indices for faunal remains will be affected by many systemic factors in addition to formation processes.





Zooarchaeologists have shown that the CSI and other measures are appreciably influenced by sample size (e.g., Grayson 1979, 1984). These sampling effects are obviously important and must be assessed; nevertheless, often it is formation processes (and not recovery processes) that determine sample size. Isolating sample-size effects per se in such situations is much more problematic. Clearly, application of measures of disorganization, particularly of faunal remains, must be carried out in full awareness of possible sample size effects.





Artifact Reassembly





Reassembly of artifactsmostly potteryonce functioned mainly to furnish museums with displayable specimens. In recent decades, however, investigators have sought to secure information from the spatial patterns exhibited by the fragments of once-whole objects. I now examine the technique of reassembly, which is also called "cross-mending" and "refitting," in order to evaluate its potential in helping to identify formation processes. In studying formation processes, the mere grouping together of fragmentsrather than actual reassemblyusually suffices.





A number of archaeologists have reassembled ceramic and glass artifacts to establish contemporaneity between otherwise separate deposits (e.g., Burgh 1959). As South (1977:291) notes,





Cross mending of artifacts is an important means of associating features at one moment in time, such as the recovery of a white Salt-glazed stoneware teapot from a number of features. The gluing of these fragments together joins the features as well.... The same applies to cross mending of fragments from various stratigraphic layers which bounds the stratigraphy into a single temporal unit.





Underlying this use of reassembly is the assumption that fragments of an individual artifact were deposited in different places at about the same time. This assumption is not always warranted (Lindauer 1982; von Gernet 1982). For example, several deposits containing some of a vessel's sherds may be subsequently mixed with later or earlier materials and redepos-





Page 286





ited, while sherds in other deposits remain undisturbed. For Hohokam mounds and Maya temple fill, such a scenario is far from unlikely.





Archaeologists are beginning to explore the vast potential that ceramic reassembly holds for illuminating formation processes (Lindauer 1982; von Gernet 1982). For example, Cressey et al. (1982:156) discovered that about 85 percent of the pottery from privy-well deposits in Alexandria, Virginia, could be reassembled into vessels. This finding suggests a short and simple waste stream for that household refuse. London (1985) examined ceramic reconstructability for three cave deposits of the Early Bronze Age in Israel, discovering considerable variability. In an exemplary study in the identification of formation processes, Hally (1983) used ceramic reassembly to infer refuse types in three Mississippian structures at the Little Egypt site, establishing a basis for behavioral inference. Bostwick (1985) employed ceramic reassembly on several excavated assemblages from nothern Arizona; he was able to demonstrate upward movementprobably by frost heavingof small, eroded sherds from restorable vessels on structure floors (for another Southwestern case, see Nelson 1985).





Lithic reassembly or conjoining has become popular in recent years and has sometimes yielded impressive results. Because lithic cores were never whole artifacts in the same sense as a pot or glass bottle, core refitting, with some exceptions, is not a technique that sensitively and uniquely indicates formation processes. Indeed, a variety of processes, including manufacture and use, contribute to the dissemination of the products and by-products of each core. The resulting artifact distributions do not, therefore, unambiguously monitor formation processes or activity patterns. One way around this problem is to focus only on those lithic artifacts, such as bifaces, that when whole did function as an entity in systemic context. Roper (1976), for example, constructed a crude measure of plowing displacement on the basis of cross-mends in bifaces. Goodyear (1974) used biface cross-mends to investigate temporal relations among "living floors" at the Brand site. Biface fragments, however, can be reused or scavenged, factors that need to be considered in future studies.





An elegant application of lithic refitting to investigate formation processes was carried out by Villa (1982) on materials from Terra Amata (for other useful studies, see Bunn et al. 1980; Kroll and Isaac 1984; and Barton and Bergman 1982). By refitting lithics from this apparently simple site, she discovered evidence for an appreciable amount of postdepositional artifact movement, although the exact processes that mixed the artifacts into different geological layers are not specified (Villa 1982:282). Villa's demonstration of a kind of disturbance hitherto ignored has many implications for the analysis of presumably discrete archaeological layers. For





Page 287





additional references to lithic refitting studies, see Cahen et al. (1979:663) and Hofman (1981).





Fragments of individual bones can, like lithics, be reassembled. Bunn et al. (1980) performed such an analysis for an early hominid site in Kenya, obtaining information on activity patterns and formation processes (see also Kroll and Isaac 1984). Although it might be possible under favorable circumstances to perform some reassembly of elements into animal skeletons (see Villa 1982:285), ordinarily this cannot be achieved reliably (Grayson 1979:202). Moreover, like lithics, the dispersal of animal parts results from preparation and use, not just formation processes.





Degree of completeness and articulation of human skeletons, along with other evidence on manner of burial, are attributes useful in distinguishing primary and secondary interments and in indicating, generally, the degree of "post-mortem handling" (Brown 1981:31).





Artifact reassembly is a technique with much promise. In order for it to be realized, the investigator must always keep in mind, especially for lithic and bone artifacts, that past activities and formation processes can both contribute to the observed patterns.





Representation of Parts





In lieu of skeletal reassembly, taphonomists and zooarchaeologists have investigated overall patterns of representation of elements and major portions of elements (Binford 1978b; Gifford 1981; Shipman 1981). Ethnoarchaeological and experimental studies have demonstrated that many processes, ranging from curate behavior to weathering and bone collecting by procupines, operate selectively (e.g., Behrensmeyer and Boaz 1980; Binford 1981b: 42-44, 210-242; Gifford 1981; Pastron 1974; Shipman 1981; Yellen 1977b). Following Binford's suggestions, Bayham (1982:329) calculated indices of attrition for artiodactyls at Ventana Cave. He noted that "the relationship between the proximal and distal humeri at Ventana indicates the assemblage has undergone attrition." Apparently, computation of the representation patterns of elements and element fragments is an efficient and relatively sensitive approach to recognizing certain formation processes of faunal remains.





Analogous techniques can be devised for discerning patterns of part representation of other artifact classes. For example, sherd representation figures may indicate whether potters preferentially selected body, base, or rim sherds for recycling into temper. As another example, a high ratio of biface bases to tips in the remains of a base camp suggests that, after breakage, the bases were curated, probably tagging along with the haft (Goodyear 1974; Binford 1976).





Page 288





Other Properties of Deposits





A final set of characteristics sensitive to formation processes includes sediments, ecofacts, chemical properties, the structure and context of deposits, and site morphology.





Sediments





Natural processes have traditionally received major emphasis in the interpretation of archaeological sediments (e.g., Butzer 1971; Gladfelter 1977; Hassan 1978; Limbrey 1975; Pyddoke 1961). As Whittlesey and others (Bullard 1970, 1985; Butzer 1982; Eidt 1984, 1985; Rosen 1985; Stein 1985; Whittlesey et al. 1982; Wildesen 1973) point out, however, in many situations the sediment is culturally deposited or modified and is thus an artifact or "anthrosol." Butzer (1982:78) emphasizes that "people and animals are geomorphic agents that produce a specific range of archaeological sediments that require special attention and interpretation." As this perspective is elaborated by geoarchaeologists, the traces of a variety of cultural formation processes will certainly become evident. In the meantime, I shall briefly treat the extant framework for handling sediments and occasionally indicate possible lines of inquiry. For general discussions of sediment sampling and analytic procedures, see Butzer (1971, 1982), Catt and Weir (1976), Limbrey (1975), Goldberg (1980), Selley (1976), Shackley (1975), and Stein (n.d.). I now turn to the properties of sediments that are studied archaeologically and that can furnish information on formation processes.





The most commonly recorded attribute of archaeological sediment is color (see Limbrey 1975:256-259). The color of a sediment, usually recorded with the aid of Munsell color charts, is determined by a number of factors relating to formation processes, including parent materials, humus and moisture content, soil chemistry, time span of formation, and cultural constituents. Thus, differences in sediment color indicate differences in formation processes, although the converse is not necessarily true (see Wilson 1985 for the use of color in identifying the cultural formation processes of microstrata in pits). In cultural deposits, it is not just color, but color variations within a single deposit that take on significance (Limbrey 1975:259). For example,





at Town Creek Indian Mound in North Carolina there is an orange clay subsoil underlying the red clay subsoil . . pits such as burials that were dug into the orange layer and backfilled almost immediately contain flecks of orange clay in the fill ... Pits allowed to fill with midden are easily distinguished by the absence of the orange clay flecks (South 1977:285).





Swirl patterns implicate soft-sediment deformation, for which a variety





Page 289





of cultural and natural processes may be responsible. A closely related property, sensitive to formation processes, is the nature of the boundary between sediments of different colors (Limbrey 1975:269-270). For example, sharply defined pit boundaries indicate an absence of earthworm activity. A general discussion of boundaries and interfaces between strata is provided by Harris (1979:38-48).





Texture, another frequently recorded property of sediment, refers among other thingsto the frequency distribution of particle size. The ability of texture to reflect formation processes, particularly those of the natural environment, is well known (see the archaeological applications in Davidson and Shackley 1976; Stein and Farrand 1985; Rapp and Gifford 1985); usually, however, other lines of evidence are needed for isolating the precise process. Shackley (1975, 1981) and Limbrey (1975) present basic principles as well as appropriate analytic techniques. Farrand (1985) discusses textural analysis of cave and rockshelter sediments.





The composition of a sediment, its precise mineral and non-mineral make-up, furnishes a wide range of useful information on cultural and noncultural formation processes (Bullard 1970, 1985; Rosen 1985). Refined compositional studies can be carried out by petrographic analysis of sediment samples (Catt and Weir 1976).





The surface morphology of sediment particles, seen through the microscope (optical and SEM), may help to indicate the genesis of a sediment (Shackley 1981:16). In particular, Dincauze (1976:11) suggests that chipping or stone boiling debris contributes tiny angular mineral particles to sediments; this hypothesis has been confirmed experimentally (Fladmark 1982). Further studies of grain morphology in cultural sediments are clearly indicated. The morphology of larger particles, especially those found in rockshelters, provides traces of numerous noncultural processes (e.g., Laville 1976; Laville et al. 1980).





Formation processes are also illuminated by various inhomogeneities in a sediment, sometimes referred to as micromorphology or fabric (Bullard 1985; Butzer 1982; Shackley 1981; Goldberg 1980). For example, organic materials in a deposit may decay, creating voids, "which are then filled with new sediment or stabilized by the precipitation of solubles" (Butzer 1982:89-90). The filled voids of rootlets might indicate in a deeply buried horizon that the surface had once stabilized long enough to allow plant growth (see Limbrey 1975:265).





A final property of sediment is the resistance of a substrate to an applied force, such as a foot pressing downward; this property has been labeled "permeability" in trampling studies (e.g., Gifford 1978:83; Schiffer 1977:23; Wilk and Schiffer 1979:533). Because permeability already has a precise meaning in sedimentology, a less ambiguous term should be employed, perhaps penetrability or degree of compaction (see Chapter





Page 290





5). As noted above, loose substrates trap primary refuse as well as trampled and lost items. Cultural activities also create deposits varying greatly in their degrees of compaction (Pyddoke 1961:12). For example, people and animals (Watson 1979:157) can produce more compact surfaces by walking; other activities, such as filling a pit with sand or humus-rich sediment, can reduce compaction. In measuring this variable, one must allow for the possibility that various postdepositional processes have altered the degree of compaction. For example, compaction is increased by the decay of organic matter and intrusion of mineral binders, such as calcium carbonate, into a deposit. Similarly, one cannot conclude, as did Hughes and Lampert (1977), that lithification of a deposit was so rapid that various disturbance processes could not have acted after cultural deposition.





Many advances in sedimentology are expected in the years ahead, particularly as the traces of various cultural formation processes are sought, perhaps initially in experimental archaeology and ethnoarchaeology. The ubiquitous dirt we labor so hard to remove is itself an artifact that has much information to disclose (Whittlesey et al. 1982).





Ecofacts and Other Intrusive Materials





In addition to a mineral fraction, archaeological sediments contain a host of other materials that serve as traces of the environment(s) in which they formed (Pyddoke 1961:76-78; Shackley 1981). Insects (Shackley 1981), vertebrate remains (e.g., bones, hair, feathers), feces, plant parts and seeds (Miksicek n.d.), pollen (Bryant and Holloway 1983), opal phytoliths and other plant crystals (Rovner 1983; Brochier 1983), land snail shells (Evans 1972; Bobrowsky 1984), various concretions, nesting materials (of birds, rodents, and insects), and humus are among the ecofacts found in many cultural deposits that furnish evidence of noncultural formation processes. In one recent study, for example, Kroll and Isaac (1984) found that apparent fossilized termite burrows occurred in areas of an early hominid site in Kenya where artifacts had the greatest vertical dispersal, suggesting that termite disturbance and not different occupations were responsible for the vertical differentiation.





As several examples make clear, ecofacts can also help to identify cultural formation processes. In many environments weedy plants colonize refuse scatters, leaving behind characteristic pollen. If that deposit is later buried or scooped up and used as construction fill, the pollen from weedy plants will probably reveal an earlier existence as a surficial deposit (see Shackley 1981:85). Many insects, such as beetles, prefer habitats that include decaying vegetation. If such species are found, for example, in a deposit of secondary refuse that lacks preserved macrofloral remains, one could propose that such materials were present but decayed (see Shackley





Page 291





1981:142-144). Exploiting the potential of ecofacts to yield information on cultural formation processes assumes that many environmental materials are in fact culturally deposited or are deposited in microenvironments created by cultural formation processes (Greig 1981; Brochier 1983; Miller and Smart 1984).





Geochemistry





Sporadic efforts over many decades have brought us to the threshold of a recognizable ''geochemical archaeology.'' Although there has been progress, particularly in the area of prospection and analytical techniques (Carr 1982; Eidt 1984, 1985), more experimental work remains to be accomplished (e.g., Wildesen 1973).





A variety of chemical properties of deposits such as pH, moisture content, and temperature have been shown to condition or reflect the operation of both cultural and noncultural formation processes. These are sufficiently well known to require no elaboration (for examples, see Rathje and Schiffer 1982). Additional information on formation processes, particularly cultural deposition, is found in the presence of particular elements and ions, many of which are the only remaining traces of some original constituents of the matrix (Carr 1982; Cook and Heizer 1965; Butzer 1982; Bakkevig 1980; Eidt 1984). For example, on the basis of large amounts of mercury (Hg) in the soil of the Neville site, Dincauze (1976) was able to argue that the locality had been used during Archaic times to process anadromous fish. Butzer (1982:82) suggests that "gas chromatograph analysis of amino acids may identify animal residues from bone, fat, blood, etc." He goes on to propose that the sophisticated technology of organic chemistry might permit the identification of other deposited materials that have decayed (Butzer 1982:82; see also Mackenzie et al. 1982). Chemical tests can occasionally differentiate cultural from noncultural features (see, e.g., van der Merwe and Stein 1972). The ash content of a deposit may help to pinpoint the sources of refuse. Stein (1984) has shown how quantification of organic matter and carbonates can furnish information on the origins of particular levels in pit fill.





Geochemical archaeology has an important role to play in understanding formation processes and in interpreting surviving evidence. In particular, the chemical make-up of archaeological sediments can assist in resolving some problems of negative evidence, because geochemical studies can indicate (1) if conditions were favorable for the preservation of specific materials in a given deposit and (2) whether specific materials were in fact once present in a deposit. Clearly, if the chemistry of the deposits has not greatly changed, geochemical investigations can tell us when the absence of evidence is really evidence for absence (see Chapter 13).





Page 292





Site Morphology





A host of other traces are subsumed under this heading. Factors such as mound slope (Davidson 1976; Kirkby and Kirkby 1976; Rosen 1985), furrows and plow scars, and potholes furnish strong evidence on the occurrence of many cultural and natural formation processes. Such processes may affect the entire site (which can be viewed for some purposes as a single deposit) or specific deposits within it. Most such macrotraces are well known and require no further treatment.





Analytical Strategies





Use of Extant Knowledge





As Reid (1985) points out, a large number of specific formation processes and a much larger number of potential combinations of processes could have contributed to the genesis of any deposit. Fortunately, the investigator can reduce the almost infinite set of possibilities to a more manageable number by applying extant knowledge. The latter comes in several forms (Reid 1985), of which the most important for present purposes are: (1) general principles that specify the conditions known to favor or curtail the operation of particular processes (see earlier Chapters), and (2) empirical generalizations that indicate the prevalence of certain processes specific to localities, societies, or sites.





As noted in Chapters 8 and 9, environmental parameters such as landform and temperature/precipitation patterns determine the occurrence of many formation processes. For example, in areas that have been warm deserts during periods of human occupation, cryoturbation, frost heaving, and other cold-environment processes can be ruled out immediately, whereas eolian deposition or deflation and rodent burrowing most likely took place. Similarly, by drawing upon general principles of cultural formation processes, one can readily appreciate that mobile populations make use of highly curated technologies (Binford 1973, 1976, 1979) and probably engage in a considerable amount of recycling (Goodyear 1979). Knowing this, the investigator of Paleoindian sites, for example, would test for the effects of recycling and curate behavior by seeking the traces of these predicted processes. As more is learned about the general noncultural and cultural factors that condition the occurrence of specific formation processes, archaeologists will be able to expeditiously rule out some processes and assign high probabilities to others in given research contexts.





Local expertise, gained from familiarity with previous archaeological investigations in a locality or region, also figures prominently in making the study of formation processes routine. It is useful to regard local expertise as a set of empirical generalizations that, unlike laws and the-





Page 293





ories, have definite time-space boundary conditions (Reid 1985; Reid, Schiffer, and Neff 1975). For example, although Hohokam secondary cremations show abnormally low bone weights, bones from more than one person are sometimes found in the same cremation deposit (Birkby 1976). Apparently, the Hohokam were not meticulous when it came to gathering up the remains of a cremated individual for burial elsewhere, leading to "multiple cremations" and to low bone weights (Reinhard and Fink 1982). One possible outcome of this cultural practice is that portions of seemingly independent deposits may have derived from the same cremation event. South's investigations of American colonial sites have shown that secondary refuse tends to accumulate in predictable ways: "adjacent" secondary refuse near entrances to structures and "peripheral" secondary refuse in more distant places (South 1977). In the British sites of the eighteenth century, most refuse was apparently of the "adjacent'' variety (South 1977:48). Given this knowledge, the archaeologist is in an excellent position to search British sites for and begin the process of interpreting such deposits. In the eastern United States, a substantial fraction of prehistoric sites, even shallow and small ones, are multicomponent (e.g., see Schiffer and House 1975; House and Wogamon 1979). The investigator who knows that any site has a high probability of containing evidence of many occupations will seek ways to deal rigorously with the resultant complexity (see, e.g., Goodyear et al. 1979). The reader could doubtless supply additional examples of useful empirical generalizations from other regions.





Although formation processes are highly varied and their potential combinations seemingly infinite, regularitiesboth general and of more restricted naturehelp us to sort out the more (and less) likely probabilities for the cases at hand.





A Multivariate Approach





In some instances the investigator may have little prior knowledge about formation processes, and so a great many potentially independent traces will have to be examined in order to identify the formation processes of the deposits in question. A logical adjunct to the use of multiple indicators, especially where little is known about the processes that might be involved, is to analyze a set of deposit data with multivariate statistical techniques. Specific models of formation processes can then be built to account for the covarying characteristics and for the similarities and differences among the deposits.





This approach has been taken at Cuello, a Maya site in Belize (Seymour 1980; Wilk and Kosakowsky 1978). Investigators carried out intensive recovery of large and small artifacts within representative samples from different deposits. A variety of traces of formation processes were re-





Page 294





corded for each deposit and the resultant data were cluster-analyzed, thereby grouping deposits according to major formation processes. Interpretations that accounted for the similar characteristics of deposits were then offered for each group. The analysis stage of the Cuello Project is still underway, but the preliminary results have been promising. Indeed, they suggest that many of the mound-fill deposits in Maya sites, which customarily are not analyzed because they are thought to be devoid of temporal or behavioral information, have considerable potential to contribute to both kinds of inference.





Use of Published Data





It is inevitable that archaeologists will return again and again to old excavation reports to obtain data for addressing current research topics. Site reports are an important resource that, regrettably, often furnish scant evidence for studying formation processes. Even so, the attempt must be made to identify formation processes when using data from old reports, as a somewhat lengthy example shows.





Lightfoot and Feinman (1982) recently sought to study the development of suprahousehold organization among Mogollon pithouse villages. Specifically, they tried to demonstrate the presence of village leaders or "big men" having political authority. They examined house size, storage capacity, agricultural produce, and exotic goods, by analyzing the published data on nine sites from east-central Arizona and west-central New Mexico. I focus specifically on their claim to have shown, on the basis of the distribution among pithouses of exotic items such as turquoise, marine shell, and Hohokam pottery, that the occupants of larger pithouses engaged in more long-distance trade than did the occupants of small houses. The authors claim that





the five largest houses (1, 3, 7, 18, and 5) occupied during the earliest temporal component at Crooked Ridge Village were associated with 100 percent of the "Hohokam" ceramics and 100 percent of the turquoise and marine shell.... The. .. results support the hypothesis that large households were most actively involved in the exchange of nonlocal goods (Lightfoot and Feinman 1982:75).





The crucial question, of course, is the likelihood that the artifacts deposited in a pithouse were in fact used by the occupants of that house, as the investigators assume. Although Lightfoot and Feinman declined to investigate the formation processes of the pithouse deposits at the sites they used, information in the published reports makes it possible to evaluate the foundation of their analysis. Data from Crooked Ridge Village (Wheat 1954, 1955), a well-reported site that figures prominently in the Lightfoot and Feinman study, serves as an example.





Page 295





Justification of the analysis done by Lightfoot and Feinman requires that the pithouses contain predominantly primary or de facto refuse. The McKellar Principle suggests that if residual primary refuse is present, it will consist mainly of small items on floors. The exotic items are all small and could be primary refuse. Unfortunately, none of the Hohokam sherds and only one piece each of shell and turquoise were found in "floor" provenience (artifacts in contact with the pithouse floor). The remaining exotic items3 pieces of turquoise, 14 shell items, and 78 Hohokam sherdswere all recovered in floor fill (the level from floor to about 1015 cm above it) and fill (everything else above floor fill). Moreover, in the fill levels of Lightfoot and Feinman's five large pithouses, only six Hohokam sherds were foundall in one house. It is possible, of course, that the exotic items were originally deposited on floors but were moved upward by disturbance processes. Natural disturbance processes prevalent in this area include tree roots and burrowing animals such as rodents, insects, and worms. It is unlikely, however, that such varied processes could shift uniformly upward nearly all the exotic artifacts on the floors. As shown below, the preponderance of evidence suggests other than primary or de facto refuse origins for the fill materials.





Examination of restorable pots and complete manos and metates in floor provenience served as an index to de facto refuse. Only 6 of 24 pithouses contained restorable pots, and 14 had at least 1 mano or metate. On the floors of seven houses were found three or fewer artifacts. These figures suggest that many houses did not include a very impressive array of de facto refuse, probably as a result of curate behavior or scavenging. The five large pithouses of greatest interest to Lightfoot and Feinman are not atypical. All (except house 18) had at least one whole mano or metate in floor contact; but only two (houses 5 and 7) had pots in floor provenience. Thus, even if the investigators had confined their analysis exclusively to "floor" artifacts, it is doubtful that comparable deposits of de facto refuse, with the possible exception of ground stone, were available from most pithouses.





We may now ask, what is the nature of the fill and floor-fill levels? Joe Ben Wheat, the excavator, assumed but did not demonstrate that the materials had been deliberately dumped or had washed into the pithouses after their abandonments (Wheat 1954:14, 168); that is, he assumed that they were secondary refuse or secondary deposits. Additional evidence to evaluate the fluvial hypothesis is lacking, but for present purposes such a test is not essential. It should be noted, however, that the site exhibits sufficient relief to indicate that fluvial processes played a role in filling abandoned pithouses.





The remaining lines of evidence suggest that the bulk of fill and floorfill items are secondary refuse. In general, these deposits contain a di-





Page 296





versity of fragmentary artifacts. In one pithouse, for example, there are 35 sherds from at least 5 Hohokam pots. In addition, pottery types representing several phases are often present in the same pithouse; in one case, the phases span more than 600 years. Moreover, for the site taken as a whole, fill deposits contain more kinds of artifacts than floors. Of Wheat's 114 fine-grained types for all artifacts (except unworked sherds and restorable pots), 62 are found in floor context and 92 in the fill and floor-fill levels. In the fill itself, 87 types are present. Floor assemblages do exhibit a greater diversity of ground and pecked stone artifacts, however, suggesting that these sometimes bulky items were deposited as de facto refuse. With their diverse ceramic, bone, and chipped stone artifacts, the fill levels seem to represent mainly artifacts of higher discard rate, which is consistent with the secondary refuse hypothesis.





If the completeness index could be computed for pots in the fill, it would probably produce relatively low values, predictable for some kinds of secondary refuse and for extensively reworked deposits. A completeness index may be crudely approximated for all intrusive sherds by dividing the quantity of such sherds (range: 0 to 392) by the minimum number of vessels (MNV) for each pithouse. The number of different types represented by the sherds places a lower limit on the MNV. If one is willing to assume that the intrusive sherds are generally small, then values of this index should go from 1.0 (a vessel represented by one small sherd) to more than 100. The results for all Crooked Ridge pithouses range from 1.0 to 24.5 on the combined fill and floor-fill deposits, with a median of less than 2.0. The index for the five large pithouses varies from 1.0 to 2.0, demonstrating a high degree of incompleteness. These findings indicate that, after the breakage of a vessel, its sherds were widely dispersed over the site, probably as secondary refuse that was extensively reworked. Such a high degree of disorganization can arise through a number of specific refuse disposal, reclamation, and disturbance processes (Chapters 4-6). Future studies of Mogollon pithouse villages should strive to model these processes in more detail to establish a credible basis for pithouse dating and other fundamental inferences.





If the above-floor pithouse contents are mainly secondary refuse, then one might expect a statistical relationship between materials in floor-fill and fill proveniences. If such a correlation could not be found, then there would be some basis for inferring that floor-fill artifacts were indeed laid down independently from the rest of the fill, perhaps as de facto refuse. Examining sherds only, one finds a fairly good correlation (r = .71, p<.05) between artifact quantity in fill and floor-fill of the pithouses, demonstrating that the "fill" is a single deposit (or multiple deposits) of postoccupational material that has been arbitrarily segmented. Apparently, the fill deposits containing the exotic artifacts are secondary refuse





Page 297





(or secondary deposits) of an unspecified nature and origin. There is no basis to assume, as did Lightfoot and Feinman, that these artifacts were left in a pithouse by its inhabitants.





But what of the relationship the investigators purportedly found between large houses and exotic items? An explanation can be framed in terms of formation processes. The probability that a secondary refuse deposit, such as the fill and floor-fill levels of a pithouse, will contain items of low discard rate (e.g., Hohokam pottery, shell, turquoise) increases with the quantity of refuse deposited, according to the Clarke Effect. There are grounds for believing that, in a sizable sample of Mogollon pithouses, large ones on the average should contain more secondary refuse than small ones, and thus more exotic items. Holding depth constant, larger pithouses have a greater refuse-holding capacity and, once abandoned, might become preferred dumping loci. In addition, after the structures decayed (or were scavenged for wood), smaller pithouses would fill in more rapidly by natural processes, reducing their opportunities to become dumps. If the earth that perhaps was placed against the walls and on the roof of these structures contained artifacts, then more such items would come to rest after structural collapse in the fill of larger houses. Finally, because of a greater perimeter, more artifacts should wash into larger pithouses.





Evidence from Crooked Ridge is instructive. Total artifacts in the pithouse fills range from 200 to more than 3500 with a mean of 1509, indicating substantial accumulations of refuse. Indeed, two of the five large pithouses (3 and 5) held in excess of 3400 sherds. The greatest number of Hohokam sherds came from house 19, a possible ceremonial structure, which contained 3430 sherds and had the largest floor area of Crooked Ridge pithouses (about 85 m2, my estimate). Even more suggestive are the mean sherd totals for the eight largest and nine smallest houses: 2246 and 877, respectively. At Crooked Ridge, at least, there is a relationship between pithouse size and total artifacts in the fill (represented by sherds, which comprise the bulk of the assemblage). Evidently, the hypothesis that the association of exotic artifacts and pithouse size in the Lightfoot and Feinman sample results from differential refuse deposition merits further scrutiny. It is not unlikely that the archaeological pattern found by these investigators is due entirely to formation processes rather than to the past behaviors of interest.





In this example, published data have provided a basis for coarsely identifying some formation processes of pithouse deposits. Although the exact nature of the pithouse fills is still unknown, as extensively reworked secondary refuse or secondary deposits they do not furnish relevant evidence for the specific research question addressed by Lightfoot and Feinman. If this example is indicative, then extant data may include





Page 298





sufficient traces of formation processes to permit an investigator to ascertain the degree of match between research question and available data (see Reid 1975). By identifying formation processes one determines the research potential of particular deposits and sites and, as a consequence, specifies their limitations with respect to particular research questions (Schiffer and House 1977a, 1977b).





A Best-Case Scenario





In the preceding example it was possible to offer usablealbeit impreciseidentifications of formation processes for deposits reported in the literature, but the measures of various processes were quite indirect. In the best of all possible worlds, the investigator has available the artifacts themselves as well as detailed information on the characteristics of the deposits that yielded them. In addition, local expertise on formation processes in some regions is well developed. Such knowledge can be put to good use, especially when an investigator controls the recovery and analytic stages of a project (Reid 1985). A hypothetical example of a pueblo site from the American Southwest illustrates how one could identify formation processes under these more favorable conditions. (See Hally [1983] for an actual study using prehistoric materials from Georgia.)





In the Southwest, resolution of a host of traditional and modern research problems, ranging from room-function inferences to intracommunity exchange patterns, requires the use of ceramic evidence from pueblo rooms, especially floor deposits (Schiffer 1985). Although the formation processes of such deposits are not yet known in intimate detail, one can still outline a general analytical strategy that will produce identifications of sufficient precision for many research needs. The following inferences are of interest in this case: (1) the use and manufacture spans of various ceramic types, (2) the activities that were carried out in rooms, and (3) the mode of pueblo abandonment. The example concentrates on ceramic artifacts because they are abundant and readily allow identification of some formation processes.





Analysis begins with reassembly of the sherds recovered from the floor deposits. This process leads to three potential ceramic groupings (adapted from Hally 1983): (1) restored vessels, (2) orphan sherds, (3) and pot fragments. Restored vessels are those intact enough to have been used as complete vessels; nevertheless, such vessels often lack sherds because disturbances have moved them into nonfloor deposits or they have been missed during excavation. Missing sherds should be sought in nearby deposits, for they may provide evidence on the occurrence of disturbance. Orphan sherds represent only a small proportion of a vesselone or just a few sherds, having a completeness index of perhaps less than.10. Pot fragments fall between orphan sherds and restored pots





Page 299





in degree of completeness and sometimes do see use as vessels. The dividing line between orphan sherds and pot fragments is arbitrary.





Two major processes are usually responsible for depositing restorable vessels on room floors: de facto refuse and ritual deposition. Ritual deposition occurs among some modern Southwestern groups, such as the Navajo (Kent 1984), usually upon the death of the house's occupant. Thus, the inference of ritual deposition can be supported by additional evidence, such as the discovery of human remains in the same room or the traces of a deliberate fire. If ritual deposition is ruled out, and indications are lacking that the vessels were intruded by later pits, then one can provisionally infer that the restored vessels represent de facto refuse.





Two minor modes of depositionprovisional refuse and abandonment stage refusealso can contribute restorable vessels to room floors, and these need to be considered in some cases. Horizontal distribution of the sherds, evidence of trampling damage, and a cultural cause of breakage (determined from the size distribution of a vessel's sherds), are lines of evidence for distinguishing these vessels from those of de facto refuse. For many research problems, of course, this differentiation is unimportant.





Orphan sherds can derive from any number of cultural and noncultural depositional processes. Table 10.1 provides a listing of the major processes, which range from residual primary refuse to secondary refuse. At the present time, it is difficult to identify the specific process responsible for each orphan sherd, and that is why such artifacts usually provide only the weakest of evidence for behavioral inference. Nonetheless, one can sometimes make useful identifications by examining additional traces. The first task is to determine if any of the materials represent secondary refuse deposited after the room was abandoned. If secondary refuse is present, it should also be found in the fill level immediately above the floor. Thus, one can seek an ashy deposit having a large artifact diversity and, usually, ceramics that have widely varying completeness indices. If a large deposit of secondary refuse covers much of the floor, then it will be difficult to isolate only those sherds deposited previously on the floor by other processes. Nevertheless, adhering material, sherd condition, microstratigraphic relationships, and location in the room may in some cases provide a basis for making identifications.





Identifying the formation processes of orphan sherds is more definitive in rooms where above-floor and below-floor deposits contain relatively few orphan sherds. Under these conditions, the likelihood increases that many of the orphan sherds on the floor were deposited as residual primary refuse or de facto refuse. Thus, in rooms lacking a secondary refuse deposit, sherds of residual primary refusewhich are usually small, abraded, and few in numbermay be found in a fringe near the walls.





Page 300

Table 10.1. A Provisional Framework for Generating Hypotheses to Account for Orphan Sherds on Pueblo Room Floors. (Based on earlier chapters and Schiffer [1976, 1983, 1985].)





1. Culturally deposited on the floor





a. Sherds in storage awaiting reuse (as in temper), deposited as de





facto refuse.





b. Residual primary refuse (the last few sherds of a vessel broken in





that room).





c. Materials incorporated into plaster used to refurbish floor.





d. Sherds used for other purposes (e.g., gaming piece, scoop, collec-





tible), deposited as de facto refuse.





e. Sherds deposited or disturbed by child's play and vandalism.





f. Sherds awaiting transport to a dump as provisional refuse (see





Cannon and Hayden 1983). Restorable vesselsbroken in systemic





contextmay also be present in provisional refuse.





g. Sherds deposited as abandonment stage refuse, i.e., artifacts allowed





to accumulate during the abandonment process in areas normally





kept clean.





2. Culturally deposited in nonfloor context





a. Chinking from wall material, brought into floor contact by deteri-





oration of a wall.





b. Sherds from secondary refuse deposited after the room was aban-





doned. Sherds may have fallen directly on the floor or could have





been moved there by burrowing animals.





c. Sherds deposited as part of roof construction or maintenance.





Melting or collapse of the roof can bring such sherds into floor





contact.





d. Sherds deposited as primary, secondary, or de facto refuse on the





roof.





e. Subfloor materials moved upward by disturbance processes.





However, because rodents frequently burrow along walls and floors, one must be alert to the possibility that some sherds were deposited by rodent action and the natural infilling of the burrows. If the orphan sherds occur in clusters instead of or in addition to a fringe, they are more likely to have been deposited as de facto refuse, such as sherds that were being stored for later use as temper. De facto refuse deposition is also indicated





Page 301





for orphan sherds that have been modified by chipping or grinding or that display a postbreakage wear pattern.





Inevitably, one will be left with orphan sherds whose formation processes cannot be inferred. In those cases, one simply acknowledges that such sherds of unknownprobably mixedformation processes do not furnish relevant evidence for many kinds of references. Such problematic orphan sherds should be left out of subsequent analyses requiring artifacts of known formation processes, even though this deletion has the effect of reducing sample sizes.





Pot fragments, like orphan sherds, can have many sources. Thus, the most definitive identifications will be in those rooms lacking secondary refuse and other large quantities of above-floor artifacts. In such rooms, pot fragments are likely to have been deposited as de facto refuse. Some pot fragments will display postbreakage modification and wear patterns, strengthening the inference (see Hally 1983), whereas otherslacking such evidencemay represent provisional or abandonment stage refuse. Placement, degree of clustering, and extent of fragmentation of these artifacts may help to identify their formation processes (see Nelson 1985). As in the case of orphan sherds, some pot fragments will have to be labeled as having indeterminate formation processes.





When the archaeologist has completed the analysis, the artifacts sorted by formation processes can be used as evidence for inferences. It must be stressed that artifacts deposited by different formation processes usually are appropriate for different kinds of inference (Schiffer 1972; Reid 1985). The most relevant evidence for determining the use and manufacture spans of pottery types are restorable vessels as de facto refuse, provisional refuse, and abandonment stage refuse. A second, weaker line of evidence is orphan sherds deposited as primary refuse. One can link the pottery types present in these categories of refuse with chronometric evidenceappropriately interpreted (Dean 1978)to provide data points for inferring use and manufacture spans of the pottery types.





The inference of room activities employs all sherds believed to have been deposited during the use and abandonment stages. Nevertheless, artifact groupings produced by different formation processes will be treated by different analytic techniques. For example, for a variety of reasons, correlational analysis of residual primary refuse sherds from room floors is not apt to produce behaviorally interpretable patterns (Schiffer 1985, n.d.b.), whereas in some cases, such treatment of restorable vessels could be informative.





The most relevant line of evidence for inferring the mode of pueblo abandonment is restorable vessels of de facto refuse. For example, if a pueblo has been abandoned suddenly, with little opportunity for curate behavior, one should find an abundance of restorable vessels. On the





Page 302





other hand, a very gradual abandonment, with much curate behavior accompanying each abandonment event, will lead to few restorable vessels. Most abandonment processes, of course, fall between these extremes, and techniques and principles for inferring the precise mode of abandonment are still in early stages of development (Schiffer 1985). One must find ways to identify the additional formation processes, such as lateral cycling, scavenging, and intrasettlement curate behavior that contribute to the ''depletion" of the de facto refuse (in relation to the systemic inventories).





It should be emphasized that in each case of inference, concern with formation processes does not end after relevant evidence has been specified through identification. The investigator must next cope with the variability introduced by the formation processes themselves. Grappling with those effects helps direct the selection of appropriate analytic techniques. For example, in dealing with sherds of residual primary refuse, one must recognize the many stochastic factors that lead to their presence on a room floor (e.g., probability of vessel breakage, probability that at least one sherd will remain after, sometimes, many clean-ups). It is unlikely that the sherds of residual primary refuse will completely represent the range of ceramic vessels used in a room. By pooling information from many similar rooms, however, the investigator may be able to flesh out the inventory of vessels customarily used in those spaces. An appreciation for these factors leads one to choose analytic techniques that stress presences, not absences (Seymour and Schiffer 1987).





Conclusion





The first order of business for the archaeologist is to identify the nature of the cultural and noncultural formation processes that created a given deposit or set of deposits (Reid 1985). To accomplish this, we may consider artifacts as merely peculiar particles in a sedimentary matrix (Schiffer and McGuire 1982a:252) that could have been subjected by cultural and environmental formation processes to a variety of mechanical and chemical alterations. By recording and analyzing these systematic effects, such as size reduction and sorting, damage patterns, and disorganization, investigators can come to appreciate the past agencies that were responsible for the complex arrangements of cultural and environmental materials (deposits) observed today. Knowledge gained from ethnoarchaeology, experimental archaeology, taphonomy, and geoarchaeology contributes importantly to the effort to understand the distinctive sediments encountered by the archaeologist.





At the same time, the perspective elaborated in this chapter leads us to view deposits themselves as peculiar artifacts, the characteristics of





Page 303





which must be studied in their own right. Deposits are the packages containing evidence that might be relevant to one's research questions. Establishing such relevance, however, requires that the genesis of deposits be determined, in terms of both cultural and noncultural formation processes. The archaeologist with a large-scale project and scores of inferences to make will find that the focus on deposits is logical and convenient, for by first identifying their formation processes, beginning in the field, one can efficiently and firmly match research questions to relevant evidence.





The importance of identifying formation processes before behavioral or environmental inferences are attempted cannot be overemphasized. In far too many cases, the evidence used by an archaeologist owes many of its properties, not to the past phenomena of interest, but to various formation processes. The example of the Lightfoot and Feinman study indicates the perils of failing to identify formation processes. If the latter are identified ''up front," using the most sensitive lines of evidence, then the investigator will be able to establish the comparability of deposits and their relevance for the research problems and to choose the most appropriate analytic strategies.





Although the traces of formation processeson artifacts and on the deposits that yield themare ubiquitous, the identification of specific formation processes is not accomplished speedily or with certainty, even under ideal circumstances. Nonetheless, as more experience is gained in studying the traces of formation processes, identification of the latter will become a routine part of the archaeological process. This must happen, for one cannot place confidence in inferences unless the formation processes of the evidence on which they rest have been identified to the required level of accuracy.





Page 305





