    Signifying and Marking:
    'Two Afro~American Speech Acts
    CLAUDIA MITCHELL-KERNAN



I
     Claudia Mitchell-Kernan is assistant professor of anthro-
     pology at Harvard University. She received her B.A. and
     M.A. degrees from Indiana University, her Ph.D. from
     the University of California, Berkeley, and has done field-
     work in the urban United States and Samoa. As one of a
    group of anthropologists and psychologists who have
    recently embarked on a long-term cross-cultural study of
    the development of communicative competence, she is a
    coauthor of the field manual prepared to guide this study
    (Slobin et al. 1967). The present chapter, which is
    adapted from her dissertation, reports on her eth-
    nographic work in a northern California urban black
    community.
       The last few years have seen a growing concern with
    Afro-American dialects on the parts of linguists con-
    cerned with descriptive and historical problems (Stewart
    1967; Labov 1969b; Wolfram 1969) and educators inter-
    ested in improved language and reading instruction
    (Barnt and Shuy, 1969). These studies h~we made impor-
    tant contributions to our understanding of black speech.
    It has been shown, e.g., that the language of urban blacks
    is not, as some have implied, simply a random collection
    of features deviating from the standard but rather an in-
    dependent dialect of English. Like other dialects of
    English, it has its own rules of grammar and pronuncia-
    tion, rules which are explainable in terms of the history of
    its speakers in much the same way as rules of other
    English language dialects. The educator's notions of
    "linguistic deprivation" have also been discredited.
    These notions, which are based almost entirely on
                                161
162   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

responses to formal questionnaires and psychological
tests which assume a knowledge of middle-class white
culture, have led some educators to characterize ghetto
children as linguistically underdeveloped and lacking in
verbal abilities. Ethnographic studies which deal with
black speech behavior in terms of the culture's own con-
ceptual system show quite different results. As Mitchell-
Kernan suggests, the exceptio'nally rich terminological
system including such folk concepts as "sounding," "rap-
ping," "running it down," "signifying," and "marking,"
all referring to verbal skills, testifies to the importance
which black culture assigns to verbal skills.
   The American urban situation is thus best regarded as
a system of multilingualism and multiculturalism charac-
terized by the coexistence of a variety of distinct ethnic
groups, each with its own body of traditions, values, and
rules of speaking. To understand this complex system, it
is, of course, first of all necessary to identify and describe
its constituent components. But mere description of sub-
systems is not enough if we are to learn how the plurality
of cultures operates in everyday interactions and how it
affects everyday I speech behavior., Members of ethnic
minority groups spend much of the day in settings where
dominant norms prevail. Even those individuals whose
behavior on the surface may seem quite deviant tend to
have at least a passive knowledge of the dominant cul-
ture. What sets them off from others is not simply the fact
that they are distinct but that their own private language
and life styles are juxtaposed with those of the public at
large as well. Mitchell-Kernan deals with juxtaposition of
values and its effect on everyday speech behavior
through her analysis of signifying the marking.
   Her study builds on the work of folklorists such as
Abrahams and Kochman ( 1969), and her discussion also
shows some similarity to Dundes discussion of verbal
dualing (Chapter 4). Note the similarity of the skills in-
volved in choosing topics appropriate to the context,
building on weaknesses in opponents argument, and
relying on shared cultural knowledge.
   While folklorists, however, deal with their material in
its own terms, emphasizing description and structural
analysis, Mitchell-Kernan is primarily concerned with
the way folk themes are used in natural conversations to
convey special culture-specific meanings. All her ex-
     Signifying and Marking: Two Afro-American Speech Acts      163

        amples are taken from tape recordings in everyday set-
        tings. She also devotes considerable discussion to the
        value of signifying and marking as communicative strate-
        gies, discussing the condition under which a speaker
        might find it advantageous to rely on such indirect means
        of getting across his point rather than making his point
        directly.
           Mitchell-Kernan also illustrates many of the features of
        communication discussed elsewhere in this volume, such
        as the discrepancy between surface meaning and com-
        municative function referred to by Ervin-Tripp (Chapter
        7) and Sacks (Chapter 11), the notion of culture as back-
        ground knowledge (Garfinkel, Chapter 1O; Sacks,
        Chapter 11; etc.). Of particular importance is the way in
       ·which she relates choice of linguistic code to content and
        function. Basing her ideas on Hymes's (Chapter 1) notion
        of the speech event as a structured whole, she shows how
        these components of speech events combine to convey
        meaning. Her view of black dialects is thus quite different
        from that of the other traditional dialectologists, who deal
        with black dialects purely on the level of syntax and ref-
        erence. For Mitchell-Kernan, these formal features of the
        linguistic code are merely signals of culturally based
        communicative strategies, strategies which reflect the
        Afro-American concern with speaking as a skill and an
        art.
           Like many of the chapters in this volume, Mitchell-
        Kernan 's work constitutes a departure from previous
        academic tradition and must be read not for its solid
        research results but for the suggestions it implies for fur-
        ther work. Nevertheless, it would seem that her point of
        view has several important implications for educational
        policy. Some of these implications are discussed by
        Gumperz ( I 970b ). See also the works of Frederick Wil-
        liams (I 969) and Henrie (1969). For a historical discus-
        sion of Afro-American speech patterns, see Dalby 1970,
        as well as his article in Kochman (in preparation).



        In a linguistic community which is bilingual or bidialectal, the
code in which messages are conveyed is likely to be highly salient both to
members of the community and to the ethnographer. The languages
spoken tend to be named, and individual speakers, who speak one or the
        164   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

other dialect in particular settings, identified as belonging to one or more
groups. The fact that more than one language is spoken, that various
social categories of people use specific languages in certain settings when
discussing particular topics with members of other social categories, is a
significant point of departure.
   Aside from language or grammar per se, there are, however, other as-
pects of the communicative compete~ce of such a group which require
analysis. The appropriate beginning point for an investigation may be the
analysis of the components which are emphasized by elaboration in a
variety of speech forms. Well-elaborated components comprise a basis for
selection among alternates. The pattern of such selection reveals crucial
social information.
   Hymes ( 1967) notes that precedence of components may differ from
case to case, and such differences may be a basis for the classification of
sociolinguistic systems. Such. hierarchies of precedence may depend not
simply on apparent causal direction in the interrelationships between
components but also on the cultural focus (salience-emphasis) upon one
or more of the components.
   The artistic component is significant in black English. The salience of
consideration of the artistic characteristics of speech acts in black English
is evidenced by both thy proliferation of terms which deal with aspects of
verbal style and the common occurrence of speech routines which may be
labeled by these terms. The artistic characteristics of a speech act are the
characteristics that have to do with the style of the speech act, i.e., with the
way in which something is said rather than with such components as the
topic or the interlocutors. Moreover, the very term art carries connota-
tions of value or judgment of appreciation (or nonappreciation).
   The speech acts which will be described here are among the many
which are given labels in black English. The terms themselves are some-
times descriptive of the style of the speech act. A partial list of such terms
is: signifying, rapping, sounding, playing the dozens, woofing, marking,
loud-talking, shucking, and jiving. Some of these terms are variants used
in particular geographic areas. Undoubtedly, other variants exist.
   I shall deal in detail two of these speech acts, treat their stylistic as-
pects, and attempt to relate the artistic characteristics to the other compo-
nents which together comprise the speech act. I will describe how these
speech acts are used and demonstrate that concern with style and value of
artistic merit on the part of speakers of black English influences' the other
components. Specifically, I will show that this concern has a direct effect
upon the choice of the linguistic code in certain conversational settings
and frequently explains the use of black dialect forms.
   Value regarding verbal art in black English is evident not only from the
 high frequency of occurrences of nameable artistic variants but also from
 the comments on such variants in ongoing conversations, including stated _/
I~-


             Signifying and Marking: Two Afro-American Speech Acts         165

      values regarding speech use and judgments of the ability of particular
      speakers that are based upon considerations of artistic merit and style.
      Concern with verbal art is a dominant theme in black culture, and while
      these speech acts do not have style as their sole component, style is nev-
      ertheless the criterion which determines their effective use.


              Signifying

                 A number of individuals interested in black verbal behavior have
       devoted attention to the "way of talking" which is known in many black
       communities as signifying (see Abrahams 1964; Kochman, 1969). Sig-
       nifying can be a tactic employed in game activity-verbal dueling-which
       is engaged in as an end in itself, and it is signifying in this context which
       has been the subject of most previous analyses. Signifying, however, also
       refers to a way of encoding messages or meanings in natural conversa-
       tions which involves, in most cases, an element of indirection. This kind
       of signifying might be best viewed as an alternative message form,
       selected for its artistic merit, and may occur embedded in a variety of dis-
       course. Such signifying is not focal to the linguistic interaction in the
      sense that it does not define the entire speech event. While the primacy of
       either of these uses of the term signifying is difficult to establish, the latter
      deserves attention due to its neglect in the literature.
          The standard English concept of signifying seems etymologically re-
      lated to the use of this term within the black community. An audience, e.g.,
      may be advised to signify "yes" by standing or to signify its disapproval
      of permissive education by saying "aye." It is also possible to say that an
      individual signifies his poverty by wearing rags. In the first instance we
      explicitly state the relationship between the meaning and the act, in-
      forming the audience that in this context the action or word will be an ade-
      quate and acceptable means of expressing approval. In the second in-
      stance, the relationship between rags and poverty is implicit and stems
      from conventional associations. It is in this latter sense that standard
      English and black usage have the most in common.
          In the context of news analyses and interpretation we hear the rhetori-
      cal question, "What does all of this signify?" Individuals posing this ques-
      tion proceed to tell us what some words or events mean by placing m,\jor
      emphasis on the implications of the thing which is the subject of interpre-
      tation and, moreoften than not, posing inferences which are felt to
      logically follow. Such interpretations rely on the establishment of context,
      which may include antecedent conditions and background knowledge as
      well as the context in which the event occurred.
         The black concept of signifying incorporates essentially a folk notion
      that dictionary entries for words are not always sufficient for interpreting
        166   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

meanings or messages, or that meaning goes beyond such interpretations.
Complimentary remarks may be delivered in a left-handed fashion. A par-
ticular utterance may be an insult in one context and not in another. What
pretends to be informative may intend to be persuasive. Superficially,
self-abasing remarks are frequently self-praise. The hearer is thus con-
strained to attend to all potential meaning carrying symbolic systems in
speech events-the total universe of discourse. The context embeddedness
of meaning is attested to by both our reliance on the given context and,
most importantly, our inclination to c~nstruct additional context from our
background knowledge of the world. Facial expression and tone of voice
serve to orient us to one kind of interpretation rather than another. Situa-
tional context helps us to narrow meaning. Personal background knowl-
edge about the speaker points us in different directions. Expectations
based on role or status criteria enter into the sorting process. In fact. we
seem to process all manner of information against a background of as-
sumptions and expectations. Thus, no matter how sincere the tone of
voice affected by the used car salesman, he is always suspect.
    Labeling a particular utterance as signifying thus involves the recogni-
 tion and attribution of some implicit content or function, which is poten-
 tially obscured by the surface content or function. The obscurity may lie
 in the relative difficulty it poses for interpreting (I) the meaning or message
 the speaker is adjudged as intending to convey; (2) the addressee-the
 person or persons to whom the message is directed; (3) the goal orienta-
 tion or intent of the sp~aker. A precondition for the application of the
 term signifying to some speech act is the assumption that the meaning
 decoded was consciously and purposely formulated at the encoding stage.
  In reference to function the same condition must hold.
     The following examples of signifying are taken from natural conversa-
  tions recorded in Oakland, California. Each example will be followed by
  interpretations, intended to clarify the messages and meanings being con-
  veyed in each case.

I. The interlocutors here are Barbara, an informant; Mary, one of her friends;
and the researcher. The conversation takes place in Barbara's home and the epi-
sode begins as I am about to leave.

 BARBARA:         What are you going to do Saturday? Will you be over here?
 R:               I don't know.
 BARBARA:         Well, if you're not going to be doing anything, come by. I'm
                  going to cook some chit'lins. [Rather jokingly] Or are you one of
                  those Negroes who don't eat chit'lins?
 MARY:            [Interjecting indignantly] That's all I hear lately-soul food,
                  soul food. If you say you don't eat it you get accused of being
                  saditty [affected, considering oneself superior].
                                                                                      1
                  [Matter of factly] Well, I ate enough black-eyed peas and neck-




                                                                                   J
             Signifying and Marking: Two Afro-American Speech Acts            167

                        bones during the depression that I can't get too excited over it. I
                        eat prime rib and T-bone because I like to, not because I'm
                        trying to be white. [Sincerely] Negroes are constantly trying to
                        find some way to discriminate against each other. If they could
                        once get it in their heads that we are all in this together maybe
                        we could get somewhere in this battle against the man.
                        [Mary leaves.]
       BARBARA:         Well, I wasn't signifying at her, but like I always say, if the shoe
                        fits, wear it.                                                             I.
                                                                                                   I::
           While the manifest topic of Barbara's question was food, Mary's
        response indicates that this is not a conversation about the relative merits
       of having one thing or another for dinner. Briefly, Barbara was, in the met-
       aphors of the culture, implying that Mary (and/or I) is an assimilationist.
           Let us first deal with the message itself, which is somewhat analogous
        to an allegory in that the significance or meaning of the words must be
       derived from known symbolic values. An outsider or nonmember
       (perhaps not at this date) might find it difficult to grasp the significance of
       eating chit'lins or not eating chit'lins. Barbara's "one of those Negroes
       that" places the hearer in a category of persons which, in turn, suggests
       that the members of that category may share other features, in this case,
       negatively evaluated ones, and indicates that there is something here of
       greater significance than mere dietary preference.
           Chit'lins are considered a delicacy by many black people, and eating
       chit'lins is often viewed as a traditional dietary habit of black people.
       Changes in such habits are viewed as gratuitous aping of whites and are
      considered to imply derogation of these customs. The same sort of sen-
      timent often attaches to other behaviors such as changes in church affilia-
      tion of upwardly mobile blacks. Thus, not eating or liking chit'lins may be
      indicative of assimilationist attitudes, which in turn imply a rejection of
                                                                                                         i
      one's black brothers and sisters. It is perhaps no longer necessary to men-                        I

      tion that assimilation is far from a neutral term intraculturally. Blacks
      have traditionally shown ambivalence toward the abandonment of ethnic
      heritage. Many strong attitudes attached to certain kinds of cultural                    I     I


     behavior seem to reflect a fear of cultural extermination.
          It is not clear at the outset to whom the accusation of being an assimi-
     lationist was aimed. Ostensibly, Barbara addressed her remarks to me.
     Yet Mary's response seems to indicate that she felt herself to be the real
     addressee in this instance. The signifier may employ the tactic of ob-
     scuring his addressee as part of his strategy. In the following case the
     remark is, on the surface, directed toward no one in particular.

     2. I saw a woman the other day in a pair of stretch pants, she must have
     Weighed 300 pounds. If she knew how she looked she would burn those things.




b:
        168   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

   Such a remark may have particular significance to the 235-pound
member of the audience who is frequently seen about town in stretch
pants. She is likely to interpret this remark as directed at her, with the in-
tent of providing her with the information that she looks singularly unat-
tractive so attired.
   The technique is fairly straightforward. The speaker simply chooses a
topic which is selectively relevant to his audience. A speaker who has a
captive audience, such as a minister, may be accused of signifying by
virtue of his text being too timely and selectively apropos to segments of
his audience.
   It might be proposed that Mary intervened in the hope of rescuing me
from a dilemma by asserting the absence of any necessary relationships
between dietary habits and assimilationist attitudes. However, Barbara's
further remarks lend credence to the original hypothesis and suggest that
Mary was correct in her interpretation, that she was the target of the
insinuation.

BARBARA:        I.guess she was saying all that for your benefit. At least, I hope
                she wasn't trying to fool me. If she weren't so worried about
                keeping up with her saditty friends, she would eat less T-bone
                steak and buy some shoes for her kids once in a while.

   Although Mary never explicitly accuses Barbara of signifying, her
response seems tantamount to such an accusation, as is evidenced by Bar-
bara's denial. Mary's indignation registers quite accurately the spirit in
which some signifying is taken.
   This brings us to another feature of signifying: The message often
carries some negative import for the addressee. Mary's response deserves
note. Her retaliation also involves signifying. While talking about ob-
stacles to brotherhood, she intimates that behavior such as that engaged
in by Barbara is typical of artificially induced sources of schism which are
in essence superficial in their focus, and which, in turn, might be viewed
as a comment on the character of the individual who introduces divi-
siveness on such trivial grounds.
   Barbara insulted Mary, her motive perhaps being to injure her feelings
or lower her self-e~teem. An informant asked to interpret this interchange
went further in imputing motives by suggesting possible reasons for Bar-
bara's behavior. He said that the answer was buried in the past. Perhaps
Barbara was repaying Mary for some insult of the past, settling a score, as
it were. He suggested that Barbara's goal was to raise her own self-esteem
by asserting superiority of a sort over Mary. Moreover, he said that this
kind of interchange was probably symptomatic of the relationship
between the two women and that one could expect to find them jockeying
for position on any number of issues. "Barbara was trying to rank Mary,"
      Signifyi11g and Marking: Two AJ)·o-American Speech Acts      169

to put her down by typing her. This individual seemed to be defining the
function of signifying as the establishment of dominance in this case.
   Messages like the preceding are indirect not because they are cryptic
(i.e., difficult to decode) but because they somehow force the hearer to
take additional steps. To understand the significance of not eating
chit'lins, one must voyage to the black social world and discover the char-
acteristics of social types referred to and the cultural values and attitudes
toward them.
   The indirect message may take any number of forms, however, as in the
following example:

3. The relevant background information lacking in this interchange is that the
husband is a member of the class of individuals who do not wear suits to work.

WIFE:            Where are you going?
HUSBAND:         I'm going to work.
WIFE:            (Your're wearing) a suit, tie, and white shirt? You didn't tell
                 me you got a promotion.

   The wife, in this case, is examining the truth value of her husband's as-
sertion (A) 'Tm going to work" by stating the obvious truth that (B) he is
wearing a suit. Implicit is the inappropriateness of this dress as measured
against shared background knowledge. In order to account for this dis-
crepancy, she advances the hypothesis (C) that he has received a promo-
tion and is now a member of the class of people who wear suits to work. B
is obviously true, and if C is not true, then A must also be false. Having no
reason to suspect that C is true, she is signifying that he is not going to
work and moreover, that he is lying about his destination.
   Now the wife could have chosen a more straightforward way of finding
an acceptable reason for her husband's unusual attire. She might have
asked, e.g., "Why are you wearing a suit?" And he could have pleaded
some unusual circumstances. Her choice to entrap him suggests that she
was not really seeking information but more than likely already had some
answers in mind. While it seems reasonable to conclude that an accusa-
tion of lying is implicit in the interchange, and one would guess that the
wife's intent is equally apparent to the husband, this accusation is never
made explicit.
   This brings us to some latent advantages of indirect messages, es-
pecially those with negative import for the receiver. Such messages,
because of their form-they contain both explicit and implicit content-
structure interpretation in such a way that the parties have the option of
avoiding a real confrontation [Brown (1958:314) provides a similar dis-
cussion]. Alternately, they provoke confrontations without at the same
time exposing unequivocally the speaker's intent. The advantage in either
        170    Ethnographic Description and Explanation

case is for the speaker because it gives him control of the situation at the
receiver's expense. The speaker, because of the purposeful ambiguity of
his original remark, reserves the right to subsequently insist on the
harmless interpretation rather than the provocative one. When the situa-
tion is such that there is no ambiguity in determining the addressee, the
addressee faces the possibility that if he attempts to confront the speaker,
the latter will deny the message or intent imputed, leaving him in the em-
barrassing predicament of appearing contentious.
    Picture, if you will, the secretary who has become uneasy about the ten-
dency of her knee to come into contact with the hand of her middle-aged
boss. She finally decides to confront him and indignantly informs him that
she is not that kind of a girl. He responds by feigning hurt innocence:
"How could you accuse me of such a thing?" If his innocence is genuine,
her misconstrual of the significance of these occasions of body contact
possibly comments on her character more than his. She has no way of
being certain, and she feels foolish. Now a secretary skilled in the art of
signifying could have avoided the possibility of "having the tables turned"
by saying "Oh, excuse me Mr. Smith, I didn't mean to get my knee in
your way." He would have surely understood her message if he were
guilty, and a confrontation would·have been avoided. lfhe were innocent,
the remark would have probably been of no consequence.
   When there is some ambiguity with reference to the addressee, as,in the
first example, the hdrer must expose himself as the target before the
confrontation can take place. The speaker still has the option of retreating
and the oppqrtunity, while feigning innocence, to jibe, "Well, if the shoe
fits, wear it." The individual who has a well-known reputation for this
kind of signifying is felt to be sly and, sometimes, not man or woman
enough to come out and say what he means.
   Signifying does not, however, always have negative valuations attached
to it; it is clearly thought of as a kind of art-a clever way of conveying
messages. In fact, it does not lose its artistic merit even when it is
malicious. It takes some skill to construct messages with multilevel
meanings, and it sometimes takes equal expertise in unraveling the puzzle
presented in all of its many implications. Just as in certain circles the
clever punster derives satisfaction and is rewarded by his hearers for con-
structing a multisided pun, the signifier is also rewarded for his clev-
erness.

4. The following interchange took place in a public park. Three young men in
their early twenties sat down with the researcher, one of whom initiated a conver-
sation in this way:

I:     Mama; you sho is fine.
R:     That ain' no way to talk to your mother.
      Signifying and Marking: Two Aji·o-American Speech Acts            17 I

       [Laughter]
I:     You married?
R:     Um hm.
I:     Is your husband married?
      [Laughter]
R:     Very.
       [The conversation continues with the same young man doing most of the
       talking. He questions me about what I am doing and I tell him about my
       research project. After a couple of minutes of discussing "rapping," he re-
       turns to his original style.]
I:     Baby, you a real scholar. I can tell you want to learn. Now if you'll just
       cooperate a Ii'! bit, l 'll show you what a good teacher I am. But first we got
       to get into my area of expertise.
R:     I may be wrong but seems to me we already in your area of expertise.
       [Laughter]
I:    You ain' so bad yourself, girl. I ain't heard you stutter yet. You a Ii'! fix-
      ated on your subject though. I want to help a sweet thang like you all I can.
      I figure all that book learning you got must mean you been neglecting other
      areas of your education.
II:   Talk that talk! [Gloss: Ole]
R:    Why don't you let me point out where I can best use your help.
I:    Are you sure you in the best position to know?
       [Laughter]
I:     I 'mo leave you alone, girl. Ask me what you want to know. Tempus fugit,
       baby.
       [Laughter]

   The folk label for the kind of talking engaged in by I is rapping, defined
by Koch man as "a fluent and lively way of talking characterized by a high
degree of personal style," which may be used when its function is referen-
tial or directive-to get something from someone or get someone to do
something. The interchange is laced with innuendo-signifying because it
alludes to and implies things which are never made explicit.
   The utterance which initiated the conversatio·n was intended from all
indications as a compliment and was accepted as such. The manner in
which it was framed is rather stylized and jocularly effusive, and as such
makes the speaker's remarks less bold and presumptuous and is permissive
of a response which can acknowledge the compliment in a similar and jok-
ingly impersonal fashion. The most salient purpose of the compliment was
to initiate a conversation with a strange woman. The response served to
indicate to the speaker that he was free to continue; probably any
response (or none at all) would not have terminated his attempt to engage
        I 72   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

the hearer, but the present one signaled to the speaker that it was appro-
priate to continue in his original style. The factor of the audience is crucial
because it obliges the speaker to continue attempting to engage the
addressee once he has begun. The speaker at all points has a surface
addressee, but the linguistic and nonlinguistic responses of the other two
young men indicate that they are very aware of being integral participants
in this interchange. The question "ls your husband married?" is meant to
suggest to the hearer, who seeks to turn down the speaker's advances by
pleading marital ties, that such bonds should not be treated as inhibitory
except when one's husband has by his behavior shown similar inhibition.
    The speaker adjusts his rap to appeal to the scholarly leanings of his
addressee, who responds by suggesting that he is presently engaging in his
area of virtuosity. I responds to this left-handed compliment by pointing
out that the researcher is engaging in the same kind of speech behavior
and is apparently an experienced player of the game-"I' ain't heard you
stutter yet."-which is evidenced by her unfaltering responses. At the
same time he notes the narrowness of the speaker's interests, and states
the evidence leading him to the conclusion that there must be gaps in her
knowledge. He benevolently offers his aid. His maneuvers are offensive
 and calculated to produce defensive responses. His repeated offers of aid
 are intended ironically. A member of the audience interjects, "Talk that
 talk!" This phrase is frequently used to signal approval of some speaker's
 virtuosity in using language skillfully and colorfully and, moreover, in
 using language which is appropriate and effective to the social context.
    The content of the message is highly directive. Those unfamiliar with
 black cultural forms might in fact interpret the message as threatening.
 But there are many linguistic cues that suggest that the surface meaning is
 not to be taken seriously. Note particularly the use of such expressions as
 "scholar," "cooperate," "area of expertise," "fixated on your subject,"
 and "neglecting other areas of your education." All these relatively
formal or literary expressions occur in sentences spoken with typically
 black phonology and black grammar (e.g., "I ain't heard . . . " and "Are
 you sure you in the best position to know?"). By his code selection and by
 paralinguistic cues such as a highly stylized leer, the speaker indicates
that he is parodying a tete-a-tete and not attempting to engage the
 researcher in anything other than conversation. He is merely demon-
 strating his ability to use persuasive language, "playing a game," as it
 were. The researcher signals acknowledgment by her use of black forms
 such as "That ain' no way no way . . . ", and " . . . we already in . . . ".
The speaker indicates that the game is over by saying, "I'mo leave you
 alone," and redirects the conversation. The juxtaposition of the lexical
 items "tempus fugit" and "baby," which typically are not paired, is meant
 to evoke more humor by accentuating the stylistic dissonance of the
 speech sequence.
       Siun(fying and Marking: Two Afi:o-American Speech Acts       173


         Signifying as a Form of Verbal Art

            All other conditions permitting, a style which has artistic merit is
 more likely to be selected than on which does not because of positive cul-
 fural values assigned to the skillful use of speech. Having discussed some
 of the characteristics of signifying, I would now like to examine briefly the
 artistic characteristics of signifying.
    No attempt will be made here to formulate an all-encompassing defini-
 tion of art. That individuals may differ in their conceptions of art is made
 patently clear, e.g., by Abrahams's (1964:54) summarizing statement that
 signifying is "many facets of the smart-alecky attitude." That my appreci-
 ation differs has, more than likely, been communicated in these pages. For
 present purposes, what is art is simply what native speakers judge witty,
 skillful, and worthy of praise. This is a working definition at best. It never-
 theless serves to limit our field of discourse and, more importantly, to
 base our judgments on the native speaker's own point of view.
    It is true that poor attempts at signifying exist. That these attempts are
 poor art rather than non-art is clear from comments with which some of
 them are met. Needless and extreme circumlocution is considered poor
 art. In this connection, Labov has made similar comments about sounding
(Labov et al. 1968). He cites peer group members as reacting to some
sounds with such metalinguistic responses as "That's phony" and "That's
lame." Signifying may be met with similar critical remarks. Such failures,
incidentally, are as interesting as the sucesses, for they provide clues as to
the rules by violating one or more of them while, at the same time, meet-
ing other criteria.
    One of the defining characteristics of signifying is its indirect intent or
metaphorical reference. This indirection appears to be almost purely
stylistic. It may sometimes have the function of being euphemistic or dip-
lomatic, but its art characteristics remain in the forefront even in such
cases. Without the element of indirection, a speech act could not be con-
sidered signifying. Indirection means here that the correct semantic
(referential interpretation) or signification of the utterance cannot be ar-
rived at by a consideration of the dictionary meaning of the lexical items
involved and the syntactic rules for their combination alone. The apparent
significance of the message differs from its real significance.
   Meaning conveyed is not apparent meaning. Apparent meaning serves
as a key which directs hearers to some shared knowledge, attitudes, and
values or signals that reference must be processed metaphorically. The
words spoken may actually refer to this shared knowledge by contradict-
ing it or by giving what is known to be an impossible explanation of some
obvious fact. The indirection, then, depends for its decoding upon shared
         174    Et!tnograp/zic Description and Explanation

knowledge of the participants, and this shared knowledge operates on two
levels.
   It must be employed, first of all, by the participants in a speech act in
the recognition that signifying is occurring and that the dictionary-syntac-
tical meaning of the utterance is to be ignored. Second, this shared knowl-
edge must be employed in the reinterpretation of the utterance. It is the
cleverness used in directing the attention of the hearer and audience to
this shared knowledge upon which a speaker's artistic talent is judged.
   Topic may have something to do with the artistic merit of an act of sig-
nifying. Although practically any topic may be signified about, some
topics are more likely to make the overall act of signifying more appreci-
ated. Sex is one such topic. For example, an individual offering an
explanation for a friend's recent grade slump quipped, "He can't forget
what happened to him underneath the apple tree," implying that the
young man was preoccupied with sex at this point in his life and that the
preoccupation stemmed from the relative novelty of the experience. A
topic which is suggested by ongoing conversation is appreciated more
than one which is peripheral. Finally, an act of signifying which tops a
preceding one, in a verbal dueling sense, is especially appreciated.
   Kochman cites such an example in the context of a discussion of rap-
ping:

A man coming from the bathroom forgot to zip his pants. An unescorted party of
women kept watching him and laughing among themselves. The man's friends hip
(inform) him to what's going on. He approaches one woman-"Hey, baby, did
you see that big Cadillac with the full tires, ready to roll in action just for you?"
She answers, "No, mother-fucker, but I saw a little gray Volkswagen with two flat
tires" (1969:27).

As mentioned earlier, signifying may be a tactic used in rapping, defined
by Kochman as "a fluent and lively way of talking, always characterized
by a high degree of personal style" ( 1969:27).
   Verbal dueling is clearly occurring; the first act of signifying is an indi-
rect and humorous way of referring to shared knowledge-the women
have been laughing at the man's predicament. It is indirect in that it
doesn't mention what is obviously being referred to. The speaker has
cleverly capitalized on a potentially embarrassing situation by taking the
offensive and at the same time, displaying his verbal skill. He emphasizes
the sexual aspect of the situation with a metaphor that implies power and
class. However, he is, as Kochman says, "capped." The woman wins the
verbal duel by replying with an act of signifying which builds on the
previous one. The reply is indirect, sexual, and appropriate to the situa-
tion. In addition, it employs the same kind of metaphor and is, therefore,
very effective.
      Signifying and Marking: Two Afro-American Speech Acts      175

   M ot/ze1fucker is a rather common term of address in such acts of verbal
dueling. The term nigger also is common in such contexts, e.g., "Nigger, it
was a monkey one time wasn't satisfied till his' ass was grass" and
"Nigger, I'm gon be like white on rice on you ass."
   These two examples are illustrative of a number of points of good sig-
nifying. Both depend on a good deal of shared cultural knowledge for their
correct semantic interpretation. It is the intricacy of the allusion to shared
knowledge that makes for the success of these speech acts. The first
refers to the toast "The Signifying Monkey." The monkey signified at the
lion until he got himself in trouble. A knowledge of this toast is necessary
for an interpretation of the message. "Until his ass was grass"-meaning
"until he was beaten up"-can only be understood in the light of its
common use in the speech of members of the culture and occurs in such
forms as "His ass was grass and I was the lawnmower." What this ex-
ample means is something like: You have been signifying at me and, like
the monkey, you are treading on dangerously thin ice. If you don't stop, I
am likely to become angry and beat you!
   "Nigger, I'm gon be like white on rice on your ass" is doubly clever. A
common way of threatening to beat someone is to say, "I'm gonna be all
over your ass." And how is white on rice?-all over it. Metaphors such as
these may lose their effectiveness over time due to overuse. They lose
value as clever wit.
   The use of the term nigger in these examples is of considerable
linguistic interest. It is often coupled with code features which are far
removed from standard English. That is, the code utilizes many linguistic
markers which differentiate black speech from standard English or white
speech. Frequently, more such markers than might ordinarily appear in
the language of the speaker are used. Thus participants in these speech
acts must show at least some degree ofbidilectalism in black and standard
English. Th'ey must be able to shift from one code to another for stylistic
effect. Note, e.g., that the use of the term nigger with other black English
markers has the effect of "smiling when you say that." The use of stan-
dard English with nigger, in the words of an informant, represents "the
wrong tone of voice" and may be taken as abusive.
   Code selection and terminological choice thus have the same function.
They highlight the fact that black English is being used and that what is
being engaged in is a black speech act. More is conveyed here than simple
emphasis on group solidarity. The hearer is told that this is an instance of
black verbal art and should be interpreted in terms of the subcultural rules
for interpreting such speech acts.
   Code and content serve to define the style being used, to indicate its
tone, and to describe the setting and participants as being appropriate to
the use of such an artistic style. Further, such features indicate that it
should be recognized that a verbal duel is occurring and that what is said is
        176   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

meant in a joking, perhaps also threatening, manner. A slight switch in
code may carry implications for other components in the speech act.
Because verbal dueling treads a fine line between play and real aggression,
it is a kind of linguistic activity which requires strict adherence to
sociolinguistic rules. To correctly decode the message, a hearer must be
finely tuned to values which he observes in relation to all other compo-
nents of the speech act. He must rely on his conscious or unconscious
knowledge of the sociolinguistic rules governing this usage.


         Marking

         A common black narrative tactic in the folk tale genre and in ac-
counts of actual events is the individuation of characters through the use
of direct quotation. When in addition, in reproducing the words of individ-
ual actors, a narrator affects the voice and mannerisms of the speakers, he
is using the style referred to as mai·king (clearly related to standard
English 'mocking'.). Marking is essentially a mode of characterization. The
marker attempts to report not only what was said but the way it was said,
in order to offer implicit comment on the speaker's background, personal-
ity, or intent. Rather than introducing personality or character traits in
some summary form, such information is conveyed by reproducing or
sometimes inserting aspects of speech ranging from phonological features
to particular content which carry expressive value. The meaning in the
message of the marker is signaled and revealed by his reproduction of
such things as phonological or grammatical peculiarities, his preservation
of mispronounced words or provincial idioms, dialectal pronunciation,
and, most particularly, paralinguistic mimicry.
   The marker's choice to reproduce such features may reflect only his
desire to characterize the speaker. It frequently signifies, however, that
the characterization itself is relevant for further processing the meaning of
the speaker's words. If, e.g., some expressive feature has been taken as a
symbol of the speaker's membership in a particular group, his credibility
may come into question on these grounds alone.
   The marker attempts to replay a scene for his hearers. He may seek to
give the implications of the speaker's remarks, to indicate whether the
emotions and affect displayed by the speaker were genuine or feigned, in
short to give his audience the full benefit of all the information he was
able to process by virtue of expressive or context cues imparted by the
speaker. His performance may be more in the nature of parody and cari-
cature than true imitation. But the features selected to overplay are those
which are associated with membership in some class. His ability to get his
message across, in fact, relies on folk notions of the covariance of
      Sign(fying and Marking: Two Afro-American Speech Acts       177

linguistic and nonlinguistic categories, combined, of course, with what-
ever special skill he possesses for creating imagery.
   The kind of context most likely to elicit marking is one in which the
marker assumes his hearers are sufficiently like himself to be able to in-
terpret this metaphoric communication. Since there is, more likely than
not, something unflattering about the characterization, and the element of
ridicule is so salient, the relationship between a marker and his audience
is likely to be one of familiarity and intimacy and mutual positive affect.
   An informant quoted a neighbor to give me an appreciation of her
dislike for the woman. She quoted the following comment from Pearl in a
style carefully articulated to depict her as "putting on the dog," parodying
gestures which gave the impression that Pearl is preposterously affected:
"You know my family owns their own home and I'm just living here tem-
porarily because it is more beneficial to collect the rent from my own
home and rent a less expensive apartment." "That's the kind of person
she is," my informant added, feeling no need for further explanation. This
is, incidentally, a caricature of a social type which is frequently the object
of scorn and derision. The quote was delivered at a pitch considerably
higher than was usual for the informant, and the words were enunciated
carefully so as to avoid loss of sounds and elision characteristic of fluid
speech. What was implied was not that the phonological patterns mim-
icked are to be associated with affectation in a one-one relationship but
that they symbolize affectation here. The marker was essentially giving
implicit recognition to the fact that major disturbances in fluency are in-
dexes of "monitored" speech. The presence of the features are grounds
for the inference that the speaker is engaged in impression management
which is contextually inappropriate. Individuals who are characterized as
"trying to talk proper" are frequently marked in a tone of voice which is
rather falsetto.
   A marker wishing to convey a particular impression of a speaker may
choose to deliver a quotation in a style which is felt to best suit what he
feels lies underneath impression management or what is obscured by the
speaker's effective manipulation of language. In the following example,
the marker departs radically from the style of the speaker for purposes of
disambiguation. The individuals here, with the exception of S 1 , had
recently attended the convention of a large corporation and had been part
of a group which had been meeting prior to the convention to develop
some strategy for putting pressure on the corporation to hire more blacks
in executive positions. They had planned to bring the matter up at a gen-
eral meeting of delegates, but before they had an opportunity to do so, a
black company man spoke before the entire body. S 2 said, "After he
spoke our whole strategy was undermined, there was no way to get around
his impact on the whites."
        178    Ethnographic Description and Explanation

S1 :   What did he say?
S2:    [Drawling] He said, "Ah'm so-o-o happy to be here today. First of all, ah
       want to thank all you good white folks for creatin so many opportunities
       for us niggers and ya'II can be sho that as soon as we can git ourselves qual-
       ified we gon be filin our applications. Ya'II done done what we been
       waiting for a long time. Ya'II done give a colored man a good job with the
       company."
S1:    Did he really say that?
S,1:   Um hm, yes he said it. Girl, where have you been. [Put down by inti-
       mating S 1 was being literal]
S1:    Yeah, I understand, but what did he really say?
S-1:   He said, "This is a moment of great personal pride for me. My very
       presence here is a tribute to the civil rights movement. We now have ample
       evidence of the good faith of the company and we must now begin to
       prepare ourselves to handle more responsible positions. This is a major
       step forward on the part of the company. The next step is up to us." In
       other words, he said just what [S 2] said he said. He sold us out by ac-
       cepting that kind of tokenism.



   S2 attempted to characterize the speaker as an Uncle Tom by using
exaggerated stereotyped southern speech coupled with content that was
compromising and denigrating. It would certainly be          an
                                                           overstatement to
conclude that southern regional speech is taken by anyone as a sign of
 being an "Uncle Tom," but there is an historical association with the
 model of this sterotype being southern.
   The characterization of individuals according to the way they speak is,
of course, not peculiar to black people, although the implicit association
of particular ways of speaking with specific social types may be more
 elaborated than elsewhere.
   The parodying of southern regional black speech may sometimes serve
 as a device for characterizing a speaker as uneducated or unintelligent,
and sometimes it is used to underscore the guilelessness of the speaker.
The marker encodes his subjective reactions to the speaker and is con-
cerned with the expressive function of speech more than its referential
function.
   Because marking relies on linguistic expression for the communication
of messages, it is revealing of attitudes and values relating to language. It
 frequently conveys many subtleties and can be a significant source of infor-
mation about conscious and unconscious attitudes toward language. An
individual, on occasion, may mark a nonblack using exaggerated black
English, with the emphasis clearly being on communicating that the sub-
ject was uneducated and used nonstandard usages. Perhaps more than
anything, marking exhibits a finely tuned linguistic awareness in some
      Signifying and Marking: Two Afro-American Speech Acts        179

areas and a good deal of verbal virtuosity in being able to reproduce as-
pects of speech which are useful in this kind of metaphorical com-
munication.


         Conclusion

           Signifying and marking exemplify the close relationship of mes-
sage form to content and function which characterizes black verbal
behavior. Meaning, often assumed by linguists to be signaled entirely
through code features, is actually dependent upon a consideration of other
components of a speech act (cf. Gumperz 1964b). A remark taken in
the spirit of verbal dueling may, e.g., be interpreted as an insult by virtue
of what on the surface seems to be merely a minor change in personnel, or
a minor change in code or topic. Crucially, paralinguistic features must be
made to conform to the rules. Change in posture, speech rate, tone of
voice, facial expression, etc., may signal a change in meaning. The audi-
ence must also be sensitive to these cues. A change in meaning may signal
that members of the audience must shift their responses, and that meta-
linguistic comments may no longer be appropriate.
   It is this foc:.is in black culture-the necessity of applying sociolinguistic
rules, in addition to the frequent appeal to shared background knowledge for
correct semantic interpretation-that accounts for some of the unique char-
acter and flavor of black speech. Pure syntactic and lexical elaboration is
supplemented by an elaboration of the ability to carefully and skillfully
manipulate other components of the speech act in order to create new
meanings.
        6

        Riddles: Expressive Models
        of Interrogation               1



        JOHN M. ROBERTS AND MICHAEL L. FORMAN




        John M. Roberts is Professor of Anthropology at Cornell
        University. He received his doctorate from Yale Univer-
        sity and has taught at Harvard and the University of
        Nebraska. His principal fieldwork has been with the Zuni
        and Navajo Indians of the American Southwest, empha-
        sizing values and laws. His concern has been to develop
        fresh approaches to the description of cultural behavior
        in terms of information storage and management ( see
         Roberts I 964 and references therein). Roberts' m,tior
         research currently deals with the investigation of expres-
         sive culture as it is retllected in this paper. He has also
        been actively concerned with the development of formal
         analysis of anthropology.
            Michael Forman, a linguist specializing in Philippine
         languages, has done graduate work at Cornell University.
         He is currently affiliated with the Pacific and Asian
         Linguistic Institute, University of Hawaii.
            This previously unpublished study of riddling suggests
         the complexities encountered when any one of the many
         genres of speech activity-such as oath taking, verbal
         dueling, praying, cursing, and punning-found in human
         cultures are studied. First, there is the problem of de-
         scription-how the genre may be described, in both gen-
         eral and specific terms. Any serious study is confronted

  1
    This research was supported in part by PHS Research Grant MH 08I61-03. The
authors are particularly indebted to William W. Lambert and Brian Sutton-Smith for help in
dealing with the theory of riddles. They are grateful to Sheila Forman for her aid in con-
ducting the Tagalog study and to Cynthia Burton and Maureen Liebl for assistance. They
must also thank Donn V. Hart, Gerald B. Kelley, Bernard Lambert, Terence S. Turner, and
numerous students and informants for help and suggestions.

                                           180
           Riddles: Expressive Models of Interrogation     181

at present, as Roberts and Forman point out, by lack of
agreed definitions on precisely what is being studied, by
inadequate reporting in comparative ethnographic litera-
ture, and other problems. Second, there is the problem of
explanation. Here lies the special interest of the ,approach
taken in this chapter.
    In virtue of a general hypothesis relating genres of
speech to socialization, Roberts and Forman are able to
use comparative data as a preliminary approximation (a
point they stress), and to seek to confirm an explanation
in more fine-grained experimentation in their own soci-
ety. This approach opens up the possibility of both of
generality for results obtained only in one society and of
continued relevance and validation of reports from so-
cieties no longer accessible, as a result of extinction or
change.
    Notice that the key to the method is that it is able to
 deal with not only the presence or absence of a trait but
 also with the frequency of occurrence of that trait, and
 with the strength or weakness of commitment or motiva-
 tion. The method can be seen as one realization of
 Edward Sapir's view that "it is only through an analysis
 of variation that the reality and meaning of a norm can be
 established at all" (1949f:576). Sapir called for "an inves-
 tigation into living speech" (1949a:593). Robert's ap-
 proach shows one way that Sapir's concern with the
 concrete, with personally realized meanings in actual
 networks of communicative experience, can be linked to
 theories of human culture as a whole. Notice also that
 variation in order to validate pattern is essential to the
 methodology developed by Labov (Chapter 19).
     Roberts and Forman had initially thought that riddling
 shows a relationship mainly with the presence of a strong
 interest in strategy (Abrahams 1968); instead, their pre-
 liminary cross-cultural survey displays a primary rela-
 tionship with strong training for responsibility (note the
 parallels with Dundes', verbal dueling Chapter 4). The
 Tagalog inquiry confirms this latter link. At the same
 time it indicates a shift in principle settings for riddling,
 from wakes and courtship to schools. It also suggests a
  possible difference between men and women in the kinds
  of riddling preferred, and it links riddling with the socially
  important role of intermediary in marriage arrangements.
  The study of American students further substantiates the
  fact that strategy is not the answer, and it brings out new
         182    Ethnographic Description and Explanation

         associations between high interest in riddling and the im-
         portance of chores (responsibility) and the absence of
         nagging in childhood, as well as with a balanced or posi-
         tive attitude toward oral questioning. The paper con-
         cludes with a sketch of the further lines of inquiry that
         are needed for an adequate theory.
            One point of general methodological importance
         touched on is the study by fieldworkers of the relation
         between their own modes of questioning and those native
         to the community. Both Hymes (1969) and Grimshaw
         ( 1969) provide discussions of cross-cultural variations in
         modes of questioning. Goffman (1967) discusses involve-
         ment in conversational terms.



          In the United States riddling is largely a children's recreational
activity, although many adults retain an interest. If riddling is not particu-
larly salient, then, it is still so general that everyone, other than quite small
children has some familiarity with it. (It will be assumed here that the
reader has this general familiarity.)                                  '
   Riddles thus have a place in American culture, just as they do, often
more importantly, in many other cultures throughout the world. Riddles,
however, do not occur in all cultures; and within the cultures in which
they occur, individuals and groups differ, both in their involvement in
riddles and riddling and in their control of them. There is something here
to be explained. An adequate theory must account for the uneven dis-
tribution of the genre in time and space, both in culture-historical and in
functional terms, for differential involvement and cognitive control of the
patterns of the genre, and for the structure and meaning of the patterns
themselves. No such theory of riddling now exists, but the research
reported here suggests a view point from which such a theory may be
developed.
   Our general approach has been developed through the study of games
and similar phenomena and is embodied in a number of publications. 2 In
the main these studies have been concerned with explaining the interest
and competence that persons acquire in what may be called expressive
models. By 'model' is meant simply a representation of something. Here
we are concerned with the natural models found in cultures, such as
games, portraits, maps, etc., rather that with the formal models of mathe-
  2
    Roberts, A'rth, and Bush 1959; Roberts and Sutton-Smith 1962; Roberts, Sutton-Smith,
and Kendon 1963; Sutton-Smith, Roberts, and Kozelka 1963; Sutton-Smith, and Roberts
1964; Sutton-Smith, Roberts, and Rosenberg 1964; Roberts 1965; Roberts, Hoffmann, and
Sutton-Smith 1965; Roberts and Sutton-Smith 1966; Roberts, Thompson, and Sutton-Smith
1966; Sutton-Smith and Roberts 1967; and Roberts and Koenig (1968).
                     Riddles: Expressive Models of Interrogation       183

matics and science. Every such natural model has both expressive and
cognitive components, but usually one of the two is the more important.
Thus chess, regarded as a model of war, emphasizes the expressive com-
ponent, while an aerial photograph, as a model of terrain, emphasizes the
cognitive (or instrumental) component. Both chess and aerial photographs
are surrogates, but normally the photograph is primarily a means to an
end whereas chess, like other expressive models, becomes an end in itself,
whose relation to other ends may be hidden. It seems natural to us that
people should enjoy games and related expressive involvements. It is only
when we ask why they should foster some and not others, that we see that
these phenomena may be not only expressive but models as well.
  The investigations noted previously (see footnote 2) have supported a
hypotheses as to personal involvement in models that may be termed
conjlict-e11culturation. Two earlier statements of a conflict enculturation
hypotheses, as it pertains to game playing by American adults, are the fol-
lowing:

These relationships suggested a conflict-e11culturatio11 hypothesis of model
involvement which stated . . . that conflicts induced by social learning in child-
hood and later (such as those related to obedience, achievement, and responsi-
bility) lead to involvement in expressive models, such as games, through which
these conflicts are assuaged and as a result of which a process of buffered learning
occurs which has enculturative value for the competences required in the culture
(such as acquiring the competitive styles of strategy, physical skill, or chance).
In sum, the conflict-enculturation hypothesis says that child training induces
conflict which leads to curiosity about representations (as in expressive models) of
the dimensions of this conflict. Involvement in models follows because their
microcosmic representation reduces the conflict's complexities to cognitive and
emotional comprehensibility and because the participant can learn about the cog-
nitive and emotional aspects of winning in a model in a way that he cannot do out-
side of it, and because his successes give him increased confidence that he can
manage the achievement pressures in full-scale cultural participation. The models
thus have the general cultural function that they contribute to the learning and ad-
justment of persons who must maintain a high level of achievement motivation if
the general cultural norms are to be sustained (Sutton-Smith, Roberts, and
Kozelka 1963: 15, 28).

   These statements will need to be revised to take into account three kinds
of results of further research: (a) There are relevant differences between
interest and competence; (b) the scale, representativeness or verisimili-
tude, and complexity of the model are important variables; (c) most im-
portantly, new research into the psychology of conflict must be taken into
account. For the present we rely on Berlyn's definition: "when two or
more incompatible responses are aroused simultaneously in an organism,
we shall say that the organism is in conflict (Berlyne 1960: l 0). Rela-
tionships between conflict and arousal, curiosity, and other relevant
         184     Ethnographic Description and Explanation

matters are discussed by Berlyne ( 1960). The subject has also been
approached from an anthropological standpoint (Roberts 1965; Roberts
and Koening 1971; Roberts, Strand, and Burmeister, in press; Meyers
and Roberts 1968), but the findings are preliminary. For the present, we
simply say that conflict can be measured and described, and that it leads
to involvement and curiosity. The place of riddling in the general body
of research can be indicated in this way. Many of the papers cited here
deal with contests or contesting (games, folktales which represent con-
tests, etc.). One deals with testing in the form of oaths and autonomic or-
deals (Roberts 1965), and one with expressive self-testing (Roberts,
Thompson, and Sutton-Smith 1966). The present discussion deals with
expressive testing, but testing of a nature which can be transformed into
contesting (riddling contests occur in a number of cultures) or self-testing
(as when an individual reads printed riddles and attempts to guess the
answer before he turns to the printed answer).
   The interpretation of riddling that has emerged from the present
research is this: Riddles may be regarded as natural models which repre-
sent interrogation, i.e., riddles represent an instrumental (nonexpressive)
activity in a expressive way. More specifically, riddles will be regarded
here as expressive models, or representations, of the serious and even
formal interrogation of subordinates by superordinates. Such interroga-
tion occurs when a parent questions a child, a teacher a pupil, an
employer an employee, a judge a defendant, an officer a soldier, and so on.
In these situations the subordinate usually is deemed to have less knowl-
edge and power, and the superordinate to have more, at least with regard
to the specific context of a given interrogation. (The extent to which
written interrogation should be considered part of the antecedent cultural
question which riddles model is not clear. Certainly, for riddles the basic
pattern of questioning is an oral one.)
   For our purposes a dictionary definition of riddle can be accepted:
"riddle: a mystifying, misleading, or puzzling question posed as a problem
to be solved or guessed often as a game" (Webster's Third New Interna-
tional Dictionary 1967: 1952). More technical definitions exist,3 but the
advantage of the dictionary definition is its focus on the riddle as a ques-
tion, this being the heart of the matter so far as the present inquiry is con-
cerned. Also, the definition describes a riddle as a game, thus bringing out
its expressive character. (The relationship between expressive and non-
expressive questioning will be considered throughout the discussion.)

   " See especially the important study by R. A. Georges and Alan Dundes (1963). They
survey definitions of the riddle from Aristotle to Archer Taylor and then provide one of their
own, which has been used since by others, e.g., Hart (1964:25). Another such survey has
been provided by C. T. Scott (1965: 14-22). Insofar as classification implies a kind of defini-
tion, we might also note here that the Human Relations Area Files (HRAF) lists riddles
under category 524, "Games," under the subhead "Problem Games." Notes and Queries
orders riddles under "Knowledge and Tradition": "Proverbs, traditional sayings and riddles
may be education or a form of intellectual recreation" ( 1951 :206).
                      Riddles: Expressive Models of Interrogation        /85

   Questions, of course, are linguistic phenomena. Unfortunately,
linguists have not provided us with a formal definition of question suitable
for universal or cross-cultural use. Recent discussions of linguistic univer-
sals touch on interrogation (Weinreich 1963: 150-151) (Greenberg,
1966:50, 70), yet never quite state the question as a language universal.
Perhaps the most used definition is that of Fries: Questions are the largest
group of those utterances (calls, greetings, and questions) which regularly
elicit oral responses (Fries 1952:47; see also 53: 142-172). Other work by
linguists asserts that neither phonological nor grammatical charateristics
have proven adequate for identifying phrases as questions (Pike,
1945: 168; Bolinger, 1958:3). Transformational work discusses such
questions as permutational transforms, but the assumption is made that
the reader can identify questions. As our study moves "outward into the
exploration of speech behavior and use" (Hymes 1962: 18), we too must
be content for the present to use our cultural judgment. We all recognize
questions.
   The recognition of settings of interrogation poses a similar problem. A
relatively rare offering from linguistics is found in Samarin's guide to field
linguistics ( 1967: 144-145):

Sustained questioning (or what we call in English interrogation) is probably
restricted in all societies to a limited number of settings. In our own we can imag-
ine being questioned by a physician, highway patrolman, income tax controller,
census taker, personnel manager, bank mortgage representative, and so on. This
list of interrogators points out a significant fact about these settings: That the
person opposite us is in some official capacity: his role is formally defined within a
legal, occupational, or other context. In this setting we are passive and vulnerable.
This is no less true when the questions are put by those with whom we are
otherwise on intimate terms, our parents or our spouses, for example.

Anthropologists have given little explicit attention to informal and formal
interrogation as cultural phenomena. Like sociologists, however (cf.
Hyman 1954), anthropologists have been concerned with interviewing.
Frake has recently argued for a new approach to "queries in eth-
nography." The investigator's ethnographic record has traditionally been
a list of questions and answers, Frake says, the questions being brought
from home and the answers sought in the field. The ethnography Frake
argues for

also includes lists of queries and responses, but with this difference: both the
queries and their responses are to be discovered in the culture of the people being
studied. The problem is not simply to find answers to questions the ethnographer
brings into the field, but also to find the questions that go with the responses he ob-
serves after his arrival (Frake 1964c: 132).

This is done at least partly by listening for:
         186     Ethnographic Description and Explanation

queries in use in the cultural scenes he observes, giving special attention to query-
rich settings, e.g., children querying parents, medical specialists querying patients,
legal authorities querying witnesses, priests querying the gods (1964c: 143).

Work of the sort which Frake seeks to encourage obviously would be of
great value, indeed would ultimately be essential, to the theory of riddling
proposed here. The concern with questioning in this particular study
stems from examination of the formal interrogation associated with use of
judicial oaths and ordeals (Roberts 1965) and with the development of a
field technique of dyadic elicitation (Roberts and Arth I 966). 4
   The design of the present study is very simple, and the study must be
regarded as an exploratory, low-cost venture. First, a preliminary cross-
cultural study was conducted in the Human Relations Area Files. 5 Next,
a small study of Tagalog riddling was made, from literature on the Tagalog
and by working with Tagalog informants available in Ithaca, New York.
 Finally, several small surveys were made of American students at Cor-
nell. In the pages which follow each of these substudies will be discussed
in turn, and then the overall conclusions and implications to be drawn
from this research will be given in a final section.


         A Preliminary Cross-Cultural View

         Despite the facts that a substantial comparative literature exists
on riddles and a few anthropologists have made brilliant contributions to
the study of riddles, 6 the cross-cultural literature is so uneven that riddles
are not a good subject for conventional cross-cultural investigation. The
interest in riddles and riddling has not been general enough to insure stan-
dard anthropological coverage. A great deal of intensive and extensive
scholarship would be required to produce a cross-cultural study of riddles
and riddling which would be definitive in its own right; the authors have
lacked the resources to produce such a study. Yet it can be argued that a
preliminary and admittedly inadequate cross-cultural survey can be most
uesful in putting riddles into cross-cultural perspective, testing prelimi-
nary hypotheses, and framing revised hypotheses for further testing. This

   1
  · The senior author of this chapter has also profited from discussions on this subject with
Lindsey Churchill, who is currently studying questioning.
  "The Human Relations Area Files at Cornell University were searched in the fall of
1966. Since new materials are steadily added to the files, it is always necessary to give the
date of the search.
  " Archer Taylor's work is perhaps the best known. The outstanding structural study is
that by Georges and Dundes (1963). T. R. Williams (1963), D. Simmons (1958), and B. M,
du Toit (1966) have made notable functional studies. Potter (1950) and Hart (1964;
Chapters II I, IV, and V) provide general surveys. See also the linguistic study by C. T.
Scott (1965).




                 AW                                                                             d
                        Riddles: Expressive Models of Interrogation           187

     use of the cross-cultural survey to provide a first approximation of a
     Problem has not received the attention that it deserves from the cross-cul-
     tural methodologists, largely because most of them (with the outstanding                 Ii
                                                                                            1·!
     exception of Whiting) have failed to consider the possibilities of sub-                     I



     ~ystem replication and validation. 7 In any event, this is1 the method which             ::
    Is used here.                                                                             I I
                                                                                              I      I
        Initially, it was thought that riddles were expressive models of strategy.           ''
                                                                                             Ii
                                                                                             :
    This led to the hypothesis that riddles should occur in the same cultural
    environments as games of strategy. Since it was not convenient to com-                   i
                                                                                             I

    ~are the riddling variables with the numerous additional variables pub-                  I'


    hshed in the literature, the authors used a series of variables selected for
    relevance to the hypothesis. Later the initial hypothesis was modified, as
   ~he relation to interrogation emerged, but the same variables still have
   mterest, and the results of these comparisons will be given here.
       In the fall of 1966 students who had been trained to judge the presence
   and absence of riddles surveyed the material in the Human Relations
   Area Files. Each reviewed only a limited number of cultures, but the
   survey was made in such a way that every culture had two judges. An at-
   tempt was made to correct their file-based entries where they disagreed
  or where the findings did not make sense, but after a few corrections were
  made, this attempt was abandoned because of lack of time for additional
  research. This judging technique is not ideal, but it may have been ade-
  quate for the present preliminary or exploratory view.
      The survey had other limitations which ought to be mentioned. Clearly,
  the most advanced requirements for ethnographic sampling have not been
  ~et, and a purist might argue that the use of the simple statistics used here
 is not appropriate (riddles, e.g., are clearly concentrated in the Old
 World). Practical experience has shown, however, that work with unac-
 ceptable samples is often robust in the sense that acceptable predictions
 can be made for single system or subsystem replication. Undoubtedly,
 t.here was error in the judging, but there was even more error in the filed
 hterature.
      A few cultures lacking riddles may have been reported as having them.
 Much more importantly, cultures having riddles have been reported as
lacking them or, more probably, as not containing information on them. If
We treat no information as indicating absence, as we do, we are undoubt-
edly introducing a substantial amount of error into the study. This latter
source of error stems from the facts that riddles are a minor interest for
many ethnographers, with the result that they are not reported even when
!hey exist and that riddles are often reported in obscure, highly special-
ized articles which are too specific for general inclusion in the files. Again
  7
    This method was used by Roberts and Sutton-Smith in several studies (c.f. Roberts and
Sutton-Smith 1962; Sutton-Smith, Roberts, and Kozelka 1963).
        188    Ethnographic Description and Explanation

few ethnographers state that riddles are definitely absent even when they
are genuinely absent. All of these errors are compounded, of course,
when riddles are compared with other ethnographic variables, for the
judgments used in producing the other variables are also subject to error.
Still it is argued that the robustness of the findings is great enough to
permit the toleration of a substantial amount of error.
     Turning now to the riddles, the following cultures were reported as
definitely having riddles: Afgan, Amharic, Apayao, "Arabic," Austrian,
Aymara, Bemba, Bhil, Bisayan (central), Bulgariam, Bush Negro, Cal-
linago, Cambodian, Chagga, "Chinese," Cornish, Cuna, Czechoslova-
kian, Oard, Dhegiha, Eskimo (central), Estonian, Fang, Fellahin, (mod-
ern) "Formosan," Gondi, Greek, Gujerati, Hausa, Hottentot, Hungarian,
 lban, Ila, Indonesian, Iranian, Irish (rural), Kashmiri, Kikwyu, Kol,
Korean, Kurdish, Lapp, Lithuanian, Lovedu, Malays, Maori, Masai,
 Mayan (Yucatan), Mbundu, Mongolian, Ngondi, Ngoni, Nuer, Polish,
 Rumanian, Rundi, Rwala, Samoan, Serbia, Somali, Soviet Union, Syrian,
Thonga, Tibet, Tiv, Toda, Ukrainian, Wolof, Yao, Yakut, and Yugosla-
 vian.
   The following cultures were reported as being indeterminate (hereafter
 they will be classed with the riddles-present group): Aden, Burmese,
 Chukchee, Iraqi, Jordanian, Kuwait, Lebanese, Nahane, Nootka, Saudi
 Arabian, Thailand, Tuareg, Yemen.
   The following cultures are those in which riddles were reported as
 being definitely absent: Manus, Miao, and Pukapuka.
   The following cultures are those in which the presence of riddles is
 unreported: Ainu, Albanian, Aleut, Andamans, Azandi, Aztec, Bahrain
 Islands, Bambara, Bedouin, Bellacoola, Burusho, Bushman, Caingang,
 Carib, Caucasian, Cayapa, Choroti, Comanche, Creek, Crow, Delaware,
 Dorobo, Easter Islands, Eskimo (Copper), Gandian, Georgian, Goajiro,
 Gros Ventre, Guana, Hadhramut, Ifugao, Incan, Indian, Iroquois, Jivaro,
 Kachin, Kamchadal, Kapauku, Katab, Kazak, Khasi, Koryak, Laotian,
 Lepcha, Lolo, Luo, Manchurian, Mandan, Marquesas, Massachusetts
 (historical), Mende, Micmac, Mongo, Monguor, Montagnais, Mosquito,
 Mossi, Munduracu, Murgnin, Nambicuara, Navaho, New Ireland, Nupe,
 Ojibwa, Orokaiva, Paiute (northern), Papago, Pawnee, Pomo, Punjab
 (east), Rif, Russian (great), Samoyed, Semang, Senegal, Seri, Siberian,
 Sinkiang, Sino-Tibetan border, Shilluk, Sirono, Siwan, Talamanca, Tal-
 lensi, Tanala, Tapirape, Tarahumara, Tarasco, Tehuelche, Tepoztlan,
 Tewa, Tikopia, Timpira, Tiwi, Tlingit, Tubatulabal, Tucuna, Turkestan,
 Tupinamba; Twi, Uttar Pradesh, Yahgan, Yokut, Yoruba, Yuman (pla-
 teau), Yuman (river), Yurok, Vedda, Wogeo, and Zuni.
    In the tables which follow, those societies in which riddles are definitely
 and probably absent are compared with all others. For any one compari-
 son, though, the full range of societies may not be used since the entries
 for other cultural variables may not exist.
                      Riddles: Expressive Models of Interrogation          189

   In 13 of the 3 8 cases where it could be studied, riddling was true game,
and in 13 of the 28 cases where -the matter could be judged, there were
riddling contests. The relationship between riddling and gaming clearly
merits more examination than it will receive here.                ,
   In 22 of 33 judgeable cases riddles were regarded as J;,eing important in
the culture, and in 22 of 29 cases the frequency of riddling was judged to
be high. In general, importance and frequency could not be judged.
   In all of the 18 cases where the presence of rote learning and riddles
could be judged, rote learning was present. In 15 of these cases, rote
learning had a religious connection. It proved to be exceptionally difficult
to judge rote learning.
   Comparisons were made with variables from the "Ethnographic Atlas"
(as it existed in the fall of 1966)8 (see Murdock 1967). There is, e.g., an
obvious relationship between levels of political integration, the presence
or absence of authority, and the presence ofriddles. This distribution speaks

         table 6.1
Level of Political Integration
                             Autonomous     Peace      Depen-    Minimal    Lillie
                  Absent        Local       Groups      dent      State     State    State

Riddles absent       9           40            2          3         16        6       25
Riddles present      0             8           2          2         10        7       16


for itself, but ifwe omit the possibly ambiguous "peace group" and "depen-
dent" categories, x2 = 13.92, p < .01, with four degrees of freedom. Note
that the riddle-absent-state cell almost certainly contains a large number
of erroneous entries, but these work against the hypothesis that riddles
will be associated with institutionalized interrogation. Again, if we con-
trast the "absent" and "autonomous local" categories against all others
(e.g., simple against complex), x 2 = 11.10, p < .001, G = .627. Riddles
appear to be associated with political integration.
   The higher the level of political integration, the more likely the pre-
sence of institutionalized interrogation. Probably, some interrogation
occurs in all courts, so if we compare the presence or absence of riddles
with the number of levels in the jurisdictional hierarchy beyond the local
community, we can again see the predicted association. The distribution
speaks for itself (Table 6.2). x 2 = 10.81, with four degrees of freedom,
p < .05. Again if the societies with no and one level are compared with all
others, X 2 = 8.90,p < .01, G = .553. The more elaborate the jurisdictional
hierarchy, the more likely the presence of riddles.
  8 The atlas as it was published in Ethnology was used, but the complete summary is cited

for the reader's convenience.
        190    Ethnographic Description and Explanation

                              table 6.2
                  Number of Levels in Jurisdictional
                  Hierarchy Transcending Local Community
                                         0                    2        3        4

                  Riddles absent         47        28        13        9        2
                  Riddles present         7        11        14        4        2


   Oaths and ordeals are associated with formal judicial interrogation,
although they can occur in other settings. Table 6.3 shows the asso-

                    table 6.3
              Riddles and Oaths and Ordeals
                                         Riddles

                                 Absent            Present                 x2        p<      G

              Oaths absent          70                  15
              Oaths present         28                  20
                                                                       7.94          .01   .538
              Ordeals absent        78                  17
              Ordeals present       18                  20
                                                                       10.70         .01   .672


ciation. The association is somewhat stronger with ordeals than it is with
oaths, and this is not surprising.
   There is also an association with domestication, as Table 6.4 illustrates.


                 table 6.4
        Riddles and Domesticated Animals
                                                   Riddles

                                         Absent              Present                x2     p<      G

       Domesticated animals
        absent                                36                  4
       Domesticated animals
        present                               53                  35
                                                                                10.14      .01    .712
       Domesticated animals other
        than large animals (cows,
        camels) present                       65                  12
       Domesticated large animals
        present                               34                  27
                                                                                12.4       .001   .612
                    Riddles: Expressive Models 0 , 1II t          .
                                                      'J   errogatwn   191

Thl·s is probably
              •
                    an• •important
                               •
                                   association ' and its releva< nee w1.11 emerge
weh  n the
         . chtld-trammg
                  .         variables
                               ..     are considered.      1

   Finally, there is an asso~mt1on between the presence of games of strat-
egy and the presence of riddles (see Table 6.5). Table 6 _5 has x2 = 4 .4 5 ,

                            table 6.5
                   Riddles and Games of Strategy
                                                       Riddles

                                               Absent      Present
                   Games of strategy absent      47              11
                   Games of strategy present     21              16


p < .05, {! ~ .530: It ~ill be noted that this association is not as strong as
the associattons with either ordeals or cows and camels. Originally, this
  articular association had been predicted to be exceptionally strong. It is
~resent, bu~ it is weak. The Barry, Bacon, and.Child mimeographed child-
training ratmgs were also used. These have smce been published in cor-
rected form (Barry, Bacon, and Child 1967). Here the samples are even
smaller, but the. r~sults P_resented in Table 6.6 have obvious interest.
   This brief prehmmary view suggests that riddling is associated with ( J)
strong responsibility training, (2) large domestic animals, (3) high political
integration, (4) more than one level of jurisdictional hierarchy beyond the
local community, (5) oaths, (6) ordeals, and (7) games of strategy. No
doubt a more elaborate survey would reveal other associations, but these
findings constitute a pattern which is consistent and which will be in-
terpreted after the evidence of the other studies has been presented. It
would appear, though, that responsibility training is more important than
the hypothesis had originally predicted and that the strategy component is
less important.


         The Tagalog Study

          In order to gain more insight into riddles and riddling, it was
 decided to study riddles in Tagalog culture. The Tagalog are an eth-
 nolinguistic subclass of Philippine people found chiefly in the central and
 southern parts of Luzon. The decision to study Tagalog riddling was
 made in part because native speakers were available on the Cornell Uni-
 versity campus, in part because of the stimulation of the recent anthropol-
 ogical analysis of Filipino riddles (Hart 1964), and in part because of the
 saliency of riddling in Tagalog culture. The material presented here is
                  table 6.6
         Riddles and Child-Training Practices
                                                                Contingency Table Cells

                                                        (Riddles absent)       (Riddles Present)
                                            Sex           (I          b         C            d
                                          (male, M;   (Low CT (High CT       (Low CT (High CT
             Child-Training Variable     female, F)    rating)     rating)    rating)     rating)     x•    p~      G

......   Responsibility
\Cl
Iv         Reward for performance            M           19         16          3          12        3.95   .05    .652
           Anxiety over nonperformance       M           25           9         3          12       10.09   .01    .713
           Anxiety over performance          M           26           8         6           9        4.61   .05    .660
           Frequency of performance          M           24          ·3         4          II        8.00   .01    .784
           Frequency of performance          F           23         II          4          IO        4.67   .05    .679
         Obedience
           Reward for performance            F           17         15          2          12       4.56    .05    .744
         Independence
           Anxiety over performance          M           20         15          3          12       4.43    .05    .684
         Nurturant agent
           Constancy of presence of                      16         18         II           I       5.56    .02   -.850
                        Riddles: Expressive Models of Interrogation            193

based on independent field work by the junior author, work with infor-
mants, and a survey of the specific literature.
   A Filipino psychologist, Jaime Bulatao, using a thematic analysis of
stories collected from 90 subjects, has described four principle values for
the Tagalog: family solidarity, authority, economic sufficiency, and pa-
tience (1962:52-75). Under these values were found recurrent themes
such as the need for parents or older children to make sacrifices for the
younger family members, or the necessity of respecting and obeying
authority figures, although only within limits. When not discussed expli-
citly, responsibility is interwoven in the discussion of family solidarity,
authority, and reciprocity. This is true as well of other studies (such as
those by Hollensteiner 1962 and Lynch 1962a) in the same volume
(Lynch 1962b).
   Clearly, there is an emphasis on responsibility. Guthrie and Jacobs
describe

the whole area of responsibility into which the child is gradually initiated.
Depending on the particular family situation and the age he has reached, there are
always errands to run, household jobs to do, and younger siblings to be cared for.
There are chickens and pigs to feed, goats or a carabao to pasture, yard corners to
weed, dead leaves to sweep up and burn, and water and firewood to carry to the
house ( 1966).

Children who are not old enough to do these chores prepare for them by
playfully imitating their elders (Abasolo-Domingo 1961:150-157).
   When a Tagalog child fails to meet the expectations of his elders in the
performance of these tasks, he can expect a punishment, usually a verbal
one, rarely in the form of nagging. Some of the main verbal punishments
are teasing, joking, and the threat of sundry witches. Tagalog children are
extremely sensitive to ridicule. 9 That these facts are relevant to riddling
seems apparent. It is interesting to note that in nearby Borneo, Dusun
men riddle in a tone otherwise reserved for teasing children (Williams
1963 :97).
   If a culture has (I) an authority system (e.g., high political integration)
and (2) heavy responsibility training, conjoined with (3) oral questioning,
then it has the conditions which favor riddling. That Tagalog culture con-
tains the first two conditions we have illustrated from the literature. It is
more difficult to do this for the third condition. Ethnographic work on the
Tagalog does not differ from other anthropological literature in lacking
discussion of oral questioning. But there are settings in Tagalog culture

   9
     Compare the similar sensitivity to ridicule and use of verbal punishments in other areas
of the Philippines: Ilokos (Nydegger and Nydegger 1966: 167), Leyte (Nurge 1965:79), and
Sulu (Eslao 1962:87). Abasolo-Domingo (1961) supports the conformity of Tagalog prac-
tices to this basic pattern.
     194   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

which might be described as "query rich" (Frake 1964c: 143). A full dis-
cussion of these would likely require monograph treatment. Only a few
can be mentioned here. Our Tagalog informants report that parents often
questioned them on their behavior. When they visited their baptismal god-
parents on the traditional feast days (e.g., Christmas), they were also sub-
jected to many questions. Perhaps more important is the oral interroga-
tion throughout a marriage negotiation, a questioning which is often
couched in metaphoric language and managed by a "go-between" (Malay
 1957:79).
    Most Tagalogs are at least nominally Roman Catholics. Within the con-
text of the Church, oral interrogation exists in association with baptism,
 catechism, and confession. In the baptism ceremony there is ritual inter-
 rogation by the priest of the person being baptized, or in the more
common case of infant baptism, of the infant's godparent sponsors. The
 interrogation associated with catechism is obvious. Perhaps less obvious
is the interrogation in confession, but Hart has provided us with a Filipino
 view in the words of one Cebuano (the same could have been said by a
Tagalog): "Before the wedding ceremony I was led to the confessionario
 and before long the padre began bombarding me with questions" (Hart
 1956:275). Phelan has described the missionary confessors' technique:
 "In order to overcome the Filipinos' fear and embarrassment, the mis-
 sionaries developed a simple question and answer technique. Brief ques-
 tions were phrased . . . , [but], placing no faith in the veracity of their
 parishoners . . . , the confessors asked the same question in a variety of
 ways" (1959:66-67).              .,
    The present Philippine undersecretary of education has pointed out the
 tie between Spanish friar-dominated education and the current practice of
 rote recitation in the schools (Corpuz 1965 :49-50). Beside this form of
 question and answer, there are national examinations and periodic inspec-
 tions in the school system which subject both teachers and pupils to inter-
 rogation.
    The Tagalogs have a rich legal culture which is filled with interrogation.
 Apparently, this was also the case prior to Spanish contact. "In 1599 the
 Audiencia defined as customary law for the whole archipelago Tagalog
 usages as codified by Friar Juan de Plasencia" (Phelan 1959: 129). In
 some ways Tagalog interrogative culture is epitomized in the social role of
 the go-between, a person of great verbal skill. Within this context, the
 political function of the fiscal, a role that might ordinarily be viewed as
 legal, is particularly interesting. When the Spanish introduced the role, the
 fiscal was at the national level a member of the court of the Inquisition,
 and at the local level he was an assistant to the parish priest with the task
 of serving as intermediary between the priest and the people. His special
  duty was drilling of the children in their catechism. Today, the role of the
                     Riddles: Expressive Models of Interrogation      195

fiscal has been shifted from the arena of religion 1to that of the public
courts and politics. As of the coming of the American system, the fiscal
is the public defender at the provincial level; but in addition, fiscal is a
special title used to honor a politician who functions as oppositionist. All
in all, he must be a man of great verbal skill, adept at questioning and
answering.
   It seems clear that there is formal interrogation of subordinates by
superordinates in Tagalog culture. Now we can turn to Tagalog riddling.
The Filipino folklorist Manuel states,

While the bugtungan [Tagalog term for contest in riddle making] is chiefly the pas-
time of children, adults are not unknown to have indulged in it. In fact it is from
the old folks that boys and girls learn some of the enigmatic riddles. Young women
and men are observed to enjoy it as practised in night vigils over the dead, bap-
tismal parties and other social gatherings (1955:152).

    Although content analysis is a common concern of riddle studies, it is
 not our concern to apply this method to Tagalog riddles. Nevertheless,
before we get too far away from the discussion of query-rich settings, we
wish to mention an observation by Frake in his review of Harts (1964)
analysis. "Certain prominent aspects of Central Philippine cultures are
weakly represented: malevolent supernaturals, politics, birth, marriage,
sickness, crime, and cats" (Frake 1966:245; Hart 1964:70-72). The sub-
ject matter of Tagalog riddles is seldom that of the serious interrogations.
Malevolent supernaturals figure in the interrogations linked with disease
and death. The serious interrogations linked with politics, crimes birth,
and marriage have already been noted. We suspect that the taboo on cats
relates to their part in witchcraft beliefs introduced by the Spanish, but we
may be wrong. It is noteworthy that the intermediary or go-between
serves in all of these situations.
   Against this background then, it was decided to study riddle compe-
tence and associated attitudes possessed by 20 Tagalog informants.
These informants came from the Greater Manila area or from Laguna, a
Tagalog-speaking province south of Manila. All the informants had
spoken Tagalog as their first language; this language was the current lan-
guage of their homes and was the language of their childhood.
   With a Ione exception all our Tagalog informants had engaged in
riddling while in elementary school. Some of them had also heard riddles
at wakes, and three of the better riddlers mentioned using riddles in their
courtship. It would appear, however, that the locus of riddling is steadily
shifting away from the older settings of the wake and courtship and set-
tling in the school. Although interest in riddling may be declining (not one
of our informants engages in riddling now), still riddling remains salient
         196     Ethnographic Description and Explanation

enough in Tagalog culture that our riddling instrument induced nostalgia
and brought tears to the eyes of a number of our informants. Riddles are
still relatively more important than they are in American culture.
   These Taglog informants were given the riddle test discussed here. In
constructing the test 26 riddles were selected from a popular collec-
tion entitled /sang Libo at /sang Bugtong (Santos 1958). This collection
of riddles was read very carefully by an intelligent and highly motivated
bilingual assistant, who selected riddles she felt would have maximum gen-
erality (any Tagalog speaker would feel that he should have known the
answer to a riddle once given it). The maximally general riddles were then
judged for degree of difficulty, and a matching set of easy and difficult
riddles, 26 in all, was chosen. 10
    An example of a riddle (#724) considered easy is

             Aling bunga ang palibot ng mata?             pinya
             Which fruit (is) the one surrounded by eyes? pineapple

An example of a difficult riddle ( #777) is

                 Sapagka't la/wt na ay nakahihipo
                 Since everybody handles it
                  W alang kasindumi't kasimbaho
                  Nothing is dirtier or smellier
                 Bakit malzal nati't ipinakatatago?       salaping papel
                 Why do we love and treasure it?          paper money

   In the interest of approximating the proper setting, the instrument was
administered in the Tagalog language, even though all the informants
were bilinguals. A dcore was computed by giving an informant one point
for each correctly answered riddle. The most successful informant
answered 17 of 26. The least successful answered 7 riddles. The average
for the ·20 informants was 12.3 and the median was 13.
   From this group of 20, all those who had previously played ticktacktoe
( 18) were. given the Tick Tack Toe test described in Sutton-Smith and
Roberts (1967) as a rough measure of strategic competence. 11 Results are
indicated in Table 6. 7.
   Unfortunately, 8 of the 20 informants returned to the Philippines before

   10
      The riddles used in this instrument are to be found as follows in the book by Santos
 (1958) (they are listed in the order in which we presented them): #953, #724, #556, #442,
 #377,#383,#266,#91,#75,#37,#5,#60,#57,#68,#777,#661,#673,#427, #379,
 #277, #497, #418, #323, #314, #324, #295.
   11
      Scores on the first stripe were judged more competent than those on the second, and so
 on. X scores were used for ordering within each stripe. Otherwise no attention was paid to
 the x and y scores in and of themselves (c.f. Roberts and Sutton-Smith 1966).
                    Riddles: Expressive Models of Interrogation         197

                          table 6. 7
                 Tagalog Riddle and Strategic Competence*
                                       High Strategic   Low Strategic
                                        Competence       Competence

                High riddle competence       8                I
                Low riddle competence .                       6
                         *p < .01.


the study was completed, but the 12 remaining subjects were given the
following questions:
Try to remember, if you will, back to the time in your elementary school when you
were learning the multiplication table. Now imagine that one day the academic
supervisor (a province-level official in the Philippine school system) makes a
surprise visit-and this is one of those rare times when it really catches your
teacher by surprise. The supervisor-and notice well, it is the supervisor and not
your teacher-calls on you to multiply two numbers for him. If your answer is cor-
rect, how HAPPY would you be, giving a score of 1 for completely indifferent and
a score of 7 for very happy?
  Completely Indifferent 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Very Happy
How HIYA [ashamed] would you be if you got confused and your answer was
wrong?

   The responses to the two questions were added, and the 12 informants
were ranked in terms of the resultant score. It was thought that those who
scored high on both would have the antecedent conflict necessary for
riddle involvement in that they had both high approach and high avoid-
ance attitudes.
   The basic ranks by informants are given in Table 6.8. It is interesting to
note that the rank order correlation between the ranks of the riddling com-
petence scores and the Tick Tack Toe competence scores was .406, using
Kendall's Tau (p = .033). The rank order correlation between the riddle
competence scores and the interrogational conflict scores was .600 (p =
.004), and the rank order correlation between the Tick Tack Toe test
scores and the interrogational conflict scores was .460(p=.0188). Use of
the Kendall Partial Rank Correlation Coefficient showed that the correla-
tion between riddle competence and interrogational conflict was relatively
independent of strategic competence.
   Riddling in modern Tagalog society, then, conforms with the basic
complex suggested by the cross-cultural study: Riddles are related to
training for responsibility and the maintenance of a complex society with
its associated interrogation. Today, however, the locus of Tagalog rid-
        198   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

                         table 6.8
              Rank Order
                                               TTT (Tick Tllck Toe)
              Riddle Rllnk    Question Rllnk          Rllnk

                                                       6.5
                   2                  2.5              2
                   3                 10.5              9
                   4                  2.5              I
                   5.5                5.5              8
                   5.5                5.5             II
                   7                  5.5              3.5
                   8                  9                3.5
                   9                  8                5
                  10                  5.5              6.5
                  II                 12               10
                  12                 10.5             12


dling is shifting from the settings of wakes and courtship to the setting of
schools, and this shift raises the matter of time perspective.
   Over an area of islands in Southeast Asia broader than the Philippines,
and back through time, riddling has been associated with wakes and har-
vests. To answer a riddle at other times meant risking danger from malev-
olent supernaturals. Crops too were subject to such dangers, but rituals
existed for warding off this danger to the spirit of the rice or millet. Perhaps
riddling models success or failure at harvesting. Harvest time provided
the possibility of other successes, for the harvest was a time of opportu-
nity for young men and women to court. Courtship, we have noted,
remains to some extent one of the settings for riddling. And today, as
fewer people are involved in harvesting, more and more the road to suc-
cess in general and the opportunities for courtship has become the school.
It seems not without significance that the setting of riddling has shifted
toward the schools. Clearly, the total pattern is not well understood but
would merit further examination.
   Evans (1951, 1954, 1955) Thomas R. Williams (1963) have reported
differences in male and female riddling for one Southeast Asian group, the
Dusun: Women are reported as showing a preference for those riddles
which use archaic words or syllables not usually meaningful in the lan-
guage, a form suggestive of religious ritual. Men seem not to share the
preference; their riddles are the more simply metaphoric type. Women
too bear the heavier responsibilities for the chores of wakes. Perhaps this
involvement is of significance for explaining the component of obscure
 words in women's riddles. If, however, men are more interested in har-
 vest riddling, this may be related to the possibility that a successful har-
 vest courtship can lead to new chores for men, for bride service is a not
 uncommon prelude to marriage in this area of the world.
                          Riddles: Expressive Models of Interrogation                   /99·

   In any case, although we have not studied the matter, it seems particu-
larly significant to note the metaphoric nature of most riddle questions
and to consider this in the light of Malay's description of the intermediary:
a person verbally skilled in the use of metaphoric language. We offer the
hypothesis that riddling functions as training for the role of intermediary,
a role of great importance to the maintenance of solidarity in many
Southeast Asian societies.


           The American Study

         The Tagalog study suggests that involvement in riddles might
well be linked with attitudes toward oral interrogation. Some additional
exploratory surveys were made with Cornell students to examine this
relationship in greater detail.
   As a pretest, members of a large undergraduate class in sociology were
asked to estimate their general interest in riddles on a scale ranging from 1
(low interest) to 7 (high interest) and to answer a number of questions
dealing with oral interrogation. The general level of reported interest in
riddles was so low, however, that it was decided to measure this interest
more precisely.
   With the members ofa large undergraduate class in anthropology, a dif-
ferent measure of riddle involvement was used. Here 20 riddles were
selected randomly (through the use of a random number table) from a gen-
eral book on riddles (Withers and Benet 1954). 12 The 20 randomly
selected riddles were then arranged in a random order for presentation in
a written instrument. Each student was asked to judge his interest in each
riddle on a scale of 1 (low interest) to 7 (high interest). An average of the
20 riddle interest scores was used to arrive at the average interest of each
student in riddles. These average scores ranged from 1.00 (the absolute
minimum) to 5.40, with the next highest score being 4.80 (well short of the
7.00 possible highest score). Clearly, the general level of interest was low.
For purposes of the study the 69 students with riddle interest scores of
2.89 or less were placed in a "low riddle interest" group, while the 73
students with scores of 2.90 or higher were placed in a "high riddle inter-
est" group.
   Each student was also asked 4 questions designed to elicit positive atti-

   12
      The specific riddles selected were the following [in each instance the page number in the
Withers and Benet volume (1954) is given together with the number of the riddle counting
from the top of the page; in addition each riddle is lettered in order of presentation in the
test]: p. 14 (4), K; p. 18 (7), D; p. 26 (2), H; p. 28 (6), O; p. 30 (5), T; p. 31 (2), P; p. 44 (5), Q;
p. 45 (I), R; p. 47 (5), M; p. 65 (2), F; p. 76 (6), S; p. 87 (3), G; p. 92 (1), A; p. 92 (2), C; p.
104 (I), I; p. 110 (7), E; p. 111 (6), L; p. 116 (8),j; and p. 118 (5), B.
                                                                                    -   !




         200   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

tudes toward oral questioning and 4 questions designed to elicit negative
attitudes. Each of the 8 questions was preceded by the phrase, "In the
generalized classroom of your childhood (no earlier than the fifth or sixth
grade)." With the exclusion of this phrase, the questions were the fol-
lowing:

1,2.   how (eager) (uneager) were you to answer a question when the teacher
       selected you to answer a moderately difficult oral question in class?
3,4.   how (happy) (unhappy) were you when you answered a moderately difficult
       oral question when it was asked by the teacher in class?
5,6.   how (proud) (ashamed) were you when you (answered) (failed to answer) a
       moderately difficult oral question asked by the teacher in class?
7,8.   how (comfortable) (uncomfortable) were you when you answered an oral
       question correctly which other students in the class had failed to answer?

After each question the student was asked to circle the appropriate
number indicating his attitude ranging from 1 (low) to 7 (high). Hindsight
allows us to say that these questions could have been improved, but still
the 4 positive questions were held to be indicative of approach attitudes
toward oral questioning and the 4 negative question's were held to be
indicative of avoidance attitudes toward oral questioning.
   Various types of analysis were used, But Table 6.9 summarizes the
general findings. The division of the respondents into "high riddle inter-
est" and "low riddle interest" groups has already been described. The dis-
tribution of scores for each of the 8 oral interrogation questions was
plotted, and the responses to each question were divided into a high and a
low group, as nearly in half as the distribution permitted. Each respon-
dent, then, was given a score ranging from O to 4 for the number of
approach questions to which his answers were above the median; simi-
larly, each respondent was given a like score based on the avoidance
items. The distribution of these scores is given in Table 6.9. Note that all
entries to the left of line A fall in the approach < avoidance category; the
entries falling between lines A and B are in the approach= avoidance cat-
egory; and entries to the left of line B are in the approach > avoidance
category.
   It is- our provisional formulation that the greatest competence at
riddling and the greatest interest in riddles should be displayed by respon-
dents falling in the approach < avoidance category, that the intermediate
competence and interest should be displayed by the respondents falling in
the approach= avoidance category, and that the least competence and
interest should be displayed by the respondents falling in the approach >
avoidance category. Subsequent tables, therefore, have been arranged
with the three categories listed in that order, and they have been treated
as an ordinal scale.
                  table 6.9
         Attitudes toward Oral Interrogation and Riddle Interest
                                         Approach < A l'Oidance                                     Approach= A l'Oidance

                                                                                                Line A

                       4   2LoR     2HiR     3LoR          IHiR        ILoR       IHiR   ILoR   OHiRI    OLoR   OHiR
                                                                                                                        Line
                                                                                                                            B

         High          3   2LoR     4HiR     4LoR          3HiR        7LoR       3HiR   3LoR   2HiR     ILoR   3HiR
N
c:,
         Avoidance
......   Score         2   5LoR     OHiR     5LoR          3HiR I 2LoR            7HiR   3LoR   IOHiR    4LoR   6HiR

                       I   2LoR      IHiR    3LoR          2HiR       I 5LoR      5HiR   9LoR   9HiR     3LoR   3HiR
         Line A
                       0   OLoR*     IHiR    ILoR          2HiR        ILoR       3HiR   ILoR   IHiR     ILoR   IHiR
                                                                                                                            --
                              0                       1-          2           2               3              4
                     Approach = Avoidance                                                   Approach > Avoidance
                                                     High Approach Score

                                            Line B
                  * LoR, low riddle interest (2.89 or less); HiR, high riddle interest
                  (2.90 or more).
        202     Ethnographic Description and Explanation

  The relationship between high and low riddle interest and the three
approach-avoidance categories can be seen in Table 6.10.

                    table 6.10
          Riddles and Oral Interrogation Attitudes
                                   Approach =       Approach >            Approach <
                                    A l'oidance      A 1•oida11ce          Avoidance

            High riddle interest           12             43                   18
            Low riddle interest            8               29                  32


   x 2 = 7.44, p < .05, G = .352. If approach < avoidance is compared with
the other two categories, G = .451.
   Although these findings indicate that avoidance attitudes are associated
with low interest in riddling, an examination of the male and female dis-
tributions shows that this is largely true of the male, not the female, re-
spondents (see Table 6.11). It should be noted that when males and

              table 6.1 /
   Male and Female Interest in Riddles and
   Attitudes toward Oral Interrogation
                                            Orn/ lnterrouation

                                   Ap=AI'*        Ap>A1•        Ap<A1•              x2 p G

   Male high riddle interest           5            15               7
   Male low riddle interest            2             9              19        x 2 = 7.55 < .05
   Total, male                         7            24              26         G = .598

   Female high riddle interest         7            28              11         non significant
   Female low riddle interest          6            20              .!l
   Total, female                      13            48              24
              • Ap, approach; Av, avoidance.


females are compared without regard to riddle interest in terms of the
approach-avoidance category, as against the other two categories com-
bined, males clearly show relatively more avoidance, x 2 = 3.79, which is
almost significant at the .05 level.
  Each of the respondents was asked to list his favorite game. Later these
games were classified into games of physical skill and strategy and games
of strategy (cf. Roberts, Arth, and Bush 1959). The basic distribution is
given in Table 6.12. Although it was thought that the high riddlers would
favor games of strategy, there is no general relationship of this kind. How-
                       Riddles: Expressive Models of Interrogation           203

         table 6.12
Male and Female Interest, Oral Interrogation, ,lnd Preferred Game
                                     Female                                  Male
                                                             I
                        Physical Skill      Strategy        Physical Skill          Strategy

                       High      Low      High     Lo11•    High     Low         High      Low
  Orul Interrogation   Riddle   Riddle   Riddle   Riddle   Riddle   Riddle      Riddle    Riddle

Approach = avoidance      4        4       2           2      4        I                       0
Approach > avoidance     15       II       9           7      9        8            6          0
Approach < avoidance      4        3       4           9      2       12            3          6


   ever, males preferring games of physical skill are less likely to have high
   interest in riddles than males preferring games of strategy (G = -.40, p <
   .01). There is a directional relationship between the Ap = Av, Ap > Av,
   Ap < Av ordinal scale and the ordinal scales of physical skill and strategy
   (G = .320), which suggests that relatively more of the strategists are
   avoiders of oral interrogation.
      When the female distributions were plotted, it could be seen that the
    majority of the high riddle interest responses for females preferring games
   of physical skill occurred at four data points (2 Ap, 1 Av), (3 Ap, 1 Av),
   (2 Ap, 2 Av), and (3 Ap, 2 Av). When the distribution of responses in
   these cells ( 15 high and 5 low riddle interest) was compared with all others
   combined (8 high and 13 low interest), it could be seen that the four cells
   mentioned were the locus of high riddle interest (X2 = 4.27, p < .05).
   Notice that in these particular cells there is a balance between ap-
   proach and avoidance, but that all extreme balances are not repre-
   sented. The same comparisons were nonsignificant for female strategists,
   male potent strategists, and male strategists.
      Indeed, the female strategists, male potent strategists, and male strate-
   gists can be combined to produce the same relationship given for males
   (G = 6.02) as far as riddle interest and oral interrogation are concerned.
   Yet there is no obvious reason why the female potent strategists should
   differ from the others. When they are compared with the female strat-
   egists in terms of average responses to the individual questions, the female
   potent strategists display slightly greater approach and slightly lesser
   avoidance than the female strategists, but the differences are not great.
   Clearly, this is a problem for future study.
      Finally, a very small survey was made of the students in an introduc-
   tory linguistics class in which the same instrument was administered
   together with some additional questions. The same relationships of riddle
   interest and oral interrogation appeared to hold. More importantly, how-
   ever, this group was asked the following questions. Each question was
   rated: Very Little 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 A Great Deal.
        204    Ethnographic Description and Explanation

Most children are expected to perform certain tasks or chores for which they are
held accountable by adults. These tasks can include things such as performing
homework or doing household chores ranging to such things as milking the cows.
A. What is your estimate of the amount of such work that you were expected to
do as a child?
B. How much importance did the adults who assigned the work place on your
responsible completion of it?
C. To what extent was your performance of these tasks monitored through per-
sistent questioning or nagging by adults?
D. To what extent do you think that you were nagged in general?

The responses to these questions provide new insight into involvement in
riddles.
   Interestingly enough, there was no correlation between the responses
to question A and to question B. Only question B was used, with entries
of 6 and 7 counting as "high importance." The questions C and D were
combined to produce a single nagging score with respondents who had en-
tries of 3 or more for each of the two questions being placed in the high-
nagging group. Table 6 .. 13 shows the results. The same grouping of riddle


                   table 6.13
          Responsibility (Chores), Nagging, and Riddle Interest
                                                          High       Low
                                                         Riddle     Riddle
              Responsibility (chores) and Nagging       Interest   Interest

          High importance of chores with low nagging       9           2
          High importance of chores with high nagging      I'         II
          Low importance of chores with low nagging        3           7
          Low importance of chores with high nagging       3           4


involvement responses into high and low used for the larger survey was
used. Note in this table that there is an association between low nagging
and high riddle interest, X 2 =4.01, p < .05. High riddle interest, how-
ever, is particularly associated with low nagging when chores are impor-
tant (as against the other three categories combined) (X2 = 8. 78, p < .0 I,
G = .868). If we consider only the group with high importance of chores,
there is a definite association of high riddle interest with low nagging
(X 2 = 9.57, p < .00 I, G = .960). There were no sex differences of impor-
tance.
  In the American college student study, high riddle interest was as-
sociated with balanced or positive attitudes toward oral questioning, with
low nagging, and particularly with the high importance of chores con-
                      Riddles: Expressive Models of Interrogation      205

 { 0 ined with the presence of low nagging. The relationship ofriddle interest
  0 sex and to game involvements is intriguing, but not clear from the
 Present inquiry.


          Discussion

     h      Each of the three successive exploratory studies reported in this
  c apter is too modest to be publishable in its own right, but taken together
  ~ a s~ries of reinforcing and related inquiries, they merit consideration.
      e~tamly, they serve to identify cultural and psychological variables
  ~hich ought to be considered when a general theory of riddles and
  riddling is finally framed. We will now discuss some of these variables.
  b Pattern. This chapter does not deal with the linguistic forms of riddles;
     ut both the Tagalog and American studies suggest the importance of
  ~~c~ analysis. Our collection of Tagalog riddles, e.g., seems to be separa-
  tic~ mto a number of types, at least some of which are marked linguis-                1'
                                                                                       11


  A ally_ by patterns of stress and rhyme. Some exploratory work with the
  h mencan data suggested that the conundrum, in contrast to other riddles,
  t~,s appeal f~r respon?ents with high-.approach-low-avoidance attitud~s
      Ward oral mterrogation and with a slight preference for games of physi-
  cal skill, but this relationship if it exists, must be tested in further
  ~:~earch. In _any event, it is high,ly probable that_rid_dles with ~in:erent. pat-
       ns have different psychological and cultural s1gmficance w1thm a smgle
  CUltu re an d that these differences
                             .           can be mapped with · profit.
      Culture history. Riddles appear to be primarily an Old World phenome-
  non, and such riddles as do occur in the New World may be largely the
  ~~:ult of acculturation. There are undoubtedly cultura! environments in
  bee N_ew World_ where riddles are not found, ?ut where nddles.would ha_ve
  de n accepte? 1f they had diffused there or 1f they ha? been m_vented m-
    ·lendently m these settings. Perhaps there are functional eqmvalents to
  ~ d)es in such settings, and this is a problem which ought to be studied.
     gain, some riddles may be peculiar to single communities or to small
 group~, but others are systemic patterns with very wide cultural and geo-
 graphic a I d'1stributions. The culture history of both types 1s   · mterestmg.
                                                                       ·        ·
  s Pattern load. The patterns of riddles and riddling may be nearly the

 i:
· a~e descriptively in two different cultures without having the same
  8
      ;nee or weight in each. The pattern of riddling is more heavily loaded
 t agalog culture than it is in the United States, although admittedly the
 i Wo Patterns are not the same. The frequency of riddling, intensity of
 tterest and evaluation differing competence, differing behavioral set-
 stgs, and other variable's contribute to differences in pattern loading. The
     Udy of such loading is a task for the future.
        206   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

   Culfllral complexity. It would appear that cultures must have attained a
minimal level of cultural complexity if riddling is to exist as a form of
expressive behavior. This conclusion is supported by the associations
reported in this chapter of riddles with the higher levels of political in-
tegration, the number of levels in the jurisdictional hierarchy transcending
the local community, and oaths and ordeals. More indirectly, the links
with games of strategy, large domestic animals, and certain patterns of
child training have a similar significance. It would not be difficult to
produce other associations with traits indicative of cultural complexity. In
complex cultures, too, there is more likely to be institutionalized formal in-
terrogation in the court, schoolroom, temple, and elsewhere. Here su-
perordinates do question subordinates.
   Responsibility. Cross-culturally the presence of riddles is associated
with several child-training variables, but the most striking of these are the
associations with high responsibility training (see Table 6.6). The large-
animal and rote-learning findings are also pertinent. Remarkably enough,
the same variable seems to be relevant at the intracultural level in the
United States (see Table 6.13). Perhaps the responsible performance of
chores may be linked with the responsible answering of questions, both
expressively and nonexpressively. In all probability it is not accidental
that judicial oaths and ordeals also have associations with responsibility
training (Roberts 1965:204). Clearly, the definition and the measurement
of this variable should be improved.
   Oral socialization. Nagging which involves persistent questioning and
scolding must be one form of oral socialization. This study suggests that
high nagging leads to high-avoidance and low-approach attitudes toward
oral interrogation and to a low interest in riddles. A lesser amount of nag-
ging, however, may contribute to the conflict over oral interrogation,
which contributes to high involvement in riddles. Other techniques of oral
socialization, such as teasing, praising, ridiculing, rebuking, and the like,
may be more relevant to a positive interest in riddles. At least teasing is
important in Tagalog culture. Further information is needed on this group
of variables.
   Oral interrogation. The Tagalog study suggests that high-approach atti-
tudes toward oral interrogation balanced by high-avoidance attitudes
toward oral interrogation are linked with high riddling competence. In the
second game study (Roberts and Sutton-Smith 1962) and in the later work
dealing with games and other expressive models, much has been made of
the conflict-enculturation hypothesis for game involvement which has
already been described. This same general hypothesis may hold for com-
petent involvement in such expressive models as riddles.
   A high interest in riddles, however, is not the same as a high compe-
tence at riddling, for a man may enjoy responding to riddles, listening to
                    Riddles: Expressive Models of Interrogation    207

riddles, and reading riddles without being able to ask riddles effectively in
genuine riddling situations or even to tell them in any number. Admit-
tedly, someone who is highly competent at riddling is likely to be highly
interested in them. In contrast to the Tagalog study, the American inves-
tigation dealt with interest and not with competence. Here, at least, the
conflict-enculturation hypotheses must be modified.
   The American study shows that there is an approach-avoidance field
insofar as attitudes toward oral questioning are concerned. In this field,
despite the scoring used in Table 6.9, there is probably conflict
throughout in that there is always some approach and there is always
some avoidance. Still approach balanced by avoidance is linked with high
riddle interest, as is approach where it is greater than avoidance. When,
approach is less than avoidance, however, there is low riddle interest. In
other words, in addition to the link between conflict over oral interroga-
tion and high riddle interest predicted by the hypothesis, riddle interest is
also found where approach attitudes outweigh avoidance ones. Perhaps
the hypothesis should now be termed the conflict approach and encultura-
tion hypothesis, for two motivational principles seem to be at work: (1)
conflict and (2) simple approach. The extremes may be handled by a
conflict theory, but simple reinforcement may account for lower levels of
motivation.
   Work with the happiness, unhappiness, pride, and shame questions
showed that there was a high conflict group characterized by high
approach and high avoidance (type- I interest) and a low conflict group
characterized by high approach and low avoidance (type-2 interest). The
type-2 respondent seemed to prefer conundrums and games of physical
skill, while the type- I respondent seemed to prefer the other riddles and
games of strategy. Further work must be done here before anything can
be said, but there is a possibility, at least, that two types of interest can be
distinguished. Possibly, the type-I individuals are the active riddlers (i.e.,
players) and the type-2 people are less actively involved (in effect, spec-
tators). This must be tested.
   It would appear in any case that interest in riddles is associated with at-
titudes toward oral interrogation. Also if interest is to be considered
broadly, the narrow interpretation of the conflict-enculturation hypothesis
must be modified.
   Strategy. A strategic component exists in riddles and riddling. Cross-
culturally, there was the predicted association between the presence of
riddles and the presence of games of strategy. Within American culture,
however, it was not determined that people who like games of strategy in
preference to other games of physical skill are also more likely to have a
high interest in riddles. Since most of the games of physical skill listed
were games of the "physical skill and strategy" subtype, it is probable that
        208   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

even those involved with games of physical skill had some interest in
strategy. It may be more interesting to consider the game interest and the
power styles which they indicate. Clearly, the female potent strategist
must be placed in a different category. This power-style question will be
considered in another study.
     Competence. The level of competence among the Tagalog riddlers was
high, and it was obviously lo\V among the American college students. This
variable also merits more quantitative study.
     Enculturation. Again it is argued that participation in riddling as an
expressive activity entails some valuable learning, possibly about how to
handle oneself under interrogation and how to interrogate others. This im-
portant variable was not studied at all.
     Other variables. There were interesting sex differences, and it is certain
that the child training is varied in terms of sex, that game involvement
varies with sex, and that patterns of oral interrogation may vary with sex.
It was not possible in this study to do enough research to say something
meaningful about this variable, but it must be considered in future
research. There are other variables, as well, including those which con-
tribute to uncertainty in interactive situations (is, e.g., teasing more
ambiguous than nagging?), but these will not be discussed here.
     Theory of riddle involvement. We assert here that riddles are expres-
 sive models of oral interrogation. Such models should occur in cultures
 sufficiently complex to provide patterns of formal or serious oral inter-
 rogation to be modeled. Furthermore, there should be high responsibility
 training which both contributes to an individual's caring about his per-
 formance in oral interrogation situations and to his interest in such situa-
 tions (particularly if he is in conflict about responsibility). If with these
 antecedent conditions an individual's attitudes toward oral interrogation
 are balanced between approach and avoidance, or if his attitudes are such
 that approach outweighs avoidance, he is likely to be interested in a repre-
 sentation of the area of conflict (i.e., a riddle), but if avoidance attitudes
 are stronger than approach attitudes, he should not be interested in such a
 model. Possibly, the more nearly approach is balanced by avoidance, the
 more likely he is to be competent at riddling and to have high interest.
  Finally, participation in riddling should provide useful learning to the par-
 ticipants in that they may improve their ability to ask and answer oral
  questions in a variety of situations and they may learn to deal with enig-
 matic situations. In a sense it is to the advantage of the society to provide
  models which assuage conflict-induced motivation and which contribute
  to learning.
      Future research. Additional work is needed, and it is probable that mul-
  ti variant statistical techniques should be used in the data analysis rather
  than the very simple statistics used here. Riddles and riddling must be
                   Riddles: Expressive Models of Interrogation   209

studied in the field in cultures where they are important, as among the
Tagalog, and at the childhood level within American culture. Additional
research into the theory of expressive models in general should also con-
tribute to our understanding of the place of riddles and riddling in expres-
sive behavior and in expressive culture.
j
part two




      DISCOVERING
           STRUCTURE
              IN
            SPEECH
         7
        On Sociolinguistic Rules:
        Alternation and Co-occurrence                                1

        SUSAN ERVIN-TRIPP




         Susan Ervin-Tripp is a profe;sor in the Department of
         Rh~tori~ and lecturer in psychology at the University of
         Cahforma, Berkeley, and a member of the Committee on
         Sociolinguistics of the Social Science Research Council.
         She received her doctorate in social psychology from the
         University of Michigan, and has done fieldwork on bi-
         lingualism among French residents of the United States,
         the Navaho, and Japanese-Americans in San Francisco.
         She has recently completed a long-term investigation of
         child language development, and is currently engaged in
         the cross-cultural study of language socialization.
            The first two parts of Ervin-Tripp's chapter each deal
         with a major type of sociolinguistic rule. As the terms
         suggest, altemation concerns choice among alternative
         ways of speaking, co-occurrence concerns interdepen-
         dence within an alternative. These two types of rules are
         the sociolinguistic analogues of the paradigmatic and syn-
          tagmatic axes long recognized in linguistics (cf. Jakobson

  1 A longer and slightly different version of this chapter appeared as a paper entitled
"Sociolinguistics" (Ervin-Tripp 1969). I am ·deeply indebted to William Labov, William
Geoghegan, and the editors for detailed commentaries on drafts of this work and to other
members of the Sociolinguistic Committee of the Social Science Research Council and our
work group in Berkeley for discussions which have radically altered my views. Wallace
Lambert and Richard Tucker very generously lent their working tables and draft manu-
scripts. Elizabeth Closs-Traugott was a consultant on British address. Dan Slobin provided
Soviet data. This paper was written with the support of the Institute of Human Develop-
ment and aid from the Language-Behavior Research Laboratory of the University of
California. Student work contributing to generalizations in the text included studies by
Renee Ackerman, Lou Bilter, Camille Chamberlain, Judith Horner, Andrea Kaciff, Jane
Logan, Dana Meyer, Elaine Rogers, Elisabeth Selkirk, and Billi Wooley.

                                           213
214   Discovering Structure in Speech

and Halle 1956). Ervin-Tripp shows that the two princi-
ples, while simple, are of great scope, serving to integrate
a wide variety of studies. She begins with an illustration
of how much can be at stake in the choice of an alterna-
tive in address. The case is not isolated.

The fact that a journeyman artisan accorded a student Er
aroused such protest at the University of Gottingen that a great
part of the student body left town . . . . A similar incident in
Mainz created such disorder that the elector was forced to call
in troops.

   Metcalf (l 938:4) is here referring to the late eighteenth
century, when the third person singular form Er, having
attained a relatively high position as a form of address in
the seventeenth century, first in co-occurrence with titles
and Herr ___ , then independently of them, had gener-
ally sunk again in status, being mainly used to subordi-
nates.
   Ervin-Tripp proceeds to show how a formal analysis
based on the theory of information processing devel-
oped by Wi'lliam Geoghegan ( 1971 a) can serve to make
explicit the involuntary processes underlying selection
rules. In surveying other systems of address, she points
both to specific contrasts (e.g., consequences of added
age, ways of realizing a value) and to universal character-
istics (e.g., the point at which the greatest number of
choices may be found and some of the dimensions that
may underlie choice). Ervin-Tripp's analysis is tentative,
yet it offers highly interesting insights into human inter-
action processes. Note, e.g., the discussion of com-
munication problems arising from the fact that speakers
of the same language may have different sociolinguistic
rule systems and thus may misread each others' inten-
tions. One wonders whether such differences may acer-
bate ethnic tensions in modern contemporary societies.
Kohl's (l 967) and Gumperz and Hernandez (197 l) ac-
count of ghetto children's communication problems in
schools and studies of American Indian children (Polgar
 1960; Philips 1970) suggest that they do. Bateson's work
(Jackson, Haley, and Weakland 1956) on the com-
municative basis of schizophrenia is also relevant here            I"
(1968).                                                            J
   From consideration of rules for specific linguistic alter-
 natives, Ervin-Tripp turns to social variables, such as
on Sociolinguistic Rules: Alternation·and Co-occurrence      215

 deference, as a more general starting point. She notes
 that in. both ~espects analyses take the standpoint of
 predicting choice by speaker, and that the relation of this
 to comprehension and interpretation by others largely
 remains to be studied.
       In the second part of the essay two kinds of co-occur-
 rence rules are distinguished, (a) those operating within a
 single (eve!, or sector, of linguistic structure and (b) those
 operating between levels or sectors. The first are termed
  "horizontal," the second "vertical." Thus lexical selec-
  tion would b_e horizontally inconsistent in mixing an in-
  formal form 1?to a formal sequence in "You may rest as-
  sured that His Excellency is most seriously considerin'
  your suggestion." A striking case of vertical selection is
  found in Surinam (former Dutch Guiana), whose two
  main languages are Dutch and the English-based creole,
  Sranan. To speak Dutch with a Dutch pronunciation is
   considered affected, but to speak grammatically and lex-
   ically perfect Dutch with a Sranan pronunciation is
   praised. In some circles, however, to speak Sranan with a
   Dutch pronunciation is prestigious.·.
        Ervin-Tripp points out that the existence of normal co-
   occurrence allows departures from it to take on, or invite,
    social meaning. These questions lead into the very broad
    area commonly designated as that of style. (On work in
    stylistics in relation to literature, but with implications for
    sociolinguistics, see Guiraud (l 96 l) and the collections
    edited by Chatman and Levin ( 1967), Sebeok ( 1960), and
    Steinmann (l 967). The common distinction between
    formal and informal style is discussed with some refer-
    ence to slang, elaboration, and ellipsis. Interpretation of
    the selections made by the speaker implicates the general
    study of linguistic repertoires, the range of alternative
    ways of speaking available, and thus broaches some of
     the questions dealt with in Part Ill.
        The concepts discussed under the heading of switching
     within discourse, particularly speech act and J1111ctio11,
     and also topic and episode, are at the core of modern
     sociolinguistics and are referred to either explicitly or
     implicitly in this volume (see Blom and Gumperz,
     Chapter 14; Friedrich, Chapter 9). Ervin-Tripp first men-
      tions alternation between one situation and another (sit-
      uational shifting). When that to which an alternation rule
      applies is itself defined by co-occurrence rules, one has
216   Discovering Structure in Speech

the relationship singled out in much of the British work in
sociolinguistics by the term register (Halliday, McIntosh,
and Strevens 1964), a register being a way of speaking
that stands in a one-to-one relationship to a situation. By
definition, if the register is different, then so is the situa-
tion, and conversely .. More fundamental is the notion of
metaphoric alternation of ways of speaking within a situ-
ation. It is in such alternations that the meaning of ways
of speaking, and the rule-governed creativity entailed in
their use, are most revealed. Here one requires the notion
of speech act, such that the sequence of conversation can
be identified as a sequence of such acts. Ervin-Tripp
notes that most studies so far have dealt with the more
patent routines that mark the boundaries of conversation
(greeting, taking leave), or with "set pieces," as it were
(narrating a tale, telling a joke, playing the dozens), and
goes on to explore the difficult, yet essential, notion of
topic. Since speakers are able to identify change and
 recurrence of topic within a conversation, it must be pos-
 sible to characterize what is involved in doing so.
    Notice that the focus of concern has shifted. At the
 outset alternation rules concerned particular terms. In
considering entire ways of speaking, one may find alter-
 nation rules at a different level. Not only may alternation
 rules deal with styles themselves defined by co-occur-
 rence rules but one may find rules for choosing between
 different sets of alternations-e.g., choice between the al-
 ternatives of address offered by one language and those
 offered by another, or choice of one language rather than
 another because oneself or one's interlocutor was more
 master of the alternation rules within it.
    Withregard to messages, Ervin-Tripp makes an impor-
 tant distinction between manifest and latent content. It is
 sometimes thought that ~ociolinguistic questions, partic-
 ularly those of function, require one to deal with com-
  munication in its totality, including intent, and thus are
  unmanageable. As if in order to consider some aspect of
  the function of sentences one had to embrace every as-
  pect at once. In fact, reasonably orderly progress is pos-
  sible; in particular, a great deal of work can and must be
  done to identify the speech acts recognized in a commu-
                                                                      r
  nity, work which is formal in the same sense as phonol-         /
  ogy and syntax. Such work makes explicit criteria for
  recognizing recurrences of particular acts of speech or
On Sociolinguistic Rules: Altemation and Co-occurrence     217

  tactics, parallel to criteria for recognizing phonological
  and syntactic sameness or difference; in dealing with this
  additional aspect of the form of an utterance, socio-
  linguistic research begs the question of ultimate intentjust
  as much or as little as phonology and syntax. One can,
  e.g., identify "May I help you?" as, say, interrogative in
  sentence form, in message form, an offer; one may even
  be able to specify (from paralinguistic features, probably)
  that there is a functional component (elocutionary force)
  of ingratiation ("Please let me . . . "), matter-of-fact per-
 formance of duty, warning ("You are not unobserved"),
 or rebuff (" Are you certain you are the sort of person
  who belongs here?"). That is, one can know these things,
 perhaps only from hearing (apart from seeing) the utter-
 ance, through a knowledge of shared means of com-
 munication, without necessarily ascertaining the entire
 intent or state of mind of the speaker (e.g., without acer-
 taining the extent to which there is expression of sponta-
 neous attitude, to what extent a rehearsed manner). In
 sum, there is a shared competence here-it can be
 learned, for example, by actors, imd we can judge how
 adequately an actor manifests it, independently of his
 state of mind while so doing.
    Ervin-Tripp takes the position that a theory of func-
 tions served in speech is itself outside sociolinguistics.
 Her discussion, however, would seem to support the dis-
 tinction between function as private intent and function
 as the communicative status or value that a speech act is
 conventionally recognized as having. She indeed goes on
 to consider criteria for determining functional status, and
 to discuss study of the functional category of what
 Skinner calls mands, in some detail. If sociolinguistics
 must turn to other social-science fields for theories of
 functions (as of institutions, values, and the like), it is
 clear that it must itself develop the connection between
 such theories and specification of their realization in
 speech.
    The essay concludes with recognition of the problem
 of different conceptions of the notion of "rule," and of the
 problem of the relation between behavior and reports of
 behavior, reports themselves being one of the kinds of
 behavior to be studied. One's first impression of this
 survey must be that there is so much to be learned and
      218    Discovering Structure in Speech

       done; sociolinguistics is in its infancy. If one considers
       what was available before, the essay is seen to stand as a
       path-breaking integration of diverse lines of work, and to
       reveal more concretely than ever before the presence of a
       coherent field in which one can identify cumulative lines
       of research. Searle (1969) and Ervin-Tripp (1970a,
       1970b) provide additional related readings. For a more
       recent treatment of Geoghegan's address rules, see
       Geoghegan 1971 b.




        Alternation Rules
 AMERICAN RULES OF ADDRESS

 A scene on a public street in the contemporary United States:


       "What's your name, boy?" the policeman asked.
       "Dr. Poussaint. I'm a physician . . . . "
       "What's your first name, boy?
       "Alvin."
                                             (Poussaint 1967:53)

   Anybody familiar with American address rules can tell us the feelings
reported by Dr. Poussaint: "As my heart palpitated, I muttered in
profound humiliation. . . . For the moment, my manhood had been
ripped from me. . . . No amount of self-love could have salvaged my
pride or preserved my integrity. . . . [I felt] self-hate." It is possible to
specify quite precisely the rule employed by the policeman. Dr. Pous-
saint's overt, though coerced, acquiescence in a public insult through
widely recognized rules of address is the source of his extreme emotion.
    Brown and Ford (Hymes, 1964b) have done pioneering and ingenious
research on forms of address in American English using as corpora Amer-
ican plays, observed usage in a· Boston business firm, and reported usage
of business executives. They found primarily FN (first name) recipro-
 cation, or TLN (title plus last name) reciprocation. However, asymme-
 trical exchanges were found where there was age difference or occupa-
 tional rank difference. Intimacy was related to the use of multiple names.
    Expanding their analysis to account for details from my own rules of
 address, I have found the structure expressed in the diagram in Fig. 7 .1.
 The advantage of formal diagramming is that it offers precision greater
       On Sociolinguistic Rules: Alternation and C
                                                     a-occurrence   219



                                                                          TITLE
                                                                          + LN




                                                                          MR.
                                                                          + LN




                                                                          MRS.
                                                                          + LN




                                                         ',,,,>
                                                            '             MISS
                                                                          + LN



                                                                           KIN
                                                                          TITLE
                                                                          + FN




                                                                           FN




                          +
                                                                            0



        figure 7.1
American address



than that of discursive description (Hymes 1967). The type of diagram
presented here, following Geoghegan ( 1971 a), is to be read like a com-
puter flow chart. The entrance point is on the left, and from left to right
there is a series of binary selectors. Each path through the diagram leads
to a possible outcome, that is, one of the possible alternative forms of
address.
   Note that the set of paths, or the rule, is like a formal grammar in that it
is a way of representing a logical model. The diagram is not intended as a
model of a process, of the actual decision sequence by which a speaker
chooses a form of address or a listener interprets one. The two structures
may or may not correspond. In any. case, the task of determining the
structure implicit in people's report of what forms of address are possible
and appropriate is clearly distinct from the task of studying how people, in
        220    Discovering Structure in Speech

real situations and in real time, make choices. The criteria and methods of
the two kinds of study are quite different. Just as two individuals who
share the same grammar might not share the same performance strategies,
so two individuals might have different decision or interpretation proce-
dures for sociolinguistic alternatives but have the identical logical struc-
ture to their reports of behavior.
. The person whose knowledge of address is represented in Fig. 7 .1 is as-
 sumed to be a competent adult member of a Western American academic
 community. The address forms which are the "outcomes" to be ac-
 counted for might fit in frames like "Look, ___ , it's time to leave." The
 outcomes themselves are formal sets, with alternative realizations; for ex-
 ample, first names may alternate with nicknames, as will be indicated in a
 later section. One possible outcome is no-naming, indicated in Fig. 7 .1 by
 the linguistic symbol for zero [0].
    The diamonds indicate selectors. They are points where the social
 categories allow different paths. At first glance, some selectors look like
 simple external features, but the social determinants vary according to the
 system, and the specific nature of the categories must be discovered by
 ethnographic means. For. example, "Older" implies knowledge by the
 range of age defined as contemporary. In some southeast Asian systems,
 even one day makes a person socially older.
     The first selector checks whether the addressee is a child or not. In
 face-to-face address, if the addressee is a child, all of the other distinctions
  can be ignored. What is the dividing line between adult and child? In my
  own system, it seems to be school-leaving age, at around eighteen. An
  employed sixteen-year-old might be classified as an adult.
     Status-nwrked situations are settings such as the courtroom, the large
  faculty meeting, and Congress, where statuses are clearly specified,
  speech style is rigidly prescribed, and the form of address of each person
  is derived from his social identity, e.g., "your honor" or "Mr. Chairman."
  The test for establishing the list of such settings is whether personal
  friendships are apparent in the address forms or whether they are neutral-
  ized (or masked) by the formal requirements of the setting. There are, of
   course, other channels by which personal relations might be revealed, but
   here we are concerned only with address alternations, not with tone of
   voice, connotations of lexicon, and so on.
      Among nonkin the dominant selector of first-naming is whether alter is
   to be classified as having the status of a colleague or social acquaintance.
   When introducing social acquaintances or new work colleagues, it is nec-
   essary to employ first names so that the new acquaintances can first-name
   each other immediately. Familiarity is not a factor between dyads of the
   same age and rank, and there are no options. For an American assistant
   professor to call a new colleague of the same rank and age "Professor
          On Sociolinguistic Rules: Alternation and Co-occurrence
                                                                                 221
Watkins" or "Mr. Watkins" would be considered strange, at least on the
American west coast.
   Rank here refers to a hierarchy within a working group or t .. k d
                             . I h A            .                ,      o 1an e
statuses like teacher-pup1 1. n t e mencan system, rio distin -                  .
                                  b   d .         .                      c 110n m
address is made to equals or su or mates smce both receive FN Th d" _
 ·
tmction   may be made e Isew h ere m · t h e 1·mgu1stJc
                                                    · · system toi· exa·     e is.
                                                              ,        c mp 1e, 1n
the style of requests used. We have found that subordinates outsid th
family receive direct commands in the fo~m of imperatives more ~fte~
than equals, to whom requests are phrased m other ways, at least in some
settings.
   A senior alter has the option of dispensing the speaker from offering
TLN by suggesting that he use a first name, or tacitly accepting the first
name. Brown and F_or? (Hymes, 1964b) have discus.sed the ambiguity
that arises because 1t 1s not clear whether the supenor, for instance a
professor addressing a doctoral candidate or younger instructor, wishes to
receive back the FN he gives. This problem is mentioned by Emily Post:
"It is also effrontery for a younger person to call an older by her or his
first name, without being asked to do so. Only a very underbred thick-
skinned person would attempt it" (Post 1922:54). In the A~erican
system described in Fig. 7.1, age difference is not significant until it is
nearly the size of a generation, which suggests its origins in the family.
The presence of options, or dispensation, creates a locus for the expres-
sion of individual and situational nuances. The form of address can reveal
dispensation, and therefore be a matter for display or concealment in front
of third parties. "No-naming" or 0, is an outcome of uncertainty among
the options. 2
   The identity set refers to a list of occupational titles or courtesy titles
accorded people in certain statuses. Examples are "Judge," "Doctor,"
"Professor," and so on.:3 A priest, physician, dentist, or judge may be
addressed by title alone, but a plain citizen or an academic person may
not. In the latter cases, if the name is unknown, there is no address form
    2
      Reference rules involve additional considerations such as the relation of the addressee
 and referent. If the addressee is of lower rank or age than both the referent and the speaker,
e.g., then the speaker in Fig. 7.1 employs the addressee's address term-e.g., Mrs. Jones
 may refer to her husband to addressees who know him as '"Charles" to a friend, "Mr. Jones"
 to a servant, or "Daddy" to his young child (Ervin-Tripp 1969).
   " English occupational titles usually neutralize sex. The first woman appointee to the Brit-
ish High Court of Justice produced an address crisis because the traditional occupational
titles contained terms that in other contexts are selected by sex. Mrs. Lane, like the other
justices, were by the lord chancellor's decree to be called '"My Lord" and Mr. Justice
Lane." His lordship, Mr. Justice Lane, is also entitled by ancient judicial tradition to a
bachelor knighthood" (Time, August 27, J 965). Justices in British law wear wigs and robes,
elaborating the status marking of the settings in which they act. The decision shows that to
members the terms are not sex indicators, and that the alternatives, "My Lady" and "Mrs.
 Justice Lane" would be sex marked rather than neutral, just as '"chairwoman" is.
       222    Discovering Structure in Speech

(or zero, 0) available, and we simply "no-name" the addressee. The
parentheses used here refer to optional elements, the bracketed elements
to social selectional categories.
               [Cardinal]: Your excellency
               [U.S. President]: Mr. President
               [Priest]: Father(+ LN)
               [Nun]: Sister(+ religious name)
               [Physician]: Doctor(+ LN)
               [Ph.D., Ed.D.], etc.: (Doctor+ LN)
               [Professor]: (Professor+ LN)
               [Adult] etc.: (Mr.+ LN)
                             (Mrs.+ LN)
                             (Miss+ LN)
    Wherever the parenthetical items cannot be fully realized, as when LN
is unknown, and there is no lone title, the addressee is no-named, by a set
of rules of the form as follows: Father+ 0 - Father, Professor+ 0 - 0,
Mr.+ 0 --0, etc. An older male addressee may be called "sir" if defer-
ence is intended, as an optional extra marking.
    These are my rules, and seem to apply fairly narrowly within the aca-
demic circle I know. Nonacademic university personnel can be heard
saying "Professor" or "Doctor" without LN, as can schoolteachers.
These delicate differences in sociolinguistic rules are sensitive indicators
of the communitation net.
    The ze'ro forms imply that often no address form is available to follow
 routines like "yes," "no," "pardon me," and "thank you." Speakers of
 languages or dialects where all such routines must contain an address
 form are likely in English either to use full name or to adopt forms like
 "sir" and "ma'am," which are either not used or used only to elderly
 addressees in this system.
    One might expect to be able to collapse the rule system by treating kin
 terms as a form of title, but it appears that the selectors are not identical
 for kin and nonkin. A rule which specifies that ascending generation only
 receives title implies that a first cousin would not be called "cousin" but
 merely FN, whereas an aunt of the same age would receive a kin title, as
 would a parent's cousin. If a title is normally used in direct address, and
 there are several members of the kin category, a first name may also be
 given (e.g., Aunt Louise). Frequently, there are additional features
 marked within a given family, such as patrilineal vs. matrilineal, near vs.
 distant. Whenever the address forms for an individual person's relatives
 are studied, this proves to be the case, in my experience.
    Presumably, the individual set of rules or the regional dialect of a reader
 of this chapter may differ in some details from that reported in Fig. 7 .1; or
  a better formulation is possible. Perhaps sociolinguists will begin to use a
       On Sociolinguistic Rules: Alternatio 11      lC
                                                 anc o-occurrence   223

favorite frame of_ li~gu!st~-"!n. my_ dialect we say . . . "-to illustrate
such differences 10 ~ocwlmguisti~ ~ules. For example, I have been told
that in some Amen~an co1!1mumties there may be a specific status of
familiarity bero~d fil st-na~ung, where a variant of the middle name is op-
tl·on·1l
      ' 'among mt1mates. This form then becomes th e norma 1' , or unmar k e d ,
address form to the addressee.

                        "What's your name, boy?"
                        "Dr. Poussaint. I'm a physician ,,
                        "What's your first name boy?" ·
                        "Alvin."               '     ·

   The policeman insulted_ Dr. Poussaint three times. First, he employed a
social selector for race, m addressing him as "boy," which neutralizes
identity set, rank, and even adult status. Addressed to a white man, "boy"
presumably would be used only for a child, youth, or medial regarded as a
nonperson.
   Dr. Poussaint's reply supplied only TLN and its justification. He made
clear that he wanted _th~ officer to suppress the race selector, yielding a
rule like Fig. 7.1. This 1s clearly a nondeferential reply since it does not
contain the FN required by the policeman's address rule. The officer next
treated TLN as failure to answer his demand, as a nonname, and de-
manded FN; third, he repeated the term,"boy," which would be appropri-
ate to unknown addressees.
   According to Fig. 7.1, under no circumstances should a stranger
address a physician by his first name. Indeed, the prestige of physicians
even exempts them from first-naming (but not from "Doc") by used-car
salesmen, and physicians' wives can be heard so identifying themselves in
public so as to claim more deference than "Mrs." brings. Thus the police-
 man's message is quite precise: "Blacks are wrong to claim adult status or
occupational rank. You are children.'' Dr. Poussaint was stripped of all
deference due his age and rank.
    Communication has been perfect in this interchange. Both were famil-
 iar with an address system which contained a selector for race available to
both blacks and whites for insult, condescension, or deference, as needed.
 Only because they shared these norms could the policeman's act have its
 unequivocal impact.


   COMPARATIVE RULE STUDIES
   The formulation of rules in this fashion can allow us to contrast one
 sociolinguistic system with another in a systematic way. We can assume
 that a shared language does not necessarily mean a shared set of socio-
        224   Discovering Structure in Speech

linguistic rules. For instance, rules in educated circles in England vary. In
upper-class boarding schools, boys and girls address each other by last
name instead of FN. In some universities and other milieux affected by
the public school usage, solidary address to male acquaintances and col-
leagues is LN rather than FN. T9 women it is Mrs. or Miss+ LN by men
(not title + LN), and FN by womeµ. T,hus sex of both speaker and
addressee is important.                      ·
    In other university circles the difference from the American rule is less;
prior to dispensation by seniors with whom one is acquainted, one may
use Mr. or Mrs. rather than occupational title as an acceptably familiar
but deferential form. Note that this is the usage to women by male
addressees in the other system. The two English systems contrast with
the American one in allowing basically three, rather than two, classes of
alternatives for nonkin: occupational title+ LN, M + LN, and FN/LN.
M + LN is used for in.termediate cases, the familiar person who must be
deferred to or treated with courtesy.
    Two Asian systems of address have been described recently. The
pioneering work of William Geoghegan ( 1971 a) describes the naming
system of a speaker of Bisayan, a Philippine language. As in most
systems, children routinely receive the familiar address form. The Bi-
sayan system, like the American and English, chooses on the basis of rela-
tive rank, relative age, and friendship. But there are important differences.
 In the United States, all adult strangers are addressed with deference; in
 the Bisayan system, social inferiors do not receive titled address. In the
 American system for nonkin, added age, like higher rank, merely in-
 creases distance or delays familiar address; in the Bisayan system in-
 feriors or friends who are older receive a special term of address
 uniting informality and deference.
     The Korean system is more unlike the American (Howell 1967). In
 Korea, relative rank must first be assessed. If rank is equal, relative age
 within two years is assessed, and if that is equal, solidarity (e.g., class-
 mates) will differentiate familiar from polite speech. This system differs
:both in its components and its order from the American and Bisayan
 rules. Both inferiors and superiors are addressed differently from equals.
 Many kinds of dyads differ in authority-husband-wife, customer-
 tradesman, teacher-pupil, employer-employee. In each case, asymme-
 trical address is used. Addressees more than two years older or younger
 than the speaker are differentially addressed, so that close friendship is
 rigidly age graded. Solidary relations arise from status, just as they do
  between equal colleagues in the American system, regardless of personal
  ties. There are more familiar address forms yet to signal intimacy within
  solidary dyads. If the English system has three levels, there are even more
  in the Korean system. Since the criteria were multiple in the Howell
  study, not a single frame, the comparison is not quite exact.
         On Sociolinguistic Rules: Alternation and Co-occurrence                225

  As Howell points out, the Korean system illustrates that the dimension
of approach that Brown and Gilman (1960) called solidarity may in fact
have several forms in one society. In the Korean system intimacy is sepa-
rable from solidarity. This separation may also exist in the American
system, but in a different way. One is required to first-name colleagues
even though they are disliked. As Brown and Ford (Hymes 1964b)
showed, however, nicknames may indicate friendship more intimate than
the solidarity that requires or is shown by FN. They found that various
criteria of intimacy, such as self-disclosure, were related to the number of
FN alternates, such as nicknames and sometimes LN, used to an ad-
dressee, and proposed that greater intimacy creates more complex and
varied dyadic relations which speakers may opt to signal by a greater
number of address variants. Thus in the American system two points of
major option for speakers exist: the ambiguous address relation between
solidary speakers of unequal age or status and intimacy. We can expect
that systems will vary in the points where address is prescribed or where
options exist; Brown and Ford suggest a universal feature, however, in
saying that in all systems relatively more frequent interaction should be
related to more address variation. This they suggest is related to a
semantic principle of greater differentiation of important domains. 4


   TWO-CHOICE SYSTEM

   The brilliant work of Brown and Gilman which initiated the recent
wave of studies of address was based on a study ofT and V, their abbrevi-
ation for familiar vs. formal second person verbs and pronouns in many
European languages. In English the same alternation existed before
"thou" was lost. The contrast is realized in German by du and sie, in
French by tu and vous, and in Russian by ty and vy.
  One might expect two-choice systems to be somewhat simpler than a
system like Bisayan, which in Geoghegan's (1971 a) description gives
nineteen output categories. 5 But the number of outcomes can be few,
though the number of selectors is many or the kinds of rules relating them

   ,, In the system shown in Fig. 7.1, it is possible to create asymmetrical address by using
FN to a familiar addressee who cannot reciprocate because of rank or age difference and
lack of dispensation, e.g., a domestic servant. E. Hughes has noted a shift from TLN to FN
by physicians whose patients moved from private fees to Medicare. This usage is hard to
accommodate in Fig. 7.1.
  ' William Geoghegan has pointed out that in the community he studied in the Philippines,
there was probably a higher degree of familiarity than that reached by Brown and Ford's
students at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. In this condition, shifts were not
realized lexically, so he would not expect extreme familiarity to be related to multiple
address, only moderate familiarity. Note that extreme familiarity makes available interpre-
tability of paralinguistic and other subtle cues, which are particularly likely to be employed
for signalling emotion and function shifts in "restricted code" groups (Bernstein 1964a).
        226   Discovering Structure in Speech

complex. Figure 7.2 gives a description of the nineteenth-century rules of
the Russian gentry, as I derive them from the excellent analysis by
Friedrich (Chapter 9), which gives sufficiently full detail to permit resolu-
tion of priorities. Special statuses refers to the tsar and God, who seem
not to fit on any status continuum. Status-marked settings mentioned by




                                      +                            +




                                                                        V



                                                                    +




        figure 7.2
Nineteenth-century Russian address



 Friedrich were the court, parliament, public occasions, duels, and exami-
 nations. Rank inferiors might be lower in social class, army rank, or ethnic
 group or be servants. Solidarity applied to classmates, fellow students,
 fellow revolutionaries, lovers, and intimate friends. Perhaps it is more
 properly called familiarity or intimacy since there does not seem to be the
 prescription present in the Korean and American solidary relation. A fea-
 ture of the system which Friedrich's literary examples illustrate vividly is
 its sensitivity to situational features. Thus T means "the right to use ty"
 but not the obligation to do so. Within the kin group, household is of con-
 siderable importance because of the large households separated by dis-
 tance in traditional Russia.
    A slightly later eastern European system described by Slobin (1963) is
 given in Fig. 7.3. The Yiddish system, as described by immigrants, is
       On Sociolinguistic Rules: Alternation and Co-occurrence   227




         E




         figure 7.3
Yiddish address




 somewhat more like the American than like the Russian system in that
 deference is always given adult strangers, regardless of rank. However,
 an older person received deference, despite familiarity, unless he was a
 member of the kin group. In the American system familiarity can neutral-
 ize age.
    How have these systems changed? We have some evidence from the
Soviet Union. The Russian revolutionaries, unlike the French, decreed
V, implying that they wanted respect more than solidarity. The current
system is identical to the old with one exception: Within the family, asym-
metry has given way to reciprocal T, as it has in most of western Europe,
at least in urbanized groups. For nonkin in ranked systems like factories,
superiors receive vy and give ty:
    When a new employee is addressed as "ty," she says, "Why do I call
you 'vy' while you call me 'ty'?" "Kormilitzyn gleefully shoots back a
ready answer:" "If I were to call everyone 'vy' I'd never get my plan ful-
filled. You don't fulfill plans by using 'vy'" (Kantorovich 1966:30).
    Evidently, the upper-class habit of using vy until familiarity was es-
tablished (a system reflecting the fact that the T/V contrast itself came in
from above as a borrowing from French) has seeped downward. "A half-
century ago even upon first meeting two workers of the same generation
would immediately use 'ty.' Today things are different. Middle-aged
workers maintain 'vy' for a long time, or else adopt the intermediate form
which is very widespread among people within a given profession: 'ty'
combined with first name and patronymic" (Kantorovich 1966:81).
        228    Discovering Structure in Speech

   Kantorovich, true to the 1917 decree, complains about three features of
the current system: ty to inferiors regardless of age, ty to older kin, and
first names alone among young acquaintances. Thus he favors the more
deferential alternative in each case. Social change in Russia has been rela-
tively slow in sociolinguistic rules, has affected family life more than
public life, and has spread the practices of the gentry among the workers.
   The Puerto Rican two-choice system shown in Fig. 7.4 is quite simple,



                                                                  T




        E




                                                                  V




                                                                  T



         figure 714
Puerto Rican address



either because it is a system of children or because my analysis is based
on statistical tables not individual interviews. The data were generously
supplied by Wallace Lambert and his collaborators from a large-scale
study of comparative address systems in several cultures. Elementary and
high school students filled in questionnaires about the forms of address
given and received. In this chart, interlocale and intersubject differences
have been suppressed. The striking feature of this system is that it
requires only three discriminations. It is likely, of course, that adult infor-
mants would elaborate further details. Intimacy in this system refers to
close ties of friendship, which can occur with others of widely varying
age, e.g., with godparents, and is quite distinct from solidarity, which
arises from status alone. Adolescent girls, for example, do not give tu to a
classmate unless she is a friend.
   Lambert and his collaborators have collected slightly less detailed data
from samples of schoolchildren in Montreal, from a small town in
Quebec, from Mayenne, France, and from St. Pierre et Michelon, an
       On Sociolinguistic Rules: Alternation and Co-occurrence
                                                                         229

island colony with close ties to France, much closer than to nearby
Canada.
    The system  . of kin address varies considerably
                                            .            · In both M ayenne an d S t.
Pl ·erre   all km and   godparents     receive   tu. In Quebec     the urb        "ddl
         '          . h" d"        .     b                      '          an m, e
c lass  is moving   m  t  1s
                    . h. d .  irect10n,  . ut the  urban  lower  class ,and  th c rma. 1
r egions   from  wh,c    1t  enves   retam   an address  system   like Pue  t   R"    ,
                         • J d"         ) ·                                r O !CO S
in which distance ( m_c ~ mg age_ with the family is impor'tant. In some
families, even_ older s1?lmgs receive vous. For kin address, of course, the
sanctions are mt~afam1I~' so one would ~xpect between-family differences
to be greater dunng social change than m nonkin address. Generally, "in-
timate" means _Parents,. the~ aunts, uncl_es, and godparents, then grand-
parents. Some mterfam~ly ~1fferences might be accounted for by finding
which family members hve m the household, which nearby, and which far
away.
    Sex of address_e_e_appea~s ~o be a feature of adult systems, or may influ-
ence the probabil!tles of mt1?"1acy where there is a selector. In Quebec,
adults generally give tu to children and young men regardless of familiar-
ity. In St. Pierre (except_ ~ith upper-~lass girls,. who are less likely to
receive tu under any cond1t1ons) acquamtance legitimizes tu and is neces-
sary even in addressing children. In Mayenne, middle-class little boys
said they received tu from everyone (and reported often reciprocating to
strangers), but otherwise familiarity seems to be required, as in Puerto
Rko, in the Mayenne system. Boys generally receive T from employers,
and in the country and the urban lower class they receive T from service
personnel. It should be noted that the analysis from the children's stand-
point of what they think they receive is an interesting reflection of the fact
that people know what they should say themselves, and they also expect
some standard form from others. In analyzing the adult rule systems,
however, the children's data are not the best; the adults of rural or lower-
class background may have different rules (e.g., service personnel?) than
others.
    Elsewhere Lambert (1967b) has discussed the development of address
rules with age. There are several interesting problems in the learning of
these systems, such as the visibility of the various social selectors. One
can assume the rank gradations in an adult system might be learned late
(at least in terms of generalizability to new addressees), as would genera-
tion differentiations not highly related to age.
    A second problem emphasized by Lambert is the structure of alterna-
tion itself. Children in most language communities learn fairly early to
employ the asymmetry of first and second person (for a case study, see
McNeill 1963). Thus if they always received T and gave V, there might
be less difficulty; however, they see others exchanging reciprocal V and T
as well as asymmetrical address, and they give T to some alters. Compar-
        230    Discovering Structure in Speech

ative research should be done in natural language communities where the
language structure provides different category systems and social se-
lectors (Slobin 1967).
   The compressed presentation here of Lambert's work has indicated
several directions for research on social criteria of address selection.
Lambert has shown that these rules are sensitive indicators of differences
between social groups, and of social change. One must look beyond the
address system for independent social features correlated with address
systems of a defined type. In order to do such studies, a clear-cut formal
system for typologizing properties of address systems (like language
typologies) is necessary.
   Brown has already suggested that the dimensions of power and solidar-
ity are likely to be present in all address systems since they are the basic
dimensions of social behavior. If these are universals, we can look else-
where for ways of typologizing systems, as suggested here, according to

        I. The order of universal selectors in the rule
        2. The location of personal options (such as dispensation, located
        at rank in the rule on Fig. 7. I)
        3. Outcome types (for a given social selector, what linguistic or
        paralinguistic features most commonly realize the contrast?)
        4. Formal features of the informational system (e.g., the relation
        of input alternatives to outcomes, or the amount of neutralization)
        5. Formal type of rule for realizing insults, condescension, defer-
        ence, and so on by operations on the output of rules for normal,
        unmarked address (or on the rules themselves) (see the last sec-
        tion of this chapter)

   SOCIALIZATION
    Adults entering a new system because of geographical or occupational
 mobility may have to learn new sociolinguistic rules. A contrastive analy-
 sis of formal rules, in combination with a theory of social learning, would
 allow specification of what will happen.
    First, we can predict what the speaker will do. We can expect, on the
 basis of research on bilinguals, that the linguistic alternatives will at first
 be assimilated to familiar forms, to "diamorphs." Thus a Frenchman in
 the United States might start out by assuming that monsieur = Mr.,
 madame= Mrs., and so on.
    However, the rules for occurrence of these forms are different in
France. In polite discourse, routines like "merci," "au revoir," "bon-
jour," and "pardon" do not occur without an address form in France,
although they may in the United States. One always uses "Au revoir,
        On Sociolinguistic Rules: Alternation and Co-occurrence    231

  1nadmne" or some alternative address form. Madarne differs from "Mrs."
  in at least two ways. Unknown female addressees of a certain age are nor-
  mally called madame, regardless of marital status. Further, Mrs.+~= ,0;
  mada,ne + ~ = madame. As a matter of fact, the rule requiring address
  with routines implies that when LN is not known, there cannot be a "zero
  alternant"-some form of address must be used anyway, like the English
 "sir." As a result of these differences in rules, we can expect to hear el-
 derly spinsters addressed: "Pardon me, Mrs."
     How do listeners account for errors? Shifting at certain points in
 sociolinguistic rules is regularly available.as an option. Normally, it is in-
 terpreted as changing the listener's perceived identity, or his relation to
 the speaker. The result may be complimentary, as "sir" to an unknown
 working-class male, or insulting, as "Mommy" to an adolescent male. If
 the learner of a sociolinguistic system makes an error that falls within this
 range of interpretable shifts, he may constantly exchange predictably
 faulty social meanings. Suppose the speaker, but not the listener, has a
 system in which familiarity, not merely solidarity, is required for use of a
first name. He will use TLN in the United States to his new colleagues
and be regarded as aloof or excessively formal. He will feel that first-
name usage from his colleagues is brash and intrusive. In the same way,
encounters across social groups may lead to misunderstandings within the
United States. Suppose a used-car salesman regards his relation to his
customers as solidary, or a physician ,so regards his relation to old pa-
tients. The American using the rule in Fig. 7'. l might regard such speakers
as intrusive, having made a false claim to a solidary status. In this way,
one can pinpoint abrasive features of interaction across groups.
    Another possible outcome is that the alternative selected is completely
outside the system. This would be the case with "excuse me, Mrs.,"
which cannot be used under any circumstances by rule 1. This behavior
is then interpreted by any additional cues available, such as the face,
dress, or accent of a foreigner. In such cases, if sociolinguistic rules are
imperfectly learned, there may be social utility in retaining an accent;
wherever the attitude toward the group of foreigners is sufficiently be-
nign, it is better to be so designated than to risk insulting or offending
addressees.

  INTEGRATED SOCIOLINGUISTIC RULES
   The rules just given are fractional. They are selective regarding the
linguistic alternations accounted for. They define only specific linguistic
entries as the universe of outcomes, to be predicted. If one starts from
social variables, a different set of rules might emerge. This is the outlook
of William Geoghegan (1971 a), Ward Goodenough (1965a), and Dell
        232   Discovering Structure in Speech

Hymes (1964b), who suggests taking "a specific or universal function,
such as the distinguishing of the status or role of man and woman, deroga-
tion, respect, or the like, and investigating the diverse means so organized
within the language habits of the community, . . . [rather than] looking
for function as a correlative of structure already established." This is the
point of view taken in the last section of this paper.
   Using such an approach, Goodenough examined behavior toward a
range of statuses and found that it was possible to rank both the statuses
and the forms of behavior into Guttman scales and equivalent classes,
grouped at the same scale point (1965a). In this way, various kinds of
verbal and nonverbal behavior can be shown to be outcomes of the same
social selectors.
   Deference, the feature studied by Goodenough, may be indicated by
pronoun alternations, names or titles, tone of voice, grammatical forms,
vocabulary, and so on (Capell 1966: 104ff; Martin, in Hymes 1964d).
Rubin suggests even language change may serve the same purpose
(1962). Deferential behavior as in the Spanish-Guarani choice in Para-
guay may in some systems only be realized in special situations such as
in introductions or in making requests. If one compares an isolated seg-
ment of two sociolinguistic systems, it cannot legitimately be concluded
that a given social variable is more important in one system than the
other. It may simply be realized through a different form of behavior.
   It is not clear'how the different realizations of social selectors might be
important. Language, address, terms, pronominal selection, or consistent
verb suffixing (as in Japanese) can be consciously controlled more readily,
perhaps, than can intonation contours or syntactic complexity.
Frenchmen report "trying to use tu" with friends. Such forms can be
taught by rule specification to children or newcomers. Forms which allow
specific exceptions, or which have options so that too great or too little
frequency might be conspicuous, cannot be taught deliberately so easily.
Such rules can be acquired by newcomers only by long and intense ex-
posure rather than formal teaching.
   Some alternations are common and required; others can be avoided.
Howell reports that in Knoxville, Tennessee, Negroes uncertain whether
or not to reciprocate FN simply avoided address forms to colleagues
(Howell 1967:81-83),just as Brown and Ford noted in the academic rank
system. In a pronominal rank system, like French or Russian, such avoid-
ance is nearly impossible. Among bilinguals, language switching may be
employed to avoid rank signaling (Howell 1967; Tanner 1967). The
avoidable selector can be considered a special case of the presence of op-
tions in the system. Tyler (1965) has noticed that morphological defer-
ence features (like the Japanese) are more common in societies of particu-
lar kinship types, such as lineage organization.
         On Sociolinguistic Rules: Alternation and Co-occurrence            233

   This description is primarily made from the standpoint of predicting a
speaker's choice of alternatives in some frame. It is also possible to exam-
ine these rules from the standpoint of comprehension or interpretation, as
have Blom and Gumperz (Chapter 14) in their discussion of social
meaning. Just as one can comprehend a language without speaking it, as
actors we can interpret the social meaning of the acts of' others without
necessarily using rules identical to our own. The relation between produc-
tion and comprehension rules remains to be studied.


          Co-occurrence Rules 6

   TYPES OF RULES
    "How's it going, Your Eminence? Centrifuging OK? Also have you
 been analyzin' whatch'unnertook t'achieve?" The bizarreness of this
 hypothetical episode arises from the oscillations between different
 varieties of speech. It violates the co-occurrence rules that we may as-
 sume English to have.
    In the preceding section, we were concerned with the selection of lex-
 ical items, pronouns, or inflectional alternatives. We conceived of each in-
 stance as involving social selectors. Once a selection has been made,
 however, later occurrences within the same utterance, conversation, or
even between the same dyad may be predictable. Whenever there is
 predictability between two linguistic forms, we can speak of co-occur-
 rence rules (Gumperz 1967).
   Co-occurrence rules could be of two kinds. The instance of predict-
ability through time might be called horizontal since it specifies relations
between items sequentially in the discourse. Another type might be called
vertical, specifying the realization of an item at each of the levels of struc-
ture of a language. For instance, given a syntactical form, only certain lex-
icon may normally be employed, and a particular set of phonetic values
may realize the lexicon. If one has learned political terms in New York
and gardening terms in Virginia, the phonetic coloring of the lexicon may
reflect their provenance in the individual's history. The most striking case
lies in the well-practiced bilingual who uses French syntax and pronuncia-
tion for French vocabulary and English syntax and pronunciation for
English vocabulary.
   In the example, the following are violations of vertical co-occurrence:


   6 Many of the concepts covered in this and the preceding section were discussed from a

slightly different perspective by Gumperz (1964b).
        234   Discovering Structure in Speech

        a. "How's it going" is a phrase from casual speech, but the suffix
        "-ing" is used, rather than "-in'," which is normal for casual
        speech
        b. An elliptical construction is used in the second utterance,
        which contains only a participle, but the formal "-ing" appears
        again
        c. A technical word, "centrifuge," is used in the elliptical con-
         struction
        d. The "-in'" suffix is used with the formal "analyze"
         e. Rapid informal articulation is used for the pedantic phrase
         "undertook to achieve"

   Horizontal co-occurrence rules refer to the same level of structure, and
might be lexical or structural. The vocabulary in the example oscillates
between slang and technical terms, the syntax between ellipsis and paral-
lel nonellipsis. In bilingual speech one may find structural predictability
independent of lexicon, as in an example of Pennsylvania German:

                         Di kau ist over di fens jumpt.

Here the syntax and grammatical morphemes are German, lexicon
English. Horizontal ~o-occurrence rules governing selection of grammatical
morphemes .are common, with lexical switching and phrase switching
allowed. Diebold (l 963) also gives examples in which Greek-Americans
who can speak both Greek and English with "perfect" co-occurrence
rules, if they employ English loan words in the Greek discourse, realize
them in the Greek phonological system. This would suggest that for these
speakers horizontal, or syntagmatic, phonological rules override vertical
realization rules.
   One of the startling aberrations in the example is the use of slang to a
cardinal. We would expect to find that deferential address forms would be
co-occurrent with formal style. One pictures a cardinal in a microbiology
laboratory addressed by a janitor who knows technical terms but cannot
fully control formal syntax and phonology! Like ungrammatical sen-
tences, sociolinguistically deviant utterances become normal if one can
define setting and personnel to locate them. This, of course, is the point.
Wherever there are regular co-occurrences, deviant behavior is marked
and calls attention to its social meaning.
   The most extreme forms of sanctions for co-occurrence specification
are likely to be found in ritualized religious speech in traditional societies.
Here it would be blasphemous to utter the wrong speech. Indeed, Gum-
perz has suggested that linguistics first began with the Sanskrit scholars'
efforts to identify the formal features of religious texts and transmit them
       On Sociolinguistic Rules: Alternation and Co-occurrence     235

unchanged. Th~; from the}pecial social constraint on alternations sprang
the concept of language.               .
  At the opposite ~xtreme are the conditions in American college lec-
turing, where technical ~en1:s, slang, and informal and formal syntax alter-
nate to s~me_ extent. Fne?nch als_o gives examples (Chapter 9) of delicate
commumcat10n of changmg relationships by shifts within conversations.


  STYLE

   Formal Style. Style is the term normally used to refer to the co-occur-
rent changes at various levels of linguistic structure within one language.
The vertical properties of such shifts have been pointed out by Joos
( 1962). Hymes ( 1964d) has commented that probably every society has at
least three style levels: formal or polite, colloquial, and slang or vulgar.
    If Hymes is right about a polite style which contrasts with the un-
marked or "normal" colloquial, it might be proposed that this is the style
preferred in public, serious, ceremonial occasions. Co-occurrence restric-
tions· are particularly likely because of the seriousness of such situations.
The style becomes a formal marker for occasions of societal importance
where the personal relationship is minimized. We would expect that the
distant or superior form of address and pronoun is universally employed
in public high style. In Fig. 7.1 and 7.2 "status-marked situations" which
call for titles and V may also call for polite style. Thus speakers who
 exchange colloquial style normally might change to this style in certain
public occassions such as funerals or graduation ceremonies.
    It might in general be the case in English that in otherwise identical situ-
 ations, an alter addressed with TLN receives polite style more than one
 addressed with FN. Howell (1967:99) reported such correlations in
 Korean.
    In Geertz' (1960) analysis of prijaji speech etiquette in Java, a distinc-
 tion is made between affixes and function morphemes controlled by co-
 occurrence rules, and honorific vocabulary (like "sir"), which is sporadic
 and which is governed in effect by rules of frequency rather than categori-
 cal co-occurrence. Since a single selection is made in the first case, he
 refers to a "styleme."
    Formal lexicon and "-ing" should be related. Fischer (Hymes 1964d)
 found that criticizing, visiting, interesting, reading, and correcting and
 flubbin', punchin', swimmin', chewin', and hittin', occurred in a single
 speaker's usage. It is not clear here whether it is lexical style or topic that
 is at issue since there were no examples of denotative synonyms realized
 through different vocabulary. Such examples, of the sort given in
 Newman (Hymes 1964d) and found plentifully in English lexicon for
          236         Discovering Structllre in Speech

body functions (e.g., urinate vs. weewee), provide clearer evidence for co-
occurrence restrictions between lexicon and structure.
  Labov (1966b) did include the "-ing" vs. "-in"' variation in his study of
style contrasts in different social strata, and found it worked precisely as
did the phonological variables. Polite style in a speaker might require a
certain higher frequency (Figs. 7 .5 and 7 .6) of postvocalic [r], or [l'5] rather


                 OO (th) Index
             1
                                 SOCIOECONOMIC CLASS




                 00
                   Casual         Careful     Reading        Word
                   speech         speech       style         lists


           fiiure 7.5
 Class and style stratification of 'th' in 'thing,' 'three,' etc., for adult
 native New York City speakers (Labov 1966).



 than [d] in, e.g., "this," and of "-ing." While the variables differentiating
 polite from casual style tended to be the same in different classes, the
 precise frequency reached for each variable was a function of class too
 (Labov 1966). Thus his evidence suggests co-occurrence rules for gram-
 matical morphemes and phonology. Labov (1966b) and Klima (1964)
 consider the formal description of phonological and syntactic style fea-
 tures, respectively.                  ·

    Informal Style. In trying to sample different styles while interviewing,
 Labov made the assumption that speakers would use a more formal style
 during the interview questioning than at other times. He used several
 devices for locating such shifts contextually: speech outside the interview
 situation, speech to others usually in the family, rambling asides, role
 playing (specifically, getting adults to recite childhood rhymes), and/-
        On Sociolinguistic Rules: Alternation and Co-occurrence             237

                  (r) Index
             80
                                  SOCIOECONOMIC CLASS




             oo~=:::::=:==----'--~
              Casual          Careful   Reading   Word    Minimal
              speech          speech     style    lists    pairs

          figure 7.6
Class stratification of 'r' in 'guard,' 'car,' 'beer,' 'beard,' etc., for
native New York City adults (Labov 1966).



answers to a question about a dangerous experience. He found that when
"channel cues" (changes in tempo, pitch range, volume, or rate of
breathing) indicated a change to casual or spontaneous speech within a
speech episode, the phonological features changed. In the examples illus-
trating the shifts, lexicon and syntax changed too.
   It is commonly the case that as one moves from the least deferent
speech to the most, from the informal to the ceremonial, there is more
structural elaboration and less abbreviation. Probably, this difference is a
universal, for two reasons. One is that elaboration is a cost, and is
therefore most likely in culturally valued situations or relationships
(Homans 1958). The other is that a high degree of abbreviation is only
possible in in-group communication. While ceremonials may be confined
to a sacred few, wherever they have a public function and must com-
municate content, we assume that this principle of elaboration holds.
Elaboration could be defined with respect to a surface structure, or to the
complexity of imbedded forms in the syntax, or some such criteria. A
very brief poem might, in fact, in terms of rules and "effort" of compres-
sion, be more complex than a discursive report of the "same" content.
Some forms are unambiguous: suffixed versus unsuffixed forms, as in Jap-
anese honorifics or polite verb suffixes; titles versus nontitles; and so on.
   From a formal grammatical standpoint, ellipsis is more complex than
nonellipsis since the grammar must contain an additional rule. It is not
       238    Discovering Structure in Speech

clear how ellipsis might be handled in a performance model. However,
ellipsis in the syntactical sense is clearly more common in informal
speech.
   From Soskin and John's (1963) text of a married couple we find the fol-
lowing:

                        Bet you didn't learn it there.
                        Your name?
                        Want me to take it . . .
                        Wanna take your shoes off?
                        Not that way!
                        Directly into it.

The formal rules for sentence contractions and ellipsis are readily written.
  Another form of ellipsis is that used in conversational episodes in
second-speaker forms or to complete one's own earlier utterances. From
Soskin and John (1963):

                             That fish, Honey.
                             Like this?
                             Undulating!
                             Towed!
                             With both of them!
                             Well, I could.

   These forms of ellipsis are learned. Brent and Katz (1967) found that
anaphoric pronominalization is rare in young children; it is obligatory in
second-speaker rules. Bellugi ( 1967) found also that contractions occur
later than uncontracted forms in children, except as unanalyzed mor-
phemes.
   Semantic compression is also available, in casual speech among in-
timates (see Ervin-Tripp 1968). In slang the alternates are primarily lex-
ical. As Newman (Hymes 1964d) has pointed out, the actual forms used
are not necessarily different, but in sacred or slang contexts they take on a
different meaning, so in speaking of slang vocabulary one must include
both form and its semantic features. Since slang is highly transitory bY
definition, it will be understood and correctly used only within the group
or network where it developed or to which it has moved at a given time.
Thus one might predict that the selection rules for slang should restrict it
to addressees to whom one claims a solidary relation. Thus a college lec-
ture laced with slang is a claim on the identification of the audience.
   Phonetically, a form which occurs in casual speech more than in polite
 styles is rapid speech, which entails horizontal changes.                /
        On Sociolinguistic Rules: Altemation and Co-occurrence    239

                  What are you doing?   [hw ddar ju 'duwilJ]
                  Whaddya doing?        [hwddji 'duwil)]
                  Whach <loon?          [wdc 'dun]

 There are regular phonetic alternations related to rate, e.g.,

          l. Retention of syllable of major stress and peak pitch
         2. As degree of speeding increases, loss of weakest stress
         3. Loss or assimilation of semivowels
             [r] in postvocalic position lost
             [d] + [y] - [j]     e.g., Whadja do?
             [t] + [y] - [c]     e.g., Whaca doin?
         4. Possible loss of marginal phonological distinctions like /hw/
         vs. /w/, perhaps as part of casual speech style
         5. Centralization of unstressed vowels

   There is a reverse set of rules available to speakers used to these alter-
nations. The extra-slow style may be employed in sounding out for a dic-
tionary or over the telephone. Thus normal "school" may become slow
[sikuwil]. Many of these rules derive from the rules of English stress
(Chomsky and Halle 1968).

    Styles Related to Occupation. Language changes related to work arise
 for three reasons. One is that any activity brings with it objects, con-
 cepts, and values which are talked about by specialists in that activity,
and indeed may be known only to them. Another is that whatever soli-
darity an interacting work group may achieve, or whatever identification a
reference group (e.g., psychologists or transformational linguists) may
stimulate, it can be alluded to by selection of appropriate alternatives in
speaking or writing. Many instances of abbreviations in factories, or of
work-group slang, or of technical terminology synonymous with collo-
quial vocabulary, must have this second feature. Further, the particular
communicative conditions might give rise to some features-signal tower
communication, headline style, the special syntax of short-order restau-
rant speech. While the slang and lexical features of restaurant speech can
be found in kitchens, fast unambiguous oral communication needed
between waiter and cook alone may lie behind the special syntax Brian
Stross reported (see Ervin-Tripp 1969). Examples are the structure
(number)+ (category)+ (modifier) which he found in such orders as "two
bacon and" for bacon and eggs and "LT plain" for lettuce and tomato
sandwich. Virtually all registers, including that of social-science writing,
have syntactic as well as lexical features. The details of the co-occurrence
rules for such styles remain to be studied.
        240   Discovering Structure i11 Speech

   Baby Talk. In many languages a special style is employed in talking to
infants, which changes its features with the age of the child. A cross-
linguistic comparison has been made by Ferguson (1964b). In English,
baby talk affects all levels of structure.
    Most speakers are likely to be conscious of baby-talk lexicon, as they
often are of the lexical features of styles. Baby lexicon includes words
like potty, weewee, bunny, night-night, mommy, and daddy. Many other
words in adult speech become appropriate for speaking to infants when the
suffix "-ie" is added. Drach and liis colleagues ( 1969) found that speech to
children is syntactically simpler and more repetitious, and contains fewer
errors and hesitation pause and more ellipsis resulting in shorter sen-
tences than speech to adults.
    Phonological effects and paralinguistic features are especially conspic-
 uous. Samples of talk to infants show certain general phonetic changes
 such as palatalization. Most striking is the higher pitch the younger the in-
 fant, and the use of a singsong, wide-ranging intonation. Observations of
 the social distribution of this style show it more common in addressing
 other people's children than one's own. For instance, nurses use the
 paralinguistic features at least in persuading children; and in cooperative
 nurseries, comparison of own-child and other-child addressees indicates a
 distinct shift to more age attribution with own child.
    Children themselves use many of the features of adult baby talk very
 early. In address~ng younger siblings they may adopt lexical and para-
 linguistic features of the adult baby talk as early as age two. In role play
 they use phrases and address terms from baby talk, e.g., "Goo-goo, little
 baby," and freely employ the sing-song intonation in addressing "babies."
  In other respects their role play is stereotyped rather than strictly imita-
 tive, for example in the frequent use of role names, and it may be that the
 use of the intonational and lexical features of baby talk may function sim-
  ply as role markers in their play.

  Linguistic Repertoire. Co-occurrence rules refer to the selection of al-
ternates within the repertoire of a speaker in terms of previous or con-
comitant selections. The range of possible alternates should be known in
such a study. In an American monolingual, the range is likely to include
the styles just discussed, and perhaps an occupational register. Labov has
pointed out, however, that it is rare to control a very wide stylistic range
unless one is a speech specialist and that upwardly mobile persons usually
lose the "ability to switch 'downwards' to their original vernacular"
(1964b:92).
   In many parts of the world, a code that is relatively distinct from the
casual vernacular is used in formal situations. This condition, called
"diglossia" in Ferguson's (Hymes 1964d) classic article, may, because of
        On Sociolinguistic Rules: Alternation and Co-occurrence   241

  the greater code difference, be accompanied by more co-occurence
  restriction than is style shifting, where the common features of the styles
  may outweigh their differences. Examples where the codes are related are
 Greece, German Switzerland, Haiti, and Arab countries. Standard lan-
 guages coexisting with local dialects are somewhat less perce1,'tually sepa-
 rable; historically, the dialect does not usually maintain itself except pho-
  netically, though there may be ideological resistance to borrowing from
 the standard (Blom and Gumperz, Chapter 14). Differential access to the
 everyday use of the standard, in combination with valued social meanings
 of a dialect, as in the case of nonstandard urban English or creoles such as
 those of Hawaii and Jamaica, may preserve variation.
    Where diglossia takes the form of bilingualism (Fishman 1967), one
 might at first assume that the co-occurrence rules would primarily govern
 situations requiring the high form. Such a condition exists in many Ameri-
 can bilingual communities, with English as the high form. However, these
 are not usually pure cases since English is the vernacular if there are cas-
 ual contacts outside the immigrant community. Under these conditions
 there can be considerable interpenetration (Gumperz 1967).
    Co-occurrence rules in common-sense terms refer to "language
 mixing." Some bilingual communities have strong attitudinal opposition
 to switching (usually they mean lexical co-occurrence). Blom and Gum-
perz (Chapter 14) found that in a Norwegian village speakers
were unconscious of the use of standard forms and were very upset to
hear tapes showing lack of co-occurrence restrictions in behavior. In
practice, the maintenance of coordinate or segregated systems depend
on social factors. Coordinate bilingualism is possible if there is a complete
range of equivalent lexicon in both systems, and social support for the
bilingualism. If this is not the case, some topics cannot be discussed, some
emotions cannot be conveyed, and borrowing, perhaps surrounded by a
routine disclaimer frame, will occur. The other social condition permitting
such segregation in diglossia are the closed network circumstances re-
ported by Blom and Gumperz (Chapter 14) where certain topics and
transactional types simply would not occur in casual discourse. Thus
American researchers can find rich grounds for the study of behavioral
support or loss of co-occurrence rules, either in English style, registers,
dialects, or multilingualism.



       Shifting within Discourse

  Situational Shifting. The social features alluded to in the alternation
rules so far discussed have primarily been features of situations or per-
         242     Discovering Structure in Speech

sonnel present. Sociolinguistic alternations based on these kinds of "sit·
uational shifting" (Blom and Gumperz, Chapter 14) can be seen in the
two-year-old's use of baby-talk intonation to his baby sister, the mul-
tilingual child's selection of language for a new servant, the slum Afro·
American child's loss of classroom copulas when on the playground, the
Hawaiian college boy's selection of standard lexicon when a mainland
stranger arrives, and replacement, in addition, of the creole's intonation if
the stranger is a girl. These consistent behavioral shifts may or may not be
related to normative rules of the type shown in Figs. 7 .1 to 7.4 derived
from informant's reports.·

   Speech Acts. In addition, however, such shifts can occur within oc·
casions. They might be related to functions, speech acts, or topics. "What
did he say?" "He asked her for a match." "Why did he do that?" "J-le
wanted to meet her, talk with her." The first characterization describes a
speech act, request. The second refers to the function of the act. We as·
sume that all members of social groups can identify speech acts, that theY
are units in the cultural system. "What are you talking about?" "We were
just saying hello." HWe were telling jokes." "I was introducing Joe.''
Saying hello, telling jokes, and introducing are speech acts subordinate to
organized exchanges like parties and joint work, often located within
them by sequencing rules (Schegloff, Chapter 12) or rules of proprietY
(e.g., one introduces guests at a formal dinner, but not the waitress),
   In these examples, the speech acts are labeled units. It is possible that
some consistencies in rules of behavior imply the existence of a unit,
though it may not appear in the folk taxonomy of speech acts. For ex·
ample, suppose that one cannot say to a stranger on the street, "My name
is George Landers. What time is it?" or "Hello, sir. Where is the post of·
flee?" Then to formulate the rule, one needs a category of information
requests addressed to strangers in order to indicate that greetings and self·
introductions are excluded. Another indication that such units may exist
is that they commonly occur in bilingual interaction; there may be a tan·
guage shift between two different speech acts.7
   There is no reason to assume that speech acts are the same everywhere,
Certain special forms of discourse, like poetry and speechmaking, rnaY
have components known only to specialists. Whether and why there are
labels used in the teaching of these performances is itself an interesting
cultural study.
   Speech acts in English include greetings, self-identification, invitations,
rejections, apologies, and so on. The ones identified so far tend to be rou·

   7 Recent work in transformational grammar has specified certain speech acts as perfor!11~~

tive verbs in the deep structure of sentences. Then the syntactic rules would have to contat
the rules for neutralization or ambiguity I allude to later.
          On Sociolinguistic Rules: Alternation and Co-occurrence         243

  tines, b~t we can expect to find other more abstract units as research
  Proceeds .

     . Topics. When conversations have an explicit message with informa-
   honal content, they can be said to have a topic. "What are you talking
   ~bout?" "Nothing." "Gossip." "Shop talk." "The weather." ",The war."
    .We were having an automobile discussion about the psychological mo-
   tives for drag racing in the streets." In everyday discourse, the question of
  topic is most likely to occur in invitations or rejections so that the answers
  are such as to exclude a new arrival or give him enough information to
  Participate. Besides selecting personnel for participation, topics may be
  governed by a continuity rule. In a formal lecture in a university there is a
  ~onstraint on continuity and relevance, just as there is in technical writ-
  Ing, Where editing can enforce the constraint. Evidences of constraint are
 ~Pologies for deviation: "That reminds me . . . " "Oh, by the way . . . "
    l'o get back to the question . . . " "To change the subject . . . " Cul-
 tural rules regarding speech events may include constraints as to the
 grounds for relevance.
      lqolseth (1967) has found in analysis of some group interaction that
 topical episodes are key factors in speakers' tactics.

  A Performer's tactic may be to direct his episode as a probe into the preceding epi-
  sode. In contrast, in another situation his tactic may be to extend and elaborate
 some antecedent episode. On still another occasion his tactic may be to close off
 ~nd limit a previous episode . . . . These tacticaltypes are based on, or defined in
   erms of, two qualities abstracted from the performances: (a) the episode locus of
 ;~leva?ces drawn from the existent conversation resource, and (b) the purpose of
    e episode with respect to surrounding episodes .

  . l'he three examples given by Kjolseth would involve topical continua-
 tion, recycling, or change, respectively. These general features of speech
 events require that members be able to identify relevance but not neces-
 s ·1                                                                     ,
  an Y to label topics.
 B?here is yet a third form of evidence that topic ma~ be a cultu~al u.nit.
    linguals can frequently give reliable accounts of topical code sw1tchmg,
;n? their behavior often corresponds in general to their accounts (Ervin-
   flpp 1964).
. We can thus argue that topic, like speech act, must be a basic variable in
1
 nterac t·ion on the grounds that speakers can 1denh
                                                  ·     'fy top1ca
                                                               · l c hange as
;enerating code shift that speakers can sometimes report what they are                    pi

n~king about, and th~t topical continuity, recycling, a11d change may be                  'I
                                                                                         'J

    rrnative features of speech events, or at least relevant to values about
good conversations One might in fact find that there are rules for topic
Sel ·                 '           '       '
    ection just as there are for address.
        244   Discovering Structure in Speech

    Messages. The analysis of messages refers to two-term relationships,
whereas topic is a single term allowing for simple taxonomies. Here we in-
tend to refer only to the manifest or explicit message. Our reason for the
distinction is that latent content categories typically refer to intent (see,
e.g., Dollard and Auld 1959; Katz 1966; Leary 1957; Marsdo 1965). Our
position here is that intent or function is part of the constellation of social
features out of which inter~ctiqn is generated. It can be realized in a vari-
ety of ways, of which verbal interaction is only one. We seek regular rules
by which one can relate underlying categories to their formal realizations,
 or the formal features of interaction with their social meanings. Failure to
 discover such rules has led to considerable discouragement with the evi-
 dent arbitrariness of content classifications in studies of natural discourse.
    The manifest message, however, is the product of the social features of
 the situation as well as of intent, and is therefore inseparable from the in-
 teraction product. All the selections made in realization of the functions
 of communication can carry some kind of information, whether about the
 speaker, the situation, the hearer, or the topic. In detail, given alternations
 cannot do all at once, though they may be ambiguous as to which is in-
 tended. In this case, we intend the message only to refer to what is said
 or implied about the topic. There have been numerous summaries of ways
 of classifying messages (e.g., Pool 1959). A recent innovation is logical
  analysis (Verori et al. 1965). The underlying structure of logical linkages
  between terms in utterances was analyzed, then semantic relations were
  described in terms of logical relations between pairs of units (e.g., equiva-
  lence, inference, conjunction, specification of conditions, sequential rela-
  tions, explanation, opposition, causes, . . . ). A Markov semantic analysis
  revealed very large and consistent differences between subject groups,
  which were, in the study reported, clinical categories, but could be texts in
  a different society.

   FUNCTION OF INTERACTION

    Criteria. If sociolinguistic alternation rules have intents or functions as
 their input, then one strategy in identifying such rules is to isolate a func-
 tional category and examine its realizations. We assume that the theory of
 functions itself must lie outside of sociolinguistics, in another social sci-
 ence. However, an examination of the various functions realized by
 speech is of considerable importance in view of the evidence that these
 functions change with age and vary with culture.
     Firth (Hymes 1964d) was among many who sought to identify the func-
  tions of speech. He included phatic communion (creating solidarity or
  alluding to it); pragmatic efficiency (accompanying work); planning and
  guidance; address; greetings, farewells, adjustment of relations, and so
        Oil So ciolinguistic Rules: A ltemation a,zcl Co -oc· currence   245

  on; Sp eech as a commitment,
                          .         (courts·, promises) · Pri'm any,
                                                                 ·i h'1s view
                                                                          .   of
        tion was the social value of the act.
  f unc             · I     b ·      db
      Function.is hke ~ to ~ viewe Ya psychologist from the standpoint of
  the interacting parties, either the sender or the receiver. Soskin has played
  tapes to listen~rs and.asked them to report what they would say and what
  they would tfunk. This method assumes that function is effect. It is close
  to Blom and Gumper~' (Chapter 14) criterion of social meaning.
      A second method 1s to analyze actual instances of acts and infer
  whether the. receiver's resp~ns~ sati~fied the speaker, eith~r from his
  overt behavior or     ?Y   que~tiom~g him. This method includes action,
· response, and reaction. _It 1s d.enved from Skinner's (195 7) theory that
  speech is operant behav10r which ~ffects the speaker through the media-
  tion of a hearer. Feedback and audience consistency presumably "shape"
    tfective speech in the normal person. In this method, function is iden-
  ;ified by classes of satisfactory listener responses.
      If intent is imputed to a speaker on the basis of some features of the
   content or form of his speech, a third form offunctional analysis appears.
  This of course, is the method of latent content analysis (e.g., Katz· 1966).
      A ~et of function categories was devised to account for the initiation of
   dyadic interaction, _on the ~asis . of a corpus of instances of action,
                                               !
   response, and react1?n (Erv1~-Tr~pp ~64). The list includes eliciting
     oods services, and mformat10n; 1mphc1t requests for social responses;
   g       '             .      .            .
     ffering of information or mterpretahons; expressive monologues; rou-
   ~nes, and speech to avoid alternative activities.

   Mands. One of the simplest functional categories to examine is one
 which Skinner ( 1957) called the mand since it is defined by the fact that
 normally it elicits goods, services, and information. One could broaden
 the definition by specifying that the intent is to obtain these since it is
 clear that under some conditions, the actor does for himself.
   Soskin and John (1963) devised a category system, intermediate
 between the strata suggested here, which will serve to illustrate the
 breadth of possible realizations of mands. Suppose the actor wants the
 loan of a coat:
                "It's cold today" (structone).
                "Lend me your coat" (regnone).
                "I'm cold" (signone).
                "That looks like a warm coat you have" (metrone).
                "Br-r-r" (expressive).
                "I wonder if I brought a coat" (excognitative).

  It is immediately obvious that these ways of getting a coat are socially dis-
  tributed in a nonrandom way and would be quite ineffective under many
  circumstances.
        246     Discovering Structure in Speech

    If we look at the category which most explicitly realizes a mand, and
can be said to be pragmatically unambiguous, the regnone, we find that
there are a variety of speech acts that might be regnones, including
requests and orders: "Ask him to close the window" vs. "Tell him to
close the window." "Shut the window!" vs. "Would you mind closing the
window?"
    At a lower stratum, the syntactical, the request often involves some
kind of speech act neutralization. For example, one can joke by misin-
terpreting a speech act, by saying "yes" to "Would you mind closing the
 window?" or to "Do you have a match?" or "Do you know where the
 post office is?" or to "Is George there?" on the phone, and doing nothing
further. In each of these cases, the request is realized through a yes/no
 question. From the standpoint of syntax, such a response is quite
 appropriate. Under specifiable social conditions, however, these become
 the normal, unmarked form for realizing requests in the mature speaker.
 When one does not in fact want to speak to George but merely to know
 whether or not he is home, some other form must be chosen, or a fast foot-
 note added.
     These instances are highly stabilized cases of an apparent neutral-
 ization which has become the normal form for request and therefore
 would in fact be described by many speakers as "asking X to close the
 window" and so on, if they were told to convert these into indirect speech.
     In addition, one finds many instances of the selection of the normal
 form for realization for some other function to represent a mand. Quite
  possibly, of course, in closed networks these become as usual as the
  "asking" examples.
     In a term paper, Bessie Dikeman and Patricia Parker ( 1964) found that
  within some families mands were neutralized between equals most of the
  time, less than half the time from seniors to juniors, and in a minority of
  cases when juniors spoke. Examples from their papers were these

 "Where's the coffee, Dremsel?" (it is visible) (to wife) [gloss: bring me the coffee].
 "Is that enough bacon for you and Thelma?" (to husband) [gloss: save some for
 Thelma].
 "It's 7: 15 (to daughter) [gloss: hurry up].
 "Mother, you know I don't have a robe. Well, we're having a slumber party
 tomorrow night" [gloss: buy me a robe].
 "Oh dear, I wish I were taller" (to adult brother) [gloss: get down the dishes].

   In factory settings, subordinates usually received commands, some-
 times requests. Carol Pfuderer (l 968) found that in a university office
 commands were reserved for familiar peers. Within this category of
 addressee, however, if the speaker was within the territory of the re-
        On Sociolinguistic Rules: Altenfation and Co-occurrence   247

 ceiver, requests were used instead. If distance separated them, a com-
 mand might be altered by a tag question making it a request ("Ask Marcy,
 why don't you?"), "please," address terms, or rising pitch. If the addressee
  was not a peer, requests, pragmatic neutralizations, or displacement of
 addressee occurred. Pragmatic neutralizations included information ques-
 tions ("Has anyone gone to the accounting this week?" "Whose turn is it
 to make coffee this week, Ruby?") and statements "(It's stuffy in here."
 "Someone has to see Dean Smith."). In cases where the obvious receiver
 was much higher in rank, there might be displacement to a peer addressee
 but use of a highly deferent request form ("Joan, would you please get the
 stapler for me?"). In this example the nearest person to the stapler was a
 standing senior professor, not Joan, who was seated farther away.
    Mands require action on the part of the alter so that the obligations and
 privileges inherent in the social relations of the personnel are likely to
 result in different linguistic realizations of the same function. We might
expect displacement where possible in cases of extreme deference,
perhaps pragmatic neutralization allowing the receiver an option of in-
terpretation. In situations of high mutual nurturance where intimacy
makes interpretability likely, as in many families, the basis for pragmatic
neutralization may be quite different, perhaps serving to mask mands out-
side the normal duties of the receiver. In the same way, Stross (1964)
found that "please" was used only for requested acts extraneous to
duties.
   We can expect that where variant address forms exist, they might alter-
nate in minds. Milla Ayoub (1962), in a discussion of bipolar kin terms in
Arabic, points out that in addition to proper names, a mother can call her
son by either of two terms that also can mean "my mother." When a
parent wishes to cajole or placate a child, but not command him, he uses
these bipolar terms. This is particularly the case with sons. They are
never used in direct commands.
   In discussing current address practices in the Soviet Union, Kan-
torovich ( 1966) mentions that friends might switch from ty to vy with first
name and patronymic when help is asked for.

   Episodes. Watson and Potter ( 1962) used the term episode as a unit of
analysis, which can terminate whenever there is a change in the major
participants, the role system of the participants, the focus of attention,
and the relationship toward the focus of attention. This term, rather than
topic, was chosen to differentiate cases where a similar apparent topic
might be within a person's own experience, part of an ongoing activity, or
an abstract referential category, as in a discussion.
  The different episodes that Watson and Potter's units identify probably
will find some reflections in formal changes. These shifts arise from:
        248   Discovering Structure in Speech

        a. Sequencing rules concerning speech acts within a speech
        event.
        b. Changes in the activity, if any, accompanying the interaction
        (e.g., a ball game or dinner preparation).
        c. Disruptive events such as the arri.val of new personnel, ac-
        cidents like bumps or sneezes, and phone calls which require rou-
        tines to right the situation.
        d. Shifts arising from unexpected responses of alter, leading to
        changes in function.
        e. Function satiation. Presumably, functions oscillate in pat-
        terned ways in stable groups.
        f. Topic-evoked shifts in functions. Under the impact of instruc-
        tions or of associative dynamics, the topic may change in the
        course of the conversation. These changes can alter the available
        resources for ~he participants and thereby change their intent. If
        the topic shifts from child rearing to economics, e.g., a bachelor
        may find he has greater resources for displaying knowledge and
        receiving recognition. He may speak more, use more technical
        vocabulary, perhaps even to the point that listeners do not under-
        stand. There were many such instances in studying the speech of
        bilinguals, in which topic and language were controlled by in-
         structors (Ervin 1964; Ervin-Tripp 1964, 1967).

   Blom and Gumperz (Chapter 14) found that among university-trained
villagers, many features of standard Norwegian appeared when topics
shifted from local to nonlocal. In the offering of information, speakers
with a large repertoire of speech alternatives can maximize credibility by
adopting the most suitable role. Thus discussion of university structure
might elicit use of more standard Norwegian forms than would gossip
about instructors, where student speech features would be adopted, es-
pecially those shared with addressees.
   As functions change, address too may change through a conversation.
David Day described in a term paper changes when an argument oc-
curred in a class regarding an instructor's views of a student's beliefs.
Address progressed from FN to Dr. .LN to Professor LN. In comments
with other students as addressee, LN was used in reference to the in-
structor, in front of him. Concurrently, slang decreased.
   When there is agreement about the normal, unmarked address form to
alters of specified statuses, then any shift can convey intent. Friedrich
(Chapter 9) gives convincing cases of momentary shifts at times of per-
sonal crises. He points out that in a public setting friends would mask
their intimacy with V; in talking of personal topics they would invoke
their friendship with ty and remove it for impersonal topics with VY·
          On Sociolinguistic Rules: Alternation and Co-occurrence          249
                                                                I

     Kantorovich (1966:43) gives similar examples in current practice:

   I say "ty" to my subordinates, but certainly don't do this in order to belittle them.
   I know that they'll answer me with "vy," but this isn't grovelling-it's a mark of
  respect. . . . Somebody I call "ty" is somehow closer to me than someone I have
  to call "vy." . . . If I get mad at one of my workers, and he needs a bawling out, I
  frequently switch to "vy." When cursing, many people who customarily use "ty"
  suddenly switch to "vy," and many who are on a mutual "vy" basis switch to "ty"
  (Kostomarov 1967).

    In systems with age or rank asymmetries of address, the use of the
 more deferential form to an equal or subordinate can either mean that they
 are receiving respect or being put off at a distance. To account fully for
 the interpretation of such actions by the receivers, we need to know the
 other signals, such as tone of voice, other address features, and the avail-
 able ambiguities of the relationship. In the case of courtship, e.g., the im-
 portant dimension is closeness or distance, and address changes would be
 so interpreted .

    . Rules for Switching. I have emphasized throughout this chapter that
   1!nguistic interaction is a system of behavior in which underlying func-
   h.ons are realized through an organized set of output rules within a social
   situation. If the function requires conveying an explicit message with in-
   for~ational content, some semantic information is presented in the alter-
   natives selected. Other alternatives require the representation of social in-
  formation.
      In address~e-dominated rules like those in Figs. 7.1 to 7.4, effects of
  function switching can be represented as transformations upon the un-
  marked outputs of the addressee rules. They may take the form of simple
  replacements, e.g., if familiarity exists, different names may be employed
 as a direct representation of varied functions. Thus a node or selector for
 familiarity and for function is added to the branching rules. Tyler's ( 1966)
 rules are of this type.
     ~lorn and Gumperz (Chapter 14) have suggested that metaphori~al
 switching simply consists of treating the addressee as though his social
 features were different. In this case, the rule acts upon the selection
 Points. In the case of Dr. Poussaint, hostile intent was represented in the
Selection of "adult"-rather than "adult +"-at the first selection point.
;.resumably, this possibility suggested itself by the existence of a tradi-
  tonaJ southern system of address to Blacks in which all but the very ol_d
(aunty) were addressed as children. When Harvey Sacks asked his
l?CLA students to play the role of boarders with their families in vaca-
tion, their silence, politeness of address and requests, and withdrawal
       250    Discovering Structure in Speech

from gossip and semantic ellipsis in conversation were interpreted by
their families as evidence of sickness or hostility.
   The Russian example implies that a simple transformation upon the
output forms can express hostility; however, the inversion may be a
consequence of transformation of selection features, making the friend a
nonfriend, and the formal associate an inferior. Such general rules are a
necessity if familiarity is absent since they permit the interpretation of
new instances on the basis of the hearer's general knowledge of the
system of sociolinguistic rules.
   "Rules" could refer to structures for generating or interpreting speech,
to reports of beliefs about practices, or to standards of correctness. We
have given examples of all three kinds of rules, not always clearly distin-
guishing them. Labov's (1966b) index of linguistic insecurity compared
the last two.
   Behavioral rules and reports about behavior are likely to be systemat-
ically different. If the norms contain a probability or frequency factor,
speaker's beliefs are, instead, categorical (Labov 1966b). Beliefs about
the social selectors in sociolinguistic rules are more likely to include fea-
tures of personnel, since categorization devices realize these (Sacks in
press) features, than to note functional variation. Syntactical variables
are not remembered (Sachs 1967) beyond the time needed for decoding
unless they are markers, helping us classify the speaker. In multilingual
 communities phonological, syntactic, and semantic shifting is often not ob-
 served (Gumperz 1964a, 1967). Even borrowed vocabulary is unnoticed
 by members if values oppose borrowing (Blom and Gumperz, Chapter
 14). Some speakers cannot remember the language in which they just
 spoke, let alone report it to an interviewer.
    These phenomena are not merely grounds for distrusting members'
 reports. Just as reference to a relative (Tyler, Chapter 8) is affected by
 more than the semantic dimensions of reference, so the act of describing,
 even to oneself, is a product which could realize a variety of functions.
 Member's reports are likely to be as sensitive to social variation as any
 speech act mentioned in this chapter, and therefore prove as amenable to
 study. We expect then that rules based on report will have a systematic
 relation to behavioral consistencies, but not a one-to-one correspondence.
          8

         Context and Alternation
