          Models of the Interaction
          of Language and Social Life                               1


          DELL HYMES




          Dell Hymes is Professor of Anthropology at the Univer-
          sity of Pennsylvania. He received his B.A. in anthro-
          pology and literature from Reed College, and his Ph.D.
          in linguistics from Indiana University. He has taught at
          Harvard and the University of California at Berkeley,
          and has lectured at Cambridge University. He has done
          fieldwork among American Indians of the northwest
          coast. His research interests include ethnography of
          speaking, verbal art, the history of linguistics and an-
          thropology, and historical linguistics. This chapter has
          evolved from a paper published in 1967 (Macnamara
          1967).
             To claim that sociolinguistics is a distinct field is to
          imply that there are both problems and types oflinguistic
          data that have not been adequately considered before.
          Language, after all, is all around us, and its description is
          among the oldest of man's scientific enterprises. What
          does it mean to do a description of a sociolinguistic sys-
          tem, and how does this differ from doing a grammar of a
          language or dialect, mapping dialect boundaries, deter-
          mining historical relationships, studying rules of rhetoric

  1 Revised from Hymes 1967, particularly elaborating the treatment of taxonomy and re-

casting the presentation of components of speaking. Many of the examples come from an
examination of ethnographic data undertaken with support of the culture of Schools pro-
gram of the Office of Education in 1966-1967. I am greatly indebted to Regna Darnell,
Helen Hogan, Elinor Keenan, Susan Philips, Sheila Seitel, Joel Sherzer, K. M. Tiwary, and
my wife, Virginia, for their participation in that work. My own thinking on the general
problem has benefited from a small grant from the National Institute of Mental Health in
spring 1968. I thank Meyer Fortes, Edmund Leach andJ. L. M. Trim for discussion of some
of these problems, and many kindnesses, while a visiting fellow at Clare Hall, Cambridge, in
1968-1969.

                                            35
36   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

and literary style, or analyzing the speech varieties char-
acteristic of the various ethnic groups or social classes
coresident in a particular region? Which of the many
aspects of verbal behavior do we observe, and what con-
cepts do we utilize in classifying what we observe to
insure comparability of data? This chapter addresses
itself to these issues. It is general in scope in that it sug-
gests criteria for gathering information on rules of speak-
ing rather than focusing on a particular social group. It is
thus in a sense complementary to the chapters by Ervin-
Tripp (Chapter 7), Bernstein (Chapter 17), and Garfinkel
(Chapter 10), which deal with similarly general problems
of theory and analysis.
   Rules of speaki11g are the ways in which speakers as-
sociate particular modes of speaking, topics or message
forms, with particular settings and activities. The con-
cern is, first of all, with the attitudes and knowledge of the
 members of the community, as manifest in contrasts in
native terminologies and conduct. Except for occasional
references in ethnographies or grammatical descriptions
 of certain linguistically distinct special pari'ances (such as
Vedic recitation styles, African praise singing, thieves
 argots, and the like) there is almost no systematic infor-
 mation on such matters. What ethnographic information
we have suggests considerable cross-cultural variation in
 rules of speaking (see Albert, Chapter 2; Frake, Chapter
 3; Philips 1970). Yet the range of this variation and its
 relation to social structure and linguistic form is as yet
 unknown. What is needed at this stage are new types of
 discovery procedures and concepts designed to facilitate
 the empirical collection of data.
    Since one human groups's theories of speaking can
 best be isolated by contrast with those of another, the
 comparative approach to fieldwork is probably the most
 useful at this stage. Note, however, that the basic unit of
 analysis is a community or group rather than a language
 or dialect. Recent work with Afro-American speech
 groups in the urban United States highlights the impor-
 tance of this distinction. Linguistically, urban Afro-
 American dialects (at least those of the urban northern
 United States) do not differ greatly from standard En-
 glish. Yet Afro-American speakers differ radically from
 their white neighbors by the cultural emphasis they place
  Models of the Interaction of Language and Social Life   37

 on speech acts such as "signifying," "sounding,"
 "toasts," etc. Such speech acts, until quite recently,
 were almost unknown in the community at large, and the
 average white educator's ignorance of relevant rules of
 speaking has been responsible for perpetuating some
 rather tragic misconceptions about lower-class black
 children's low linguistic competence. Labov and his
 colleagues ( 1968) have shown that if, rather than studying
 black teen-agers' responses to psycholinguistic tests
 (which, after all, are quite unfamiliar and at times seem
 threatening to ghetto children), one studies performance
 in these typically black speech acts, children who in
 formal interviews seem almost nonverbal in fact, prove to
 be highly skilled in the use of English.
    Emphasis on human groups rather than grammar per se
 does not mean a neglect of careful linguistic analysis.
 Both linguists and sociolinguists deal with linguistic
 form, but they do so from different perspectives. As
 Hymes puts it, "A linguistic sign is a relation between
 linguistic form and a linguistic value. A sociolinguistic
 feature is a relation between a form and a sociolinguistic
 value." Whereas linguists deal with dictionary meanings
 (denotation, or meaning abstracted from context), socio-
linguists deal with what Sacks calls situated meaning
(meaning mediated and sometimes transformed by rules
of speaking) which reflects speakers attitudes to each
other, and to their topics. [Sacks (see Chapter 11) pro-
vides one analysis of the process by which such meanings
are communicated.] Sociolinguistic value is discussed
either directly or indirectly in several chapters (Friedrich,
Chapter 9; Fischer, Chapter 18; Labov, Chapter 19).
    Note also Hymes' distinction between the marked or
ordinary value of sociolinguistic features and the un-
marked value of sociolinguistic features. This is analyzed
formally in Geoghegan's study of address rules among
the Samal of the southern Philippines ( 1970).
   Although the term ethnography of speaking has only
begun to gain currency, a number of studies recently
completed, or still in progress, give evidence of growing
scholarly interest. The field elicitation problems raised in
the present paper are dealt with explicitely in Darnell and
Sherzer's outline guide for the ethnographic study of
speech use (Appendix), which lists some of the basic
       38   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

        questions to be covered by ethnographers interested in
        speech behavior. "A Field Manual for the Cross-Cultural
        Study of the Acquisition of Communicative Compe-
        tence" (Slobin et al. 1967) also deals with relevant ques-
        tions. Tanner (1967), Hogan (1967), Sankoff (1968), and
        Seitel (1969) provide additional related readings.


           Diversity of speech has been singled out as the hallmark of socio-
linguistics. Of this two things should be said. Underlying the diversity of
speech within communities and in the conduct of individuals are sys-
tematic relations, relations that, just as social and grammatical structure,
can be the object of qualitative inquiry. A long-standing failure to recog-
nize and act on this fact puts many now in the position of wishing to apply
a basic science that does not yet exist.
    Diversity of speech presents itself as a problem in many sectors of
life-education, national development, transcultural communication.
When those concerned with such problems seek scientific cooperation,
 they must often be disappointed. There is as yet no body of systematic
 knowledge and theory. There is not even agreement on a mode of descrip-
 tion of language in interaction with social life, one which, being explicit
 and of standard form, could facilitate development of knowledge and
 theory through studies that are full and comparable. There is not even
 agr~ement on the desirability or necessity of such a mode of description.
     Bilingual or bidialectal phenomena have been the main focus of the
 interest that has been shown. Yet bilingualism is not in itself an adequate
 basis for a model or theory of the interaction of language and social life.
 From the standpoint of such a model or theory, bilingualism is neither a
 unitary phenomenon nor autonomous. The fact that two languages are
  present in a community or are part of a person's communicative compe-
 tence is compatible with a variety of underlying functional (social) rela-
 tionships. Conversely, distinct languages need not be present for the
 underlying relationships to find expression.
     Bilingualism par excellence (e.g., French and English in Canada, Welsh
 and English in North Wales, Russian and French among prerevolutionary
  Russian nobility) is a salient, special case of the general phenomenon of
  linguistic repertoire. No normal person, and no normal community, is
  limited to a single way of speaking, to an unchanging monotony that
  would preclude indication ofrespect, insolence, mock seriousness, humor,
  role distance, and intimacy by switching from one mode of speech to
  another.
     Given the universality of linguistic repertoires, and of switching among
  the ways of speaking they comprise, it is not necessary that the ways be
           Models of the Interaction of Language and Social Life   39

   distinct languages. Relationships of social intimacy or of social distance
   may be signaled by switching between distinct languages [Spanish:
  Guarani in Paraguay (Rubin 1962, 1968)]; between varieties of a single
  language (standard German: dialect), or between pronouns within a
   single variety (German Du:Sie). Segregation of religious activity may be
  marked linguistically by a variety whose general unintelligibility depends
  on being of foreign provenance (e.g., Latin, Arabic in many communities),
  on being a derived variety of the common language [Zuni (Newman
  1964)], or on being a manifestation not identifiable at all (some glos-
  solalia). Conversely, shift between varieties may mark a shift between
  distinct spheres of activity [e.g., standard Norwegian: Hemnes dialect
  (see Blom and Gumperz, Chapter 14)], or the formal status of talk within
  a single integral activity [e.g., Siane in New Guinea (Salisbury 1962)],
  Latin in a contemporary Cambridge University degree ceremony (e.g.,
  Cambridge University Reporter 1969).
     A general theory of the interaction of language and social life must
  encompass the multiple relations between linguistic means and social
  meaning. The relations within a particular community or personal reper-
  toire are an empirical problem, calling for a mode of description that is
 jointly ethnographic and linguistic.
     If the community's own theory of linguistic repertoire and speech is
 considered (as it must be in any serious ethnographic account), matters
 become all the more complex and interesting. Some peoples, such as the
 Wishram Chinook of the Columbia River in what is now the state of
 Washington, or the Ashanti of Nigeria, have considered infants' vocaliza-
 tions to manifest a special language (on the Wishram, see Hymes 1966a;
 on the Ashanti, Hogan 1967). For the Wishram, this language was inter-
 pretable only by men having certain guardian spirits. In such cases, the
 native language is in native theory a second language to everyone. Again,
 one community may strain to maintain mutual intelligibility with a second
 in the face of great differentiation of dialect, while another may declare
 intelligibility impossible, although the objective linguistic differences are
 minor. Cases indistinguishable by linguistic criteria may thus be now
 monolingual, now bilingual, depending on local social relationships and
attitudes (discussed more fully in Hymes 1968c).
     While it is common in a bilingual situation to look for specialization in
the function, elaboration, and valuation of a language, such specialization
is but an instance of a universal phenomenon, one that must be studied in
situations dominantly monolingual as well. Language as such is not every-
where equivalent in role and value; speech may have different scope and
functional load in the communicative economies of different societies. In
our society sung and spoken communication intersect in song; pure speak-
ing and instrumental music are separate kinds of communication. Among
           40   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

the Flathead Indians of Montana, speech and songs without text are
separate, while songs with text, and instrumental music as an aspect of
songs with text, form the intersection. Among the Maori of New Zealand
instrumental music is a part of song, and both are ultimately conceived as
speech. [It is interesting to note that among both the Flathead and Maori
it is supernatural context that draws speech and music together, and
makes of both (and of animal sounds as well among the Flathead) forms
of linguistic communication.] 2 With regard to speaking itself, while
Malinowski has made us familiar with the importance of phatic communi-
cation, talk for the sake of something being said, the ethnographic record
suggests that it is far from universally an important or even accepted
motive (see Sapir l 949i: 16, 11). The Paliyans of south India "communi-
cate very little at all times and become almost silent by the age of 40.
Verbal, communicative persons are regarded as abnormal and often as
offensive" (Gardner 1966:398). The distribution of required and pre-
ferred silence, indeed, perhaps most immediately reveals in outline form
a community's structure of speaking (see Samarin 1965; Basso 1970).
Finally, the role of language in thought and culture (Whorf's query) ob-
viously cannot be assessed for bilinguals until the role of each of their
languages is assessed; but the same is true for monolinguals since in dif-
ferent societies language enters differeqtially into educational experience,
transmission of beliefs, knowledge, values, practices, and conduct (see
Hymes 1966a). Such differences may obtain even between different
groups within a single society with a single language.
   What is needed, then, is a general theory and body of knowledge within
which diversity of speech, repertoires, ways of speaking, and choosing
among them find a natural place. Such a theory and body of knowledge
are only now being built in a sustained way. Social scientists asking rele-
vant functional questions have usually not had the training and insight to
deal adequately with the linguistic face of the problem. Linguistics, the
discipline central to the study of speech, has been occupied almost wholly
with developing analysis of the structure of language as a referential code,
neglecting social meaning, diversity, and use. There have been notable
exceptions (as in the work of Firth, Jakobson, and Sapir), but the main
course of linguistic work has been from the then newly captured sector of
phonology (before World War II) through morphology and syntax. Now
that the inner logic of linguistics itself brings it to deal with semantics and
speech acts, and now that the social sciences generally in the United
States are engaged in the sort of cross-cultural and educational research
that makes language differences of concern, there has emerged something
tantamount to a movement to redress the situation. The movement is
commonly called sociolinguistics, especially when seen as relating Ian-

 2
     These examples draw on a study by Judith Temkin Irvine (1968).
           Models of the Interaction of Language and Social Life   41

 guage to sociological categories, or as mediating between linguistics and
 social science as a whole .
  . It is not necessary to think of sociolinguistics as a novel discipline. If
 lm_guistics comes to accept fully the sociocultural dimensions, social
 science the linguistic dimensions, of their subject matters and theoretical
 bases, sociolinguistic will simply identify a mode of research in adjacent
 sectors of each. As disciplines, one will speak simply of linguistics, an-
 !hropology, and the like (see Hymes 1964b, 1966b, 1970a, b, c). But, as
Just implied, the linguistics, anthropology, etc., of which one speaks will
 have changed. In order to develop models, or theories, of the interaction
of language and social life, there must be adequate descriptions of that
interaction, and such descriptions call for an approach that partly links,
but partly cuts across, partly builds between the ordinary practices of the
disciplines. This is what makes sociolinguistics exciting and necessary. It
does not accept, but it is a critique of the present partitioning of the sub-
ject of man among the sciences of man. Its goal is to explain the meaning
of language in human life, and not in the abstract, not in the superficial
phrases one may encounter in essays and textbooks, but in the concrete,
m actual human lives. To do that it must develop adequate modes of
description and classification, to answer new questions and give familiar
questions a novel focus.


         The Case for Description and Taxonomy
                                                                                 'I
          For some of the most brilliant students of language in its social           'I

 setting, the proper strategy is to select problems that contribute directly
 to current linguistic and social theory. A primary concern is relevant to
particular problems already perceived as such in the existing disciplines,              i
although the modes of work of those disciplines must often be trans-
formed for the problems to find solutions. Field studies in societies exotic
                                                                                 ::~
to the investigator, where strong control over data and hypothesis testing       ,/~
cannot easily be maintained, are not much valued. A concern to secure             ii
                                                                                 .,(
                                                                                 ;iii
reports from such societies is thought pointless since it suggests a pros-        Iii
pect of endless descriptions which, whatever their quantity and quality,
would not as such contribute to theoretical discovery.                           I!/!
                                                                                 I
   My own view is different. I accept an intellectual tradition, adumbrated
in antiquity., and articulated in the course of the Enlightenment, which
holds that mankind cannot be understood apart from the evolution and             :1
maintenance of its ethnographic diversity. A satisfactory understanding of       :I'
the nature and unity of men must encompass and organize, not abstract            ,,,
                                                                                 :11
from, the diversity. In this tradition, a theory, whatever its logic and
insight, is inadequate if divorced from, if unilluminating as to, the ways of
life of mankind as a whole. The concern is consonant with that of Kroeber,
                                                                                 l!,·,:!
                                                                                 ,J
reflecting upon Darwin:                                                          I
                                                                  -- - --- -- - ---·:=r r•c:rw·'l~




         42   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

anthropologists . . . do not yet clearly recognize the fundamental value of the
humble but indispensable task of classifying-that is, structuring, our body
of knowledge, as biologists did begin to recognize it two hundred years ago
(1960:14).

   Even the ethnographies that we have, though almost never focused on
speaking, show us that communities differ significantly in ways of speak-
ing, in patterns of repertoire and switching, in the roles and meanings of
speech. They indicate differences with regard to beliefs, values, reference
groups, norms, and the like, as these enter into the ongoing system of
language use and its acquisition by children. Individual accounts that
individually pass without notice, as familiar possibilities, leap out when
juxtaposed, as contrasts that require explanation. The Gbeya around the
town of Bossangoa in the western Central African Republic, for example,
are extremely democratic, and relatively unconcerned with speech. There
is no one considered verbally excellent even with regard to traditional
folklore. Moreover,

Gbeya parents and other adults focus little attention on the speech of children.
No serious attempt is made to improve their language. In fact, a child only un-
commonly takes part in a dyadic speech event with an adult . . . . Among the
Gbeya "children are seen and not heard." Finally, there appears to be very little
interest in reporting how a person speaks . . . (Samarin 1969).

The Anang (Nigeria) received their name from neighboring Ibo, the term
meaning "ability to speak wittily yet meaningfully upon any occasion."

The Anang take great pride in their eloquence, and youth are trained from early
childhood to develop verbal skills. This proverb riddle [not quoted here, but see
discussion] instructs young people to assume adult duties and responsibilities as
early as possible, even if doing so is difficult and unpleasant at times. As the vine
must struggle to escape growing into the pit [the riddle], so must the child strive to
overcome his shyness and insecurity and learn to speak publicly [the proverbial
answer], as well as perform other adult roles (Messenger 1960:229).

   Or, to consider the word and the sword, among the Araucanians of
Chile the head of a band was its best orator, and his power depended
upon his ability to sway others through oratory. Among the Abipon of
Argentina no desired role or status depended upon skill in speaking;
chiefs and members of the one prestigious men's group were selected
solely on the basis of success in battle. The Iroquois value eloquence in
chiefs and orators as much as bravery in war; the two are usually men-
tioned together and with equal status. A chief could rise equally quickly
by either.
            Models of the Interaction of Language and Social Life             43

   Since there is no systematic understanding of the ways in which com-
munities differ in these respects, and of the deeper relationships such
differences may disclose, we have it to create. We need taxonomies of
speaking, and descriptions adequate to support and test them.
   Such description and taxonomy will share in the work of providing an
adequate classification of languages. If the task of language classification
is taken to be to place languages in terms of their common features and
differences, and if we consider the task from the standpoint of similarities,
then four classifications are required. Languages are classified according
to features descended from a common ancestor (genetic classification),
features diffused within a common area (areal classification), features
manifesting a common structure or structures, irrespective of origin or
area (typological classification), and features of common use or social
role (as koine, standard language, pidgin, etc.) (functional classification)
(see Hymes 1968c; Greenburg 1968: 133-135). The processes underlying
the classifications (various kinds of retention, divergence, convergence)
all can be viewed in terms of the adaption of languages to social contexts
but the forms of classification in which the dependence on social pro~
cesses can be most readily excluded (genetic, typological) are the forms
that have been most developed. Sociolinguistic research reinforces the
intermittent interest that areal classification has received, and can prop-
erly claim the most neglected sector, functional classification, the inter-
action between social role and features of languages, for its own. The
natural unit for sociolinguistic taxonomy (and description), however, is
not the language but the speech community.
   Of course, sociolinguistic taxonomy is not an end in itself, any more
than is language classification. A taxonomy is not in itself a theory or
explanation, though it may conceal or suggest one. There will indeed be a
variety of taxonomies, answering to a variety of significant dimensions,
as well as taxonomies of whole communities, societies, and social fields.
(For a step in the latter direction, see Ferguson 1966.) The work of
taxonomy is a necessary part of progress toward models (structural and
generative) of sociolinguistic description, formulation of universal sets of
features and relations, and explanatory theories. (I shall say something
about each of these later.) Just the demonstration that the phenomena of
speaking are subject to comparative study may help end the obscuring of
actual problems by descant on the function of language in general. Those
who do so should be received as if they were continuing to discuss physics
                                                                     3
in terms 'of the Ionian controversies as to the primordial element.

  3 For recent examples of uncritical praise and i~transigent indictm~nt of language, see
J. 0. Hertzler 1965 and Brice Parain I 969. On "high and low evaluat10ns of language" as
an integral part of the history of philosophy and human culture, sec Urban 1939: 12, 23-32.
            44    Ethnographic Description and Explanation



            An Illustration

           As an indication of what can be done, as well as of how much
  there is to be done, let me briefly consider the grossest, and most likely to
  be reported, aspect of speech, quantity. Contrasts were drawn already in
  antiquity, although amounting only to folk characterization, as when the
  Athenian says to his Spartan and Cretan interlocutors,

 But first let me make an apology. The Athenian citizen is reputed among all the
 Hellenes to be a great talker, whereas Sparta is renowned for brevity, and the
 Cretans have more wit than words. Now I am afraid of appearing to elicit a
 very long discourse out of very small matter (Plato, Laws 64 IE). 4

 One could extract a dimension with three points of contrast, naming the
 types according to the dialogue (as kinship systems are named after
 societies in which they are identified, Crow, Omah, and the like):

      i
 Dimension:             verbose           laconic          pithy
 Type:                ATHENIAN           SPARTAN          CRETAN


   A number of analytically different dimensions are probably confounded
 within gross observations as to quantity of speech, length and frequency
 of speech, and the like; and there are qualitative characteristics vital to
 the interaction of language with social life in the particular societies.
 Something of this appears in the quotation from Plato, and becomes
 explicit in the following contrast:

    ii
Dimension:               voluble             reserved, reticent          taciturn
Type:                BELLA COOLA                  ARITAMA               PALIYAN


   BELLA cooLA (British Columbia). Fluent, interesting speech is valued,
and a common, if not a requisite, part of social life. Essential roles in
ceremonial activity, and an important spirit impersonated in the Kusiut
initiation, had to have the ability to talk constantly, keeping up a flow of
witty and insulting remarks. The ethnographer Mcllwraith found that if
he could not joke with them constantly, people lost interest. When groups
talked, one was sure to hear bursts of laughter every few minutes.

   4 According to Sandys (I 920, I :4), the noun p/zilo/ogia is first found in Plato, and its

adjective, p/zi/6/ogia, is used in this passage to contrast "lover of discourse" with "hater
of discourse." Plato, Laws 641 E, quoted from Benjamin E. Jowett's translation of Dialogues
(New York; Random House, 1937, Vol. 2, p. 423).
                 LE---e




              Models of the Interaction of Language and Social Life                45

     ARITAMA (Colombia).
  People in Aritama are not much given to friendly chatting and visiting. They are
 controlled and taciturn," evasive and monosyllabic .... This reserve ... is not
 only displayed toward strangers, but characterizes their own interpersonal con-
 tacts as well. There is a front of ready answers and expression, of standard af-
 firmations and opinions, and there is always, in the last resort, the blank stare, the
 deaf ear or the sullen nose . . . . Such behavior ... leads frequently to a highly
 Patterned type of confabulation (Reichel-Dolmatoff 1961 :xvii).

    PALIYAN (south India). See previous quotation from Gardner (1966).
  According to Gardner, the many hunting-and-gathering societies of the
  World should be divided into two types, of one of which the Paliyans are a
 perhaps extreme representative.
   1:he dimensions may, of course, apply within, as well as between,
 societies, as to groups, cultural content, verbal style, and situations. As
 to groups,

    iiia
Dimension:                voluble                             taciturn
Type:                                  ARAUCANIAN
Subcategory:               Men                                Women

    ARAUCANIAN (Chile). The ideal Araucanian man is a good orator, with
 good memory, general conversationalist, expected to speak well and
 often. Men are encouraged to talk on all occasions, speaking being a sign
 of masculine intelligence and leadership. The ideal woman is submissive
 and quiet, silent in her husband's presence. At gatherings where men do
 mu~h talking, women sit together listlessly, communicating only in
 Whispers or not at all. On first arriving in her husband's home, a wife is
 expected to sit silently facing the wall, not looking anyone directly in the
~ace. Only after several months is she permitted to speak, and then, only a
httl.e. Sisters-in-law do not speak much to each other. The one means by
which women can express their situation is a form of social singing
(ulkantun) in which mistreatment, disregard, and distress can be ex-
Pressed. The one approved role for a woman to be verbally prominent is a
shamanistic intermediary of a spirit (Hilger 1957). [Silence is expected of
a bride in her new home in a number of cultures, e.g., traditional Korea.
The restriction of women's expression of grievances to certain occasions
and a musical use of voice also is widespread, as in Bihar (India).]
   5
     Although the Reichel-Dolmatoffs use "taciturn" here of the Aritama, the subsequent
term "reserved" characterizes them well, while "taciturn" is specifically apt for the Paliyans.
~s taxonomy and description develop, careful explication of technical terms will be increas-
ingly important. Note that the three groups are also respectively "now-coding," "then-
Codmg," and "non-coding" (cf. footnote 7).
       46     Ethnographic Description and Explanation

  As to situations,

    iiib
Dimension:                    discursive disclosure       reticent quotation
Type:                                  WISHRAM-W ASCO CHINOOK
Scene: (See discussion)

   WISHRAM-WASCO CHINOOK (Washington, Oregon). Recitation of myths
in winter, public conferal of personal name, and disclosure of an adoles-
cent guardian spirit experience upon approaching death are three major
communicative events. In each event, discursive disclosure (of the myth
as a whole, the identification of name and person, or the verbal message of
the vision) comes only when an implicit relationship (of culture to nature,
person to reincarnated kin-linked "title," or person to personal spirit) has
 been validated. Each is part of a cycle-the annual round of society, a
 cycle of reinstituting names of deceased kin, an individual life cycle from
 adolescence to death. At other times during the cycle there may be quota-
 tions (of a detail in a myth, a name in address, a song from one's vision in
 winter spirit dance), but the substance of the relationship must not be
 explicitly stated. In each case of discursive disclosure the speak~r is a
 spokesman, repeating words previously said, this being the rule that con-
 stitutes formal speech 'events. (See Hymes 1966a.)
    As to cultural content,

    iv
 Dimension:       verbal elaboration      verbal sparseness
 Type:                 HIDATSA                   CROW


    HIDATSA (North Dakota). CROW (Montana). According to Lowie
 (1917 :87-88), "The culture of the Hidatsa differs from that of the Crow
 not merely by the greater number and elaboration of discrete features but
 also in a marked trait of their social psychology-the tendency towards
 rationalization and systematization." Lowie illustrates the contrast in
 four domains: formal instruction; accounting for cultural phenomena;
 individual interpretation and conception of names, myths, and prayer; and
 kinship nomenclature. In each domain the Hidatsa use language to
 systematize and stabilize the cultural universe to an extent greatly in
 contrast to the Crow: (It was the Crow that Lowie knew more intimately;
  hence his sense of greater Hidatsa elaboration is trustworthy). Of par-
  ticular interest here is the following:

 The Crow child ... seems to have grown up largely without formal instruction.
 Even on so vital a matter as the securing of supernatural favor, the adolescent
 Crow was not urged by his elders but came more or less automatically to imitate .,,,.
 his associates .... With the Hidatsa everything seems to have been ordered and




                                                                                .• v
              Models of the Interaction of Language and Social Life                    47

Prearranged by parental guidance; the father repeatedly admonished his sons, at
the same time giving them specific instructions. 6                   :



      As to verbal style,

        V
Dimension:             elaborate, profuse              restrained, sparse
Type:                        ENGLISH                          YOKUTS


    ENGLISH, YOKUTS (California). A contrast with regard to the limits of
 a~ceptable use of syntactic possibilities has been drawn by Newman, who
tnes to sketch each from the standpoint of the other. Sparseness and
restraint are found to characterize Yokuts narrative style as well (Gayton
and Newman 1940).
   _Work in societies, with the goals of taxonomy and descriptive models in
mind, is interdependent with detailed work in one's own society. Each
Provides insight and a test of universality and adequacy for the other. It
has been suggested, for example, that there is only a class-linked British
relevance to Bernstein's sociological model of elaborated vs. restricted
coding, governed by personal vs. positional types of social control. 7 While
some Americans indeed have misapplied Bernstein's two types to ethnic
and class differences in the United States, from the standpoint of tax-
onomy and description, the model takes on a new scope. It suggests a set
0
  ~ universal dimensions, and possibly polar ideal types, isolable and ap-
Phcable to the description and comparison of situations and whole com-
mu n1t1es,
     ··    as well as particular groups.
   ~hus Margaret Mead has analyzed the Arapesh and Iatmul of New
Guinea as contrasting types of society in which the adult patterns seem
appropriately interpreted as personal and positional, respectively. In the
ARAPESH type (which includes the Andamanese, Ojibwa, and Eskimo),
societies depend, for impetus to or inhibition of community action in
PUblic situations, upon the continuing response of individuals. The point

  6
     As the initial quotation indicates, Lowie did not relate the contrast explicitly to the role
~~.1.ang~age in social life. A major task and methodologic\11 challenge is to go b~y<;>nd super-
   ial p1 esence or absence of overt mention of speech, m order to restate ex1stmg ethno-
gra h'1_c analyses, wherever possible, in terms of speaking,just as i~ is often poss1'bl e to fim.d m
eari'                                                                                               ·
     1e1 ac_counts of languages evidence permitting restatement m terms of con.temporary
P~onolog1cal and grammatical models. Such restatement is more than an exercise; 1t con-
tn~utes to the !'ange of cases for comparative studies.·
. d Elaborated codes are largely now-coding, and adaptive in lexicon and synta~ to the
:daho~ elaboratio~ of subjective intent, while .restricted codes are largely then-co,~111g'. and
Pe/hv.e t? t~e remforcement of group solidanty throug~ u~e of prefo.rmul~ted ~xp1ess1~n.s.
tion~on,ll_ ~ocial co~trol appeals to individual charact~n~ttcs, role. d1scret10n, and mot'.va-
th '. Pos1ttonal social control bases itself on membership m categones of age, sex, class, and
m:J~~e. See Bernstein's chapter in this volume. Mead (1937) places Zuni also as a type inter-
      I,lte between Iatmul and Bali (cf. also footnote 5).
                                                                /
                     48    Ethnographic Description and Explanation

           of communication is to excite interest and bring together persons who will
           then respond with emotion to whatever event has occurred. In the
           IATMUL type the societies depend upon formal alignments of individ-
           uals, who react not in terms of personal opinions but in terms of defined
           position in a formal sociopolitical structure.
              At the same time the comparative perspective extends the model.
            Mead identifies a third type of society, such as that of BALI, which does
           not depend on situations in which individuals express or can be called
           upon to express themselves for or against something, so as to affect the
           outcome regarding it, but which functions by invoking participation in and
            respect for known impersonal patterns or codes, and in which communi-
           cators act as if the audience were already in a state of suspended, un-
           emotional attention, and only in need of a small precise triggering of
            words to set them off into appropriate activity. Mead interprets the dif-
           ferences as ones in which political feeling depends on "How do I (and
            A, B, and C) feel about it?" (Arapesh); "How does my group (their group)
            feel about it?" (latmul); and "How does this fit in?" (Bali). Such a type as
            Bali seems appropriately labeled one of traditional social control and
            communication. (Obviously, only a subset of the societies lumped to-
            gether as "traditional" by some social scientists can be said to be so in a
            useful way.) (See Mead 1937, 1948; the latter articly discusses Manus as
            well.) Keesing and Keesing (1956:258) suggest Samoa as a type com-
            bining Iatmul and Bali characteristics, but distinctive, so that one might
            have:

               vi
           Dimension:           personal         positiona/ 8       traditional      positional,
                                                                                     traditional
           Type:                ARAPESH           IATMUL               BALI            SAMOA

              Comparative ethnographic examples show the need to separate some-
           times the dimensions joined together in Bernstein's model. Iatmul is a
           society with important development of oratory, which might seem an
           instance of elaboration which should go with personal control. If the
           oratory is then-coding, employing largely preformulated expressions,
           there is, in fact, no discrepancy. Positional and personal social control
           do,. however, cross-cut then-coding and now-coding to define four types
           of cases, not just two. Cat Harbour, Newfoundland, as described by Faris
           ( 1966, 1968), shows positional social control and restriction of personal
           expression in speech and other normally scheduled activities. As in most
           societies, there are certain situations marked as reversals of normal con-
           duct (e.g., legitimated stealing of food); and, as if to compensate for

              8
                  Mead (193 7) places Zuni also as a type intermediate between Iatmul and Bali.




........
             Models of the Interaction of Language and Social Life                    49

  pla!nness of life and to satisfy the great interest in "news" of any kind,
  While rem · ammg· wit · h'm normal restramts,
                                           .    there has .
                                                         ansen a genre known
  as kthe "cuffe r. " A " cuuer" may anse spontaneously, or someone may be
                               ,i,              •

  us. ed to start one. It consists of developing an intense argument over an
    nimportant detail (such as how many men actuaJly were Jost in a boat-
  :~eck some decades back); but to show personal emotional involvement
  e rmgs _sha?1e and exclusion. We thus find elaborated now-coding, indeed,
  si~ten~ive mvention, in a positional setting. There can be then-coding in a
  th uation of ad hoc subjective intent as weJI, as when Ponapeans arrive at
 foe status of mutual lovers through manipulating a Jong sequence of verbal
     rmuJas which aJJow for role discretion at each step (Paul Garvin, per-
 sonal communication), or when a traditional saying is used. precisely
 baecau se ·its ·impersonal, preformulated character grants role ·
                                                                 discretion to
  unother that direct rebuke would not (e.g., the Chaga of Central Africa
    se proverbs to children in this way). 9

 it ~elevant Features and Types. The examples just presented show that
 c is essential to isolate the dimensions and features underlying taxonomic
 stategorie
          . s. Th ese features and ·            ·
                                        d1mens10ns,                  · Iar con-
                                                     more than particu
 de 11 a~ 10~s of them, will be found to be universal, and hence elementary to
 ue~cnptive and comparative frames of reference. This is not to consider
 wniversal features and dimensions the only goal. Explanation faces two
 hays, toward the generic possibilities and general constraints, on the one
 t:nd (Chomsky's "essentialist" form of explanatory adequacy), and
     W~rd the types that are historicaJly realized and their causes (an "exis-
 tentia]" o_r ."
 l'h                     ·   ·
                 experiential"    form of explanatory adequacy ), on the ot h er.
      e heuristics of description require an etics of types as weJI as of ele-
 111
 a ents. ' for 1·ns·1g ht ·mto the organizat10n
                                             ·    · ·   · t o a case, as agams
                                                  mtnns1c                   · t
                                                                                                       l'

 st~r
     Pnori or mec h. amca
     B                    . I structuring
                                      . of .1t.                .             .
 e       both defimng some universal dimensions of speakmg and proposmg
       anation within social theory of certain consteJlations of them, Bern-
- em has shown the goal toward which sociolinguistic work must proceed.

 (~/he contrast between Hopi and Zuni on the one hand, and the Wishram Chinook
 With~:i5 I 9_67: 12) was incorrectly drawn.' Among both sociali~ation pressure is _initially

 refer
        f
 Bggan 9; 1th regard to toilet training and the like un!il _the. child ca~ talk (Denms .1940,
              8 [ 1943]; on the significance of early socmhzation pressure, though without
 duigeen:cee to ways of speaking, Whiting and Child 1953 :254 ff.). The sudden shi~t from in-
 1948 [I to control among the Hopi apparently came after the first few years ofhfe (~ggan
 "per      9 43]:232-233). It is the subsequent difference between "positional" (Hopi) and
 Periesonal"
           '       · 1 control that would seem to fit with the differences ·m a d uIt re 1· ·
                socia                                                                     1g10us ex-
 age (~~e, together w!th the shock of public disillusion in the kach!~as for Hopi children at_an
 they th IO), when W1shram children were training for private spmtual ~ncounters of wh\ch
 that st ehselves would be individually the interpreters and eventual disclosers. It remains
 as be/c contrasts as that between Hopi and Chinookan relations to the supernatural, and
 Word"W:en prayer as beseeching petition (e.g., the Oela~ar.e) ~nd prayer as "compulsive                    ,'
                                                                                                            ;:   I

          ( .g., the Navaho) need to be related to speech socmhzat1on.
                                                                                                            1:'
        50   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

The total range of dimensions and of kinds of explanation, to be sure, will
be more varied. Indeed, the fact that present taxonomic dimensions con-
sist so largely of dichotomies-restricted vs. elaborated codes, trans-
actional vs. metaphorical switching, referential vs. expressive meaning,
standard vs. nonstandard speech, formal vs. informal scenes, literacy vs.
illiteracy-shows how preliminary is the stage .3:1t which we work. With
regard to ways of speaking, we are at a stage rather like that of the study
of human culture, as a whole, a century ago, when Tyler, Morgan, and
others had to segregate relevant sets of data, and give definiteness and
name to some of the elementary categories on which subsequent work
could be built (on Tylor, see Lowie 1937:70-71; Tylor 1871, Chapter I).
    Like Tylor and Morgan, we need to establish elementary categories and
names. Among the Bella Coola of British Columbia, for instance, there is
a genre such that at the investiture of an inheritor of a privilege validated
by a myth, someone tells a public audience kept outside just enough of the
recited myth to be convincing as to the validation, but not so much as to
give it away (knowledge ·of the myth itself being part of the privilege)
(Mcllwraith 1948). Among the Iatmul of New Guinea knowledge of the
correct version of a myth may also be proof of a claim, in this instance to
land and group membership. In public debate ~ speaker refers to his myth
in cliches that fragment the plot. In this way "he demonstrates his mem-
bership in a group and at the same time keeps outsiders in the dark as to
the esoteric matrix of the story" (Mead 1964b:74). We lack a name for
this recurrent way of speaking. Identifying it would increase the chances
that others will notice and report it in ways that will lead to knowledge of
the conditions under which it occurs in various parts of the world.
    Anthropological contributions to this branch of comparative research
are almost nonexistent. Even a list of terms lacking careful definition is to
be noted (Keesing and Keesing 1956); careful description and analysis of
named concepts is remarkable (Calame-Griaule 1965; Abrahams and
Bauman 1970) .. There are no books on comparative speaking to put
                 1
beside those on comparative religion, comparative politics, and the like.
In the major anthropological collection of data for comparative studies,
the Human Relations Area Files, information on ways of speaking is
only sporadically included and is scattered among several categories.
Existing manuals and guides for ethnography, or for specific aspects, such
as socialization, largely neglect speech.
    The first break in this neglect is the pioneering field manual prepared
by a group at Berkeley (Slobin 1967). The manual has already contri-
 buted to (and benefited from) the research of a number of fieldworkers. It
 is important to note that it is acquisition of the structure of language with
 regard to which the manual can be most detailed. The linguistic code takes
 pride of place as to topics, procedures, and specific questions and hypo-
          Models of t/ze lnteractio11 of La11guage and Social Life   51

 theses, even though the acquisition of linguistic codes is in principle
 recognized as but part of the acquisition of communicative competence
as a whole. It is recognized that "before a description of the child's
 language acquisition can be undertaken, the conventions of the adult
 members of the group must be described" (Slobin 1967:161), but it has
not been found possible to make such description the initial matrix of
 research, nor to show what such description would be like, beyond
 sketching a conceptual framework with illustrations.
    An ethnographic guide, focusing on the acquisition of speaking as a
 whole (prepared by a group initially at the University of Pennsylvania), is
 now in press (Hymes et al., 1972). An outline is included as an appendix
 to this volume. The full form will have queries in considerably more detail,
together with ethnographic examples and sketches of cultural types.
    The need for etics (Pike 1967, Chapter 2) of terms and types, as an
 input to description, is clear from the frequency with which fieldworkers
 have let observations of great interest lie fallow, lacking precedent and
format for their presentation. There is need to show ethnographers and
 linguists a way to see data as ways of speaking. At this juncture we are
 still attempting to achieve "observational adequacy" in the sense of being
able to adequately record what is there in acts of speech.
    For an adequate etics we of course most need field studies of the sort
 the manual and guide just cited encourage. We can also make useful
ethnographic accounts not obtained with analysis of speaking in mind, by
a procedure that can be called "sociolinguistic restatement" (see Hymes
 1966a; Hogan 1967; Sherzer 1970). We must draw as well on the ac-
cumulated insight of all the fields that deal with speech, rhetoric, literary
criticism, and the like. To be sure, the terminologies of rhetoric and
literary criticism fall short of the range to be encompassed. Terminology
for ways of speaking seems not to have developed much since the heyday
of rhetorical education in the Renaissance-the recent revival of interest
in rhetorical analysis indeed returns to the starting point (see Joseph 1962;
Lanham 1968; Sonnino 1968). But treatments of verbal art of necessity
draw distinctions and make assumptions as to notions with which a de-
scriptive model of speaking must deal, as does much work in philosophy,
most notably in recent years "ordinary language" philosophy and the
work of J. L. Austin, John Searle, and others on "illocutionary acts," or
performatives. Several philosophers, psychologists, and literary critics,
as well as linguists, have proposed classifications of the components Of
the functions served in them (Karl Blihler, Kenneth Burke, Roman
Jakobson, Bronislaw Malinowski, Charles Morris, C. K. Ogden and I. A.
Richards, B. F. Skinner, William Soskin, and Vera John). Much is to be
hoped from the growing interest of folklorists in the analysis of verbal
performance (see Hymes 1970b). A systematic explication of these con-
tributions is greatly to be desired. These lines of work provide concepts
        52   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

and insights from which much can be learned, and for which a compara-
tive ethnography of speaking can perform anthropology's traditional
scientific role, testing of universality and empirical adequacy.
   In sum, just as a theory of grammar must have its universal terms, so
must a theory of language use. It can indeed be argued that the notions of
such a theory are foundational to linguistics proper (see Hymes 1964b,
where the theory is called "(ethno)linguistic"{ The fundamental prob-
lem-to discover and explicate the competence that enables members of a
community to conduct and interpret speech-cuts deeper than any
schema any of us have so far developed.


        Toward a Descriptive Theory

         The primary concern now must be with descriptive analyses from
a variety of communities. Only in relation to actual analysis will it be
possible to conduct arguments analogous to those now possible in the
study of grammar as to the adequacy, necessity, generality, etc., of con-
cepts and terms. Yet some initial heuristic schema are needed if the de-
scriptive task is to proceed. What is presented here is quite preliminary-
if English and its grammarians permitted, one might call it "toward toward
a theory." Some of it may survive the empirical and analytical work of the
decade ahead.
   Only a specific, explicit mode of description can guarantee the mainte-
nance and success of the current interest in sociolinguistics. Such interest
is prompted more by practical and theoretical needs, perhaps, than by
accomplishment. It was the development of a specific mode of description
that ensured the success of linguistics as an autonomous discipline in the
United States in the twentieth century, and the lack of it (for motif and
tale types are a form of indexing, distributional inference a procedure
common to the human sciences) that led to the until recently peripheral
status of folklore, although both had started from a similar base, the con-
verging interest of anthropologists, and English scholars, in language and
in verbal tradition.
   The goal of sociolinguistic description can be put in terms of the dis-
ciplines whose interests converge in sociolinguistics. Whatever his ques-
tions about language, it is clear to a linguist that there is an enterprise,
description of languages, which is central and known. Whatever his ques-
tions about society and culture, it is clear to a sociologist or an anthro-
pologist that there is a form of inquiry (survey or ethnography) on which
the answers depend. In both cases, one understands what it means to
describe a language, the social relations, or culture of a community. We
need to be able to say the same thing about the sociolinguistic system of a
community.
   Such a goal is of concern to practical work as well as to scientific theory.
                                                                                       .I




          Models of the Interaction of Language and Social Life     53

In a study of bilingual education, e.g., certain components of speaking will
be taken into account, and the choice will presuppose a model, implicit if
not explicit, of the interaction of language with social life. The significance
attached to what is found will depend on understanding what is possible,
what universal, what rare, what linked, in comparative perspective. What
survey researchers need to know linguistically about a community, in
selecting a language variety, and in conducting interviews, is in effect an
application of the community's sociolinguistic description (see Hymes
 I 969). In turn, practical work, if undertaken with its relevance to theory
in mind, can make a contribution, for. it must deal directly with the inter-
action of language and social life, and so provides a testing ground and
source of new insight.
    Sociolinguistic systems may be treated at the level of national states,       .1
and indeed, of an emerging world society. My concern here is with the
level of individual communities and groups. The interaction of language
with social life is viewed as first of all a matter of human action, based on
a knowledge, sometimes conscious, often unconscious, that enables per-
sons to use language. Speech events and larger systems indeed have
properties not reducible to those of the speaking competence of persons.
Such competence, however, underlies communicative conduct, not only
within communities but also in encounters between them. The speaking
competence of persons may be seen as entering into a series of systems of
encounter at levels of different scope.
    An adequate descriptive theory would provide for the analysis of indi-
vidual communities by specifying technical concepts required for such
analysis, and by characterizing the forms that analysis should take. Those
forms would, as much as possible, be formal, i.e., explicit, general (in the
sense of observing general constraints and conventions as to content,
order, interrelationship, etc.), economical, and congruent with linguistic
modes of statement. Only a good deal of empirical work and experi-
mentation will show what forms of description are required, and of those,
which preferable. As with grammar, approximation to a theory for the
explicit, standard analysis of individual systems will also be an approxi-
mation to patt of a theory of explanation.
    Among the notions with which such a theory must deal are those of
speech community, speech situation, speech event, speech act, fluent
speaker, components of speech events, functions of speech, etc.                             i.
                                                                                            !'

  SOCIAL UNITS
  One must first consider the social unit of analysis. For this I adopt the
common expression speech community.

  Speech Community. Speech is here taken as a surrogate for all forms of
language, including writing, song and speech-derived whistling, drum-

                                                                                       .[':

                                                                                       ~
        54   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

ming, horn calling, and the like. Speech community is a necessary, pri-
mary term in that it postulates the basis of description as a social, rather
than a linguistic, entity. One starts with a social group and considers all
the linguistic varieties present in it, rather than starting with any one
variety.
   Bloomfield (1933) and some others have in the past reduced the notion
of speech community to the notion of language (or linguistic variety).
Those speaking the same language (or ~rime first language, or standard
language) were defined as members of the same speech community. This
confusion still persists, associated with a quantitative measure of fre-
quency of interaction as a way of describing (in principle) internal varia-
tion and change, as speculatively postulated by Bloomfield. The present
approach requires a definition that is qualitative and expressed in terms
norms for the use of language. It is clear from the work of Gumperz,
Labov, Barth, and others that not frequency of interaction but rather
definition of situations in which interaction occurs is decisive, particularly
identification (or lack of it) with others. [Sociolinguistics here makes
contact with the sh.ift ii) rhetorical theory from expression and persuasion
to identification as key concept (see Burke 1950: 19-37, 55-59).]
   Tentatively, a speech community is defined as a community sharing
rules for the conduct and interpretation of speech, and rules for the inter-
pretation of at least one linguistic variety. Both conditions are necessary.
   The sharing of grammatical (variety) rules is not sufficient. There may
be persons whose English I can grammatically identify but whose mes-
sages escape me. I may be ignorant of what counts as a coherent se-
quence, request, statement requiring an answer, requisite or forbidden
topic, marking of emphasis or irony, normal duration of silence, normal
level of voice, etc.' and have no metacommunitative means or opportunity
for discovering such things. The difference between knowledge of a vari-
ety and knowledge of speaking does not usually become apparent within
a single community, where the two are normally acquired together. Com-
munities indeed often mingle what a linguist would distinguish as gram-
matically and as socially or culturally acceptable. Among the Cochiti of
New Mexico J. R. Fox was unable to elicit the first person singular pos-
sessive form of "wings," on the grounds that the speaker, not being a
bird, could not say "my wings"-only to become the only person in
Cochiti able to say it on the grounds that "your name is Robin."
   The nonidentity of the two kinds of rules (or norms) is more likely to
be noticed when a shared variety is a second language for one or both
parties. Sentences that translate each other grammatically may be mis-
takenly taken as having the same functions in speech, just as words that
translate each other may be taken as having the same semantic function.
There may be substratum influence, or interference (Weinreich 1953) in
the one as in the other. The Czech linguist J. N eustupny has coined the
-
               Models of the Interaction of Language and Social Life   55

     term Spreclzbund "speech area" (parallel to Sprachbund "language area")
     for the phenomenon of speaking rules being shared among contiguous
     languages. Thus, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Austria, and southern ~er-
     many may be found to share norms as to greetings, acceptable topics,
     what is said next in a conversation, etc.
        Sharing of speaking rules is not sufficient. A Czech who knows no
     German may belong to the same Sprechbund, but not the same speech
     community, as an Austrian.
        The language field and speech field (akin to the notion of social field)
     can be defined as the total range of communities within which a person's
     knowledge of varieties and speaking rules potentially enables him to move
     communicatively. Within the speech field must be distinguished the speech
     network, the specific linkages of persons through shared varieties and
     speaking rules across communities. Thus in northern Queensland, Aus-
     tralia, different speakers of the same language (e.g., Yir Y oront) may have
     quite different networks along geographically different circuits, based on
     clan membership, and involving different repertoires of mutilingualism. In
     Vitiaz Strait, New Guinea, the Bilibili islanders (a group of about 200-
     250 traders and potmakers in Astrolabe Bay) have collectively a knowl-
     edge of the languages of all the communities with which they have had
     economic relations, a few men knowing the language of each particular
     community in which they have had trading partners.
        In sum, one's speech community may be, effectively, a single locality
     or portion of it; one's language field will be delimited by one's repertoire
     of varieties; one's speech field by one's repertoire of patterns of speaking.
     One's speech network is the effective union of these last two.
        Part of the work of definition obviously is done here by the notion of
     community, whose difficulties are bypassed, as are the difficulties of
    defining boundaries between varieties and between patterns of speaking.
    Native conceptions of boundaries are but one factor in defining them,
    essential but sometimes partly misleading (a point stressed by Gumperz
    on the basis of his work in central India). Self-conceptions, values, role
    structures, contiguity, purposes of interaction, political history, all may
    be factors. Clearly, the same degree of linguistic difference may be as-         i,,!:
                                                                                     I       I
    sociated with a boundary in one case and not in another, depending on
    social factors. The essential thing is that the object of description be an
    integral social unit. Probably, it will prove most useful to reserve the no-
    tion of speech community for the local unit most specifically characterized
    for a person by common locality and primary interaction (Gumperz 1962:
                                                                                         !.i
    30-32). Here I have drawn distinctions of scale and of kind of linkage
    within what Gumperz has termed the linguistic community (any dis-
    tinguishable intercommunicating group). Descriptions will make it pos-
    sible to develop a useful typology and to discover the causes and conse-
    quences of the various types.
        56   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

    Speech Situation. Within a community one readily detects many situa-
tions associated with (or marked by the absence of) speech. Such con-
texts of situation will often be naturally described as ceremonies, fights,
hunts, meals, lovemaking, and the like. It would not be profitable to con-
vert such situations en masse into parts of a sociolinguistic description by
the simple expedient of relabeling them in terms of speech. (Notice that
the distinctions made with regard to speech community are not identical
with the concepts of a general communicative approach, which must note
the differential range of communication by sp/ech, film, art object, music.)
Such situations may enter as contexts into the statement of rules of speak-
 ing as aspects of setting (or of genre). In contrast to speech events, they
 are not in themselves governed by such rules, or one set of such rules
 throughout. A hunt, e.g., may comprise both verbal and nonverbal events,
 and the verbal events may be of more than one type.
     In a sociolinguistic description, then, it is necessary to deal with ac-
 tivities which are in some recognizable way bounded or integral. From the
 standpoint of general social description they may be registered as cer-
 emonies, fishing trips, and the like; from particular standpoints they may
 be regarded as political,' esthetic, etc., situations, which serve as contexts
 for the manifestation of political, esthetic, etc., activity. From the socio-
  linguistic standpoint they may be regarded as speech situations.

   Speech Event. The term speech event will be restricted to activities, or
aspects of activities, that are directly governed by rules or norms for the
use of speech. An event may consist of a single speech act, but will often
comprise several. Just as an occurrence of a noun may at the same time be
the whole of a noun phrase and the whole of a sentence (e.g., "Fire!"), so
a speech· act may be the whole of a speech event, and of a speech situation
(say, a rite consisting of a single prayer, itself a single invocation). More
often, however, one will.find a difference in magnitude: a party (speech
situation), a conversation during the party (speech event), a joke within
the conversation (speech act). It is of speech events and speech acts that
one writes formal rules for their occurrence and characteristics. Notice
that the same type of speech act may recur in different types of speech
event, and the same type of speech event in different contexts of situation.
Thus, a joke (speech act) may be embedded in a private conversation, a
lecture, a formal introduction. A private conversation may occur in the
context of a party, a memorial service, a pause in changing sides in a
 tennis match.

   Speech A ct. The speech act is the minimal term of the set just discussed,
 as the remarks on speech events have indicated. It represents a level
 distinct from the sentence, and not identifiable with any single portion of
 other levels of grammar, nor with segments of any particular size defined
           Models of the Interaction of Language and Social Life   57

 in terms of other levels of grammar. That an utterance has the status of a
 command may depend upon a conventional formula ("I hereby order you
 to leave this building"), intonation ("Go!" vs. "Go?"), position in a con-
 versational exchange ["Hello" as initiating greeting or as response (per-
 haps used when answering the telephone)], or the social relationship
 obtaining between the two parties (as when an utterance that is in the
 form a polite question is in effect a command when made by a superior to
 a subordinate). The level of speech acts mediates immediately between
 the usual levels of grammar and the rest of a speech event or situation in
 that it implicates both linguistic form and social norms.
   To some extent speech acts may be analyzable by extensions of syn-
 tactic and semantic structure. It seems certain, however, that much, if not
 most, of the knowledge that speakers share as to the status of utterances
as ::icts is immediate and abstract, depending upon an autonomous system
of signals from both the various levels of grammar and social settings. To
attempt to depict speech acts entirely by postulating an additional seg-
ment of underlying grammatical structure (e.g., "I hereby X you to . . . ")
is cumbersome and counterintuitive. (Consider the case in which "Do you
think I might have that last bit of tea?" is to be taken as a command.)
   An autonomous level of speech acts is in fact implicated by that logic of
linguistic levels according to which the ambiguity of "the shooting of the
blacks was terrible" and the commonality of "topping Erv is almost im-
possible" and "it's almost impossible to top Erv" together requires a
further level of structure at which the former has two different structures,
the latter one. The relation between sentence forms and their status as
speech acts is of the same kind. A sentence interrogative in form may be
now a request, now a command, now a statement; a request may be mani-
fested by a sentence that is now interrogative, now declarative, now im-
perative in form.
   Discourse may be viewed in terms of acts both syntagmatically and
paradigmatically; i.e., both as a sequence of speech acts and in terms of
classes of speech acts among which choice has been made at given points.                                      I
                                                                                                     :I
                                                                                                     11
                                                                               .'I       :           1!
   Speech Styles. Style has often been approached as a matter of statistical
frequency of elements already given in linguistic description, or as devia-
tion from some norm given by such description. Statistics and deviations
matter, but do not suffice. Styles also depend upon qualitative judgments
of appropriateness, and must often be described in terms of selections that
apply globally to a discourse, as in the case of honorific usage in Japanese
(Mccawley I 968: 136), i.e., there are consistent patternings of speaking         !                  ;! i
                                                                                                 I   I~           I

that cut across the components of grammar (phonology, syntax, seman-              i :, , I':: I
tics), or that operate within one independently of the selectional restric-                 '                     I
                                                                                         I i'!
tions normally described for it. Whorf adumbrated as much in his concep-          1     I'               '.       I

tion of "fashions of speaking"; Joos has made and illustrated the point           i     [,,.I;:
                                                                                             ,       I
                                                                                  I,;, I 'i
                                                                                        l1·::
                                                                               :,::,,   ..           ~:
                                                                               ' ~
                                                                                i

        58   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

with regard to English; Pike (1967) has considered a wide variety of
contextual styles as conditions on the manifestation of phonological and
morphological units. Besides the existence of qualitatively defined styles,
there are two other points essential to sociolinguistic description. One is
that speech styles involve elements and relations that conventionally
serve "expressive" or, better, stylistic, as well as referential function
(e.g., the contrast in force of aspiration that conyentionally signals empha-
sis in English). The second point is that speec){ styles are to be considered
not only in terms of cooccurrence within each but also in terms of con-
trastive choice among them. Like speech acts, they have both syntagmatic
and paradigmatic dimensions. (Ervin-Tripp treats rules of cooccurrence
and of alternation in detail in Chapter 7.) The coherence, or cohesion,
of discourse depends upon the syntagmatic relation of speech acts, and
speech styles, as well as of semantic and syntactic features.

  Ways of Speaking. Ways of speaking is used as the most general, in-
deed, as a primitive, term. The point of it is the regulative idea that the
communicative behavior within a community is analyzable in terms of
determinate ways of speaking, that the communicative competence of
persons comprises in part a knowledge of determinate ways of speaking.
Little more can be said until a certain number of ethnographic descriptions
of communities in terms of ways of speaking are available. It is likely that
communities differ widely in the features in terms of which their ways of
speaking are primarily organized.

   Components of Speech. A descriptive theory requires some schema of
the components of speech acts. At present such a schema can be only an
etic, heuristic input to descriptions. Later it may assume the status of a
theory of universal features and dimensions.
   Long traditional in our culture is the threefold division between
speaker, hearer, and something spoken about. It has been elaborated in
information theory, linguistics, semiotics, literary criticism, and sociology
in various ways. In the hands of some investigators various of these
models have proven productive, but their productivity has depended upon
not taking them literally, let alone using them precisely. All such schemes,
e.g., appear to agree either in taking the standpoint of an individual
speaker or in postulating a dyad, speaker-hearer (or source-destination,
sender-receiver, addressor-addressee). Even if such a scheme is intended
to be a model, for descriptive work it cannot be. Some rules of speaking
require specification of three participants [addressor, addressee, hearer
(audience), source, spokesman, addressees; etc.]; some of but one, in-
different as to role in the speech event; some of two, but of speaker and
audience (e.g., a child); and so on. In short, serious ethnographic work
shows that there is one general, or universal, dimension to be postulated,
           Models of the Interaction of Language and Social Life     59

that of participant. The common dyadic model of speaker-hearer speci-
fies sometimes too many, sometimes too few, sometimes the wrong par-
 ticipants. Further ethnographic work will enable us to state the range of
actual types of participant relations and to see in differential occurrence
 something to be explained.
    Ethnographic material so far investigated indicates that some sixteen or
seventeen components have sometimes to be distinguished. No rule has
been found that requires specification of all simultaneously. There are
always redundancies, and sometimes a rule requires explicit mention of a
relation between only two, message form and some other. (It is a general
principle that all rules involve message form, if not by affecting its shape,
then by governing its interpretation.) Since each of the components may
sometimes be a factor, however, each has to be recognized in the general
grid.
    Psycholinguistic work has indicated that human ~emory works best
with classifications of the magnitude of seven, plus or minus two (Miller
 1956). To make the set of components mnemonically convenient, at least
in English, the letters of the term SPEAKING can be used. The com-
ponents can be grouped together in relation to the eight letters without
great difficulty. Clearly, the use of SPEAKING as a mnemonic code
word has nothing to do with the form of an eventual model and theory.
    I. Message form. The form of the message is fundamental, as has just
been indicated. The most common, and most serious, defect in most re-
ports of speaking probably is that the message form, and, hence, the rules
governing it, cannot be recaptured. A concern for the details of actual
form strikes some as picayune, as removed from humanistic or scientific
importance. Such a view betrays an impatience that is a disservice to
both humanistic and scientific purposes. It is precisely the failure to unite·
form and content in the scope of a single focus of study that has retarded
understanding of the human ability to speak, and that vitiates many at-
tempts to analyze the significance of behavior. Content categories, inter-
pretive categories, alone do not suffice. It is a truism, but one frequently
ignored in research, that how something is said is part of what is said. Nor
can one prescribe in advance the gross size of the signal that will be cru-
cial to content and skill. The more a way of speaking has become shared             ''
                                                                                    I',

and meaningful within a group, the more likely that crucial cues will be
efficient, i.e., slight in scale. If one balks at such detail, perhaps because it
requires technical skills in linguistics, musicology, or the like that are
hard to command, one should face the fact that the human meaning of
one's object of study, and the scientific claims of one's field of inquiry, are
                                                                                              :~ ' :
not being taken seriously.                                                                    :j, :·:

   Especially when competence, the ability of persons, is of concern, one                 :i
                                                                                    . I 11'· ,;.
                                                                                    '        ,I

must recognize that shared ways of speaking acquire a partial autonomy,             i iii I
                                                                                    I!
developing in part in terms of an inner logic of their means of expression.         i. I!!:
                                                                                         tr
The means of expression condition and sometimes control content. For                :    I



                                                                                    i I ,f! I
                                                                                    : ;       (         .I
                                                                                    I   'i        r,:111
                                                                                    I!        ]i !
                                                                                    !Jii:;i
                                                                                        '
                                                                                    ' , , 11
                                                                                              \/    I

                                                                                    ''       1,I'
                                                                                    ''
        60   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

members of the community, then, "freedom is the recognition of neces-
sity"; mastery of the way of speaking is prerequisite to personal expres-
sion. Serious concern for both scientific anaiysis and human meaning
requires one to go beyond content to the explicit statement of rules and
features of form.
   While such an approach may seem to apply first of all to genres conven-
tionally recognized as esthetic, it also applies to conversation in daily life.
Only painstaking analysis of message f9tm-how things are said-of a
sort that indeed parallels and can learn from the intensity of literary crit-
icism can disclose the depth and adequacy of the elliptical art that is talk.
   2. Message content. One context for distinguishing message form from
 message content would be: "He prayed, saying' . . . '" (quoting message
form) vs. "He prayed that he would get well" (reporting content only).
   Content enters analysis first of all perhaps as a question of topic, and
of change of topic. Members of a group know what is being talked about,
 and when what is talked about has changed, and manage maintenance,
 and change, of topic. These abilities are parts of their communicative com-
 petence of particular importance to study of the coherence of discourse.
   Message form and message content are central to the speech act and the
 focus of its "syntactic structure"; they are also tightly interdependent.
Thus they can be dubbed jointly as components of "act sequence"
 (mnemonically, A).                       ,
   3. Setting. Setting refers to the time and place of a speech act and, in
 general, to the physical circumstances.
   4. Scene. Scene, which is distinct from setting, designates the "psy-
 chological setting," or the cultural definition of an occasion as a certain
 type of scene. Within a play on the same stage with the same stage set the
 dramatic time may shift: "ten years later." In daily life the same persons
 in the same setting may redefine their interaction as a changed type of
 scene, say, from formal to informal, serious to festive, or the like. (For an
 example of the importance of types of scene to analysis of speech genres,
 see Frake's contrast of the Subanun and Yakan at the end of Chapter 3.)
 Speech acts frequently are used to define scenes, and also frequently
judged as appropriate or inappropriate in relation to scenes. Settings and
 scenes themselves, of course, may be judged as appropriate and inap-
 propriate, happy or unhappy, in relation to each other, from the level of
 complaint about the weather to that of dramatic irony.
    Setting and scene may be linked as components of act situation
 (mnemonically, S). Since scene implies always an analysis of cultural
 definitions, setting probably is to be preferred as the informal, unmarked
 term for the two.
    5. Speaker, or sender.
    6. Addressor.
    7. Hearer, or receiver, or audience.
    8. Addressee.



                                                                                  J
          Models of the Interaction of Language and Social Life   61

    These four components were discussed in introducing the subJect of
 components of speech. Here are a few illustrations. Among the Ab1pon of
 Argentina -in is added to the end of each word if any participant (what-
 ever his role) is a member of the Hocheri (warrior class). Among the
 Wishram Chinook, formal scenes are defined by the relationship between
 a source (e.g., a chief, or sponsor of a ceremony), a spokesman who re-
 peats the source's words and others who constitute an audience or pub-
 lic. The source whose w~rds are repeated sometimes is not present; the
 addressees sometimes are spirts of the surrounding environment. In the
 Presence of a child adults in Germany often use the term of address
 which would be ap~ropriate for the child. Sometimes rules for partici-
 pants are internal to a genre and independent of the participants in the
 embedding event. Thus male and female actors in Yana myths use the
 appropriate men's and women's forms of speech, respectively, irrespec-
 tive of the sex of the narrator. Use of men's speech itself is required when
both addressor and addressee are both adult and male, "women's" speech
otherwise. Groups differ in their definitions of the participants in speech
events in revealing ways, particularly in defining absence (e.g., children,
maids) and presence (e.g., supernaturals) of participation. Much of re-
ligious conduct can be interpreted as part of a native theory of communi-
cation. The various components may be grouped together as participants
(mnemonically, P).
    9. Purposes-outcomes. Conventionally recognized and expected
outcomes often enter into the definition of speech events, as among the
Waiwai of Venezuela, where the central speech event of the society, the
olw-c/zant, has several varieties, according to whether the purpose to be
accomplished is a marriage contract, a trade, a communal work task, an
invitation to a feast, or a composing of social peace after a death. The
rules for participants and settings vary accordingly (Fock 1965). A tax-
onomy of speech events among the Yakan of the Philippines (analyzed by
Frake, Chapter 3) is differentiated into levels according jointly to topic
(any topic, an issue, a disagreement, a dispute) and outcome (no particular
outcome, a decision, a settlement, a legal ruling).
    10. Purposes-goals. The purpose of an event from a community
standpoint, of course, need not be identical to the purposes of those en-
gaged in it. Presumably, both sides to a Yakan litigation wish to win. In a           i·· I1




negotiation the purpose of some may be to obtain a favorable settlement,
of others simply that there be a settlement. Among the Waiwai the pro-
spective father-in-law and son-in-law have opposing goals in arriving at a
marriage contract. The strategies of participants are an essential deter-
minant of the form of speech events, indeed, to their being performed at
all (see Blom and Gumperz 2, Chapter 14).
   With respect both to outcomes and goals, the conventionally expected
 or ascribed must be distinguished from the purely situational or personal,      i             I
                                                                                'I     ;       i
                                                                                 I.
        62    Ethnographic Description and Explanation

and from the latent and unintended. The interactions of a particular
speech event may determine its particular quality and whether or not the
expected outcome is reached. The actual motives, or some portion of
them, of participants may be quite varied. In the first instance, descrip-
tions of speech events seek to describe customary or culturally appro-
priate behavior. Such description is essential and prerequisite to under-
standing events in all their individual richness; but 1 the two kinds of
account should not be confused (see Sapir 1949h:534, 543).
   Many approaches to communication and the analysis of speech have
not provided a place for either kind of purpose, perhaps because of a
conscious or unconsciously lingering behaviorism. [Kenneth Burke's
(1945) approach is a notable exception.] Yet communication itself must
be differentiated from interaction as a whole in terms of purposiveness
(see Humes 1964e). The two aspects of purpose can be grouped together
by exploiting an English homonymy, ends in view (goals) and ends as
outcomes (mnemonically, E).
   11. Key. Key is introduced to provide for the tone, manner, or spirit in
which an act is done. It corresp'ond; roughly to modality among gram-
matical categories. Acts otherwise the same as regards setting, partici-
pants, message form, and the like may differ in key, as, e.g., between
mock: serious or pe1functory: painstaking.
   Key is often conventionally ascribed to an instance of some other com-
ponent as its attribute; seriousness, for example, may be the expected
concomitant of a scene, participant, act, code, or genre (say, a church, a
judge, a vow, use of Latin, obsequies). Yet there is always the possibility
that there is a conventionally understood way of substituting an alterna-
tive key. (This possibility corresponds to the general possibility of choos-
ing one speech style or register as against another.) In this respect, ritual
remains always informative. Knowing what should happen next, one still
can attend to the way in which it happens. (Consider, for example, critics
reviewing performances of the classical repertoire for the piano.)
   The significance of key is underlined by the fact that, when it is in
                         1

conflict with the overt c ontent of an act, It often overrides the latter (as in
sarcasm). The signaling of key may be nonverbal, as with a wink, gesture,
posture, style of dress, musical accompaniment, but it also commonly in-
volves conventional units of speech too often disregarded in ordinary
linguistic analysis, such as English aspiration and vowel length to signal
emphasis. Such features are often termed expressive, but are better
dubbed stylistic since they need not at all depend on the mood of their
user. Revill ( I 966:251) reports, for instance, that "some forms have been
found which cannot [emphasis mine] be described as reflecting feelings on
the part of the speaker, but they will be used in certain social situations"
(for emphasis, clarity, politeness).
   12. Channels. By choice of channel is understood choice of oral, writ-
          Models of the Interaction of Language and Social Life   63

ten, telegraphic, semaphore, or other medium of transmission of speech.
With regard to channels, one must further distinguish modes of use. The
oral channel, e.g., may be used to sing, hum, whistle, or chant features of
speech as well as to speak them. Two important goals of description are
accounts of the interdependence of channels in interaction and the relative
hierarchy among them.
    I 3. Forms of speech. A m,\jor theoretical and empirical problem is to
distinguish the verbal resources of a community. Obviously, it is super-
ficial, indeed misleading, to speak of the language of a community
(Ferguson and Gumperz I 960). Even where there is but a single "lan-
guage" present in a community (no cases are known in the contemporary
world), that language will be organized into various forms of speech.
Three criteria seem to require recognition at the present time: the his-
torical provenience of the language resources; presence or absence of
mutual intelligibility; and specialization in use. The criteria often do not
coincide. Language and dialect are suggested for the first; codes for the
second; and varieties and registers for the third. One speaks normally of
the English language, and of dialects of English, wherever forms of speech
are found whose content is historically derived from the line of linguistic
tradition we call "English." The different dialects are nqt always mutually
intelligible (see Yorkshire and Indian English), and their social functions
vary considerably around the world, from childhood vernacular to bu-
reaucratic lingua franca. "Code" suggests decoding and the question of
intelligibility. Unintelligibility may result when speech is in a language
historically unrelated to one's own, but also from use of a simple trans-
formation of one's own speech, e.g., Pig Latin, or "op" talk. In short,
some forms of speech derive from others by addition, deletion, substitu-
tion, and permutation in various combinations. Finally, forms of speech
are commonly specialized to uses of various sorts. Register has become
familiar in English linguistic usage for reference to specific situations;
varieties, or "functional varieties," has been used in American linguistics
in relation to broad domains (e.g., vernacular vs. standard).
    For sociolinguistics, varieties has priority as a ,standpoint from which
 to view the forms of speech of a community. The criteria of provenience
 and intelligibility have to do with sources and characteristics of the crite-
 rion of use with the functional organization, of the forms of speech.
 Channels and forms of speech can be joined together as means or agen-
 cies of speaking and labeled, partly for the sake of the code word, partly
with an eye on the use of the term instrumental in grammar, as instm-
mentalities (mnemonically, I).
    14. N onns of interaction. All rules governing speaking, of course, have
a normative character. What is intended here are the specific beh,iviors
and proprieties that attach to speaking-that one must not interrupt, for
example, or that one may freely do so; that normal voice should not be
                                                                                    !

        64   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

used except when scheduled in a church service (whisper otherwise); that
turns in speaking are to be allocated in a certain way. Norms of interac-
tion obviously implicate analysis of social structure, and social relation-
ships generally, in a community. An illustration follows:

The next morning during tea with Jikjitsu, a college professor who rents rooms in
one of the Sodo buildings came in and talked of koans. "When you understand
Zen, you know that the tree is really there."-The only time anyone said anything
of Zen philosophy or experience the whole week. Zenbos ntver discuss koans or
sanzen experience with each other (Snyder 1969:52).

    15. Norms of interpretation. An account of norms of interaction may
still leave open the interpretation to be placed upon them, especially when
members of different communities are in communication. Thus it is clear
that Arabic and American students differ on a series of interactional
norms: Arabs confront each other more directly (face to face) when con-
versing, sit closer to each other, are more likely to touch each other, look
each other more squarely in the eye, and converse more loudly (Watson
and Graves 1966:976-977). The inyestigators who report these findings
themselves leave open the meanings of these norms to the participants
(p. 984).
    The problem of norms of interpretation is familiar from the assessment
of communications from other governments and national leaders. One
often looks for friendliness in lessened degree of overt hostility. Rela-
tions between groups within a country are often affected by misunder-
 standings on this score. For white middle-class Americans, for example,
 normal hesitation behavior involves "fillers" at the point of hesitation
 ("uh," etc.). For many blacks, a normal pattern is to recycle to the be-
 ginning of the utterance (perhaps more than once). This black norm may
 be interpreted by whites not as a different norm but as a defect. (I owe
 this example to David Dalby.)
    Norms of interpretation implicate the belief system of a community.
 The classic precedent in the ethnographic analysis of a language is
 Malinowski's ( 1935) ,treatment of Trobriand magical formulas and
 ritual under the heading of dognwtic context. (Malinowski's other rubrics
 are roughly related to these presented here in the following way: His
 sociological context and ritual context subsume information as to setting,
 participants, ends in view and outcome, norms of interaction, and higher ·
  level aspects of genre; structure reports salient patterning of the verbal
 form of the act or event; mode of recitation reports salient characteristics
  of the vocal aspect of channel use and message form.)
     The processes of interpretation discussed by Garfinkel (Chapter I 0),
  including "ad hoeing" generally, would belong in this category. These
  two kinds of norms may be grouped together (mnemonically, N).
          Models of the Interaction of Language and Social Life     65

   16. Genres. By genres are meant categories such as poem, myth, tale,
proverb, riddle, curse, prayer, oration, lecture, commercial, form letter,
editorial, etc. From one standpoint the analysis of speech into acts is an
analysis of speech into instances of genres. The notion of genre implies
the possibility of identifying formal characteristics traditionally recog-
nized. It is heuristically important to proceed as though all speech has
formal characteristics of some sort as manifestation of genres; and it may
well be true (on genres, see Ben-Amos 1969). The common notion of
"casual" or unmarked speech, however, points up the fact that there is a
great range among genres in the number of and explicitness of formal
markers. At least there is a great range in the ease with which such
markers have been identified. It remains that "unmarked" casual speech
can be recognized as such in a context where it is not expected or where it
is being exploited for particular effect. I ts lesser visibility may, be a func-
tion of our own orientations and use of it; its profile may be as sharp as
any other, once we succeed in seeing it as strange.
   Genres often coincide with speech events, but must be treated as an-
alytically independent of them. They may occur in (or as) different events.
The sermon as a genre is typically identical with a certain place in a
church service, but its properties may be invoked, for serious or humorous
effect, in other situations. Often enough a genre recurs in several events,
such as a genre of chanting employed by women in Bihar state in India;
it is the prescribed form for a related set of acts, recurring in weddings,
family visits, and complaints to one's husband (K. M. Tiwary, personal
communication). A great deal of empirical work will be needed to clarify
the interrelations of genres, events, acts, and other components (mne-
monically, G).
   As has been shown, the sixteen components can be grouped together
under the letters of the code word SPEAKING: settings, participants,
ends, act sequences, keys, instrumentalities, norms, genres. That the
code word is not wholly ethnocentric appears from the possibility of re-
labeling and regrouping the necessary components in terms of the French
PARLANT: participants, actes, raison (resultat), locale, agents (instru-
mentalities), normes, ton (key), types (genres).

   Rules (Relations) of Speaking. In discovering the local system of speak-                            :,
ing, certain familiar guidelines are, of course, to be used. One must de-                              ,i
termine the local taxonomy of terms as an essential, though never per-             '       •I'
                                                                                   .. : I}''
fect, guide. A shift in any of the components of speaking may mark the
presence of a rule (or structured relation), e.g., from normal tone of
voice to whisper, from formal English to slang, correction, praise, em-
barrassment, withdrawal, and other evaluative responses to speech may
indicate the violation or accomplishment of a rule. In general, one can
                                                                                             r:
                                                                                   ,, I
                                                                                            I :
                                                                                          ;, r;I




                                                                                       '!' I~      •   Ii
                                                                                   ''     ',1,,,       '
                                                                                                       t'\1
                                                                                             ;:,1

                                                                                   :J4
                                                                               !

        66   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

think of any change in a component as a potential locus for application
for a "sociolinguistic" commutation test: What relevant contrast, if any,
is present?
   The heuristic set of components should be used negatively as well as
positively, i.e., if a component seems irrelevant to certain acts or genres,
that should be asserted, and the consequences of the assertion checked.
In just this way Arewa and Dundes (1964) discovered additional aspects
of the use of proverbs among the Yoruba: Channel){ad seemed irrelevant
(or rather, always spoken). Pressing the point led to recognition of a
change in the form of proverbs when drummed, in keeping with a pattern
of partial repetition particular to drumming. Again, the status of partici-
pant (user) as adult seemed invariant. Pressing the point by stating it as a
rule led to discovery of a formulaic apology by which a child could make
use of proverbs.
   Many generalizations about rules of speaking will take the form of
statements of relationship among components. It is not yet clear that
there is any priority to be assigned to particular components in such
statements. So far as one can tell at present, any component may be taken
as starting point, and the others"viewed in relation to it. When individual
societies have been well analyzed, hierarchies of precedence among com-
ponents will very likely appear and be found to differ from case to case.
Such differences in hierarchy of components will then be an important
part of the taxonomy of sociolinguistic systems. For one group, rules of
speaking will be heavily bound to setting; for another primarily to par-
ticipants; for a third, perhaps to topic.
   Experimentation with the formal statement of rules of speaking has
only recently begun. (See Tyler's informal examples in Chapter 8, and
Ervin-Tripp's'pioneering survey, with many original points, in Chapter 7.)
Work of Joel Sherzer and myself with some ethnographic data suggested
the possibility of adapting a syntactic mode of statement. In such a for-
mat, features holding throughout a speech event are stated at the outset
in a sort of "lexicon" of components. The sequential structure of the act
itself is stated in a sort of "syntax" by means of rewriting rules (Chomsky
 1965). Whe_n pros~ descriptions of events have been so restated, there has
been a considerable gain in understanding of structure; or, one might say,
a considerable clarification of what one understood to be the structure has
been demanded. The form of the event is disengaged, as it were, from the
verbal foliage obligatory in prose sentences, and can be more readily
seen. In order to compare events within a society, and across societies,
some concise and standard formats are needed. Comparison cannot de-
pend upon memorization or shuffling of prose paragraphs vastly different
in verbal style. And it is through some form of formal statement that one
can commit oneself to a precise claim as to what it is a member of society
knows in knowing how to participate in a speech act.
--
                Models of the Interaction of Language and Social Life               67

 A bipon "Scoring" (= G)

     I.   Event: shaman's retribution (minor offense)

          Components: S                  -        shaman's house
                      p                  -        (I) shaman, (2) offender
                                                  shaman ---> [-female]
                                                  offender ---> person identified by shaman as
                                                                 responsible for a misfortune



                                         ---
                                                    to punish offender]
                         E                        [ to test courage?
                         K                        ritual seriousness
                                                  Abipon language, fish (pa/ometa) jaw
                         I
                         N
                                           -        -speech]- [courage
                                                  [ +speech - cowardice
                                                                            J

          Sequence:
                                           --     call + scoring


                                            --
                         Call                     ?
                                                  (Pl) {piercing}+ (P2) response
                         Scoring                         response
                                                    -avoidance, -speech]
                         (P2) Response            [ +avoidance, +speech

                         (PI) Response
                         RI
                                         --->
                                             --     RI
                                                  [ RI + R2
                                                             ]/[-avoidance, -speech
                                                                   +avoidance, +speech
                                                                                         J ·
                                                  reproach in name of ancestral spirit and tradi-
                                                  tions for initial offense
                                                  Reproach in name of ancestral spirit for offense
                         R2
                                                  of cowardice

     2.   Event: girl's puberty rite

          Components: S                  -        shaman's house
                                                                                                                    I
                      p                  --->     (I) shaman, (2) girl
                                                  shaman -        [+female, +old]                                 :1
                                                  girl      ---> [+female, +marriageable age
                                                                 (ca. 20)]

                         E
                                         --         to identify girl as marriageable
                                                    to beautify girl
                                                  [ to test/manifest girl's courage
                         K


                         N
                                            --    ritual seriousness
                                                  Abipon language, thorns
                                                    -speech + co~rage ]
                                                  [ +speech cowardice




                                          ---
                                                                                                     ; ' i,       'l
          SC'quence:                              (?call) + scoring                                               'I
                                                                                                                    I
                                                         pricking}                                            I   ;,I
                         Scoring                  (PI) {response + (P2) response
                                                    -avoidance, -speech J
                         (P2) Response            [ +avoidance, +speech

                         (PI) Response
                         R2
                                             --     (?)
                                                  [ R2 + R2
                                                            ]/[-avoidance, -speech
                                                                +avoidance, +speech
                                                                                         J
                                                  reproach in name of ancestral spirit and tradi-
                                                  tions for cowardice



                                                                                                     '        ,1 ·

                                                                                                     :   ....:::~,
                                                                                                     '~
         68    Ethnographic Description and Explanation

                    R3             -        taunt of future spinsterhood

 3.   Event: testing of children

      Components: S
                  p
                  E

                    K
                                   --
                                   ->
                                            parent's home?
                                            (PI) parent, (P2) child
                                            to teach receiver's role in ritual taunting
                                            to teach, test courage (?)
                                            ?                    I

                                   -
                    I                       Abipon language
                    N                         -speech + courag~ ]
                                            [ +speech cowardice

      Sequence:
                    "Scoring"     -
                                   -   (?)+scoring
                                       (PI) { taunt
                                              response
                                                       } + (P2) response

                    Taunt         - > ?'?

                    (P2) Response ---" [ -speech]
                                         +speech

                     (PI) Response -          ? (praise?)J/[-speech]
                                            [ R2            +speech
                                        /

   It was the explicit analysis of the more formally defined events that led
Sherzer to notice features of the same sort in the casual mention by the
source of an informal use of speech by parents. More than one mode of
formal (explicit) statement obviously might be attempted-the format
used here differs from that in Sherzer ( 1967) and also in minor details
from the revised format of Sherzer (1970). The point is that to put the
analysis in such a format forces one to confront what prose may let es-
cape: Just exactly what does one's information specify, and what does it
fail to specify, about those features? The task of presentation in a for-
mat-something that can take a good deal of time to do consistently and
exhaustively-forces attention to structure, and brings out the parallelism
in organization of these events, as well as the revealing differences-the
relative hierarchy, e.g., of piercing with a fish jaw, pricking with, thorns,
and purely verbal t~unting, covarying with the relative hierarchy of the
initiator's response to silence, single reproach (RI), silence, and perhaps
 praise, in keeping with the general ends in view, punishment, initiation,
 and training. The parallel structure suggests the exploitation of the several
 sense of the English word "scoring" for the initiator's first action, and
 would direct attention (were the Abipones still extant) to behavior equiv-
 alent to the call of the shaman's retribution that might be found with the
 other two events.
    The labeling of the acts is unavoidably somewhat arbitrary. We cannot
 now determine how the Abipones would have translated "taunting" and
 "reproach," e.g., nor whether they would have distinguished the two as is
 done here. While the terms overlap in their senses in English, it is rea-
          Models of the Interaction of Language and Social Life              69

sonable to use "reproach" with regard to offenses (cause of a misfortune,
offense against traditions by replying to "scoring"), and "taunting" other-
wise, while following Sherzer in choosing "taunting" for the general
category. Information from other indigenous South American cultures,
and general theory of speech acts, may later support or change the
interpretation.
  The analysis has been from the "syntactic" standpoint of the compo-
ne(!t of act sequence. The analysis also makes possible the standpoint of
categories or a "lexicon" of acts. The first participants acts of scoring and
response can be somewhat as subcategorization in the context either of
the event or the component of the second participant:

     Scoring         -      [piercing]/[Shaman's retribution] or [offender]
                            [pricking]/[Girl's puberty rite] or [marriageable girl]
                            [taunting]/[training of child] or [child]
     Taunting        -      r RI + (R2)l/fas abovel or [as above]
     (Pl)Response           [(R2 + R3)]/
                            [ (R2)         ]/

                                                                                          i.
We do not know the message form of the initial taunting or response                       I,
which might lead to further specification. The second participant's re-
sponse is constant throughout the three events on the level at which we
have information, but again, might be subcategorized if message form                      i    I   I      "I
were known.                                                                               i ,          : ii
  All three kinds of acts can also be seen as entries in a communicative              l       i'        ·:1
lexicon, where the familiar formulation X - (is rewritten, or realized, as)                                    I
                                                                                                               I

Y/(in the context) W-Z, can be adapted to read, X (has the value) Y/(in
the context) W-Z.

         Scoring__,. [punishment]/[shaman's retribution]         [offender]
                     [initiation]/[girl's puberty rite] or [marriageable girl]
                     [training]/[testing of child]      [child]

   The second participant's alternative responses have the same meaning
throughout: courage/cowardice. Perhaps it is not accidental that the one
                                                                                                        :J
insight into verbal socialization that we have from Dobrizhoffer fits with a
society in which no valued adult role depended upon verbal skill.                     \:
                                                                                      :
   Such a mode of analysis permits formal treatment of many of the acts               i'
                                                                                      ),,

of speech. The conventional means of many such functions can indeed                                     1'1'

be analyzed as relations among components, e.g., message form, genre,                                   'i"
and key in the case of the -y form of the accusative plural of masculine
nouns in Polish, which has the value "solemn" in the genre of poetry, and
the value "ironic, pejorative" in the genres of nonpoetic speech. Func-
tions themselves may be statable in terms of relations among components,
such that poetic function, e.g., may require a certain relationship among
         70    Ethnographic Description and Explanation

choice of code, choice of topic, and message form in a given period or
society.
   It would be misleading, however, to think that the definition of functions
can be reduced to or derived from other components. Such a thought
would be a disabling residue of behaviorist ideology. Ultimately, the func-
tions served in speech must be derived directly from the purposes and
needs of human persons engaged in social action, and are what they are:
talkin? to_ seduce, to stay awake, to a~oid a war. Thrformal analysis of
speakmg 1s a means to the understandmg of human purposes and needs,
and their satisfaction; it is an indispensable means, but only a means, and
 not that understanding itself.


           Explanation

         Beyond description is the task of devising models of explanation.
The many kinds of act and genre of speech are not all universal; each has
a history, and a set of conditions for its origin, maintenance, change, and
loss. All the questions that attach to explanation in social science- ques-
tions of primacy of factors (technology, social structure, values, and the
like), considerations of areal patterning, diffusion, independent develop-
ment, and evolution, will impinge. If the kind of explanatory adequacy
discussed by Chomsky (1965) is recognized as "essential," i.e., as con-
cerned with what is internal to language, and beyond that, internal to
human nature, we can see the need for an "existential" or "experiential"
explanatory adequacy, a kind of explanation that will link speaking with
 human history and praxis (Petrovich 1967: 111-1 18, J 26-127, 171-172;
 LeFebvre 1968:34, 45-46). To do this is not only to see languages as part
 of systems of speaking but also to see systems of speaking from the stand-
 point of the central question of the nature of sociocultural order-a theory
 of the maintenance of order being understood as implying a corresponding
 theory of change, and conversely. 10
    Each case, or eac~ type of case, to be sure, may be valued in its own
    10 See Cohen 1968. His cogent, penetrating account takes explanation as fundamental to

  theory and social order as central to what is to be explained {pp. x, 16, Chapter 2). Cohen
  speaks simply of "social order." I use "sociocultural order" to make explicit the inclusion of
  symbolic or cognitive order (see Berger 1967). On the relevance of sociolinguistics, note the
  introduction by Donald Mac Rae (center p. x). On an adequate theory of linguistic change, see
  Weinreich, Labov, and Herzog 1968, especially pp. 100-10 I: "The key to a rational con-
  ception of language change-indeed, of language itself-is the possibility of describing
  orderly differentiation in a language serving a commu~ity . . . native like command <?f
  heterogeneous structures is not a matter of multidialectaltsm or "mere" performan~e, but 1s
  part of unilingual linguistic competence . . . in a .language serving a compl~x (1.~., real)
  community, it is abs£'11ce of structured heterogeneity that would be dysfun_ct1.onal. ~IOI).
  The conclusions (187-188) make clear that an adequate theory must be soc10Itngu1st1c and
   be based on sociolinguistic description.
          Models of the Interaction of Language and Social Life   71

right as an expression of mankind. My own work stems in part from a
desire to understand the meanings of language in individual lives, and to
W~rk toward ending the frequent alienation from human beings of some-
thmg human beings have created (see Berger 1967, Chapter l, especially          I·
                                                                                I

Pp. 12-13, and notes l, 2, and l l; Lefebvre 1966: Chapter VIII, and
1968:72-74; and Merleau-Ponty 1967). Individuating, interpretive,                          ! ':


and phenomenological motives are consistent with a concern for general,
causal explanation. Each case and type is valuable, enlarging and testing
general knowledge, and it is only with a general view of conditions and
possibilities that the value of individual ways of speaking can be accu-
rately assessed .
 . We require a widely ranging series of-descriptions, whatever the mo-
tives that severally produce them. Neither a descriptive model nor an
explanatory theory is convincing if it has not met the test of diverse situa-
tions, of a general body of data. Recall that Darwin's exposition 'of natural
selection, and Tylor's (l 87 l, Chapter I) of exposition of a science of
culture, were convincing in piut for such a reason. We require some initial
0 :dering of the diversity, although the ordering need not be conceived as
~i~her historical or unique. Sociolinguistic description and taxonomy are
Jomt conditions of success for understanding and explaining the interac-
tion of language and social life.




                                                                                     Ii       .!
                                                                                      i. ·.I
                                                                                      !:      I
         2

         Culture Patterning
         of Speech Behavior in Bufundi                                       1



         ETHEL M. ALBERT




         Ethel M. Albert is Professor of Anthropology and Speech
         at Northwestern University. She received her doctorate
         in philosophy at the University of Wisconsin and taught
         logic and philosophy of science at Brooklyn College,
         Wisconsin, and Syracuse. As Research Associate of the
         Comparative Study of Values in Five Cultures at Har-
         vard, she concentrated on Navaho values with fieldwork
         among the Ramah Navaho. This chapter, revised from a
         paper included in Gumperz and Hymes' "The Ethnog-
         raphy of Communication" (Albert 1964), draws on two
         years of fieldwork on values and world view in Burundi.
         Dr. Albert's main interests are in "macrosemantics" as a
         theory of verbal and cultural contexts and cultural logics
         and ethnoepistemology.
             A comprehensive account of speech behavior, such as
          Dr. Albert provides here, is rare. To it she adds a dis-
         cussion of the problems of fieldwork on speech behavior
         that is also of great value. Most ethnographers obtain
         information on speech behavior through the sheer neces-
          sity of learning how to comport themselves and to obtain
         information, whatever their principal subject of study.
          Few make that process an object of reflection and report
          in itself, as Dr. Albert does here. Both ethnography and

          A revision of" 'Rhetoric,' 'Logic,' and 'Poetics' in Burundi: Cultural
          Patterning of Speech Behavior," reproduced by permission of the
          American Anthropological Association and the author from American
          Anthropologist, Vol. 66, No. 6, 1964.
  1
    The research upon which this paper is based was carried out in Burundi, Central Africa.
It wa.5 supp~r!ed by a Ford _Foundation Overseas Study Fellowship (1955-1957) and
materially facilitated by the assistance of 1.R.S.'A.C. (lnstitut pour la Recherche Scientifique
en Afrique Centrale).


                                              72
