   to Educability
  BASIL BERNSTEIN




    Basil Bernstein is Professor of Sociology and director of
   the Sociolinguistics Research Unit at the Institute of
   Education, London University. For some years his re-
   search has been concentrated on speech as a central
   process in social theory. He has conducted extensive in-
   vestigations into the social implications of differences in
   speech in London.
     In the present chapter Bernstein sets forth the theoreti-
  cal perspective that forms the basis for his work. The dis-
  tinction between elaborated and restricted codes, for
  which he is internationally noted, is developed as part of
  a general theory of the processes by which fundamental
 properties of social systems-division of labor, belief,
 type of solidarity, family roles, modes of social control-
 are linked and maintained (or changed). The present
 essay is a general introduction to the work which was
 written especially for this volume-the supporting data
 appear in a series of papers and monographs (e.g., Bern-
 stein and Henderson I 969; Brandis and Henderson
 I 970; Cook, J972; Hasan 1972; Turner and Mohan
 1970; Robinson and Rackstraw 1972; Bernstein 1971).
    The essential thing is that Bernstein identifies a set of
significant dimensions and systematically relates them.
The dimensions and relationships are richly productive,
both of research and further thought, but most important
is that Bernstein shows that sociolinguistics can and must
come to grips with general social theory. There is so
much to discover in the structure of speech that discov-
ery may remain exciting for its own sake for some time to
come. If, however, as Bernstein maintains, speech
                            465
466   Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

systems are generated, or controlled, by forms of social
relations, then discoveries, however fascinating and well
described, cannot be explained without a theory that
embraces social relations. [Cf. the relationship between
descriptive and explanatory adequacy in Chomsky's
grammatical theory (1966).] If sociolinguistic research
often begins as an extension of linguistics, it must end as
an intension of the social sciences-but in the idiom of
disciplines that is only to say that it changes from a way
of studying language to a way of studying man as a social
being.
   Much of the initial effort of sociolingusitics is to show
as problematic what is often taken for granted. Bernstein
does this. His work makes it impossible ever again to
pass over the problem of the functions of speech with the
"truism" that language is very important because it
serves · to transmit culture. English, then, transmits
English culture. As this essay shows, the primary ques-
tions are: How? Which parts of culture? For whom? [Cf.
in this respect Bernstein and Henderson 1969.]
   A dichotomy such as elaborated and restricted codes
lends itself Ito dichotomous thinking. Bernstein warns
against it, but the point needs to be emphasized. First of
all, a given individual, family, or group may (and most cer-
tainly will) commonly make use of both kinds of codes
(more exactly, of more than one of the varieties of coding
indicated in the chapter). It is not a question of assigning
persons, families, or classes to a single type of code but
rather of ascertaining the scope of their repertoire of
types of coding, and any hierarchy among them. Bern-
s.tein does focus on the dominant, or preferred, coding of
a person or group, and hence his concepts are to be un-
derstood as ideal types. The present chapter, and the de-
tailed research, show that the types are degrees of more
and less, not of all or nothing (see Cook 1972).
   Second, while the types themselves may be defined by
a particular co-occurrence property (that of contrast in
range, or predictability, or alternatives), their use is sub-
ject to rules of alternation. Bernstein observes that con-
text is a major control upon syntactic and lexical selec-
tion. One would not be surprised to find the quantitative
 measure to vary by social position and situation, as do




                                                                d
              A Sociolinguistic Approach to Socialization   467

      the phonological variables studies by Labov (Chapter
      19).
        Third, the distinctions are not evaluations, and cer-
     tainly not pejorative evaluation. Each type of coding is
     seen as appropriate to the social matrix that gives rise to
     it; the rewards, costs, and possible failures of each are
    recognized. The differences do come under evaluation,
    and sanction, within a complex society, especially where
    individuals of different social background are brought
    into close contact. They do show sources of stress under
    conditions of social mobility, and Bernstein is concerned
    to point out such implications. Either type of coding may
    show warmth, respect for personal dignity, etc. ("Indi-
    vidual oriented" might be more helpful in connotation
   that "person oriented" in this regard.)
       Restricted code use on the one hand, relies heavily on
   gestures, intonation, and verbal metaphor to express
   respect, familiarity, etc., toward addressees or to indicate
   attitude (certainty about, sureness of, etc.) toward a mes-
   sage. These nonverbal signs are fully intelligible only to
   audiences who share the speaker's cultural background
  (home, ethnic identity, intellectual interests, etc.). In
  elaborated codes, on the other hand, a much greater
  amount of such attitudinal iriformation is expressed by
  verbal means. To the extent that these verbal devices are
  taught in public schools (accessible to all, regardless of
  home background), elaborated codes are more suitable
 for cross-cultural communication (Gumperz 1970a).
      Children used to predominantly restricted coding, i.e.,
 who have not had practice in much elaborated code use,
 tend to have difficulty in culturally diverse, big city
 school systems. As Bernstein points out elsewhere
 (1969), teachers in such schools tend to be unable to deal
 with the modes of communication of culturally different
children, and this accounts for much of the children's
lack of educational success (see also Gumperz 1970b).
Given a communality of cultural background, however,
those skilled in restricted code usage may have some ad-
vantage insofar as it is true that the paralinguistic signals
carry the true import of speech wherever they conflict
with the import of the words. (Cf. Bateson et al. 1956;
Hymes 196lb:32I). Note also, e.g., that dramatic per-
468   Genesis, Maintenance, a11d Change of Linguistic Codes

formances as well as music and poetry tend to rely heav-
ily on restricted code-like metaphoric devices, and that in
many situations verbal explicitness of the sort typical of
elaborated coding is inappropriate, even a sign of incom-
petence. It should also be stressed that these functional
notions are entirely independent of "ungrammatical" or
substandard features, and that it is orientation and use of
communicative modes that is in question, not fun-
damental capacity for logical analysis and conceptual
thought (see Labov 1969a).
    Finally, the distinctions do not point to wholly fixed,
received sets of linguistic habits. Bernstein points out
that frequency and length of talk are not what is in ques-
tion. In the first instance, size of vocabulary and scope of
gramm~tical competence are not at issue either (although
long-range consequences might be expected). Long
 stretches of complex syntax, if only taken over as lan-
 guage forms that cannot be used in creative, unpredicted,
 individuating ways, would count as a restricted, not an
 elaborating, use (Barnes et al. 1969:61). As the preceding
 phrase indicates, it would be more appropriate perhaps to
 speak of elaborating and restricting codes, or better yet,
 of elaborated and restricted coding. It is of the essence of
 Bernstein's approach' that it is concerned with a mode of
 action (not a countersign of social class): Witness the
 term communication codes, and the stress on the state-
 ment "A social role can then be considered as a co1nplex
 coding activity . ... " (It is helpful to keep in mind the
 origin of this aspect of Bernstein's approach in the late
 Hughlings Jackson's distinction between "now-coding"
 and "then-coding," i.e., between ad hoc formulation of
 what one is saying (likely to be reflected in more and
 longer hesitation pauses, as well as less predictability of
 forms used), and use of preformulated expressions (greet-
 ings, sayings, and commonplaces provide obvious ex-
 amples).
    The key to the linkage between codes, role systems,
 families, communication systems, and modes of social
 control is the notion of range of alternatives. Codes are
 elaborated or restricted, according to whether it is dif-
 ficult or easy to predict their linguistic alternatives; role
  systems are open or closed, according to whether they
 permit or reduce range of alternatives for realization of
                 A Sociolinguistic Approach to Socialization     469

      verbal meaning; families are person oriented or posi-
      tional, according to whether decision making is based on
      the psychological (individual) qualities or formal (socially
      defined) status of persons, implying a greater or lesser
      range within which decisions are open to discussion;
      communication systems are open or closed, according to
      this last dimension (openness of decisions to discussion);
     family type and communication system jointly entail
      another important dimension, that of role discretion-in
      the person-oriented, open type there is greater role dis-
     cretion, i.e., greater range of alternatives of the role in dif-
     ferent social situations, while in the positional, more
     closed type, there is less role discretion. With modes of
     social control, matters are somewhat more complex; per-
     sonal and positional modes are both subtypes of appeal,
     itself contrasted to the imperative mode; but the basis of
     all three distinctions is again role discretion (the range of
     alternatives accorded).
        Two further dimensions multiply the range of alterna-
I
     tives within the theory itself. With regard to role systems,
     two orders, or areas, of meaning are noted, those of ob-
I·   ject and person, with respect to each of which a role
     system might be open (encouraging novel meanings,
     hence alternatives) or closed. There may thus be "ob-
     ject" or "person" oriented codes, either elaborated or
     restricted. Later, two variants for each such type of code
     are suggested, considering whether the code is used to
     explore (primarily?) means or ends. There are thus at
     least eight possible types of code, four of them person
     oriented and four object oriented, each four subdivided
     as to elaborated and restricted, and again, as to means
     and ends focus. Morever, the two orders of meaning,
     person and object orientation, are presented as areas
     with regard to which a role system may be open or
     closed. Both pertain to any given role system. In princi-
     ple, then, a person, family, or group might be character-
     izable in any one of sixteen ways (assuming an exclusive
     or dominant mode). The table on page 4 70 shows the pos-
     sibilities; each cell contains one of the possible combina-
     tions of person and object orientation. Possibly, the
     dominance of orientation toward one area, or order, of
     meaning is so great as to obviate any need to consider
     more than eight possibilities [El(e), El(m), R(e), R(m) for
         470     Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

                                                              Object Orientation*

                                                         Elaborated         Rl'strictl'd

                                                    Ends       Means     Ends       Ml'ans


                        Elaborated
                                       Ends
                                              {~    El(e),
                                                    El(e)
                                                    El(m),
                                                                El(e),
                                                                El(m)
                                                                El(m),
                                                                         El(e),
                                                                         R(e)
                                                                         El(m),
                                                                                    El(e),
                                                                                    R(m)
                                                                                    El(m),
Pl'rson Orientation
                                      Means   {"0   El(e)       El(m)    R(e)       R(m)
                                                    R(e),       R(e),    R(e),      R(e),
                        Restricted
                                      Ends
                                              {~    El(e)
                                                    R(m),
                                                                El(m)
                                                                R(m),
                                                                         R(e)
                                                                         R(m),
                                                                                    R(m)
                                                                                    R(m),
                                      Ml'ans {~     El(e)       El(m)    R(e)       R(m)

                      * P, person orientation; 0, object orientation;     El, elaborated; R,
                      restricted; (e) ends; (m) means.

         both person orientation (any column in the table) and ob-
         ject orientation (any row)]. In any case, when one singles
         out, say, a person-oriented elaborated code (means
         variant) for discussion in relation to a type of social con-
         trol, one must understand a preferred or dominant mode
         of coding (not an absence of coding with respect to the
         other order, in this case, object).
             Notice that Bernstein's work could be developed to ac-
          count for the origin and maintenance of particular genres
          of speech. In the context of family types and forms of
          social control he observes that "special forms of arbitra-
          tion, reconciliation, and explanation will develop. It
          would be interesting if Bernstein's approach should yield
          predictions different in this regard from that of Roberts
          (see Roberts and Forman, Chapter 6). The two are, of
          course, distinct both in basis in the verbal genres to
          which they most readily apply, Roberts dealing with
          salient expressive models, games, and the like, whereas
          Bernstein's approach points to speech structures that
          have yet to be well described or even identified for many
          cultures, e.g., what. counts as an apology, a request, an in-
          struction. Sociolinguistic description here would enrich
          both approaches. Certainly, in extending Bernstein's
          theory to societies of which the investigator lacks a par-
          ticipant's knowledge, many difficult, yet rewarding, eth-
          nographic problems arise-the distribution of restricted
          coding according to formality or politeness of situation,
          or type of political authority (one suspects that the
             A Socioling11istic Approach to Socialization   471

   Pathans described by Barth favor elaborated coding in
   political communication, the Baluchi not). It is es-
  sential to bear in mind that restricted coding (e.g., a genre
  such as "small talk") is as much an accomplishment as
  elaborated coding; those who have the knowledge and
  skill to manage it in one set of circumstances may not in
  another, and some may be unsuccessful altogether. In
  any community to be able to identify "small talk," to
  recognize where it is and is not done, and to discover
  what comfort or success in it presuppose, might be es-
  pecially revealing.
     Bernstein places his work in relation to that of Whorf.
  Whorf, of course, did not consider the form of social rela-
  tionships, or differences in function within a single lan-
  guage. He did, however, specify that it was not a lan-
  guage as such but rather a consistent active selection of
  its resources, a fashion of speaking, that was to be stud-
 ied. Bernstein's delineation of communication codes can
  be seen as giving Whorf's insight new life and socio-
 logical substance. There is a further parallel between the
 two approaches. Whorf held that different languages en-
 tail different world views; that thesis itself implies a
 single universal relationship between languages and
 world views. Multilingualism and cross-cultural dif-
 ferences in the use of language in socialization make the
 functional implication something to be demonstrated, not
 taken for granted (Hymes 1966a). Bernstein's theory
 implies a single universal relationship between linguistic
 and paralinguistic channels, on the one hand, and social
 systems (including ingredients of world view), on the
 other. It assumes that personal (individualized) meanings
and novel intent are always made explicit, and elab-
orated, through relatively novel, unpredictable words
and syntax, never through selection and elaboration of
conventionalized verbal means (e.g., proverbs) and/or
paralanguage. The range of alternatives, or unpredict-
ability within the one (words and syntax) matches the
range of alternatives in the other. Bernstein's view gives
added, realistic dimension to the notion of the "creative"
use oflanguage (Chomsky 1966); but its assumptions can
and should be tested cross-culturally. Indeed, a great im-
portance of Bernstein's work for the development of
sociolinguistics is that it provides a theory that stimu-
       472    Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

        !ates, gives immediate theoretical point to, ethnographic
        work.
            The final section of the chapter indicates the range of
        suggestiveness of the theory. It is not without bearing on
        subjects as seemingly remote as interviewing (Strauss
        and Schatzmann 1955), liturgical reform, and structural
        analysis of myth. In societies where myths convey of-
        ficial cultural meaning through terse, traditional ma-
        terials, personal meaning may find expression through
        imagery and tone in ways that very much suggest an
        institutionalized form ofrestricted coding (Hymes 1968a).
         Additional related readings are provided by Gardner
        (1966); Mead (1937, 1964a); Sapir (1949b, 1949c,
         I 949e).



          If a social group, by virtue of its class relation, i.e., as a result of
its common occupational function and social status, has developed strong
communal bonds; if the work relations of this group offers little variety;
little exercise in decision making; if assertion, if it is to be successful must
be a collective rather than an individual act; if the work task requires
physical manipulation and control rather than symbolic organization and
control; if the diminished authority of the man at work is transformed into
an authority of power at home; if the home is overcrowded and limits the
variety of situations it can offer; if the children socialize each other in an
environment offering little intellectual stimuli; if all these attributes are
found in one setting, then it is plausible to assume that such a social
setting will generate a particular form of communication which will shape
the intellectual, social, and affective orientation of the children.
    I am suggesting that if we look into the work relationships of this partic-
 ular group, its community relationships, its family role systems, it is rea-
 sonable to argue that the genes of social class may well be carried not
 through a genetic code but through a communication code that social
 class itself promotes. Such a communication code will emphasize verbally
 the communal rather than the individual, the concrete rather than the ab-
 stract, substance rather than the elaboration of processes, the here and
 now rather than exploration of motives and intentions, and positional
 rather than personalized forms of social control. To say this about a com-
 munication system is not to dis value it, for such a communication system
 has a vast potential, a considerable metaphoric range and a unique
 esthetic capacity. A whole range of diverse meanings can be generated
 by such a system of communication. It so happens, however, that this
                     A Sociolinguistic Approach to Socialization   473

communication code directs the child to orders of learning and relevance
that are not in harmony with those required by the school. Where the
child is sensitive to the communication system of the school and thus to
its orders of learning and relation, then the experience of school for this
child is one of symbolic and social development; where the child is not
sensitive to the communication system at school, then this child's experi-
ence at school becomes one of symbolic and social change. In the first
case we have an elaboration of social identity; in the second case, a
change of social identity. Thus between the school and community of the
working class child there may exist a cultural discontinuity based upon
two radically different systems of communication.

  THE SOCIAL ORIGINS OF
  COMMUNICATION CODES
    I shall spend the rest of this section examining how different forms of
 communication arise. I shall argue that the particular form of a social rela-
 tion acts selectively upon what is said, when it is said, and how it is said.
 The form of the social relation regulates the options that speakers take up
 at both syntactic and lexical levels. For example, an adult talking to a
 child will use a form of speech in which both the syntax and vocabulary
 are relatively simple. The speech used by members of an army combat
 unit on maneuvers will clearly be different from the same members'
 speech at a padre's evening. To put it another way, the consequences of
 the form the social relation takes, are transmitted in terms of certain syn-
tactic and lexical selections. Thus different forms of social relation can
generate very different speech systems or communication codes (Ervin-
Tripp 1964, 1969; Gumperz 1964b; Hymes 1967; Blom and Gumperz,
Chapter 14).
    I shall argue that different speech systems or codes create for their
speakers different orders of relevance and relation. The experience of the
speakers may then be transformed by what is made significant or relevant
by different speech systems. As the child learns his speech, or in the terms
I shall use here, learns specific codes which regulate his verbal acts, he
learns the requirements of his social structure. The experience of the child
is transformed by the learning generated by his own apparently voluntary
acts of speech. The social structure becomes, in this way, the substratum
of the child's experience essentially through the manifold consequence of
the linguistic process. From this point of view, every time the child speaks
or listens, the social structure is reinforced in him and his social identity
shaped. The social structure becomes the child's psychological reality
through the shaping of his acts of speech.
   The same argument can be stated rather more formally. Individuals
        474    Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

come to learn their social roles through the process of communication. A
social role from this point of view is a constellation of shared, learned
meanings through which individuals are able to enter stable, consistent,
and publically recognized forms of interaction with others. A social role
can then be considered as a complex coding activity controlling both the
creation and organization of specific meanings and the conditions for
their transmission and reception. Now if the communication system
which defines a given role is essentially that of speech, it should be pos-
sible to distinguish critical social roles in terms of the speech forms they
regulate. By critical social roles I mean those through which the culture is
transmitted. These roles are learned in the family, in the age or peer
group, in the school, and at work. These are the four major sets of roles
learned in the process of socialization. As a person learns to subordinate
his behavior to the linguistic code through which the role is realized, then
orders of meaning, of relation, of relevance are made available to him.
The complex of meanings, e.g., generated within the role system of a fam-
ily, reverberates developmentally in the child to inform his general con-
duct. Children who have access to different speech systems or codes, i.e.,
children who learn different roles by virtue of their family's class position
in a society, may adopt quite different social and intellectual orientations
and procedures despite a common potential.
   The concept code, as I shall use it, refers to the principle which regu-
lates the selection and organization of speech events. I shall briefly
outline two fundamental types of communication codes and consider their
regulative functions. These codes will be defined in terms of the relative
ease or difficulty of predicting the syntactic alternatives which speakers
take up to organize meanings. If it is difficult to predict across a represent-
ative range the syntactic options or alternatives taken up in the organiza-
tion of speech, this form of speech will be called an elaborated code. In
the case of an elaborated code, the speaker will select from a wide range
of syntactic alternatives, and these will be flexibly organized. A restricted
code is one where it is much less difficult to predict, across a represent-
ative range, the syntactic alternatives, as these will be drawn from a
narrow range. Whereas there is flexibility in the use of alternatives in an
elaborated code, in the case of a restricted code the syntactic organization
is marked by rigidity. Notice that these codes are not defined in terms of
vocabulary or !exes. Jargon does not constitute a restricted code. How-
ever, it is likely that the lexical differentiation of certain semantic fields
will be greater in the case of an elaborated code.
   It is clear that context is a major control upon syntactic and lexical
selections, consequently, it is not easy to give general linguistic criteria
for the isolation of the two codes. Derivations from the theory would be
required in order to describe syntactic and lexical usage by any one




                                                                                  rd
                          A Sociolinguistic Approach to Socialization           475

    speaker in a specific context. 1 The definitions given in the text would have
    increasing relevance to the extent that speakers could freely determine for
    themselves the nature of the constraints upon their syntax and !exes. In
   other words, the less rigid the external constraints upon the speech, the
   more appropriate the general definitions. The more rigid the external con-
   straints, the more specific the criteria required. It is also important to
   point out that the codes refer to cultural not genetic controls upon the op-
   tions speakers take up. The codes refer to performance not to compe-
   tence in Chomsky's sense of these terms. There may be differentpe1form-
   ances for every degree of competence. It is certainly the case that these
   codes can be seen as different kinds of communicative competence as this
   concept is expounded by Dell Hymes (1970d).
      If a speaker is oriented toward an elaborated code, then the code will
  facilitate the speaker in his attempts to make explicit (verbally) his inten-
  tions. If a speaker is oriented toward a restricted code, then this code will
  not facilitate the verbal expansion of the speaker's intent. In the case of an
  ~laborated code the speech system requires more complex planning than
  Ill the case of a restricted code. For example, in the case of an elaborated
  Code the time dimension of the verbal planning of the speech is likely to be
  longer (provided that the speaker is not quoting from himself) than in the
  case of a restricted code [Bernstein 1962, 1964b (especially the post-
  script)]. It will be argued that the events in the environment which take on
  significance when these codes are used are different, whether the events
 be social, intellectual, or affective. Those two codes, elaborated and
                                                                                               !
 restricted, are generated by a particular form of social relation. Indeed                     iJ

 they are likely to be a realization of different social structures. They do
 not necessarily develop solely because of a speaker's innate ability.
     We can now ask what is responsible for the simplification and rigidity of                 I'

 the syntax of a restricted code. Why should the vocabulary across certain                     !
 semantic fields be drawn from a narrow range? Why are the speaker's in-
tentions relatively unelaborated verbally? Why should the speech con-
trolled by a restricted code tend to be fast, fluent, with reduced articula-
~ory clues, the meanings often discontinuous, condensed, and local,
'.~volving a low level of syntactic and vocabulary selection where the
   how" rather than the "what" of the communication is important; above
ali, Why should the meaning of the person be implicit rather than verbally
explicit? Why should the code orient its speakers to a low level of
causality?

ab; R~search carried out by the Sociological Research Unit shows that ~here are consider-
   e differences between middle-class and working-class five-year-old children at five years
~nd seven years of age in their ability to switch grammar and !exes in accordance with the
l:ture of the context. [See Hawkins 1968; Henderson 1968; also Hakulinen, Lewis, and
   Ylor (in preparation).]
         476    Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

   A restricted code will arise where the form of the social relation is
based upon closely shared identifications, upon an extensive range of
shared expectations, upon a range of common assumptions. Thus a
restricted code emerges where the culture or subculture raises the "we"
above "l." 2 Such codes will emerge as both controls and transmitters of
the culture in such diverse groups as prisons, the age group of adoles-
cents, army, friends of long standing, between husband and wife. The use
of a restricted code creates social solidarity at the cost of the verbal elabo-
ration of individual experience. The type of social solidarity realized
through a restricted code points toward mechanical solidarity, whereas
the type of solidarity realized through elaborated codes points toward
organic solidarity (Durkheim 1933). The form of communication re-
inforces the form of the social relation rather than creating a need to
create speech which uniquely fits the intentions of the speakers.
 Restricted codes do not give rise to verbally differentiated "l's." If we
think of the communication pattern between married couples of long
standing, then we see that meaning does not have to be fully explicit, a
slight shift of pitch or stress, a small gesture, can carry a complex
 meaning. Communication goes forward against a backcloth of closely
 shared identifications and affective empathy which removes the need to
 elaborate verbal meanings and logical continuity in the organization of the
 speech. Indeed, orientation in these relationships is less toward verbal but
 more toward extraverbal means. For extraverbal means are likely to be
 used to transmit intentions, purposes, and qualifications. lt follows from
 this that speakers limited to a restricted code may well have difficulty in
 switching from this form of communication to other forms of com-
 munication which presuppose different role relations and so different
 social orientations. Thus a restricted code may limit certain kinds of role
 switching. However, it must be pointed out that a restricted code may be
 entirely appropriate for certain contexts.
    An elaborated code will arise wherever the culture or subculture
 emphasizes the "I" over the "we." It will arise wherever the intent of the
 other person cannot be taken for granted. Inasmuch as the intent of the
 other person cannot be taken for granted, then speakers are forced to
 elaborate their meanings and make them both explicit and specific.
 Meanings which are discrete and local to the speaker must be cut so that
 they are intelligible to the listener. And this pressure forces the speaker to
  select from among syntactic alternatives and encourages differentiation of
  vocabulary. In terms of what is transmitted verbally, an elaborated code

   2 In different ways Vyg~tsky, Sapir, and Malinowski have drawn attention to the simplifi-

 cation of grammar and the lack of specificity in !exes where social relationships are based
 upon closely shared assumptions and identifications.
                    A Sociolinguistic Approach to Socialization   477

 encourages the speaker to focus upon the experience of others as different
 from his own. In the case of a restricted code, what is tra~smitted verbally
 usually refers to the other person in terms of a common group or status
 membership. What is said here epitomizes the social structure and its
 basis of shared assumptions. Thus restricted codes could be considered
 status or positional codes, whereas elaborated codes are oriented to
 persons. An elaborated code, in principle, presupposes a sharp boundary
 or gap between self and others which is crossed through the creation of
 speech which specifically fits a differentiated "other." In this sense, an
 elaborated code is oriented toward a person rather than a social category
 or status. In the case of a restricted code, the boundary or gap is between
 sharers and nonsharers of the code. In this sense a restricted code is posi-
tional or status not person oriented. It presupposes a generalized rather
than a differentiated other.
   In the case of an elaborated code, the orientation is toward the verbal
channel, for this channel will carry the elaboration of the speaker's inten-
tions. In the case of restricted codes, to varying degrees it is the ex-
traverbal channels which become objects of special perceptual activity. It
is important to point out that restricted code users are not nonverbal, only
that the speech is of a different order from that controlled by an ela-
borated code. If an elaborated code ci·eates the possibility for the trans-
mission of individual symbols, then a restricted code creates the possibil-
ity for the transmission of communalized symbols. I now want to discuss
differences in the type of social roles which are realized through these two
codes.


  OPEN AND CLOSED ROLE SYSTEMS
   Let us first consider the range of alternatives that a role system (say
that of the family) makes available to individuals for the verbal realization
of meanings. Here we need to distinguish between two basic orders of
meaning, one which refers to interpersonal and intrapersonal rela-
tionships and one which refers to relationships between objects-object
meanings and person meanings. We could call a role system which
reduced the range of alternatives for the realization of verbal meaning a
closed type. It would follow that the greater the reduction in the range of
alternatives, the more communal or coilective the verbal meanings and
the lower the order and more rigid the syntactic and vocabulary selec-
tions-thus the more restricted the code. However, we could call a role
system which permitted a range of alternatives for the realization of
verbal meanings an open type. It would follow that the greater the range
of alternatives permitted by the role system, the more individualized the
           478     Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

verbal meanings, the higher the order, and the more flexible the syntactic
and vocabulary selection and so the more elaborated the code. 3
  We can now take this simple dichotomy a little further by picking up the
di~tinction between object and person orders of meaning. A role system
may be open or closed with respect to the alternatives it permits for the
verbal realization of object or person meanings (Fig. 17.1).

                                                  Role Systems

                        Elaborated code               Open              Elaborated code
                          (person)                                        (object)

Verbal
                 Person----------+-----------Object
MEANINGS


                      · Restricted code              Closed             Restricted code
                         (person)                                        (object)




   Now in the area where the role system is open, novel meanings are
likely to be encouraged and a complex conceptual order explored. In the
area where the role system is closed, novel meanings are likely to be dis-
couraged and the conceptual order limited. Where the role system is of
the closed type, verbal meanings are likely to be assigned. The individual
(or child) steps into the meaning system and leaves it relatively undis-
turbed. Where the role system is of the open type, the individual is more
likely to achieve meaning on his own terms, and here there is the potential
of disturbing or changing the pattern of received meanings. We can begin
to see that in the area where the role system is open, there is an induced
motivation to explore and actively seek out and extend meanings; where
the role is closed, there is little induced motivation to explore and create
novel meanings. Let us take this a little further. Where the role system is
open, the individual or child learns to cope with ambiguity and isolation in

   " Our research shows that the speech of middle-class children compared to working-class
children at five years of age is more likely to show greater differentiation in the open set lex-
ical choices within the nominal group, and that these children are more flexible in their use of
the grammatical options they take up within the nominal group. The working-class children
are more likely to select pronouns as heads (especially third person pronouns). Where pro-
nouns are used as head, the possibility of both modification and qualification is considerably
reduced. Further, our research shows [as does that of Loban (1966)] that middle-class
children are more likely, in certain contexts, to use more frequently than working-class
children modal verbs of uncertainty or possibility. A detailed discussion of this work will be
found in a future Sociological Research Unit monograph (Hawkins and Turner, in prepara-
tion).
                       A Sociolinguistic Approach to Socialization   479

     the creation of verbal meanings; where the role system is closed, the indi-
     vidual or child forgoes such learning. On the contrary, he learns to create
     verbal meanings in social contexts which are unambiguous and com-
     munalized. Such an individual or child may experience considerable ten-
    sion and role conflict if he persistently attempts to individualize the basis
    of his syntactic and vocabulary selections, and thus attempts to create or
    point toward an open role system. Notice that what is a source of strain
    here is precisely that which an individual or child learns to do if he is
    socialized into an open role system. Thus a source of role strain in
    restricted codes is precisely the role relationship appropriate to an
    elaborated code.
       We have now outlined a framework which shows a causal connection
    between role systems, communication codes, and the realization of dif-
   ferent orders of meaning and relevance. Emphasis has been laid upon the
   relationship between roles and codes. It is possible for a person to be able
   to write in an elaborated code but not to be able to speak it, for he may not
   be able to manage the face-to-face requirements of the role (over and
   above the matter of dialect). This may apply, e.g., to a bright working-
   class boy whose early socialization has offered little training in the social
   role. In the same way, object and person forms of an elaborated code not
   only create different orders of meaning; they are realized through dif-
  ferent role relations. It may well be that the cultural tension between the
  sciences, especially the applied sciences, add the arts reflects the different
  role relations which control object and person forms of the elaborated
  code.
      The organization of education often produces cleavage and insulation
  between subjects and levels, and this serves to reduce role and code
  switching between person and object modes of the elaborated code and
 from restricted to elaborated codes.
     If we ask what are the general social forces which influence the devel-
 opment of elaborated and restricted codes and their two modes, the
 answer is likely to be found in two sources. These shape the culture and
 role systems of the four major socializing agencies, the family, the age
 group (or peer group), the school, and work. One major source of the
 movement from restricted to elaborated codes lies in increases in the
 complexity of the division of labor. This changes both the nature of
the occupational roles and their linguistic bases. The two modes of the
elaborated code may well be affected by the movement of economics from
goods to service types. The shift from a goods to a service economy may
Well promote the development of the person mode of an elaborated code.
The second major source of code orientation is likely to be the character
of the central value system. Pluralistic societies are likely to produce
strong orientations toward the person mode of an elaborated code,
        480    Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

whereas monolithic societies are likely to strengthen the orientation
towards the object mode. It should be remembered that persons can be
treated as objects.


  COMMUNICATION CODES
  AND EDUCABILITY

   I have been trying to show how the nature of the division of labor and
the character of the central value system affects communication codes
through the way they affect the culture and role systems of the major
socializing agencies, especially the family and school. Social class posi-
tion regulates the occupational function, the intrafamilial and interfamilial
relationships, and responsiveness to the school. Thus we can expect,
broadly speaking, to find both modes of an elaborated code within the
middle class together with restricted codes. In the lower working class we
could expect to find a high proportion of families limited to a restricted
code. We might further expect that upwardly mobile working-class chil-
dren would move toward the object rather than the person mode of the
elaborated code.
   Where children are limited to a restricted code, primarily because of the
subculture and role systems of the family, community, and work, we can
expect a major problem of educability whose source lies not in the genetic
code but in the culturally determined communication code.
   Children limited to a restricted code learn a code where the extra verbal
tends to become a major channel for the qualification and elaboration of
individual experience. This does not mean that such children's speech
output is relatively reduced. The verbal planning of the speech, relative to
an elaborated code, involves a relatively low order and rigidity of syn-
tactic organization. The interpersonal and intrapersonal, although clearly
perceived and felt, are less verbally differentiated. The concept of self-
development through a restricted code does not, itself, become an area of
enquiry, as in the case of an elaborated code, particularly one whose ori-
entation is toward persons. In the case of an elaborated code, such a code
points to the possibilities which inhere in a complex conceptual hierarchy
for the organization and expression of inner experience. This is much less
the case where experience is regulated by a restricted code, for this code
orients its speakers to a less complex conceptual hierarchy and so to a low
order of causality. What is made available for learning through elaborated
and restricted codes is radically different. Social and intellectual orienta-
tions, motivational imperative and forms of social control, rebellion, and
innovation are different. Thus the relative backwardness of many
working-class children who live in areas of high population density or in
                       A Sociolinguistic Approach to Socialization   481

    rural areas may well be a culturally induced backwardness transmitted by
    the linguistic process. Such children's low performance on verbal IQ
    tests, their difficulty with abstract concepts, and their failures within the
    language area, their general inability to profit from the school all may
    result from the limitations of a restricted code. For these children the
    school induces a change of code and with this a change in the way the
    children relate to their kin and community. At the same time we often
   offer these children grossly inadequate schools with less than able teach-
   ers. No wonder they often fail-for the "more" tend to receive more and
   become more, while the socially defined "less" receive less and become
   less.
      I want to make one final point. A restricted code contains a vast poten-
   tial of meanings. It is a form of speech which symbolizes a communally
                                                                                    '   '
  based culture. It carries its own esthetic. It should not be disvalued. We        .i / '
                                                                                    '''
  must ensure that the material conditions of the schools we offer, their val-
  ues, social organization, forms of control and pedagogy, the skills and sen-
  sitivities of the teachers are refracted through an understanding of the cul-
  ture these children bring to the school. After all, we do no less for the
  middle-class child. The problem does not stop there. Housing conditions
  must be improved, social services extended, and preschool education
 developed.
     We cannot say what a child is capable of, as we do not have a theory of
 what an optimum learning environment looks like; and even if such a
 theory existed, we are unwilling to redirect national expenditure toward
 physically creating it for children, on the scale required.


   FAMILY ROLE SYSTEMS, SOCIAL CONTROL,
   AND COMMUNICATION
     I shall now look more closely at the relationships between role systems
 and communication codes, as the connection between social class and
 communication codes is too imprecise. Such a relationship omits the
 dynamics of the causal relationship. In order to examine these dynamics,
 it is necessary to look at the nature of the role system of a family and its
procedures of social controL The basic requirement of such an analysis is
that it is predictive and so gives rise to measurable criteria for evaluating
the interrelationships between role systems, forms of social control, and
linguistic orientations.
    It is possible to evaluate family role systems by reference to the prin-
ciples which for any one family control the allocation of decision
making. Thus we could consider the effect of the allocation of decision
making on the extent and kind of interactions between members of the
         482    Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

family. Let us postulate two types of families-positional and person-
oriented families.'1

  Positional Fwnilies. If the area of decision making is invested in the
members' formal status (father, mother, grandfather, grandmother, age of
child, or sex of child), this type of family will be called positional. (It is not
necessarily authoritarian or "cold" rather than "warm.") In such a family
there would be a clear separation of roles. There would be formally
defined areas of decision making and judgments accorded to members of
the family in terms of their formal status. In such a family type we could
expect close relationships and interactions between the parents and
grandparents. Further, we could expect that the parents would closely
regulate the child's relationships with his age peers (if middle class) or the
child's relationship with his peers would be relatively independent of the
parents' regulation (if working class). Thus in certain positional families
the socialization of the child might well be through his own age mates.
Positional families, it is suggested, would give rise to a weak or closed
communication system.

   Person-Oriented Families. By contrast we could consider a family type
where the range of decisions, modifications, and judgments were a func-
tion of the psychological qualities of the person rather than a function of
the formal status. In such families there is clearly a limit to the interac-
tions set by age development and status ascription. However, status
ascription would be reduced (age, sex, age relations) compared to posi-
tional families. Unlike certain positional families the socialization of the
children would never be left to the child's age group. The behavior of the
child in his peer group would be subject to discussion with parents rather
than to their legislation. Person-oriented families would give rise to a
strong or "open" communication system.

  DISCUSSION: POSITIONAL-PERSONAL FAMILY TYPES
  AND OPEN AND CLOSED COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
  Person-Oriented Families-Open Communication System. In these
families the limits on the extent to which decisions may be open to discus-
sion would be set by the psychological characteristics of the person rather
than by his formal status. Simply, the ascribed status of the member, for

  1
    This distinction between positional and personal forms of control was set out by the
author in a paper in 1963. At that time the term stallls was used instead of positional. The
terms positional and personal have also been used by Hanson (1965). However, Hanson's
discussion is somewhat differently focused, for he sees positional relationships as contrac-
tual and personal relationships as noncontractual.
                      A Sociolinguistic Approach to Socialization    483

  many activities, would be weakened by his achieved status. The children,
  e.g., would achieve a role within the communication system in terms of
  their unique social, affective, and cognitive chad1cteristics. Clearly, if
  there is reduced segregation of role and less formal definition, then the
  parents and the children operate with a greater range of alternatives; i.e.,
  with greater role discretion. In as much as the role discretion is wide (the
  range of alternatives of the role in different social situations), then individ-
 ual choices can be made and offered. Verbal communication, ofa particu-
 lar kind, is generated. It is not just a question of more talk but talk of a
 particular kind. Judgments, their bases and consequences, would form a
 marked content of the communications. The role system would be contin-
 uously eliciting and reinforcing the verbal signaling and the making
 explicit of individual intentions, qualifications, and judgments. The role
 system would be continuously accommodating and assimilating the dif-
 ferent intents of its members. Looked at from another point of view, the
 children would be socializing the parents as much as the parents were
 socializing the children; for the parents would be very sensitive toward
 the unique characteristics of the children. These would be verbally
 realized and so enter into the communication system. Thus there would
 develop an "open" communication system which would foster and pro-
vide the linguistic means and role learning for the verbal signaling and
making explicit of individual differences, together with the explication of
judgments and their bases and consequences. Of fundamental impor-
tance, the role system would promote communication and orientation
toward the motives and dispositions of others. Note also that in such a
family the child learns to make his role rather than having it formally as-
signed to him. Children socialized within such a role and communication
system learn to cope with ambiguity and ambivalence, although clearly
there may well be pathological consequences if insufficient sense of
boundary is not provided.

   Positional Farnilies-Closed Conunwzication Systems. In this type of
family we said that judgments and the decision-making process would be
a function of the status of the member rather than a quality of the person.
There would be segregation of roles and a formal division of areas of
responsibility according to age, sex, and age-relation status. Boundary
areas, instead of generating discussion and accommodation, might well
become border disputes settled by the relative power inhering in the
respective statuses. The children's communication system might well be
"open" only in relation to their age mates, who wouJa then become a
major source of learning and relevance. If socialization is reciprocal in
person-oriented families, it tends to be unilateral in positional families.
The role system here is less likely to facilitate the verbal elaboration of
        484    Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

individual differences and is less likely to lead to the verbal elaboration of
judgments and their bases and consequences; it does not encourage the
verbal exploration of individual intentions and motive. In a person-
oriented family the child's developing self is differentiated by the continu-
ous adjustment to the verbally realized and elaborated intentions, qualifi-
cations, and motives of others. In positional families the child takes over
and responds to status requirements. Here he learns what can be called a
communalized role as distinct from the individualized role of person-
oriented families. In positional families, the range of alternatives which
 inhere in the roles (the role discretion) is relatively limited; consequently,
the communication system reduces the degree of individual selection
from alternatives. Of course, within positional families there is sensitivity
toward persons, but the point is that these sensitivities are less likely to be
 raised to a level of verbal elaboration so that they can become objects of
 special perceptual activity and control. Within positional families the
 child develops either within the unambiguous roles within his family or
 within the clearly structural roles of his age-mate society or both. Thus
 these children are less likely to learn to cope with problems of role ambi-
 guity and ambivalence. They are more likely to avoid or foreclose upon
 activities or problems which carry this potential.


   SOCIAL CONTROL AND FAMILY TYPES
   It is clear that these two family types generate radically different com-
munication systems which we have characterized as open and closed. It
has been suggested that there are important socializing and linguistic
consequences. I want now to outline differences in their forms of social
control with again special reference to uses of spoken language.
   We have said that inasmuch as a role system is person rather than posi-
tion oriented, then it is a relatively more unstable system. It is continu-
ously in the process of assimilating and accommodating the verbally
realized but different intentions, qualifications, and motives of its
members. Tensions will arise which are a function of the characteristics of
the role system. Special forms of arbitration, reconciliation, and explana-
tion will develop. These tensions only in the last resource will be managed
in terms of relative power which inheres in the respective statuses. Social
control will be based upon linguistically elaborated meanings rather than
upon power. However, it is clearly the case that power in the end is still
the ultimate basis of authority.
   In positional families where the status arrangements reduce the insta-
bility which inheres in person-oriented families, social control will be af-
fected either through power or through the referring of behavior to the
universal or particular norms which regulate the status. Thus in person-
                         A Socioli11g11istic Approach to Socialization        485

 oriented families social control is likely to be realized through. verbally
  elaborated means oriented to the person, while in positional families
 social control is likely to be realized through less elaborated verbal
 means, less oriented to the person but more oriented toward the formal
 status of the regulated (child).
    It is of crucial importance to analyze the procedures of social control,
 for I want to show, among other things, that person-oriented families,
 very early in the child's life, sensitize him toward and actively promote his
 language development in order that they can apply their favored modes of
 control. In positional families the modes of social control depend less
 upon individually created and elaborated verbal meanings, and so within
 these families there is less need to sensitize the child toward, and promote
 the early development of, verbally elaborated forms of speech.

   MODES OF SOCIAL CONTROL5
   I shall distinguish initially between imperative modes of control and
control based upon appeals. Two forms of appeal will be further distin-
guished. Underlying these distinctions in modes of control is the role
discretion (the range of alternatives) accorded.

   Jrnperative Modes. This mode of control reduces the role discretion ac-
corded to the regulated (child). It allows the child only the external possi-
bilities of rebellion, withdrawal, or acceptance. The imperative mode is
realized through a restricted code (lexicon prediction): "Shut up," "Leave
it alone," "Get out," or extraverbally through physical coercion.

  'APPEALS
   These are modes of control where the regulated is accorded varying
degrees of discretion in the sense that a range of alternatives, essentially
linguistic, are available to him. Thus social control which rests upon ap-
peals does permit, to different degrees, reciprocity in communication and
so linguistically regulated learning. These appeals may be broadly broken
into two types and each type further classified into subtypes. The two
broad types are positional and personal appeals.

   Positional Appeals. Positional appeals refer the behavior of the regu-
lated (child) to the norms which inhere in a particular or universal status.
   5 A coding manual for social control has been developed and applied to the speech of

mothers and their children. This manual gives a range of delicate subdivisions within impera-
tive, positional, and personal forms of control. The coding manual, constructed by B. Bern-
stein, and J. Cook, is available from the Sociological Research Unit, University of London
Institute of Education.
       486    Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

Positional appeals do not work through the verbal realization of the per-
sonal attributes of the controllers (parents) or regulated (children).
  Some examples now follow:
  "You should be able to do that by now" (age status rule).
  "Little boys don't cry" (sex status rule).
   "People like us don't behave like that" (subcultural rule).
  "Daddy doesn't expect to be spoken to like that" (age relation rule).
Positional appeals are not necessarily disguised forms of the imperative
mode. Consider the following situation where a child is learning his sex
role. A. little boy is playing with a doll.

MOTHER:        "Little boys don't play with dolls."
CHILD:         "I want the dolly."
MOTHER:        "Dolls are for your sister."
CHILD:         "I want the doll" (or he still persists with the doll).
MOTHER:        "Here, take the drum instead."

As compared with a situation where the mother says:
  "Why do you want to play with the doll-they are so boring-why
not play with the drum?"
   The essence of positional appeals is that in the process of learning the
rule, the child is explicitly linked to others who hold a similar universal or
particular status. The rule is transmitted in such a way that the child is
reminded of what he shares in common with others. Where control is
positional, the rule is communalized. Where control is positional, the "I"
is subordinate to the "we." Positional control is realized through a spe-
cific linguistic variant. As will be shown later, positional appeals can be
given in restricted or elaborated codes. They can be complex linguis-
tically and conceptually, as in the case of a West Point or public school
boy who is reminded of his obligations and their origins. Where control is
pos_itional, the child (the regulated) learns the norms in a social context
where the relative statuses are clear-cut and unambiguous. Positional ap-
peals may lead to the formation of shame rather than guilt. In the case of
positional appeals, however, certain areas of experience are less verbally
differentiated than in the case of personal appeals. Positional appeals
transmit the culture of subculture in such a way as to increase the similar-
ity of the regulated with others of his social group. They create bounda-
ries. If the child rebels, he very soon challenges the bases of the culture
and its social organization, and this may force the controller
(parent/teacher) into the imperative mode.

   Personal Appeals. In these appeals the focus is upon the child as an
 individual rather than upon his formal status. Personal appeals take into
                                 A Socioliniuistic Approach to Socialization   487

            account interpersonal or intrapersonal components of the soci~1l re-
            lationship. They work very much at the level of individual intention,
            motive, and disposition and consequently are realized through a dis-
            tinctive linguistic variant. This again can be within restricted or elab-
            orated codes. It will be the case that the areas of experience verbally
            differentiated through personal appeals are very different from the experi-
            ences controlled by positional appeals. The following example might help
            to bring out the distinctions.
               Imagine a situation where a child has to visit his grandfather who is
            unwell and the child does not like to kiss him because the grandfather has
            not shaved for some time. One mother says to the child before they go:

            MOTHER:         "Children kiss their Grandpa" (positional).
            CHILD:          "I don't want to-why must I kiss him always?"
            MOTHER:         "He's not well-I don't want none of your nonsense" (positional
                            reason) (imperative).          ·

               Another mother says in the same context:

            MOTHER:         "I know you don't like kissing Grandpa, but he is unwell and he
                            is very fond of you."                ·

               The second example is perhaps blackmail, but note that the child's in-
             tent is recognized explicitly by the mother and linked to the wishes of
             another. Causal relations at the interpersonal level are made. Further, in
             the second example, there is the appearance of the child having a choice
             (discretion). If the child raises a question, more explanation is given. The
             mother, so to speak, lays out the situation for the child, and the rule is
             learned in an individualized interpersonal context. The rule is, so to
             speak, achieved by the child. The child, given the situation and the expla-
             nation, opts for the rule. In the first example, the rule is simply assigned in
            a social relationship which relies upon latent power for its effectiveness.
             Here we see another difference between positional and personal appeals
            in that rules are assigned in positional control and achieved in personal
            control.                                       ·
               Where control is personal, whole orders of learning are made available
            to the child which are not there if control is positional. Where control is
            personal, each child learns the rule in a context which, so to speak,
            uniquely fits him, and a language through which this is realized. Where
            control is positional, learning about objects, events, and persons is
    ;
        /   reduced and the child comes to learn that the power which inheres in
            authority may soon be revealed. Where control is personal, as distinct
/           from where it is positional, the status differences are less clear-cut and
            ambiguities and ambivalences are verbally realized. I should point out,
         488   Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

 although I have no time to develop this, that there may well be patholog-
  ical consequences to extensive use of personal appeals.
     Finally, if positional appeals do lead to the development of shame, per-
  sonal appeals may lead to the formation of guilt.
     In the case of person-oriented appeals, the rights of the controller or
  parent which inhere in his formal status are less likely to come under at-
  tack than in the case of positional appeals. For in the case of personal ap-
  peals, what may be challenged are the reasons the controller gives or even
  a specific condition of the controller or parent (e.g., "Do you always have
  a headache when I want to play?"). Thus personal appeals may act to pro-
  tect the normative order from which the controller derives his rights. For
  here there is an attenuation of the relationship between power and the rule
  system. In the case of positional appeals which shift rapidly to the impera-
  tive mode of control, the formal rights of the controller or parent may well
  be challenged, and with this the whole normative order from which the
. controller derives his rights can come under attack. Imperative/positional
  forms of control under certain conditions may lead the socialized to turn
  to alternative value systems. Further, where control is personal, the basis
  of control lies in linguistically elaborated individualized meanings. This
  may lead to a situation where the child attains autonomy, although his
  sense of social identity may be weakened. Such ambiguity in the sense of
  social identity, the lack of boundary, may move such children toward a
  radical closed value system and its attendent social structure. However,
  where control is positional, and, even more, where it is imperative, the
  child has a strong sense of social identity, but the rules which he learns
  will be tied to specific contexts and his sense of autonomy may well be
  reduced. Finally, a child socialized by controllers who favor positional or
  imperative procedures becomes highly sensitive to specific role relations
  in the context of control. Such a child may be bewildered, initially, when
  placed in a context of control where personal procedures are used as he
  may lack the orientation and the facility to take up the different options or
  alternatives which this form of control makes available. Person-oriented
  forms of control may induce role strain where the child has been socia-
  lized through imperative or positional forms of control.
     I have briefly outlined, with special reference to communication, imper-
  ative, positional and personal modes of social control. It is very clear that
  in any one family, or even in any one context of control, all three modes
  may be used. It is also likely to be the case within a family that parents
   may share control modes or each may use a different mode. We can, how-
  ever, distinguish between families or, at a greater level of delicacy,
  between parents, in terms of their preferred modes of control. It follows
  that we could also distinguish the modes of control which are used in any
  one context. We can summarize the consequences for learning which
  inhere thus:
                         A Sociolinguistic Approach to Socialization            489

                      Mode              Leaming            Le1•e/ of Leaming
                   Imperative     Hierarchy                 Restricted code
                   Positional     Role obligation           Restricted code
                                   and differentiation
                                                            Elaborated code
                   Personal       Interpersonal             Restricted code
                                  lntrapersonal             Elaborated code



    We can now link positional families with closed systems of com-
munication with positional imperative modes of control. We could, in
principle, distinguish between positional families whose preferred mode
of control was imperative power (the lower working class?) from posi-
tional families where the preferred mode was positional appeals with rela-
tively little physical coercion. We could distinguish between positional
families according to whether the dominant code was elaborated or
restricted. In the same way we could link person-oriented families with
open communication systems operating with personal appeals. We could
again distinguish between such families in terms of the dominant general
code, elaborated or restricted. The latter tells us about the degree of
openness of the communication system and its conceptual orientation.
Thus the roles which children learn in those various families, their con-
ceptual orientations, their perception of and use of language, should
ditfer.c;


          Means and Ends Variants

         It may be that we can now sepeculate about the dynamics of ob-
ject and person modes of the two general codes as these were discussed in
the early part of this chapter. You may remember that here we suggested
that a communication system could be open or closed with reference to
relationships between objects or relationships within or between persons.
We should bear in mind that persons, if they are treated in their status
capacity can be likened to objects.
  We could in principle distinguish between two variants of "person" and
"object" oriented elaborated or restricted codes (Fig. 17.2)

   l. Object- or person-oriented codes can lead to the exploration
of means or ends. Thus we might consider that an object code (means)
is likely to be used by members of the applied sciences where indi-

  " It should be clear that in this discussion I have drawn upon a range of work in the litera-
ture of sociology and social psychology (in particular, Bott 1957; Foote 1961, Chapter V;
Nye and Berardo 1966; Bronfennbrenner 1958).
           490    Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

                                           Orientation
                                             Object




                                             Person


   viduals tend to work within established principles and derive from
   them specific applications. In the case of an object code (ends) the indi-
   vidual is less concerned with the specific application of established princi-
   ples but more concerned with the explorations, than we might expect its
   orientation to be, toward objects at the level of means.
      2. If the form of control is personal appeal and the code restricted, we
   might expect that the children wouid move initially toward a person-
   oriented restricted code of either the means of ends type. The predomi-
   nant characteristic of the ipdividuals in the quadrant would be their poten-
   tiality for change ..
      3. Families which use predominantly positional forms of control and
   elaborated codes are likely to socialize their children into an object-
   oriented elaborated code (means) where the code referents may be either
   relationships between objects (future applied scientists?) or where the
   code referents are the status characteristics of persons (military, bureau-
   cratic position?).
      4. Families which use predominantly personal forms of control are
  likely to develop a person-oriented elaborated code (means) where the
  referents emphasized are likely to be inner states and processes of the
 ·person.We might expect that such sociolinguistic socialization is likely to
~ orient the children initially toward social positions which involve control
  relationships over persons.
      5. It is difficult to speculate about the social origins of elaborated codes
  (ends), for the social psychology of creativity is still in its infancy. We
  might say that such socialization would induce (a) marked egocentricity,
  (b) risk taking, ~d (c) flexibility of boundary. In terms of the model used,
  we might then expect that where positional and personal forms of control
  were very much parent specific then the child might be faced with a basic
  tension between inner and outer which he resolves by creative restruc-             I
  turing.                                                                            I
     It is clearly the case that occupational functions of children are not sim-
  ply given by primary socialization but are dominated by the nature of the          I
  educational and occupational systems. The point here is to emphasize the
  need for research to examine the linguistic consequences of role and con-
  trol systems within families.
                            A Sociolinguistic Approach to Socialization             491


      SOCIAL CLASS, POSITIONAL AND PERSONAL FAMILIES,
      AND SOCIAL CHANGE
      On this analysis we might find positional families who were deeply im-
    bedded in their community operating essentially with imperative modes of
    control and where the children were socialized through unsupervised age
   peers or mates. Here we could expect the development ofrestricted codes
   (object) to be the hard core of the language/educability problem. It should
   also be possible to locate within the working class families who were
   moving toward personal forms of control within the general rubric of a
   restricted code. These families, we would expect, would be less tightly
   imbedded within their local community, perhaps through rehousing or
   where the parents were actively confronting the complex relationships
   between their local subculture and the cultures of the wider society. Here
   we might find an orientation toward a restricted code (person) or a move-
  ment toward an elaborated code (person).
     A further point is worth making. Within working class positional large
  families we should expect a marked difference between boys and girls in
  theiruse of language. Girls, especially older girls' in such families, tend to
  take on mothering roles. They also, of equal relevance, mediate between
  parents and sibs. Their role then is more complex as it combines a normal
 sib role with that of mediator, and with that of controller. Further, girls
 are less tied to the activity-oriented, group-dominated peer-group social
 structure such as that of boys. Thus girls, especially older girls in such
 families, are likely to be person-oriented and to have to rely upon forms of
 control based upon linguistically elaborated meanings rather than upon
 physical coercion. Finally, they are placed in a situation involving a vari-
ety of role and code switching, e.g., girl-girl, girl-boy, girl controlling girls,
girl controlling boys, girl mediating between parents and other sibs. These
factors are likely to develop the girl's orientation toward a more differen-
tiated, more individualized use of language. 7
    Within the middle class we should be able to isolate positional and
person-oriented families who, on this arg~ment, should orientate their

   7
      Henderson's research (quoted previously), as other research, indicates a marked superi-
 ority in the form-class usage of working-class girls as compared to working-class boys. It is
 Possible, however, that our very eliciting techniques may well create contexts for girls in
 Which they can demonstrate a socially promoted superiority. We have reason to believe that
 such superiority in girls is not wholly the result of earlier biological development. The girls
(five years of age) of middle-class mothers who score low on an index of repo1'ted com-
fi?Unication offer speech where the !exes is less differentiated tha~ th~ !exes of mi?dle-class
girls whose mothers score high on an index of reported commumca!lon. The findmgs of B.
Bernstein and W. Brandis ( J 968) indicate that there is a subgroup of middle-class mothers
(positional) who explain less and are more coercive in the socializing _of the girl than in !he
socializing of the boy. Thus, different uses of language by boys and_ girls may p~1r!Iy derive
from family and age-group role learning. They may also be a functwn of the ehc1tmg con-
texts constructed to obtain speech.
         492     Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

children initially (formal education could change this) to the two modes of
object and person of an elaborated code. In the earlier section of this
chapter suggestions were made as to the social origins of elaborated and
restricted codes in terms of the increases in the complexity of the division
of labor and the character of the central value system. We shall now turn
our attention to the social conditions which may produce positional and
person-oriented families within the middle-class and the working class. 8
   The literature strongly suggests that the traditional working-class fam-
ily is of the positional type. For here we find insulation between working-
class and middle-class subcultures and social relationships (a product of
the class system); high population density within limited territories; low
rate of social mobility (through educational failure) producing intragroup
marriage; social solidarity arising out of similarity of economic function
and interests; un~mployment; reciprocity of services and mutual help
between families arising partly out of low income (in the United States a.
common ethnic origin and subculture) sustaining the transmission of this
particular subculture. The weakening of the positional family type, closed
systems of communication limited to a restricted code, would result from
the play of forces which would differentiate the family from its community
and so weaken the transmission of collective beliefs, values, and the
subsequent detailed regulation of behavior.
   In England since the war, this has begun to happen as a result of:

          1. Greater affluence, greater geographical mobility, and, there-
         fore, greater responsiveness to a wide range of influences which
         has been partly assisted by mass media.
         2. Rehousing into areas of relatively low population density.
         3. A change in the power position of the wife through her in-
         dependent earning capacity.
         4. A change in attitude both toward education and child develop-
         ment on the part of the working-class groups and, therefore,
         greater responsiveness to education and subsequent social mobil-
         ity.                           .
         5. A change in the solidarity between workers arising out of, until
         recently, full employment and. higher earnings.
         6. A shift in the division of labor away from goods to that of a
         services economy. This is part of a long-term trend from a goods
         to a service economy, an economy which is now more person
         than object oriented.
                                                                                                 /

  These different forces are beginning to weaken the transmission of the                     )
  8 D. Miller and Swanson (1968) provide a very interesting attempt to distinguish between

entrepreneurial and bureaucratic families.
                                                                                                     I


                                                                                                     I

                                                                                                 ~
                            A Sociolinguistic Approach to Socialization          493

      communally based, socially insulated working-class subculti,re and have
      created the conditions for more individualized family systems. 9
        This is not to say that the working-class subculture has been eroded and
      replaced by middle-class beliefs, values, and norms, but only that there
     now exists the conditions for more individualized and less communalized
     relationships.
        In the United States (and I am really not entitled to discuss this) the situ-
     ation is much more complex. Apart from attempts of the school which so
     far have not been outstandingly successful, the most important influence
     upon change of linguistic code is probably the Civil Rights movement.
    This movement and its various organizations is bringing about a change in
    the Negro's view of his own subculture, his relation to the white culture,
    and his attitude toward education. This movement has produced powerful
    charismatic leaders at both national and local levels, who are forcing
    Negroes to reassess, reexamine, their structural relationship to the soci-
    ety. This confrontation (despite the violence) is likely to make new
    demands upon linguistic resources and to challenge the passivity of the
    old subculture and its system of social relationships. The language of
   social protest, with its challenging of assumptions, its grasping toward
   new cultural forms, may play an important role in breaking down the limi-
   tations of subculturally bound restricted codes.
       Middle-class changes in the orientations of family types, however,
   might well reflect changes in the character of middle-class occupations; in
  particular, the movement from entrepreneurial to managerial, profes-
  sional and service type occupations. At the same time, the indeter-
  minancy of the value system has individualized choice and changed the
  basis of authority relationships within the family. The "science" of child
  development and its popularization through books, papers, and journals
  has also had an important influence, given the just-stated conditions, in
  shaping role relationships and communication within middle-class fami-
 lies. It is likely that the personalizing of socialization agencies has gone
 further in the United States than in the United Kingdom. It is important to
 point out that family types may also be very influenced by the nature of
 religious and political beliefs. On the 'whole, pluralistic societies like those
in the United States and the United Kingdom are likely to produce strong
tendencies toward personalized socialization agencies, whereas societies
with monolithic centrally planned and disseminated value systems are
likely to develop highly positional socializing agencies, generating
object-oriented communication codes.

  " A good account of this movement is given ~y Go.ldthorpe and Loc~~o?d (1963). For a
general analysis of the effects of the interrelat10nsh1ps between the d1v1s10n of labor and
the central value system upon the structure of socializing agencies, see Parsons (1964),
Chapter 8.
        494   Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes


  REPRISE.
   Let me now retrace the argument. First, we started with the view that
the social organization and subculture of the lower working class would
be likely to generate a distinctive form of communication through which
the genes of social class would be transmitted. Second, two general types
of communication codes were postulated and their social origins and
regulative consequences analyzed. Third, it was suggested that the sub-
culture of the lower working class would be transmitted through a
restricted code while that of the middle class would realize both elab-
orated and restricted codes. This causal link was considered to be very
imprecise and omitted the dynamics of the process. The fourth step en-
tailed the construction of two types of family role systems, positional and
personal, their causally related "open" and "closed" communication
systems, and their procedures of social control. The fifth step made the
causal link between restricted and elaborated codes and their two modes
with positional and person-oriented ·family role systems. Finally, factors
affecting the development and change of family types were discussed.

  SOME CONSEQUENCES OF CHANGE OF
  HABITUAL LINGUISTIC CODE
   I should like finally to consider some possible consequences of
linguistic code switching. In contemporary societies, both in the West and
in the newly developing societies, educational institutions are faced with
the problem of encouraging children to change and extend the way they
normally use language. In terms of this chapter, this becomes a switch
from restricted to elaborated codes. A change in linguistic code implies
more than a change in syntactic and lexical selection. The view taken here
and in other publications is that linguistic codes are basic controls on the
transmission of a culture or subculture and are the creators of social iden-
tity. Changes in such codes involve changes in the means whereby order
and relevance are generated. Changes in codes involve changes in role
relationships and in procedures of social control.
    Elsewhere (Bernstein 1965) I have distinguished my position from that
of Whorf, but I believe that there are distillations or precipitations from
the general system of meanings which inhere in linguistic codes which
exert a diffuse and generalized effect upon the behavior of speakers. What
 I am tentatively putting forward is that imbedded in a culture or subculture
may be a basic organizing concept, concepts, or themes whose ramifica-
tions may be diffused throughout the culture or subculture. The speech
forms through which the culture or subculture is realized transmits this
                                                           i
                       A Sociolinguistic Approach to Socialization              495

 organizing concept or concepts within their gestalt rather than through
 any one set of meanings.
    The following diagram sets out the application of this essentially Whor-
 fian thought to the linguistic codes and their social controls discussed in
 this chapter:

                                           CODES
                                          Restricted

              OBJECT                                               PERSON
              Authority                                           A11t/10rity
              Piety                                               Identity

Positional                                                                            Personal
  Controls


              Rationality                                         Identity                       (

              OBJECT                                              PERSON

                                         Elaborated

        Positional restricted code (object). The basic organizing concept here
        would form around the concepts of authority or piety.
        Personal restricted code (person). The basic organizing concepts here
        would be authority/identity in a state of unresolved tension. By "iden-
        tity" I simply mean a preoccupation with the question: "Who am I?"
        Positional elaborated code (object). The basic organizing concept here
        would center about the concept of rationality.
        Personal elaborated code (person). The basic organizing concept would
        refer to the concept of identity.



   On this view an educationally induced change of code from a restricted
code (object) to an elaborated code (person) involves a shift in organizing
concepts from authority/piety toward identity. From an organizing con-
cept which makes irrelevant the question of personal identity to an
organizing concept which places the notion of identity in the forefront of
the personality. Individuals who are in the process of making such a
switch of codes are involved in a basic cultural change at the level of
meanings and at the sociological level of role. We need to know much
more about. the social and psychological consequences of radical shifts in
linguistic codes.
        496    Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

    It may be that the switch from a restricted code (object) is more
likely to be toward an elaborated code (object) than toward the person
mode of an elaborated code. In concrete terms we might expect working-
class children to move toward the applied sciences than toward the
verbal arts. This shift from authority to rationality for working-class
children may involve a less traumatic change in their role relations,
systems of meanings and control, than a shift from authority to identity.
Authority and rationality are both positional in the sense that the individ-
ual works within a framework, within a system or structure, without a
critical problem of ambiguity of ends. Where the organizing concept trans-
mitted by the code is that of identity, the individual is faced with ambigu-
ity at the level of ends and often moans. This speculation on no account
should be taken to mean that it is more appropriate for individuals limited
to a restricted code (object) to be guided toward the applied sciences or
routine low-level supervisory functions, where persons are often treated
as objects but only that it may be expected that they may well make these
choices rather than choose the verbal arts. They are more likely to be con-
cerned with object processes than interpersonal and intrapersonal pro-
cesses.
    One might further expect that the individuals starting from restricted
codes (person) will move toward elaborated codes (person) rather than
toward elaborated codes (objects). If they were to move toward the latter
mode, it would be perhaps one where persons are treated as objects. Indi-
viduals in this quadrant, if they switch to elaborated codes, are likely to be
restless in their search for belonging, or they might accept some belief
system which creates it for them. It is thought that many may become
teachers, writers, or community protest leaders, or perhaps become in-
volved in dropout movements or deviant. This code switch involves
major problems of culture conflict.
    There are relatiyely few individuals who are capable of managing
equally both mode.s of an elaborated code, although one suspects that the
social sciences contain many of these. The meanings, roles, and controls
entailed in these two modes ar~ somewhat antithetical. At the basis of the
meanings of an el~tborated code (object) is the notion of one integrated
system which can generate order. In an odd way it is objective idealist in
character. At the basis of the meanings of an elaborated code (person) is a
pluralism, a range of possibilities. It is subjective idealist or romantic in
character. Another way of seeing this might be to suggest that the major
latent function of an elaborated code (object) is to remove ambiguity,
while the major latent function of an elaborated code (person) is to create
it. In this brief discussion I have not referred to the means/ends variants
of object- and person-oriented linguistic codes. They should be borne in
mind.
   These are poorly worked out thoughts. [They have been developed by
                   A Sociolinguistic Approach
                                           I
                                              to Socialization   497

Mary Douglas ( 1967).] My excuse for including them is to point up the
need for discussion of more general issues involved in the changing of
forms of speech.


        Conclusion

        I have attempted within the confines of this chapter to work on a
broad canvas in which particular problems of language and educability
may be placed within a much broader setting. The chapter is really a plea
for more extensive research into the social constraints upon the
emergence of linguistic codes, the conditions for their maintenance and
change, and above all their regulative functions.
18
The Stylistic Significance
of Consonantal. Sandhi
in Trukese and Ponapean
JOHN L. FISCHER




John L. Fischer is a professor of anthropology at Tulane
University. He received. his doctorate from Harvard
University, where he has also taught. The present chap-
ter draws on several years of fieldwork on Truk and on
Ponape; Dr. Fischer has done fieldwork in Acton, Mas-
 sachusetts, and Japan. His major research interests in-
 clude socialization, social structure, folklore, and
 language. This chapter is a slightly revised version of an
 original paper published in the American Anthropologist
 (Fischer 1965).
     This short discussion points toward a number of im-
  portant lines of research. The particular phenomenon,
  sandhi (or morphophonemic alternation) is common in
  languages. [An English analogue would be found in
  finance: financial, province: provincial, justice: justicial,
  where (despite the spelling) the final /s/ in the first of each
  pair alternates with an /s/ ('sh' sound) before the adjecti-
  val ending -ial in the second of each pair.] Fischer points
  out that the normal, or unmarked, consequence of con-
   sonantal sandhi differs as between these two historically
   related languages. He asks· why. One course is to see
   whether there are differences between the two societies
   that might match the differences in normal linguistic
   form. Suggestive differences do exist, in the attitudes
   toward each language and toward speaking itself. Pon-

   From "The Stylistic Significance of Consonantal Sand hi in Trukese and
   Ponapean." Reproduced by permission of the American Anthropolog-
   ical Association _from the American A nthropo/ogist, Vol. 67, pp.
 ' 1495-1502, December, 1965.

                                   498
        Consonantal Sandhi in Trukese and Ponapean       499

apeans value conciseness, emotional restraint,' formal
etiquette, while Trukese value loquacity and show greater
freedom of expression. A second course is to consider the
unusual, or marked, form. The evidence again suggests a
contrast between the two societies, and a complementary
one. In effect, there appears to be sociolinguistic alterna-
tion in each society such that on Ponape the marked form
expresses abruptness, freedom of expression, aggression;
on Truk the marked form expresses greater restraint,
politeness, gentleness.
   Notice that it is notjust correlation between the normal
aspects of language and of culture but the value of the
corresponding marked forms in actual speech events, that
is decisive, for both the existence of a relationship be-
tween linguistic form and social structure and its ex-
planation. The contrast in unmarked forms suggests, and
the social meaning of the marked forms would seem to
prove, that the phonetic features involved have a com-
mon expressive value in both societies.
   Interpretation of the marked forms depends on rec-
ognizing that they serve more than one function. In
themselves, it would seem, the marked forms are con-
ventional stylistic devices, defined by their relation to the
normal phonological forms. In some uses they serve the
metalinguistic function of clarity, in others, of expression
and persuasion (and in some, both). [Mitchell-Kernan
(Chapter 5) and Gumperz (1970b) provide similar analy-
ses of marking.]
   Fischer considers alternative historical explanations
for the Trukese-Ponapean contrast but finds the best
explanation to lie in a view of the relation of linguistic
features to social life quite like that of Labov (Chapter 19)
and Barth (Chapter l 6).1 Where variation or alternation
exists, it may be given meaning, and selective pressures
over time will then operate in terms of such meaning.
Fischer adds to this view the important point that ex-
pressive, as well as social, meaning must be considered;
and he shows that expressive features must be taken into
account in the study of universals of language and of
language change. He indicates ways in which this line of
research should be further pursued, with regard to socio-
linguistic investigation in the field, and with regard to
other linguistic features whose selection might also be
         500     Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

         found to have similar explanation. Additional related
         readings are provided by Guiraud ( 1967) and Stankiewicz
         (l 964).




         This chapter1 examines a phonological process in Trukese and
 Ponapean and suggests possible differences in the significance of its use
and omission as between these two related Micronesian languages. It also
proposes a common, perhaps universal, expressive value for the types of
·sound sequence involved in the phonological process. Finally, the chapter
considers the implications for linguistic change of such stylistic choices as
 conditioned by social structure and underlying cultural attitudes toward
 speech.


          The Sandhi Rules

          Trukese and Ponapean are mutually unintelligible but have rather
similar structures. The degree of their relationship may be roughly gauged
by the fact that they share about 40 % of the Swadesh hundred-word basic
vocabulary list (indicating perhaps some 3000 years of separation). The
inventories of consonant phonemes are quite similar. For purposes of this
chapter we may note that both languages have the same number of genet-
ically equivalent and phonetically quite similar stops and nasals (the two
types of consonant involved in the phonological process to be discussed).
    In both Trukese and Ponapean there are various phonetic accommoda-
tions at the boundaries of words adjoining one another in the same con-
 struction in fluent casual speech. Some of these accommodations involve
 simply the substitution of one allophone for another of the same phoneme.
 Instead of the allophone that would occur finally if the word were uttered
 in isolation, there occurs an allophone characteristic of word-medial posi-
 tion. A particularly striking illustration of this for English speakers con-
 cerns the Trukese phoneme /n/. The [n] allophone usually found in word-

   1
     This chapter is a revised and expanded version of a paper first read at the winter meeting
 of the Linguistic Society of America in New York, December 1964, and subsequently
 published in the A 111erirn11 A nthropo/ogist (Fischer 1965). I wish to express my thanks to
 Marshall Durbin, Dell Hymes, William Labov, and Ernst Pulgram for very helpful advice
 on a number of points. Hymes in particular has provided extensive comment. Data discussed
 cussed herein are derived principally from texts and daily experience in the use of languages
 obtained during residence in the Caroline Islands 1949-1953. I was greatly aided in my
 initial understanding of the two languages by the availability of the unpublished sketches of
 Trukese by Dyen ( 1965) and of Ponapean by Garvin ( 1949), although my chief informants
 spoke slightly different dialects. Responsibility for the full formation of this chapter remains
 my own.
                   Consonantal Sall(/hi in Trukese and Ponapean     501
                                                            i


   final position is replaced by the flap allophone [r] (which is regularly
   found between vowels in words) when the next word of the construction
   begins with a vowel. Thus, the final /n/ of niikiin 'outside,' pronounced [n]
   when the word is used in isolation, is pronounced fr] in a phrase such as
   nukun iimw [niikiiriimw] 'outside the house.'
      Other phonetic accommodations may be interpreted as involving addi-
   tions or substitutions of phonemes. Changes such as these are often re-
   ferred to as sall(/hi, after the term employed by Sanskrit grammarians. (In
   modern linguistic theory, the changes treated here are technically mor-
   phophonemic since they are dependent on grammatical relationships; i.e.,
   the changes cannot be explained in terms of the occurrence of the partic-
   ular sounds as such but only in terms of their occurrence in relation to
  word boundaries and syntactic constructions.)
     The relevant rules for consonantal sandhi in Trukese and Ponapean are
  as follows (we are now considering fluent speech without special expres-
  sive import):
      I. If a final consonant of one word and the initial consonant of the fol-
  lowing word are heterorganic (i.e., articulated at significantly different
  points in the vocal passage), an epenthetic vowel is introduced. This holds
 in either language. Thus Ponapean emen 'one (living thing)' and lwern
  'frog' (the latter a Japanese loan-the example is from a modern love song
 text) yield emen-i lwem 'one frog' or 'a frog.' The vowel i is inserted be-
 tween the heterorganic consonants /n/ and /k/ but bears no additional
 meaning. Similarly, Trukese imwen 'house of' and ppw 'dirt' yield
 innven-i-ppw1111 'house of dirt,' 'native-style house.' An i is inserted
 without change of meaning, and the dental /n/ and labial /ppw/ remain
 unchanged.
     2. If the final consonant of one word and the initial consonant of the
 following word are homorganic (i.e., articulated at essentially the same
 point in the vocal passage), a vowel usually is not inserted and a con-
 sonant cluster results. Here we reach the phenomena that are the special
concern of this chapter. Under similar general conditions in both lan-
guages, sandhi operates so as to eliminate or prevent one type of conso-
nant cluster in both languages, but the type of cluster eliminated in one
language is precisely the type retained in the other. In other words, the
favored types of cluster are diametrically opposed.
    The conditions for such sandhi are that the first of the two words juxta-
posed in the construction end in a nasal or a stop, and that the second
begin with a stop. (We speak here of the form of a word as pronounced in
isolation; this form is taken as the base or underlying form.) As noted, the
final consonant of the first word and the initial consonant of the second
must also be hom·organic. Sandhi affects the first of the two consonants,
the second remaining unchanged.
           502   Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

     In Trukese, sandhi operates to produce clusters of two identical stops
  (articulated as a single long stop), while in Ponapean sandhi operates to
  produce clusters of nasal plus stop. Thus in Trukese, if the juxtaposition
                             a
  of two words results in cluster of two identical stops, no phonemic
  change occurs. Thus, Trukese otoot 'husk' (verb) plus taka 'ripe coconut'
  yield otoot taka 'husking coconuts.' The double t cluster remains phone-
  mically unchanged. On the other hand, if a homorganic cluster of nasal plus
  stop occurs at adjoining word boundaries, the nasal is normally replaced
  by the corresponding stop, resulting in a double stop (technically, regres-
 sive assimilation). Thus, Trukese aetin 'youth of-' and Toon 'Toi Island'
 yield aetit Toon 'youth of Toi Island.' In this example, the final /n/ of the
 first word has been replaced by the homorganic stop /t/.
     Conversely, in Ponapean, if the juxtaposition of two words results in a
 homorganic cluster of nasal plus stop at the adjoining boundaries, no
 phonemic change occurs, bµt if the sequence results in a double stop at
 the boundaries, the first stop is replaced by the homorganic nasal (tech-
 nically, progressive assimilation. Thus, Ponapean meen 'person of' and
 Tiati (a place name) yield meen Tiati 'person of Tiati.' Unlike Trukese,
the final /n/ does not change. But in aak 'mangrove' plus k':J 'those, the,'
yielding aa k':J 'those mangroves,' the stop at the end of the first word
(/k/) is replaced by the corresponding homorganic nasal (/r,!).
    If we represent nasals by N; stops by S, and the particular point of
articulation by subscript a, we may summarize the interlinguistic differ-
ences in which we are interested by the following formulae:


                           Underlyinr.: Forms   Results of Sane/hi
                 Truk        · • -~a Sa . . .    .. .Sa Sa. • •
                            ... s. Sa . . .      . . .Sa Sa. • •
                 Ponape     .. . Na S•...        . . . Na Sa
                            • • .Sa Sa . ..      . . . Na Sa.••



    I might add here that in both languages the most common cases in which
 the juxtaposition of words results in a cluster of nasal plus stop, the first
 ends in the construct suffix -Vn 'of,' while the second begins with a dental
or alveolar stop. As we have seen, such clusters are modifiable by sandhi
in Trukese but not in Po_napean. The most common cases in which the
juxtaposition of words results in a double stop cluster probably involve
nouns ending in -k (the most common stop in both languages), followed by
one of several plural demonstratives, which always begin with k- in
Ponapean and often do so in Trukese. As we have seen, these cases are
modifiable by sandhi in Ponapean but not in Trukese.
   In view of the above, we may speak of the clusters of two identical
                                         Conso11a11ta/ Sand!zi in Trukese and PonaP,ean            503

                   stops as a normally "preferred" type of consonant cluster in Trukese, and
                   of the clusters of nasal plus homorganic stop as a normally "preferred"
                   type in Ponapean. 2


                             Cultural Significance of Sandhi

                           There are two lines along which the significance of these contrast-
                  ing preferences for type of consonantal cluster can be explored. One is to
                  relate the preferred type in each culture to other cultural characteristics
                  on which Truk and Ponape contrast, and attempt to discern some sort of
                 relationship between the linguistic and the other traits. Since the sandhi
                 changes are the ordinary, but not the inevitable, result of the conditions
                 described, one can also examine in each culture the contexts and cir-
                 cumstances of the omission of the preferred type and the selection of its
                alternate. Both lines of inquiry involve the expressive value of the two
                types of consonant cluster. We shall consider first cultural contrasts in
                characteristic attitudes toward speech as influenced by social structure,
                for this would seem to be a promising, even essential, area in which to
                begin a search for relationships between intra- and extra-linguistic factors.


                  CULTURAL ATTITUDES TOWARD
                  SPEECH AS INFLUENCED BY
                  SOCIAL STRUCTURE
                  In this section I wish to consider what Hymes has called the relativity
         I     of role or function of language in societies ( 1966a). Most of us are perhaps
               accustomed to thinking of the function of language as a universal and
         I     stable thing which should vary little or not at all from one society to the
     I         next. However, if we think about it a bit, we recognize that within our own
               society language can serve many distinguishable functions, and it becomes
              plausible that in some other soci6ty the balance among these functions, if
              not the total inventory of functions, might be considerably different.
                 Elsewhere I have discussed differences between Ponapean and Trukese
              a little more fully (1966), but would like to note a few points here which
              seem significant for apprehending the typical attitudes of members of the


     I          2
                  A complete description ofTrukese and Ponapean sandhi would require various qualifica-
             tions and additions that are not given in detail since they would be irrelevant to the problem
             of this chapter. Suffice it to note that there are some dialectal variations in sandhi in both
             languages; that epenthetic vowels can be introduced between certain homorganic conso-
             nants, especially between a stop and afol/cJll'ing nasal; that at least in some dialects heter-


I
"i
             organic consonant clusters without an intervening epenthetic vowel result at times from
             prosodic considerations, such as number and length of syllables in the two words.
             504   Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

       two cultures toward their languages and toward speech in general:
          I. Fluency versus precision in speaking. Ponapeans value concise,
       well-chosen speech. Trukese value loquacity and fluency, and are less
       concerned with careful choice 9f words . . . . In spite of a generally
       greater emphasis on personal achievement in Ponape, there is a greater
       emphasis on verbal productivity in Truk.
          2. Overt expression of enwtion. The control of emotion in public is
      greatly emphasized in Ponape (cf. Bascom I 965: I 6-17), while relatively
      free expression of at least some kinds of emotion is allowed in Truk.
         3. Joking, lying. Ponapean joking is milder and more controlled, while
      Trukese joking is relatively more aggressive and freer. For instance, it is
      common to hear one Trukese tell another that he is lying and this is usually
      a joke. Ponapeans make this charge much less frequently and when they
     do it is more likely to be taken and intended as a serious insult.
         4. Etiquette. Formal etiquette is highly developed on Ponape. This
     includes the use of two or more levels of respect vocabulary toward chiefs
     and other social superiors (cf. Garvin and Riesenberg I 952). In Truk
     respect vocabulary is weakly developed. Such respect behavior as exists
    is about as strdng toward matrilineal of the opposite sex as toward the
    highest chiefs, perhaps stronger (cf. Goodenough 1951); in other words,
    even the existing respect behavior on Truk is not so deeply involved in
    social stratification in the usual sense of the term.
        In brief, we may say in comparing the two c~ltures that the Ponapeans
    place greater value on precision and quality of speech, while the Trukese
    place greater value on fluency and quantity of speech. These preferences
   appear related to the greater emphasis on formal etiquette in Ponape, and
   beyond that, to differences in social structure. The differences in social
   structure have been discussed elsewhere and will not be repeated in detail
   here (for a short summary and further references, see Fischer I 957; for a
   recent summary of references on Po nape see Bascom I 965). Very briefly,
   on Ponape as compared with Truk, greater individual social mobility is
   possible and at the same time. rank differences are much more elaborate
  and important, with the result that speech is pervaded by a striving to be
  courteous to near equals and superiors.
      Of course, great variations in speech situations do exist within both cul-
  tures. The Trukese can be polite in their own language and the Ponapeans
 can be informal, but the predominance of politeness and informality varies
 by culture. To give a simple example, I have heard a young boy address
 the most respected Trukese chief by an abbreviated version of his per-
sonal name, whereas in Ponape even a close intimate of a high chief, such
as his wife or younger brother, would normally address him by his title,
even in rather informal situations. In other words, while formal and in-
formal speech are found in both cultures, the formal forms are much more
widely used in Ponapean, the informal.in Trukese.
~--·




                               Co11so11a11ta/ Sand!zi in Trukese and Po11aeea11   505


                INTRACULTURAL VARIATION IN
                USES OF CONSONANT CLUSTERS
                    By noting the association of type of preferred consonant cluster with
                 the characteristic cultural attitudes toward speech described above we
                might be led to form the hypothesis that clusters of nasal plus stop, pre-
                ferred in Ponapean, in some fashion express typical Ponapean attitudes
                toward speech, and that double stop clusters, preferred in Trukese, in
                some fashion express typical Trukese attitudes toward speech. This
               hypothesis would be strengthened ifwe could examine more closely situa-
               tional variation in the use of consonantal sandhi in each language and find
               that where sandhi tends to be omitted (and thus the frequency of the pre-
              ferred type of consonant cluster reduced) there is evidence of a special
              attitude toward speech contrasting with the culturally dominant attitude,
              or a marking of the message as of some special or specialized import. For,
              as noted, the sandhi changes are by no means completely automatic in
              either language, and the frequency of their use varies by speaker and
             situation.
                 To some extent the situations in which sandhi is omitted in either cul-
             ture are parallel, and the import of the omission is much the same. Sandhi
             changes may be omitted in either language whenever it is desired to speak
            with special clarity, as in talking to a very small child or to a foreigner
            learning to speak the language, or when talking against a background of
           interfering noise. The changes are, of course, also omitted whenever there
           is hesitation between two words in a sequential construction.
               Other data, however, suggest that the omission of consonantal sandhi
           may also have some special expressive significance, one which contrasts
           as between the two languages; further, that this differing expressive value
          for omission of sandhi is related to an expressive value shared by the
          two cultures with respect to each of the two types of consonant cluster in
          question. The observations supporting this view are not numerous but
          are, I believe, suggestive.
             Regarding the expressive omission of consonantal sandhi in Ponapean
         (i.e., preserving double stops at word boundaries rather than changing the
         first stop to the corresponding nasal), the only time when I heard this done
         consistently between native speakers in a situation of ordinary audibility
         was during a rather outrageous speech in which a chief who had recently
        won out in a long dispute over rights to certain traditional titles was force-
        fully castigating his opponents and attempting to cow them into permanent
       submission. This is quite unusual behavior for modern Ponapean chiefs,
       who, like their subjects, generally try to give the impression that they are
       reasonable and gentle. Rather than directly express his anger a chief will
       usually try to manage an unruly subject through go-betweens if he sus-
       pects there is a chance of serious open resistance. This chief, on this one
        506   Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

occasion only, regularly omitted consonantal sandhi at all wordjunctures,
resulting in many double consonant clusters, especially double k's in his
speech. I spoke with him many times on other occasions and never no-
ticed the slightest tendency in this direction, nor did I ever notice such a
tendency in other speakers in speech to other native speakers in situations
of ordinary audibility. It is true that in the situation described, the speaker
was trying to state his position very clearly, and no doubt this is relevant
to the omission of sandhi, but the point to note is that the clarity was for
the purpose of expressing aggression, of telling certain members of his
audience something which he knew they did not want to hear. The omis-
sion of sandhi in this situation therefore facilitated the expression of ag-
gression. It is of special interest that the more formal form without sandhi
 should be used to express aggression since it would seem to be more com-
 mon for informal, slurred forms characteristic of rapid speech to result
 from aggressive feelings.
     For Trukese I can report no single dramatic incident such as this, but
 can give my general impression that some tendency toward the omission
 of sandhi in Trukese characterizes polite speech, as toward strangers of
 greater age, or in formal public gatherings. For what it is worth, I would
 note that consonantal sandhi does not occur as far as I know in the texts
  of love songs in Truk, although the epenthetic vowels, another sandhi
  feature, are especially common in songs in both languages. Admittedly,
  musical reasons could help to account for the epenthetic vowels and the
  retention of nasal stop clusters. But if double stops give an impression of
  greater force in both languages, it may also be significant that I have re-
  corded them in consonantal sandhi in texts of Trukese spells, where the
  intent is presumably to compel some event by magical power.
     Thus we find various bits of ethnographic evidence, as just reported,
  supporting the notion that there is a common expressive significance for
  each of the two types of c9nsonant cluster in the two languages. Specif-
   ically, in both languages the double stops seem to have the values of
   abruptness and freedom of emotional expression, including the expression
   of aggression, while the clusters of nasal plus stop seem to have the values
   of restraint, politeness, and gentleness. To the extent that these expres-
   sive considerations influence the use of sandhi, we may say that the use
   and omission of sandhi have contrasting expressive value as between the
   two cultures.


    POSSIBLE UNIVERSAL EXPRESSIVE
    VALUE OF TYPES OF CONSONANT
    CLUSTER
    The apparent similarities between the two cultures in the expressive
  value of these two types of consonant cluster may lead us to consider
                 Consonantal Sandlzi in Trukese and Ponapean     507

further whether there may not be something appropriate in these cultural
meanings from the point of view of a potentially universal phonetic sym-
bolism. If found, this would give further support to the thesis. It would
appear that in any language it would be natural for double stops to be
articulated more forcefully than single stops or nasal stop clusters: in
order to ensure most economically that a single stop is not held too long
(and thus confused with a double stop), it helps to close it with less force,
preparing for its prompt release. Increasing the number of double stops by
whatever optional means would then be suitable for expressing aggres-
sion since it would result in a more forceful articulation, considered as a
gesture of the speech organs. In Ponapean, of course, this effect is
achieved by elimination of consonantal sandhi, as in the angry chief's
speech, while in Trukese it is achieved through the normal operation of
consonantal sandhi.
   By analogy, the clusters of nasal plus stop may be regarded as a less
forceful vocal gesture. Especially when they are substituted for double
stop clusters, as in Ponapean sandhi, they may be interpreted gesturally
as a dulling or blunting of the abruptness of the double stop cluster.

   FUNCTIONAL LOAD
   While I believe that the expressive value and stylistic role of consonant
clusters discussed herein are probably in part dependent on universal
phonetic symbolism, I do not believe that the "stylistic functional load"
of these or similar consonant clusters is equal in all languages in which
they can occur. The expressive value of the consonant clusters would be
slight if there were no opportunity in actualizing particular constructions
for choice between the two types of cluster-double consonants versus
clusters of nasal plus other homorganic consonants. Since such a choice
does exist frequently in both languages, it can actively serve an important
expressive function. Of course, in any language in which the two types of
cluster existed in different words or constructions, there is still a little
opportunity for an expressive function to be served insofar as approxi-
mate synonyms might be selected at times on the basis of their phonetic
shape, e.g., as an English speaking writer might select "large" in prefer-
ence to "big" because he found the open (low) vowel of the first in some
way more expressive than the closed (high) vowel of the second.
   We may say, therefore, that the development of optional sandhi affect-
ing these consonant clusters in the two languages has provided an op-
portunity for speakers to make especially great stylistic use of what may
be a universal tendency or potential in phonetic symbolism. In the context
of human culture as a whole, then, the occurrence of sandhi may be said
to be marked (or potentially marked) in relation to its absence, and the
normal speech of the two cultures in question can be seen as marked as
           508   Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

    aggressive, and restrained, respectively,just in virtue of normal phonolog-
   ical process, as against a hypothetical universal baseline. However, in the
   context of a single culture, it is the omission of the normal phonological
   process, sandhi, that is marked, as against the known cultural (and mor-
   phonemic) baseline. On this view, in Trukese it is restrained speech that
   is marked, in Ponapean aggressive.


          Historical Considerations

           Whatever the reasons for the expressive significance of these con-
  sonant clusters, whether universal or particular to these two cultures
  there are grounds for suspecting that it is the contrasting attitudes toward
  language in the two cultures that have provided a selective pressure in
  favor of one type of consonantal sandhi in Trukese and another type in
  Ponapean.

   PHONETIC ECONOMY
    It is hard to interpret the difference in type of consonantal sandhi in
 terms of phonetic economy. While either type of sandhi results in a kind
of economy by reducing the number of consonant clusters which the
speaker must produce and the listener identify, the two languages con-
sidered in themselves appear to offer no evidence that either form of
sandhi results in a cluster which is easier to pronounce than the original
cluster since the Trukese form of sandhi (nasal plus homorganic stop
changing to double stop) results in precisely the type of consonant cluster
which Ponapean sandhi eliminates, and vice versa.

  RECENT ACCULTURATION
   The question was .raised as to whether the learning of Japanese by the
speakers of one or the other language during the period of Japanese ad-
ministration between the two world wars could have altered the possible
consonant clusters in very recent times. This possibility can be conclu-
sively ruled out for several reasons:

        I. A majority of the speakers of both languages remained mono-
       lingual during the Japanese period.
       2. Nearly all Trukese or Ponapeans who learned some Japanese
       did so imperfectly and simply used the most appropriate pho-
       nemes and phone·me combinations of their mother tongue to
       approximate Japanese pronunciation.
       3. The types of consonant clusters favored at word boundaries
-------
  /
 I
 I                           Consonantal Sandhi in Trukese and Ponapean      509

                      by sandhi shifts are the only types found within indigenous mor-
                     phemes; the consonant clusters within morphemes are generally
                     subject to no variation at present and are presumably more stable
                     historically.
                     4. Exposure to the Japanese language was roughly equal for
                    speakers of the local Trukese and Ponapean dialects which I
                    studied.
                    5. Both types of consonant cluster under consideration-double
                    stops and nasal-stop clusters-occur frequently in Japanese.

             The other m,uor non-Micronesian languages with which there has been
           some contact are English, Spanish, and German. The first three reasons
          apply to these languages as well, the first two with even greater force.
             We cannot at present rule out conclusively the possibility that after
          initial differentiation of the two languages prehistoric contact with one or
          more other Pacific languages influenced the divergent development of
         sandhi patterns, but I consider this explanation less probable than the one
         offered. I think there is some suggestion of greater Polynesian contact for
         Ponapean, but Polynesian languages generally lack all consonant clusters,
         and presumably have for some time.

           WORLD VIEW, SOCIAL STRUCTURE,
           AND LINGUISTIC CHANGE
             Consonant clusters occur within words and within morphemes in both
          languages. Here there is at present less room for stylistic choice: in
          Trukese one generally finds a double stop (or fricative) where in the cog-
         nate Ponapean word (if there is one) one finds a nasal-stop (or nasal-
         fricative) cluster. However, it seems to me plausible that we may infer a
         time in the past when "free variation," i.e., variation conditioned by ex-
         pressive or social factors and not by linguistic factors, existed in both
        languages with respect to these internal consonant clusters. I think it is
        also reasonable to infer that the significance in the internal clusters was
        the same as that of the corresponding clusters at adjoining word bound-
        aries. If this is granted, then we have an instance of an effect of stylistic
        preferences conditioned by social structure on phonological change. If
       more instances can be documented and studied in greater detail, we may
       ultimately be able to develop a general social-psychological theory for the
       interpretation of much phonological change.
          The argument with respect to phonology (specifically, formation of
      consonant clusters) is similar to the argument of a paper of mine with
      respect to syntax-specifically, the construction of noun phrases. In both
      works I compare the genetically related languages and cultures of Truk
      and Ponape and infer that long-standing differences in world view have
         510    Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

led to linguistic change along different lines. The basic theme of both
papers is that:

World view can have influence on linguistic change ... through its effect on
attitudes toward speech and language. . . . Given a fairly consistent set of
attitudes toward speech over a period of time, the linguistic alternatives of style
which express the preferred attitudes at one period ... will tend to increase in
frequency and become obligatory. . .. At the same time . . . new alternatives
must develop to express the same sort of attitudes (Fischer 1966: 182).

   World view is further relatable to social structure. As has been indi-
 cated, the basic difference between the two societies, one from which a
 number of others flow, is the greater emphasis on political and social
 hierarchy in Ponape. Ponapean hierarchy entails, for one thing, a much
 greater concern with politeness and control of emotions among the Pon-
apeans as compared with the Trukese. There is in Ponape less free play
for verbal aggression, joking or serious. In the present work I have argued
that this politeness and carefulness with speech extends to phonology,
favoring less "forceful" consonant clusters in Ponapean, and have pre-
sented some evidence suggesting that the people of both cultures attribute
similar expressive significance to the forcefulness of the different types of
cluster.
   In the paper on syntax I argue for another effect of social hierarchy on
the two languages. In the more differentiated and more hierarchical
society, Ponape, there is a stronger assumption that the listener has a
different point of view from the speaker. Consequently there is a greater
concern for speaking carefully and economically-to say what one has to
say but to avoid saying anything extra which might be misinterpreted. At
the same time there is less willingness to suffer interruption when one
"has the floor." Ponapean noun phrase construction contributes to these
values by its tightness: i.e., in the context of actual discourse it is usually
easier to infer the end of a Trukese noun phrase than its Ponapean equiv-
alent because of the differences in order of presentation of information. It
is therefore easier to interrupt the Trukese noun phrase before its comple-
tion, once the end has been inferred, or to prepare to seize the floor as
soon as it does end.
   More recently, in an unpublished paper presented at the 1967 annual
meeting of the American Anthropological Association in Washington,
D.C., I have examined some regularities in combinations of syntactic
rules noted by Joseph Greenberg (1963) in a diverse sample of world
languages, and have attempted an interpretation of these along lines
similar to those of my 1966 paper on Trukese and Ponapean noun phrase
construction. Greenberg's ~ample contains a wide range of syntactic
variables which show no difference between Trukese and Ponapean. A
                   Consonantal Sandhi in Trukese wui Ponapean      511
                                                       I


   number of these variables show a tendency toward scaling, suggesting to
   me a single underlying rhetorical variable on the order of "looseness/
   tightness" or "suspense/directness," as I have discussed previously for
   the noun phrase in Trukese and Ponapean. As I interpret Greenberg's
   data, Japanese is at one end of the scale and four languages-Berber,
   Hebrew, Welsh, and Zapotec-are at the other end.
      Unfortunately for my argument, Trukese noun phrase construction             !
                                                                                  I.
   turns out to be more like Japanese than does Ponapean, although in terms
   of social structure and values about speech Japanese culture appears to
  me to be closer to Ponapean than it is to Trukese-and I have conducted
  fieldwork in all three cultures. As far as dominant subject-verb-object
  (SVO) order is concerned, Japanese has what I regard as the most
  "suspenseful" of the three common orders, SOY, while Ponapean and
  Trukese are both like English, SVO, which is an intermediate order.
  (The other extreme order is VSO.) Probably greater weight should be
 given to the subject-verb-object order than to internal order of noun
 Phrases since either subject or object can itself be a complex noun phrase;
 SVO order therefore involves an ordering of greater chunks of the sen-
 tence. I have no simple explanation which satisfies me to explain these
 apparent inconsistencies. Possibly more focused fieldwork on the ethnog-
 raphy of speaking in these cultures would reveal that I have not chosen
 the correct rhetorical and social variables. There are a number of genres
 of language use (various kinds of narrative and songs, poetry, oratory,
 courting, gossip, age-graded discourse, etc.) in relation to which stylistic
 choices might be intensively investigated.
    However, I am still inclined to think that the scaling of certain syntactic
variables suggests the operation of some sort of universal rhetorical or
expressive factor. Further work with a larger number of variables and a
larger sample of world language may enable us ultimately to develop a
general social psychological theory for the interpretation of much lin-
guistic change.
===~~·-·-····'-·~=-....-..-- - - ~ ~




                        19

                        On the Mechanism
                        of Linguistic Change
                        WILLIAM LABOY




                        William Labov is a professor of linguistics at the Uni-
                        versity of Pennsylvania. He received his doctorate from
                        Columbia University where he also taught for a number
                        of years. He is a member of the Committee on Socio-
                        linguistics of the Social Science Research Council. His
                        research has concentrated on the observation and ex-
                        planation of linguistic change in English, analysis of
                        conversation ·and narrative, and the development of more
                        adequate linguistic analyses through the incorporation of
                        quantitative patterning and social features. The present
                        chapter is reprinted from a Georgetown University
                        monograph edited by Charles Kreidler ( 1965). Part of the
                        discussion of Labov's paper also reprinted there is re-
                        produced in an appendix at the end of the chapter. A
                        more detailed discussion of some of the notions in this
                        chapter is provided by Weinreich, Herzog, and Labov
                        (1968).              -
                           Some thirty years ago Edward Sapir objected that "In
                        linguistics, abstracied speech sounds, words and the
                        arrangement of words have come to have so authentic a
                        vitality that one can speak of 'regular sound changes' and
                        'loss of genders' without knowing or caring who opened
                        their mouths, at what time, to communicate what to
                        whom" ( I 949d:579). Sapir criticized the arbitrary bound-
                        aries drawn by "the many kinds of segmental scientists of


                        From "On the Mechanism of Linguistic Change." Reprinted from
                        Georgetown University Monograph Series on Languages and Lin-
                        guistics, No. 18, edited by Charles W. Kreidler, pp. 91-114 and pp.
                        131-132.

                                                       512


                                                                                              rd
                  On the Mechanism of Linguistic Change      513

       man," arguing that "we need never fear to modify, prune,
       extend, redefine, rearrange, and reorient our sciences of
       man as social being, for these sciences cannot point to an
       order of nature that has meaning apart from the directly
       experienced perceptions and values of the individual"
       (l 949d:578, 581). Much of the study of linguistic change
       has continued to deserve Sapir's stricture. Labov shows
       how research not afraid to "extend, redefine, rearrange,
      and reorient" current segmentations of the study of man
      can succeed in observing what has been pronounced
      unobservable, find regularity in what was thought to be
      confusion, and begin to answer some of the fundamental
      questions posed by the universal fact of linguistic change.
         The present chapter begins and ends with reference to
      data from the speech community. The implication is that
      data on the internal structure of the language, i.e., lin-
     guistic forms collected by the traditional elicitation pro-
     cedures, in which these forms are abstracted from ordi-
     nary verbal interaction, do not provide a proper basis for
     the explanation of linguistic change. One must have data
    on attitudes and use as well. Indeed the phrase means
    more than that. It is not enough simply to add (or cor-
    relate) information from the speech community to the
    linguistic analysis. The two kinds of data are interlocked
    and must be obtained and analyzed together. Note that
   the speech community is defined not by the presence or
   absence of a particular dialect or language but by the
   presence of a common set of normative values in regard
   to linguistic features. (One might speak of a criterion of
  social rather than merely "referential" intelligibility.)
       This concept of the data and conception of the speech
  community has led to the development of new and highly
  ingenious elicitation techniques capable of simulating
 some of the significant variations in social context which
 characterize everyday verbal interaction. Labov dis-
 covered that although individual speech varies greatly,
 New Yorkers are alike in the way in which they adapt
 their pronunciation and grammar in differing social situa-
tions and in the way in which they judge or evaluate the
social significance of the forms they hear. (See Labov
1966b for a full account of field techniques and results.)
Previous investigators who had confined themselves
simply to recording linguistic forms in formal interview
sessions had been defeated by the heterogeneity of what
514    Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

 they found and thought of New York only as a locale of
 great mixture of speech. Labov showed that underneath
 the heterogeneity of what people say is a considerable
 homogeneity of social meaning and of evaluation of what
  is said, New York City shows in perhaps extreme form
  what is true for any community (see e.g., that described
  by Blom and Gumperz, Chapter 14); a synchronic de-
  scription cannot be static, but must take the perspective
  called by Jakobson (1962) "dynamic synchrony."
      Labov's concern in this chapter is to develop a theory
  of some of the processes that contribute to the diversity
  within speech communities, while at the same time re-
  flecting the common evaluations that unite them. He is
  concerned first to show that sound change, a classic locus
  of linguistic theory, can indeed be observed and be de-
. scribed (as against some neogrammarian views), and then
   to show that its occurrence can be explained (a possibility
   dismissed, or trivialized, by some generative grammarians
   (Postal 1968:283-284)). Centrano the approach is recog-
   nition of a new concept, the linguistic variable, as the unit
   of change (see the Introduction and also Ervin-Tripp,
   Chapter 7). The linguistic variable is by definition a
   feature subject to social evaluation, hence requiring data
   from the speech community for its description, and at the
   same time making explanation possible (through con-
   comitant variation between the linguistic and social data).
    At any one time some features of a language will be
    subject to social evaluation, moving through the statuses
    of indicator, marker, and perhaps stereotype indicated in
    the outline of states of change.
       Linguistic change is seen as an adaptive process, as
    linguistic evolution. Its adequate study must deal with
    three problems, transition, embedding, and evaluation-
    finding the route, the sociolinguistic matrix, and the social
    meaning of a change. In both the studies reported here
    (Martha's Vineyard and New York City) self-identity is
    found to be at the root of linguistic change (see the Nor-
    wegian study by Blom and Gumperz, Chapter 14, and
     Bernstein, Chapter 16). In the first, native status as a
    Vineyarder is the key. In New York City socioeconomic
    class and, most of all, ethnic identity are most important.
     In both, of course, age enters (other work of Labov has
    formalized generation as one of the contextual features
     to which a linguistic rule is sensitive).
               On the Mechanism of Ling1iistic Change     515

      Notice the necessity of placing data in terms of the
   identity of the speaker and the context of speech. Only qy
   treating data as situated in these two respects could the
   patterning be discerned. Survey techniques were used to
   place the New York City speakers in terms of socio-
   economic class. Diverse modes of elicitation were used
  to deal with contextual style. Recognizing self-conscious-
  ness as the crucial factor, whose effects could not be
  eliminated, Labov proceeded to control for it, and indeed,
  to turn it to advantage. Four contextual styles were dif-
  ferentiated, reading of isolated words from a list giving
  the most self-conscious speech, the telling of an incident
  in which one's life had been in danger giving the least
  self-conscious. Statistical techniques were, of course,
  required to show the stable patterns that emerged, for
  these were patterns not of presence and absence of fea-
  tures but of greater and lesser incidence. Notice that it is
  not the absolute values of the percentages of a feature,
  according to class and context but the reliable (and valid)
  pattern of relationship between values that counts. An-
  other investigator or another day might show a different
 absolute but not a different relative incidence.
     Like Blom and Gumperz, Labov found people unaware
 of their own usage of language and holding values about
 speech in terms of which their usage would be stigmatized
 by the larger community. Such research gives a dynamic
 dimension to the thesis of the unconscious patterning of
 linguistic and other behavior developed by Boas, Sapir,
 and Levi-Strauss and indicates some specific explana-
 tions of that dimension, e.g., the relationship between
 hypercorrection and position just below the highest social
 level. The conflict between two sets of values (see Bern-
 stein, Chapter 17) is significant. In his general monograph
 Labov ( 1966b) speaks of the great linguistic insecurity of
the average New York speaker. participation in a partic-
ular linguistic change may be a sensitive index of social
mobility and struggle.
    Labov's research disproves the recurrent view that
linguistic change can be bifurcated between a purely
internal process of the origin of changes and an external
process of their spread, such that social factors enter only
into the second (see, most recently, Postal 1968:284).
The other view can be seen as an attempt to avoid recog-
nition of linguistics as partly a social science, as a field
      516    Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

       whose problems require some use of social science meth-
       ods for their solution. Such a view must ignore clear
       cases of social motivation of sound change (see Fischer
       1958; Hymes l 964d:450; as well as the Martha's Vine-
       yard case in this chapter), and retreat to a position from
       which the meaningfulness of linguistic change to "the
       directly experienced perceptions and values of the in-
       dividual" is either invisible or explained away (cf. Postal
       1968:283: "There is no more reason for languages to
       change than there is for automobiles to add fins one year
       and remove them the next").
          If the description and explanation of linguistic change
       require data beyond that with which most linguists are
       used to dealing, it is not, Labov stresses, multiplication of
       data in itself that matters but theoretically motivated
       selection of data, and rigor in its analysis. Additional
       related readings are provided by Malkiel ( 1960) and Mar-
       tinet ( 1952).


        Introduction

         This chapter outlines the approaches to the explanation of lin-
guistic change which are being followed in ou~ current research within the
context of the speech community. It is now clear that many theoretical
problems of linguistic structure cannot be resolved without data from the
speech community. This point of view is developed in detail in Labov
1964a. Here I will focus on the converse proposition-that linguistic
change cannot be explained by arguments drawn from purely internal
relations within the system, even if external, sociolinguistic relations are
recognized as additional conditioning factors. In the mechanism of lin-
guistic changes which we have observed, the two sets of relations are
interlocked in a systematic way.
  The investigations which form the basis for the present discussion are
studies of linguistic change on the island of Martha's Vineyard, and in
New York City; the principal focus will be on the process of sound
change. The chief techniques used in this research have been described in
several previous papers and publications, along with a certain amount of
the data and the findings (see Labov 1963, 1964a, 1964b, 1965, 1966a,
 1966b, 1968). The data to be presented here may be considered repre-
sentative of a much larger set of facts and correlations derived from these
studies.                                                                       /
   The problems of linguistic evolution. Despite the achievements of
                            On the Mechanism of Linguistic Change               517

 nineteenth century historical linguistics, many avenues to the study of
 linguistic change remain unexplored. In 1905, Meillet noted that all of the
 laws of linguistic history that had been discovered were mefely possi-
 bilities (Meillet 1921: 16): "It remains for us to discover the variables
 which permit or incite the possibilities thus recognized."

The problem as we face it today is precisely that which Meillet outlined
sixty years ago, for little progress has been made in ascertaining the
empirical factors which condition historical change. There has actually
been a retrograde movement in this respect in the sense that treatments of
linguistic change which are essentially ahistorical have become popular.
Chronological detail is deliberately set aside in such articles as those by
Pilch (1955) and Halle (1962).
   The chief problems of linguistic evolution might be summarized as five
questions:

          I. What are the causes of the continual origination of new lin-
          guistic changes?
          2. By what mechanism do changes proceed?
          3. Is there an adaptive function to linguistic evolution? 1
          4. Is there an over-all direction of linguistic evolution?
          5. What are the universal constraints upon linguistic change?

   One approach to linguistic evolution is to study changes completed in
 the past. This has, of course, been the major strategy of historical lin-
guistics, and it is the only possible approach to the last two questions-
the direction of linguistic evolution, and the universal constraints upon
change. On the other hand, the questions of the mechanism of change, the
inciting causes of change, and the adaptive functions of change are best
analyzed by studying in detail linguistic changes in progress. The mech-
anism of linguistic change will be the chief topic of the discussion to fol-
low; however, many of the conclusions will plainly be relevant to the
questions of inciting causes and adaptive functions of change, and it will
be apparent that more complete answers to these three questions will
require methods similar to those used ,here.
   An essential presupposition of this line of research is the claim that the
same mechanisms which operated to produce the large scale changes of
the past may be observed operating in the current changes taking place
around us.
   1 This question is all the more puzzling when we contrast linguistic with biological evolu-
tion. It is difficult to discuss the evolution of the plant and anim~1l kingdoms _without ~o~e
reference to adaptation to various environments. But what conceivable adaptive function 1s
served by the efllorescence of the Indo-European family? On this topic, see Labov (1964a)
and Hymes (1961 a).
        518    Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes



        A Strategy for the Study
        of Linguistic Changes in Progress
          Although answers to the first three questions given above are the
 ultimate goals of our current research, they do not represent the actual
 strategy used. For the empirical study of changes in progress, the task can
 be sub-divided into three separate problems which jointly serve to answer
 the questions raised above.
     I. The transition problem is to find the route by which one stage of a
 linguistic change has evolved from an earlier stage. We wish to trace
 enough of the intervening stages so that we can eliminate all but one of the
 major alternatives. Thus questions of the regularity of sound change, of
 grammatical influence on sound change (Malkiel 1960), of "push chains"
 versus "pull chains" (Martinet 1952), of steady movement versus sudden
 and discontinuous shifts, are all aspects of the transition problem.
    2. The embedding problem is to find the continuous matrix of social
 and linguistic behavior in which the linguistic change is carried. The
principal route to the solution is through the discovery of correlations
between elements of the linguistic system and between those elements
and the non-linguistic system of social behavior. The correlations are
established by strong proof of concomitant variation: that is, by showing
that a small change in the independent variable is regularly accompanied
by a change of the linguistic variable in a predictable direction.
    The concept of the linguistic variable is that developed in Labov 1964c.
The definition of such a variable amounts to an empirical assertion of
co-variation, within or without the linguistic system. It appears that the
fundamental difference between an explanation of a linguistic change and
a description is that a description makes no such assertion. I_n terms of a
description of change, such as that provided by Halle (1962), there is no
greater probability of the change taking place in the observed direction as
in the reverse direction. Note that the embedding problem is presented
here as a single problem, despite the fact that there are two distinct as-
pects: correlations within the linguistic system and with elements outside
the system. The main body of this chapter provides justification for this
decision.
    3. The evaluation problem is to find ·the subjective (or latent) correlates
of the objective (or manifest) changes which have been observed. The
indirect approach to this problem correlates the general attitudes and
aspirations of the informants with their linguistic behavior. The more
direct approach is to measure the unconscious subjective reactions of the             /
informants to values of the linguistic variable itself.                           )
   With tentative solutions to these problems in hand, it would be pos-
                                                                             -~-·,---~-.--:-·--




                         On the Mechanism vf Linguistic Change     519
                                                                                            ':i
  sible to provide an explanation of a linguistic change which answers the
  three questions of inciting cause, mechanism, and adaptive function. As in
  any other investigation, the value of an explanation rises in relation to its
  generality, but only to the extent that it rests upon a foundation ofreliable
  and reproducible evidence.


          The Observation of Sound Change
            The simplest data that will establish the existence of a linguistic
    change is a set of observations of two successive generations of speakers
    -generations of comparable social characteristics which represent stages
   in the evolution of the same speech community. Hermann (1929) obtained
   such data at Charmey in 1929 by developing the original observations of
   Gauchat (1905), obtained in 1899. We have such data for Martha's Vine-
   yard, adding the 1961 observations to the 1933 data of the Linguistic
   Atlas (Kurath 1941). For New York City, we add the current data of
   1963 to the Linguistic Atlas data of 1940; in addition, we have many
   other reports, including the excellent observations of Babbitt in 1896, to
   add further time depth to our analysis (Frank 1948; Kurath and Mc David
  Jr. 1961; Hubbell 1949; Babbitt 1896).          '                           '
     Solutions to the transition problem proposed here will depend upon
  close analysis of the distribution of linguistic forms in apparent time-that
  is, along the dimension formed by the age groups of the present popula-
 tion. Such an analysis is possible only because the original simple descrip-
 tion of change in real time enables us to distinguish age-grading in the
 present population from the effects of linguistic change (Hockett 1950).
     The evidence obtained in the research reported here indicates that the
 regular process of sound change can be isolated and recorded by observa-
 tions across two generations. This process is characterized by a i·apid
 development of some units of a phonetic sub-system, while other units
 remain relatively constant. It affects word classes as a whole rather than
 individual words: yet these classes may be defined by a variety of condi-
 tions, morphophonemic and grammatkal as well as phonetic. It is regular,
 but more in the outcome than in its inc'eption or its development. Further-
 more, it appears that the process of sound change is not an autonomous
 movement within the confines of a linguistic system but rather a complex
response to many aspects of human behavior.
    Some comment is required on the possibility of observing regular sound
since arguments inherited from the neogrammarian controversy have
impeded the progress of empirical research in this area. The inheritors of
the neogrammarian tradition, who should be most interested in the em-
pirical study of regular change in progress, have abandoned the arena of
             520   Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

        meaningful research in favor of abstract and speculative arguments. In-
        deed, Bloomfield (1933:347, 365) and Hockett (1958:439, 444) have
        maintained that phonetic change cannot in principle be observed by any
        of the techniques currently available. Hockett writes: "No one has yet
       observed sound change: we have only been able to detect it via its con-
       sequences. We shall see later that a mor~ nearly direct observation would
       be theoretically possible, if impractical, but any ostensible report of such
       an observation so far must be discredited." His theoretical proposal is
       that "over a period of fifty years we made, each month, a thousand ac-
      curate acoustic records . . . all from the members of a tight-knit com-
      munity." The suggestion to multiply the data in this way is not necessarily
      helpful, as the experience of sociological survey analysts has shown: for
      relatively small numbers are needed to measure change in a population if
     the bias of selection is eliminated or minimized. Otherwise, we merely
     multiply the errorsor   measurement.
         Hockett proceeds to identify sound change with a level of random
     fluctuations in the action of the articulatory apparatus, without any in-
     herent direction, a drift of the articulatory target which has no cognitive,
    expressive, or social significance. According to Hockett, the variables
    responsible for sound change include "the amount of moisture in the
    throat, nose and mouth of the speaker, random currents in his central
    nervous system, muscular tics . . . the condition of the hearer's outer
    ear [presence of wax or dirt]" (1958:443-444). All of the empirical ob-
    servations of change in progress which have been reported are explained
   as the results of a complex process of borrowing, and are relegated to a
   type of linguistic behavior known as the fluctuation or conflict of forms.
   No claims are made for the regularity of this process, and so the basic
   tenet of the regularity of sound change has been deprived of all empirical
   significance. Furthermore, the changes which actually are observed are re-
  garded as unsystematic phenomena, to be discussed with anecdotal evi-
  dence, subject to forces "quite outside the linguist's reach," factors which
  '"'elude our grasp," fluctuations "beyond our powers" to record (Bloom-
  field l 933:343-368).
      The evidence of current research suggests that this retreat was pre-
 mature, that the regular process of sound change can be observed by
 empirical methods. The refinements in methodology called for are not the
 mechanical. elaborations suggested by the writers cited above; for the
 mere multiplication of data only confounds analysis and perpetuates the
 bias of selection. It is rigor in the analysis of a population and in the selec-
tion of informants which is required. Furthermore, we need ingenuity in
the resolution of stylistic variation, to go beyond the sterile method of
endless dissection into idiolects. With such techniques, we find that reg-
ularity emerges where only confusion was seen before. Random fluctua-
tions in articulation can certainly be found: indeed, this is the level of
                                    On tlze Mechanism of Linguistic Change             521
                                                                                        I
           "noise" which prevents us from predicting the form of every utterance
           which our informants will make. But it would be an error to ascribe a
           major role to such fluctuations in the economy of linguistic change. The
          forces which direct the observed changes appear to be of an entirely dif-
          ferent order of magnitude, and the changes take place much more rapidly
          than any process of random drift could account for.
            Thus the following table contrasts the two points of view:

                                                         Fluctuation of    Ultimate
                   Neogrammarian:        Sound change
                                                             forms        regularity
                                         Sublinguistic                     Ultimate
                   Present discussion:                   Sound change
                                         fluctuations                     regularity

           A single example of a sound change recently observed will be used to
        illustrate the general approach to solving the transition, embedding, and
I       evaluation problems. This example is one of the simplest cases-that of
I      the centralization of (aw) on Martha's Vineyard. In the development of
'      this case, some new evidence will be presented on the mechanism of
'      sound changes which has not been published before.



               The Centralization of (aw) on Martha's Vineyard

                 We begin with a clear-cut case for the existence of a linguistic
         change from observations in real time. In 1933, Guy Lowman found no
         more than the barest trace of centralization of /aw/; the significant varia-
        tion observed was the fronting of /aw/ from [aUJ to [re U]. In 1961, a
        comparable set of older eighth generation descendants of Yankee settlers
        from the same villages showed a very pronounced centralization of /aw/-
        now clearly the variable (aw). (In the notation used here, parentheses in-
       dicate the linguistic variable, while slashes indicate bi-unique phonemes
       and brackets phonetic notation as usual. Thus (aw) represents the variable
       in general; (aw-2) is a particular value of,the variable; (aw)-22 is an aver-
      age index score for the variable.)           '
          The transition problem is studied through a detailed examination of the
      distribution of forms through apparent time-that is, through the various
      age levels in the present population. In this case, as in many others, the
     original sample was too small to allow us to study differences in age levels;
     only four informants were chosen on Martha's Vineyard in I 933. The
     first step in the analysis is to construct a quantitative index for discrete
     values of the variable. The original impressionistic scale had six levels.
     Instrumental measurements of a sample of these ratings indicated that
    four levels could be distinguished with a high degree of conformity to
    formant positions (see Labov 1963 :286-287).
         522   Genesis, lvlai11te11a11ce, and Change of Linguistic Codes

                                  aw-0        [aU]
                                  aw-I        [a 1. U]
                                  aw-2_,      [uU]
                                  aw-3        [~U]

The index of centralization was constructed from this scale by averaging
the numerical values assigned to each variant. Thus (aw)-00 would mean
no centralization at all, while (aw)-3.00 would mean consistent centraliza-
tion at the level of [~U]. This index was applied to interviews with 69
informants by rating each of the words in which (aw) occurred. The first
approach to the transition problem can then be made by correlating aver-
age (aw) inde;x. scores for these interviews with the age level of the
speakers. The first three columns of Table 19.1 show a regular correla-
tion, in which the centralization index rises regularly for four successive
age levels.


         table I 9. I

Centralization Indexes by Age Level
Generation          Age level          (aw)-             (ai)-

   la                   Over 75        0.22              0.25
   lb                   61-75          0.37              0.35
   Ila                  46-60          0.44              0.62
   lib                  31-45.         0.88              0.81



   The over-all tendency of Table 19.1 represents an amalgamation of
many different types of speakers and many different trends in the use of
(aw). Figure 19.1 presents a more detailed analysis of the transition prob-
lem for a critical sub-group. Here are displayed the percentage distribu-
tion of lexical items for eight individuals from 92 to 31 years of age. The
horizontal axes show the four coded levels of the variable (aw). The
vertical axes are the percentages of lexical items used with each variant.
The vocabulary is broken into two sections that are tabulated separately:
the solid line represents words in which (aw) is followed by a voiceless
obstruent, as in out, house, about, 1noutlz; the broken line represents all
other words (and principally those ending in a nasal, as in town.found, or
with no consonant final, as in now, how, etc.) [The phonetic conditioning
was actually much more complex than this, and both following and pre-
ceding consonants are involved (Labov 1963 :290).]
   The first diagram, a, in Fig. 19.1 is not that of an individual but shows
the composite results for the four Linguistic Atlas informants interviewed
in 1933. They show only the barest trace of centralization. The secol).d
                               (aw)                    (aw)                        (aw)
                         0            2     3    0    I       2    3               index



  a. Four LANE                                  15                       _co       0.06
    informants,                                                        elsewhere
                                                22
    average 65 years.




  h. Mr. H. H., Sr.,                            15    2                  _co       0.10
     92 years.                                  14    I                elsewhere




  c. Mrs. S. H.,                                 8    2                  _co       0.20
     87 years.                                  12    3                elsewhere




  d. Mr. E. M.,                                 19    2       4          _co       0.52
     83 years.                                  20    3       3        elsewhere




                                                 I    6       4          _co       I.I 8
  c. Mr. H. H., Jr.,                             4    8       2
     60 years.                                                         elsewhere




  f. Mr. D.P.,                                         3   JO            _co       1.1 I
     57 years.                                   9    15    3          elsewhere




  g. Mr. P. N.,                                               17   2     _co       1.3 I
     52 years.                                   IO   6                elsewhere




  h. Mr. E. P.,                                               9    9     _co       2.1 I
     31 years.                                   7    2                elsewhere




           figure 19.1
Stages in the centralization of (aw) on Martha's Vineyard, Massa-
chusetts

                                          523
        524    Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

diagram, b, is that of the oldest informant of 1961, a man 92 years old.
The average age of the Atlas informants was 65 years; Mr. H. H., Sr.,
would have been 64 years,old-in 1933, and so he is of the same age group.
His centralization profile is quite similar to that of the Atlas informants
in a. Inc, we have an 87-year-old woman who shows only a slight increase
in centralization. Diagram d, Mr. E. M., 83 years old, indicates a small but
distinct increase in the occurrence of variant (aw-2). Mr. H. H., Jr., in e, is
considerably younger; he is 61 years old, the first representative of the
next generation since he is the son of Mr. H. H., Sr. Here we have a
marked increase in centralization, with both classes of words centered
about a norm of (aw-1). In J: Mr. D. P., 57 years old, shows a distinct
difference between words ending in voiceless obstruents and all others;
the first are now centered about a norm of (aw-2), while the second group
is concentrated at (aw-1). This process is carried furthering, the speech
of Mr. P. N., 52 years old, who shows perfect complementary distribu-
tion. Before voiceless obstruents, /aw/ has an allophone which is almost
always (aw-2), while before other terminals it is usually uncentralized.
And at this point( there is no overlap in the distribution. Finally, in /z, the
most extreme case of centralization, we see an even sharper separation:
this is Mr. E. P., 31 years old, the son of Mr. D. P. in .f.
    On the right hand side of Fig. 19. l are the figures for the actual numbers
of lexical items observed, and the composite index scores for each of the
eight cases. It may be noted that (aw) is only one-third as frequent as (ay);
the regularity which appears here does not require a vast corpus of ob-
 servations. The regularity emerges through the controlled selection of
informants, methods of elicitation, and of recording the data.
    The eight diagrams of Fig. 19.1 represent the most homogeneous type
 of population. All of the speakers are Yankee descendants of the original
 settlers of the island, all are interrelated, many from the same families,
 with similar attitudes towards the island. All had rural upbringing, and
 worked as carpenters or fisherman, with one exception. Thus the con-
 tinuous development of centralization represents the very model of a
 neogrammarian sound change,. accomplished within two generations.
    The embedding problem was first approached by correlating the cen-
 tralization of the obviously related variables (ay) and (aw)-that is, the
 change of (aw) was embedded in the system of upgliding diphthongs. The
Atlas records indicate a moderate degree of centralization in the 1930s,
 so that we know that the centralized forms of (ay) preceded the rise of
 (aw). The fourth column of Table 19.1 shows a close correlation of the
 two variables, with (ay) slightly in the lead at first, but (aw) becoming
 more dominant at the end. This pattern was repeated when the variables
 were correlated with a number of independent extra-linguistic factors: the
 occupation, education, and geographic location of the speaker, and most
 importantly, the ethnic group to which he belonged. The significant dif-
                           On the Mechanism of Linguistic Change             525

 ferences in the transition rates of these various sub-groups allowed the
 following statement of a solution to the embedding problem:

 The centralization of (aw) was part of a more general change which began with
 the centralization of (ay). This initial change proceeded from a moderate level of
 (ay) centralization which was probably a regional recessive trait inherited from the
 original settlers of the island. The increase of centralization of (ay) began in a
 rural community of Yankee fisherman descended directly from these original
 settlers. From there, it spread outward to speakers of the same ethnic group in
 other occupations and in other communities. The structurally symmetrical vari-
 able (aw) began to show similar tendencies early in this process. The change was
·also adopted by the neighboring Indian group at Gay Head, and a generation
 later, spread to the large Portuguese group in the more settled sections of the
 island. In these two ethnic groups, centralization of (aw) overtook and surpassed
 centralization of (ay).

     Figure 19.1 would lead us to believe that the phonetic environment of
  (aw) was a powerful factor in the initiation of the sound change. More-
 over, we can observe that the centralization of (ay) also showed a strong
 tendency towards phonetic conditioning in Generation lb, similar to that
 displayed for (aw) in Generation Ilb. 2 However, phonetic restriction on
 (ay) was overridden in the following generation, so that Generation I I
 shows a uniform norm for (ay) in all phonetic environments. This develop-
 ment would support the view that phonetic conditioning does not play a
 significant role as an inciting cause of the centralization of (aw), but acts
 rather as a conditioning factor which may be eliminated by further change.
    On Martha's Vineyard, the evaluation problem was approached by
 analyzing a number of clues to the subjective attitudes towards island
 life which appeared in the course of the interviews. Attitudes toward
 summer tourists, toward unemployment insurance, toward work on the
mainland, toward other occupational and ethnic groups, were correlated
with data obtained from community leaders and historical records, and
then with the linguistic variables. It appeared that the rise of (aw) was
correlated with the successive entry into the main stream of island life of
groups that had previously been partially excluded. It was concluded that
a social value had been (more or less arbitrarily) associated with the
centralization of (ay) and (aw), and that social value could best be ex-
pressed as "native status as a Vineyarder." Thus to the extent that an
individual felt able to claim and maintain status as a native Vineyarder,
he adopted increasing centralization of (ay) and (aw). Sons who had tried
to earn a living on the mainland, and afterwards returned to the island

  2 This phonetic conditioning is more in the nature of a continuum than that for (aw). The
complete data for a speaker of the same age and background as Mr. H. H., Jr. of Fig. 19.1
are given in Labov (1963 :289).
         526     Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

developed an even higher degree of centralization than their fathers had
used. But to the extent that a Vineyarder abandoned his claim to stay on
the island and earn his living there, he also abandoned centralization and
returned to the standard uncentralized forms.
  The solution to. the evaluation problem is a statement of the social
significance of the changed form-that is, the function which is the direct
equivalent of the meaning of the form in its grammatical function. In the
developments described here, the grammatical function of /ay/ and /aw/
has remained constant. It is plain that the non-grammatical (or non-refer-
ential) functions which are carried by these phonological elements are
the essential factors in the mechanism of the change. This conclusion can
be generalized to many other instances of more complex changes in which
the net result is a radical change of grammatical function. The sound
change observed on Martha's Vineyard did not produce phonemic change,
in which units defined by grammatical function were merged or split. But
many of the changes in progress that have been observed in New York
City did produce such mergers and splits on the level of the bi-unique
phoneme.a One such change is the raising of (oh), the vowel of law, talk,
off, more, etc., which will serve to illustrate many aspects of the mech-
anism of linguistic change not relevant to the simpler example on Martha's
 Vineyard.


          The Raising of ( oh) in New York City

        It was not possible to make a direct attack upon the transition
problem in New York City. Although the records of the Linguistic Atlas
showed sporadic raising of (oh) at a fairly low level, the Atlas informants
in New York City were not selected systematically enough so that we
could construct a comparable sample in 1963.
  Convenience was apparently a greater factor in the selection of Atlas
informants in New York than on Martha's Vineyard. The great bulk of
the New York population was poorly represented in the sample, including
the working class and lower middle class. The old-family stock used for
Atlas interviews represents only a very small fraction of the ethnic com-
position of the city, at most 1 or 2 percent. Furthermore, an over-all com-
parison of the usage of this variable by older and younger speakers did not
show the clear-cut and regular progression which we saw for (aw) on
Martha's Vineyard. It was suspected that the reason for this difficulty was

    3
      The far-reaching shifts and mergers observed in the long and ingliding vowel system of
 New York City, to be discussed here, do not affect the morphophonemic system. The de-
 tailed distribution of the variables in the process of change appear to provide evidence for
 the systematic status of the bi-unique phoneme. See Labov ( 1964a) for discussion.
                        On the Mechanism of Linguistic Change     527

 the greater tendency towards stylistic variation among New Yorkers, and
 the heterogeneity of the population in terms of socio-economic class and
 ethnic membership. Therefore it was necessary to attack the embedding
 problem first, before the transition problem.
    The variable (oh) is a part of the system of long and ingliding vowels in
 the vernacular pattern of New York City speech which is essentially
 r-less: that is, where final and pre-consonantal /r/ does not occur as a
 consonantal glide.· Thus (oh) occurs in the word class of law, talk, broad,
 caught, off, and 1nore, four, board, etc. To establish a quantifiable index,
 five variants were coded as follows:

                             (oh-1)     [U:"]
                             (oh-2)     [0:J.:,+'J
                             (oh-3)     [:,:-1.•J
                             ( oh-4)    [ :,: ]
                             ( oh-5)    [o:J

  The codification of these variants can be assisted by the use of some
  modal reference points. (oh-1) is at the level of the vowel of(r-less) sure;
 (oh-3) is the level of the most common Northern vowel in (r-pronouncing)
 or, nor; (oh-4) at cardinal LP.A. [:,]; (oh-5) at the level of eastern New
 England cot. The (oh) index score was established by taking the numerical
 average of the variants recorded in any given portion of speech, and
 multiplying by ten. Thus the consistent use of (oh-2) would give a score of
 (oh)-20, and a consistent use of (oh-4), a score of (oh)-40.
    A method was developed in the New York City study for isolating a
 range of well-defined contextual styles in the speech of individual in-
 formants, and average index scores were determined for each style. A
 systematic approach to the sampling of a large urban population was
 utilized, embodying the techniques of survey methodology, and average
 index scores for various sub-groups of the sample population were de-
 termined for each style. The embedding problem was then attacked by
 correlating the five chief linguistic variables each with each other, and
 with other elements of the linguistic system, with the level of stylistic
variation in which they were recorded, and with the inµependent variables
of socio-economic class (occupation, education and income), sex, ethnic
group, and age level. (The embedding problem is treated here as one
problem, not two, in accordance with the general logic of this chapter.)
   Correlations of (oh) with socio-economic class revealed that the ir-
regular distribution of (oh) in the population as a whole was partly due to
the fact that the change had not yet affected all social classes. Figure 19.2
is a style stratification diagram for (oh) in which the transition state of
this variable can be seen in synchronic section. The horizontal axis repre-
sents the ten socio-economic levels used for this analysis, grouped in-
formally into lower class, working cl:,~ss, lower middle class, and upper
         528       Ge nesis, Maint enance , and Change of Linguistic Codes

                 Average (oh) im.l ex score s
             1 5 ..-----~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~                                                              .....




                         • ••• • • • • • Reading style
                         • • • Careful speech



               JS '--~......~~-'----~.__~_...~~-'-~~"--~--'-~~-'
                  0                        2          J    4      5                    6      7- 8               9
                                                   SOCIOECONOMIC CLASS



                                       0       I   2       J     4    5     6        7-8             9

            Soc ioeco nomi c                                              Lower m ill <l le   Upper m idd le
                                     Lower class         Working class
              class                                                          class              class
            Stylisti c
                                           None             Sli ght          Extreme             Moderate
               stratification
            (oh) in casual
              speech                       Low                 High             High                 Low

          fi gure 19.2
Sty le stratifica tion of (o h) fo r nine socio-eco nomic sub-classes



middle class. The vertical ax is represents the average (o h) index sco res:
the lower val ues of (oh) are at the top , representing the higher, closer
vowels, and the higher values of (oh) are at the bottom , indicating more
open vowe ls. The index scores for each socio-economic group are entered
on the diagram for each styli stic context, and values for the same styl e
are conn ected along straight lines.
   Figure 19.2 indicates that (oh) is not a significant variable for lower
class speakers, who do not use particularly hi gh values of thi s vowel and
show no styli stic stratification at all. Working class speakers show a recent
stage in the rai sing of (oh): very hi gh vowels in casual speech, but other-
wi se very little stratification in the more formal styles , and little tendency
 towards the extreme, hypercorrect (oh-4) and (oh-5). But lower midd le
                                       On !he M echanism r~f Linguistic C hange      529

 class speakers show the most developed state of the sound c ha nge, with
 high valu es in cas ual speec h, a nd extreme styli stic stratification. F inally,
 the uppe r middle class group is more mode rate in all respects than the
 lower middl e cl ass, still retaining the patte rn of stylistic stratifi cation.
    The ethni c group me mbers hip of N ew York C ity speakers is even more
 relevant to their use of (oh) 'th a n socio-economic class. Figure 19. 3 shows .
 th e differences be tween speakers of Jewish and Italia n background in the


                I       Ave ra ge (oh) index
                    6

                18 1--~ ~ ~~ .................;:---~ ~ ~ ~--I

               20 1--~ ~"'--:.n..-..--=--:=-c--~~~-"'111..c~ ~-1




                                       - - - - Italians

               28 ,...__~~"--~~"--~~........~~....i...~,..........,
                    0- 2               3- 5      6- 8            9
                    Lower             Workin g  Lower         Upper
                                                middle        middle
                                     SOCIOECONOMIC CLASS

           fig tll'e 19 .3
C lass stratificatio n diagram fo r (o h) by ethnic gro up in causa l speec h


  treatmen t of (o h) in casual speec h. For all but the upper middl e class, the
 Jewi sh group uses higher leve ls of (o h). The Negro group does not show
 a ny significant response to the variable (oh) , and shows a constant index
 of performance at a low level. As noted above, the lower class in general
 is simil a rly indifferen t to (o h). T able 19. 2 s hows J ewish a nd Itali a n ethni c
 groups on ly, with the lowe r class excluded. Table 19.2 shows that both
Jewi sh and Italia n speakers have participated in the raising of (o h) , but the
 increase see ms to have reached its maxi mum early for th e Jewi sh group ,
and later for the Itali an group. A separate solu tion for th e transitio n prob-
 lem is therefore required for eac h ethnic group.
    The tran sition problem for the Itali an group can be seen a nalyzed in
 F igure 19.4. The procession of values is not abso lutely regular since
socio-economic membership , sex, and othe r factors affect the valu es;
neve rtheless, there is a steady upward moveme nt from the o ldest speakers
o n the right to th e youngest spea kers on the left. Within the present sa m-
pl e of N ew York C ity spea kers, thi s is the fin est reso luti on of the transi-
tion problem which can be obtained:'

  " Figure 19.4 inc lud es Ita lian inform ants who refu sed the original int er view, a nd w hose
speec h pattern s we re sa mpl ed by th e te levi sio n inte rview , as described in Appendi x D of
Labov ( 1966b).
          530      Genesis, Maint enance, and C hange of Linguistic Codes

          table /9 .2

A verage (oh) Indexes by Age Level and Ethnic Group in C asual S peech
A ,:e                 .f e lV.\'             l taliw1.1·

 8- 19                   17                     18
20-35                    18                     18
36-49                    17                     20
50-59                    15                     20
60-                      25                     30



   The embedding problem for (oh) requires an intricate set of correla-
tion s with other elements in the linguistic system, in addition to the extra-
linguistic correlations exemplified above. We find that (oh) is firmly
embedded within the sub-s ystem of long and ingliding vowel s, and al so
related structurally to other vowel sub-systems. Quantitative studie s of
these relation s fall into five sets:
   I. There is a strong correlation between the height of (oh) and the
height of the corresponding front ingliding vowel (eh) in the word class of
bad, ask, dan ce, etc. Thi s variable originated as a rai sing of /reh/ , but

               A vcrngc (oh) index                                •women        • Men




               201--l-+--4--Hll~-!--1-4.......--l--+--l--l--l--l--+---1-+--l--+-+--+--I




               25 l-la+--1-+-al-+-!--hAIA-+-4-~            a-J---1--+---l-+-+-+-+--+--I




                 IO                20   30           40          50        60        70
                                               Age in ye ar s


          .fi g ure 19.4
Distribut io n of (oh) ind e x scores fo r Italian subjects by age
                          On the M echanism o.f Linguistic: Change   531


     early in the evo luti on of New York City speech it merged with /eh/ , the
     word class of bare, bared, where, etc. The relation between (eh) and (oh)
     is strikingly parall el to that of (ay) and (aw) on Martha's Vineyard, the
     variab le (oh) became specialized in the usage of a particular ethnic group:
     to the extent that the Italian group s hows higher use of (eh) in casual
     speech , the Jewi sh group shows higher values of (oh), until the difference
    is largely resolved in the youngest age level by merger of (eh) and /ih/ ,
    (oh) and /uh/.
        2. The variable (oh) also has close relation s with the higher ingliding
    vowel /uh/. As we observe higher and higher variants of (oh) in the casual
    speech of the younger informants, it becomes apparent that a merger of
    (oh) and /uh/ is imminent. This merger has undoubtedly occurred in the
    youngest speakers in our sample from the worki ng class and lower middle
   class. In fact, we have many informants who show the merger even in the
   mo st forma l styles, in the reading of isolated word li sts, and we can con-
   clude a fortiori that the merger exists in casual speech . C lose study of the
   variants of their casual speech shows the merger as an accompli shed fact:
   though most li steners who are not conscious of the overlap wi ll hear beer
  as higher than bear, it is in fact indistingui shable out of context.
       3. There is also a close correlation between (oh) and /ah/ , the long
  ten se vowel heard in guard, fath er, car, etc. The variab le (ah) represents
  the choi ce of back or center options for the subclasses of hot, heart, hod,
  and hard (with the last two generall y homonymou s); lower values of (oh)
  are correlated with low center positions of the vowels in these word
  classes. This corre lation is independent of socio-economic class or ethnic
 group. Whereas (oh) is firmly embedded in the socio-linguistic structure of
 the speech community, /ah/ is not. As a linguistic variable, (ah) seems to
 be a function only of the height of (oh): a purely internal variable. [The
 quantitative correlatio ns are given in Chapter I 2 of Labov 1966b. The
 relationship of (oh) and (ah) held even within a single ethnic group.]
      4. (oh) is also related to the variable height of the vowel in boy, coil,
 etc., (oy) in the front upgliding system. The height of the vowels in coil
 and ca ll seem to vary directly together in casual speech , but only (oh) is
 corrected to lower values in more formal styles. (oh) carries the major
 burden of social significance, and is the focus of non-systematic press ure
from above.
     5. Finally, we find that (oh) and (oy) are jointly correlated with the
variable (ay), which represents the backing or fronting of th e first element
of the diphthong in my, why, side, etc. High values of (oh) and (oy) are
correlated with back values of (ay), and low va lu es of (oh) and (oy) with
low center values of (ay).
    Beyond these immediate correlations, there are more indirect, diffu se
relation s with such variables as (aw) and /ih/ , through which (oh) is co n-
nec ted with all of the other vowels in the vernacular syste m of New York
        532     Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

City speech. This is not the place to pursue the full details of this intricate
set of structural correlations within the linguistic system; however, it
should be apparent that a full solution to the embedding problem will
reveal the ways in which the internal relations of linguistic elements de-
termine the direction of sound change, in a manner which provides em-
pirical confirmation for the view of linguistic structure expressed by
Martinet (1955). (See the Append1x.(We can summarize the most im-
portant relations that center about (oh) in the following notation, which
defines the structural units on the left hand side of the equations as lin-
guistic variables:

     (oh)= f1(St, C, E, A, Sx, (eh))              St= Style
     (ah)=f2((oh))                                 C = Socio-economic class
     (oy) = f3 ( (oh))                             E = Ethnic group
     (ay) =f1((ah)) =f4(f2((oh)))                  A= Age level
     (ay) = f5( (oy)') = f5(f3( (oh)))            Sx = Sex

   In New York City, the evaluation problem was approached more
directly than on Martha's Vineyard; The unconscious subjective reactions
of the informants to each of the variables were determined. The details of
this method have been presented elsewhere. 5 In general, we can say that
the reliability of the te'sts can be measured by the high degree of uni-
formity showed by New Yorkers in contrast to the scattered results from
those raised outside of New York City.
   The subjective reaction responses to (oh) give us a clear view of the
social significance of the variable, as shown in Table 19.3. The majority
of informants responded to the test in a way consistent with the stigma-
tized status of high (oh). 6 Just as the solution to the embedding problem
showed no significant stylistic response to (oh) for lower class speakers,
here we find that lower class speakers showed no significant (oh)-negative
response. The other groups showed (oh)-negative response in proportion
to the average height of (oh) used in their own casual speech, and to the
 degree of stylistic stratification in their speech patterns. This result il-
 lustrates a principle which holds quite generally in New York City: that
 those who used the highest percentage of a stigmatized form in casual
 speech were the most sensitive in stigmatizing it in the speech of others.
 Thus the lower middle class speakers between the ages of 20 and 39, who
 use the highest values of (oh) in their own casual speech, show 100%

   5 In addition to Chapter XI of Labov (1966b), the most detailed presentation of.this

 method is in "Subjective Dimensions of a Linguistic Change in Progress," a paper given
 before the Linguistic Society of America in Chicago, December, 1963.
   6 The (oh)-negative response shown here consisted of rating three speakers lower on a

 scale of job suitability when they pronounced sentences with high, close (oh) vowels, as
 compared to sentences with no significant variables. Those making the ratings were unaware
 that they were rating the same speakers.



                                                                                               !

                                                                                              td
                                  011 the Mechanism of Linguistic Change               533

                  table 19.3

      Percentage of (oh)-Negative Response by Socio-economic Class and Age Level
                                                                                       I
                                     Working         Lower Middle       Upper Middle
                    Lower Class       Class             Class              Class
      Age Level      [SEC 0-2]      [SEC 3-4]         [SEC 5-8]           [SEC 9]

       20-39            25             80                  100              60
       40-59            18             60                   62              57
       60-              33            [00]

                                                           N
                                                 4    10       II   5
                                                11    15       13   7
                                                 6     I


       (oh)-negative response. Similarly, we find that the percentages of (oh)-
      negative response among Jewish and Italian speakers is proportionate to
      the height of (oh) in casual speech.
         This solution to the evaluation problem can hardly be called satisfac-
      tory. It is not clear why a group of speakers should adopt more and more
      extreme forms of a speech sound which they themselves stigmatize as
      bad speech. (Many subjects reacted to the test with violent and unrealistic
      ratings; as, for example, marking a person who used high vowels for
      coffee and chocolate as not even speaking well enough to hold a factory
     job.) Some further explanation must be given.
         First of all, it has become clear that very few speakers realize that they
     use the stigmatized form themselves. They hear themselves as using the
     prestige forms which occur sporadically in their careful speech and in
     their reading of isolated word lists. Secondly, the subjective responses
     tapped by our test are only the overt values-those which conform to the
     value systems of the dominant middle class group. There are surely other
     values, at a deeper level of consciousness, which reinforce the vernacular
     speech forms of New York City. We have not yet measured these more
     obscure forms systematically, but through anecdotal evidence we can be
     sure of their existence-values which cluster about the themes of group
    identification, masculinity, friendship ties, and so on.
        In the case of the alternate pr~ference of Jewish and Italian ethnic
    groups for (oh) and (eh), we can put forward a reasonable suggestion
    based upon the mechanism of hypercorrection. Hypercorrection is used
    here not to indicate the sporadic and irregular treatment of a word class
    but the movement of an entire word class beyond the target point set by
    the prestige model. This mechanism is evident on Martha's Vineyard, as
    well as in New York. The influence of the Yiddish sub-stratum leads to
    a loss of the distinction between low back rounded and unrounded vowels


I


~
        534   Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

in first-generation Jewish speakers of English, so that cup and coffee have
the same vowel. In second-generation speakers of Jewish descent, the
reaction against this tendency leads to a hypercorrect exaggeration of the
distinction, so that (oh) becomes raised, tense, and over-rounded. A
parallel argument applies to Italian speakers. This suggestion is all the
more plausible since hypercorrection has been demonstrated to be an
important mechanism of linguistic c.hange in a variety of circumstances.
(I am indebted to Marvin Herzog for this suggestion.)


        The Mechanism of Sound Change
         Solutions to the transition, embedding, and evaluation problems
have been illustrated by two examples, drawn from Martha's Vineyard
and New York City. It is possible to apply the results of our work with
these and other variables to a provisional answer to the question: what is
the mechanism by which sound change proceeds? The following outline
is based upon analysis of twelve sound changes: three on rural Martha's
Vineyard, and nine in urban New York City. The stages suggested here
are necessarily ordered in approximately the manner listed, but there are
some re-arrangements and permutations in the data observed.
    l. The sound changes u,sually originated with a restricted sub-group of
 the speech community, at a time when the separate identity of this group
 had been weakened by internal or external pressures. The linguistic form
 which began to shift was often a marker of regional status with an ir-
 regular distribution within the community. At this stage, the form is an
 undefined linguistic variable.
    2. The changes began as generalizations of the linguistic form to all
 members of the sub-group; we may refer to this stage as change fronz
 below, that is, below the level of social awareness. The variable shows no
 pattern of stylistic variation in the speech of those who use it, affecting all
 items in a given word class. The linguistic variable is an indicator, de-
.fined as a function of group membership.
    3. Succeeding generations of speakers within the same subgroup,
 responding to the same social pressures, carried the linguistic variable
 further along the process of change, beyond the model set by their parents.
 We may refer to this stage as hypercorrectionfrom below. The variable is
 now defined as a function of group membership and age level.
    4. To the extent that the values of the original sub-group were adopted
 by other groups in the speech community, the sound change with its
  associated value of group membership spread to these adopting groups.
 The function of group membership is now re-defined in successive stages.
     5. The limits of the spread of the sound change were the limits of the
                        On the Mechanism of Linguistic Change     535

   speech community, defined as a group with a common set of normative
   values in regard to language.
      6. As the sound change with its associated values reached the 'limits of
  its expansion, the linguistic variable became one of the norms which
  defined the speech community, and all members of the speech community
  reacted in a uniform manner to its use (without necessarily being aware
  of it). The variable is now a marker, and begins to show stylistic variation.
     7. The movement of the linguistic variable within the linguistic system
  always led to readjustments in the distribution of other elements within
  phonological space.
     8. The structural readjustments led to further sound changes which
  were associated with the original change. However, other subgroups
  which entered the speech community in the interim adopted the older
  sound change as stage I. This re-cycling stage appears to be the primary
  source for the continual origination of new changes. In the following de-
  velopment, the second sound change may be carried by the new group
 beyond the level of the first change.
    (Stages 1-8 dealt with change from below; stages 9-13 concern change
 from above.)
    9. If the group in which the change originated was not the highest
 status group in the speech community, members of the highest status
 group eventually stigmatized the changed form through their control of
 various institutions of the communication network. ;
    10. This stigmatization initiated change from above, a sporadic and
 irregular correction of the changed forms towards the model of the highest
 status group-that is, the prestige model. This prestige model is now the
pattern which speakers hear themselves using: it governs the audio-
monitoring of the speech signal. The linguistic variable now shows regular
stylistic stratification as well as social stratification, as the motor-con-
trolled model of casual speech competes with the audio-monitored model
of more careful styles.
    11. If the prestige model of the highest status group does not corre-
spond to a form used by the other groups in some word class, the other
groups will show a second type of hypercorrection: shifting their careful
speech to a form further from the changed form than the target set by the
prestige group. We may call this state hypercorrection from above.
    12. Under extreme stigmatization, a form may become the overt topic
of social comment, and may eventually disappear. It is thus a stereotype,
which may become increasingly divorced from the forms which are ac-
tually used in speech.
    I 3. If the change originated in the highest status group of the com-
munity, it became a prestige model for all members of the speech com-
munity. The changed form was then adopted in more careful forms of
        536     Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

speech by all other groups in proportion to their contact with users of the
prestige model, and to a lesser extent, in casual speech.7
   Many of the stages in the mechanism of sound change outlined here are
exemplified in the two detailed examples given above. The centralization
of (aw) on Martha's Vineyard did not provide the evidence to decide this
question. There is no doubt, however, that the centralization of (aw) is a
secondary change, produced by the. re~cycling process when the centra-
lization of (ay) reached stage 8.
   To place the raising of (oh) in this outline, it is necessary to consider
briefly the evolution of the New York City vowel system as a whole. The
first step in the historical record is the raising of (eh). We have reason to
believe that the merger of /reh/ with /eh/ began in the last quarter of the
nineteenth century (see Babbitt 1896). The upward movement of the
linguistic variable (eh) continued beyond this merger, leading to the cur-
rent cumulative merger of /eh/ with /ih/ among most younger New
Yorkers. For the entire community, (eh) is subject to the full force of
correction from above: the change has reached stage 11, so that the lin-
guistic variable is defined by co-variation with social class, ethnic mem-
bership, age level, and contextual style. The raising of (oh) was the first
re-cycling process which began when (eh) reached stage 8. The major
burden of the raising of (oh) has been carried by the Jewish ethnic group;
 the extreme upward social mobility of this group has led to a special
 sensitivity to (oh) in the lower middle class. Thus the merger of /oh/ and
 /uh/ has gone quite quickly, and (oh) has reached stage 11 for the lower
 middle class; yet it has hardly touched stage I for the lower class.
   The third stage in the re-cycling process occurred when (oh) reached
 stage 8. The structural re-adjustments which took place were complex:
 (oy) and (ah) were closely associated with (oh), and were defined as lin-
 guistic variables only by their co-variation with (oh). Thus the raising of
 (oy) and the backing of (ah) were determined by internal, structural
 factors. Change from above is exerted upon (oh), but not upon (oy). In
 careful speech, a New Yorker might say [Its o:l tin fU:11], It's all tin
foil. But the shift of (ah) and (oy) have in turn led to a shift of (ay), and this
:Process has apparently begun a third re-cycling. Indeed, the backing of
 (ay) has reached stage 8 itself, and produced an associated fourth re-
 cycling, the fronting of (aw). There are indications that (ay) has evolved to
 stage 9, with the beginning of overt correction from above, although (aw)
 has reached only stage 4 or 5 (for details,' see Labov 1966b, Chapter 12).
    It is evident that the type of structural re-adjustments that have been
 considered here require a linguistic theory which preserves the geometry

    7
      We find some support in these observations for the idea that people do not borrow much
 from broadcast media or from other remote sources, but rather from those who are at the
 most one or two removes from them in age or social distance.
                       On the Mechanism of Linguistic Change    537

of phonological space. The structural relations found here are strikingly
parallel to those established by Moulton ( 1962) in his study of co-varia-
tion of mid and low vowels in Swiss German dialects. The techniques, the
area, the societies studied are quite different, and the coincidence of re-
sults provides strong empirical evidence for the view of phonological
structure advanced by Martinet. Both studies show strong evidence for
co-variation of low vowels along the front-to-back dimension with back
vowels along the dimension of height. Distinctive feature theory, in the
form utilized by Halle (1962), dissolves the geometry of phonological
space into a set of independent dimensions. Even if a phonetic form of
distinctive features is provided with scalar values, distinctive feature
theory has no rationale for co-variation of grave and acute with compact
and diffuse. Nevertheless, the purely internal equilibria projected by
Martinet do not provide a coherent theory of the mechanism of sound
change. In the scheme that has been outlined here, they are only part of a
more comprehensive process, embedded in the sociolinguistic structure
of the community.


        Conclusion
          This discussion has focused on the theme that internal, structural
 pressures and sociolinguistic pressure act in systematic alternation in the
 mechanism of linguistic change. It can no longer be seriously argued that
 the linguist must limit his explanations of change to the mutual influences
 of linguistic elements defined by cognitive function. Nor can it be argued
 that a changing linguistic system is autonomous in any serious sense.
 Here I have attempted to carry the argument beyond the mere cataloguing
of possibilities by introducing a large body of evidence on sound changes
observed in progress. On the basis of this evidence, we can make the
stronger claim that it is not possible to complete an analysis of structural
relations within a linguistic system, and then turn to external relations.
The re-cycling process outlined here suggests the kind of answer we can
make to the basic questions of the inciting causes of linguistic change, and
the adaptive functions of change, as well as the mechanism by which
change proceeds. We can expect that further investigations will modify
the outline given here, but that data from the speech community will con-
tinue to form an essential part in the analysis of linguistic change.
          538    Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes


           Discussion

  The following excerpt from the discussion of Mr. Labov's paper re-
printed in Kreidler ( 1965) may clarify the problem of linguistic deter-
minants of sound change:
MR. GUMPERZ: I have another question for Professor Labov. You say that
your studies show a connection between the movement of /ay/ and /oy/. ls there
any reason why you could predict that /ey/ will not be affected?
MR. LABOY: In terms of the concept of phonological space I have developed
here, nothing could be more clear than that /ey/ would not rise. First, there is a
system of long vowels and/or centering dip!Jthongs, which originally were related
like this:
                                  ih       uh
                                  eh       oh
                                      ah
In the community investigated, the high-front and mid-front have merged, and the
high-back and mid-back have merged, forming a triangular system:               ·
                             [I:"]eh       oh[U:·']
                                      ah
Then, there is a system of forward-upgliding diphthongs, originally like this:
                                   ,iy
                                    ey        oy
                                         ay
There is a hole in the high-back position since there is no /uy/ (very few New
Yorkers say buoy or [chop] suey as one syllable). As /oy/ moves upward to fill the
hole, /ay/ moves to the back. The result is that a skewed system becomes perfectly
symmetrical:
                                   iy oy[U1]
                                   ey ay[oi]
The pronunciation [m:,' bu'] 'my boy' is the most extreme form, but it shows the
direction in which the change is headed. This is repeated in the system of back-
ward-upgliding diphthongs, in which we have:
                                   iw         uw
                                              ow
                                         aw
Our theory of phonological space would predict that /aw/ would move forward to
[reu] paralleling the movement of /ay/ to [on And this, in fact, is what happens-
there is detailed quantitative evidence to show that to the extent that /ay/ moves
to the back, /aw/ moves to the front, yielding:
                                       iw uw
                                       aw ow
 There is no reason for /ey/ to rise, because it is now structurally parallel to /ay/,
 not /oy/. I think we have here a remarkable demonstration of the internal struc-
 tural pressures that Martinet has discussed in his Economie. 8
   8
       Andre Martinet, Economie des c/umgements p/zonetiques (1955).
                appendix 1
                Background Reading

               I. Predecessors in general linguistics
               2. General linguistics: current trends
               3. Historical linguistics
               4. Dialectology and social dialectology
               5. Methods of fieldwork and description
               6. Sociological perspective
               7. A short list of principal collections, monographs and journals

         1. Predecessors in General Linguistics
         Modern sociolinguistics is in many ways a renewal of long-standing interests.
      The three great American contributors to general linguistics in the first half of the
      century are also the three men of most importance in shaping interests relevant to
      the study of language as an aspect of social life: Franz Boas, Edward Sapir, and
      Leonard Bloomfield. The major statement by Boas is his :·Introduction" to the
      Hand book of American Indian Languages (Bulletin of the Bureau of American
      Ethnology 40, Part 1) (Washington, D.C.: 1911). Sapir's Language (New York:
      Harcourt, Brace, 1921) is still read. for its insights as to the relation of language to
      culture, as are his seminal essays, collected in D. G. Mandelbaum (ed.), Selected
      writings of Edward Sapir (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1949).
      Bloomfield's Language (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc., 1933) was
      the standard text for a generation, establishing orientations to the speech commu-
      nity and its description, and is still read for its masterful presentation of historical
      linguistics. On these pioneers, see discussion and bibliography in Hymes (ed.),
      Language in culture and society (New York: Harper & Row, 1964); a more de-
      tailed analysis of the development of American work with regard to a linguistic
      approach to social life is given in Hymes, "Linguistic method of ethnography," in
      P. L. Garvin (ed.), Method and theory in linguistics (The Hague: Mouton, 1970).
      On the Sapir tradition, see Hymes, "Morris Swadesh and the first Yale School" in
      Swadesh, Origin and diversification of languages (Chicago: Aldine, 1971 ).
         An early classic by a Danish scholar is Otto Jespersen, Mankind, nation and
     the individual frorn a linguistic point of view (Oslo, 1925; now reprinted, Bloom-
     ington: Indiana University Press, 1964). In England the central earlier figures
     were Bronislaw Malinowski, especially his Coral gardens and their magic; Part
     2: The language of gardening (London: Allen Unwin, 1935; reprinted, Bloom-
     ington: Indiana University Press, 1968), andJ. R. Firth. For Firth's views, see his
     Papers in linguistics 1934-1951 (London: Oxford University Press, 1957) and F.
     R. Palmer (ed.) Selected papers 1952-1959 (Bloomington: Indiana University
     Press, 1969). In France, Antoine Meillet took a social point of view in major writ-
     ings, such as the famous essay, "Comme Jes mots changent leur sens," L'a1111ee
 J
./
     sociologique (1905-1906). Meillet and Ferdinand de Saussure (Cours de linguis-

                                              539
         540    Appendix I

tique R<'Jlerale (Paris: Payot, 1916), were influenced by the sociological perspec-
tive of Emile Durkheim, whose own classic work, Elementary forms of religious
life (Paris: 1912; English translation, London: G. Allen, 1915; New York: The
Free Press, 194 7), has much about the social role of language.
   A major force for a social point of view in linguistics has been the Prague
School; see selections in P. Garvin (ed.), A Prague school reader in aesthetics, lit-
emry stmct11re and style (Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press,
 1969), and Josef Vachek (ed.), A Prague school reader in linguistics (Bloom-
ington: Indiana University Press, 1964). See also a special number of the current
Travaux Linguistique de Prague 3 (1971 ), devoted to an assessment of the prewar
school.

  2. General Linguistics: Current Trends
   H. A. Gleason, Jr., An introduction to descriptive linguistics (New York: Holt,
Rinehart and Winston, Inc., 1961) gives a still useful introduction to American
descriptive practice in the recent period. J. Greenberg, Anthropological
Linguistics (New York: Random House, 1968) provides a nonpartisan account of
descriptive and historical linguistics from a structural standpoint. The dominant
trend in linguistic analysis today of course is tranformational generative grammar
in the form given it by Noam Chomsky. Chomsky's first monograph, Syntactic
stmctures (The Hague: Mouton, 1957) remains essential reading; his more recent
views stem from the revised model presented in A spec ts of the theory of syntax
(Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1965). A general introduction to Chomsky's
development of syntactic theory and to its larger implications is found in J. Lyons,
Noam C ho111sky (New York: Viking, 1970). Lyons' Introduction to theoretical
linguistics (Cambridge: Cambridge Univ'ersity Press, 1968) is probably the best
general introduction to contemporary grammatical theory. As a practical in-
troduction to technical transformational generative grammar, note R. A. Jacobs
and P. S. Rosenbaum, English tramfornwtional grammer (Waltham, Mass.:
Blaisdell, 1968).
   A younger group of linguists have developed an alternative perspective within
the Chomskyan framework. This approach, commonly called "generative se-
mantics," is well illustrated in E. Bach and R. Hamms (eds.), Universals in
linguistic theory (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc., 1968). An ex-
cellent study, presenting Chomsky's Aspects model more clearly than Chomsky,
and then showing cogently the lines of criticism that lead to development of a
semantic approach, is P. Seuren, Operators and nuclei (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1969).
   Notice that the scope of the term "linguistic theory" has come to be narrowed
in practice to "theory of grammar"; works concerned with linguistic theory in this
sense have by no means the scope and relevance of the books on language by
Sapir and Bloomfield.
   A critical analysis, uniting a social standpoint with transformational generative
grammar, has been developed by W. Labov. See especially two major articles,
"The study of language in its social context," S flldi11111 G enerale 23: 30-87 (I 970),
and "The notion of 'system' in creole studies," in D. Hymes (ed.), Pidginization
and creoli;,ation of languages (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1971).
   An approach generically influenced by the Firthian concern with social meaning
is being developed in England by M. A. K. Halliday. His work has also been
influenced by the continuing concern of Prague School linguistics with functional
perspective on syntax. See Halliday's "Language structure and language func-
                                                            Appendix 1     541

    tion," in J. Lyons (ed.), New horizans in linguistics (Baltl.more: Penguin Books,
    1970), a collection with a number of other useful articles on many aspects of the
    study of language.
      The school of linguistic analysis developed by Kenneth L. Pike, known as tag-
   memics, has an essentially sociolinguistic foundation; see Pike, Language in rela-
   tion to a wujied theory of the structure of human behavior (The Hague: Mouton,
    1967). (The concern of tagmemics with functional aspects of syntactic units is
   taken up into the formalization developed by Seuren (see above).)
      The lines of work inspired by Halliday and Pike both are being developed in the
   analysis of texts and discourse in such a way as to make these larger contexts of
   linguistic units relevant to their grammatical analysis. In general, models of
   grammar which start from semantic rather than syntactic function are the more
   realistic and relevant to sociolinguistics; and models whose semantics include
   social as well as referential meaning are a fortiori most realistic and relevant.
      The approach being developed by Sydney Lamb takes as its premise that lan-
  guage in the mind is in the form of a network rather than a set of rules (as modelled
  in transformational grammar); Lamb applies the approach of his stratificational
  analysis to all aspects of meaning and culture. See his Outline of stratificational
  grammar (Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press, 1966).
      A broad perspective on linguistics in relation to social and humanistic concerns
  continues to be maintained by an eminent leader of the prewar Prague School,
  Roman Jakobson, who has had a special impact on American linguistics through
  residence in the United States since early in the Second World War. Jakobson's
 development of a functional perspective can be seen in a major essay, "Linguistics
 and poetics," in T. A. Sebeok (ed.), Style in language (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
 Press, 1960). Jakobson's comprehensive view of linguistic theory is set forth in
 "Linguistics in its relation to other sciences," Actes du Xe Congres foternational
 des Linguistes (Bucharest: 1969). A cognate view of the scope of general
 linguistics is presented in Hymes, "Linguistics-the field," international En-
 cyclopedia of Social Sciences (New York: Macmillan, 1968).

   3. fl istorical Linguistics
     Two standard works are W. P. Lehmann, Historical linguistics; an introduction
  (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc., 1962) and H. M. Hoenigswald,
  Language change and linguistic reconstmction (Chicago: University of Chicago
  Press, 1960), an advanced and in some respects definitive work. The second part
  of Bloomfield's Language is still useful as an introduction and has been reissued
  separately for this purpose as Language history (New York: Holt, Rinehart and
 Winston, Inc., 1966).
    The development of a sociolinguistic perspective may have the effect of re-
 storing the study of language change to the central place in linguistic theory which
 it once enjoyed. Such possibilities are broached in the efft)rts toward a reconstruc-
 tion of the explanation of change in language by U. Weinreich, W. Labov, and M.
 Herzog, "Empirical foundations for a theory of language change," in W. P.
 Lehmann and Y. Malkiel (eds.), Directions for historical linguistics: a symposium
(Austin: University of Texas Press, 1968), and in the character and scope of the
study of the processes of standardization, pidginization and creolization. For
these last 'see P. S. Ray, Language standardization (The Hague: Mouton, 1963);
J. Fishman, C. Ferguson and J. Das Gupta (eds.), Language problems of develop-
ing nations (New York: Wiley, 1968) and D. Hymes (ed.), Pidginization and
creolization of languages (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1971).
        542    Appendix I

   A unified approach to language change will of necessity integrate historical
linguistics (conceived as study of change as internal to a language) with what is
often segregated as language history (conceived as factors external to a language).
A major question in language history is maintenance and loss of language; see J.
Fishman, "Language maintenance and language shift as a field of inquiry,"
Linguistics 9:32-70 (1964) and his monograph, Language loyalty in the United
Stat es (The H tlgue: Mouton, 1966). On the related problems of language planning
and language politics, see two important recent volumes, E. Haugen, Language
conflict and language planning (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
 1966), which gives a detailed analysis of the Norwegian case, and J. Das Gupta,
 Language politics and language planning in modern India (Berkeley: University
 of California Press, 1970), in which the pressure-group theory of political science
 is applied.
    For the recent revival of a long-term evolutionary perspective on language
 change, see B. Berlin and P. Kay, Basic color terms (Berkeley: University of
 California Press, 1970), and M. Swadesh, Origin and diversification of languages
 (ed. J. Sherzer) (Chicago: Aldine, 1971).

  4. Dialectology and Social Dialecto/ogy
  •s. Pop, La dialectologie. Apercu historique et ,nethodes d' enquetes linguis-
tiques (Louvain, 1950) is the standard reference for earlier work. H. Kurath,
Handbook of the linguistic geography of New England (Washington, D.C.:
American Council of Learned Societies, 1939) provides an excellent concise in-
troduction to the development and practice of standard European dialectology
with reference to its application in the :United States. A. MacIntosh, Introduction
to a survey of Scottish dialects (Edinburgh: Thomas Nelson, 1952) provides a
more modem, structurally-oriented introduction, including attention to stylistic al-
ternation between dialects and standard languages. The major study in modem
urban dialectology, essentially redefining the entire subject, is W. Labov, The
social stratification of English in New York City (Washington, D.C.: Center for
 Applied Linguistics, 1966). Whereas earlier dialectology had focussed on dif-
 ferentiation of dialects, Labov develops a methodology for comprehending the
 dominant phenomenon of modem life, reintegration of diverse dialects within a
 complex speech community.
   The sociolinguistic character of intimate contact and diffusion among language
 varieties is given fundamental treatment in U. Weinreich's Languages in contact
 (New York: Linguistic Circle of New York, 1953; reprinted, The Hague:
  Mouton).

   5. Methods of Fieldwork and Description.
    Earlier works in descriptive linguistics retain their usefulness for socio-
 linguistics, because of their attention to the actual problems of observation,
 recording and description of speech. See K. L. Pike, Phonemics (Ann Arbor: Uni-
 versity of Michigan Press, 1947) and E. A. Nida, Morphology (Ann Arbor: Uni-
 versity of Michigan Press, 1949). W. Samarin, Field linguistics: a guide to
 linguistic field work (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc., 1967) is the
 basic introduction to elicitation and analytic procedure. W. Smalley, Manual of
 articulatory phonetics, rev. ed. (Tarrytown, N. Y.: Practical Anthropology, 1968)
 provides the best introduction to the mastery and use of phonetic transcription.
    Sociolinguistic description must extend to whatever features of verbal com-
  munication have conventional social meaning. The problems of description of
                                                            Appendix 1     543

      paralinguistic aspects of speech, including intonation, are dealt with by D.
     Crystal, Prosodic systems and intonation in English (Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
     versity Press, 1968) and "Prosodic and paralinguistic correlates of social ta-
     tegories," in E. Ardener (ed.), Social anthropology and language (ASA Mono-
     graphs I 0) (London: Tavistock, 1971 ). The related problems of description of ges-
     ture and body motion are treated from an anthropological perspective by R.
     Birdwhistell, Kinesics and context (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania
     Press, 1970); a different system of analysis is developed by P. Ekman and W.
     Friesen, "The repertoire of non-verbal behavior: categories, origins, usage and
     coding," Semiotica 1:49-98 (1969).
        Paralinguistics and kinesics have together played an important part in the devel-
     opment of the general study of communicative codes; see T. Sebeok, A. Hayes
     and M. C. Bateson (eds.), Approaches to semiotics (The Hague: Mouton, 1964).
     E.T. Hall, Tlze silent language (New York: Doubleday, 1959) is a challenging in-
     troduction to the significance of nonverbal phenomena. For a generalized structur-
  . alist approach to semiotic phenomena, see R. Barthes, Elements of semiology
    (London: Jonathan Cape, 1969). Since 1968, see the journal Semiotica and its as-
    sociated series of monographs.
        Many aspects of sociolinguistic description intersect problems of stylistics. See
    the historical introduction by P. Guiraud, La stylistique (Que Sais-je, 646) (Paris:
    Presses Universitaires de France, 1961); the report of a conference in T. A.
    Sebeok (ed.), Style in language (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1960); the recent
    collection by S. Chatman and S. Levin (eds.), Essays on t/ze language of literature
    (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1967); and since 1967, the journal Language and
    Style. A close relation also exists between sociolinguistics. and work under the
    heading of rhetoric; cf M. Steinmann, Jr. (ed.), New rhetorics (New York:
    Scribners, 1967). Not to be neglected here is the seminal influence of Kenneth
    Burke, whose Philosophy of literary form (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State Univer-
    sity Press, 1941) Grammar of motives (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall,
    1945) and Rhetoric of motives (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1950) have
   been variously reprinted and have influenced many students of the workings of
   language. For an overview, see Burke's article "Dramatism," in the /ntemational
   Encyclopedia 4 the Social Sciences (New York: Macmillan, 1968).
       Philosophical interest in the analysis of speech acts intersects sociolinguistic
   problems also. The seminal work is J. L. Austin, How to do things with words
   (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1962). The philosophical signifi-
   cance of speech acts is treated in an important book, Speec/z acts (Cambridge:
   Cambridge University Press, 1969), by John Searle, who is currently developing a
   new general classification; cf also Q. Skinner, "On performing and explaining
   linguistic actions," The Philosophical Quarterly 21 (82): 1-21 (/ 97 I) for an analy-
   sis of philosophical issues that affect sociolinguistic explanation.
       Two special publications of the American Anthropological Association present
  a broad picture of anthropological interests and contributions to the ethnographic
   analysis of meaning: A. K. Romney and R. G. D'Andrade (eds.), Transcultural
  studies in cognition (Washington, D.C., 1964) and E. A. Hammel (ed.), Formal
  senumtic analysis (Washington, D.C., 1965). Representative basic papers are
  collected in S. Tyler (ed.), Cognitive anthropology (New York: Holt, Rinehart
  and Winston, Inc., 1969). R. Burling, Man's many voices (New York: Holt,
  Rinehart and Winston, Inc., 1970) is an introduction to this field as well as to sev-
  eral other areas of sociolinguistics. A sociolinguistic perspective on ethnographic
· semantics and cognitive anthropology is sketched in Hymes, "A perspective for
  linguistic anthropology," in S. Tax (ed.), Horizons in anthropology (Chicago: Al-
         544    Appendix 1

dine, 1964) and "Two types of linguistic relativity," in W. Bright (ed.)
Sociolinguistics (The Hague: Mouton, 1966).
   The contributions of folkloristic materials to the analysis of meaning in texts
and events have experienced a renascence in the work of C. Levi-Strauss on myth
and of Victor Turner and Mary Douglas on ritual. E. Leach, U:vi-Strauss (New
York: Viking Press, 1970) is a critical introduction to Levi-Strauss' approach; for
Levi-Strauss' own work, see the series Myt/10/{igiques, beginning with The raw
and the cooked (New York: Harper & Row, 1968). On ritual, see V. Turner, The
ritual process (Ithaca, N .Y.: Cornell University Press, 1967) and Mary Douglas,
 Purity and danger (London: Penguin Press, 1968) and N atllral symbols (New
York: Pantheon, 1970), in the latter of which use is made of Bernstein's socio-
linguistic categories. A general series in anthropological analysis of symbolism has
 been launched through Cornell University Press under Turner's editorship. On
 the analysis of a specific genre of event, cf J. Peacock, Rites of modernization
 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1968). For developments within folklore
 proper, cf Americo Paredes and Richard Bauman (eds.), Towards new perspec-
 tives in folklore (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1971; also, Journal of A meri-
 can Folklore 84(1) (1971 ), and K. Goldstein, special editor, "Folklore and com-
 munication," in S emiotica 5 (I 972, in press). See also the major study by A.
 Lomax, Folk song style and culture (Washington, D.C.: American Association
 for the Advancement of Science, 1968), which unites textual detail and event
 structure, and T. Kochman, Language and exriressive role behavior in the black
 inner city (in preparation), showing application of a folkloristic perspective to
 sociolinguistic material.
    Guides to ethnographic research· oriented toward speech include, first of all, D.
 Slobin (ed.), A field mamwl for cross-cultural study of the acquisition of com-
 nwnicative competence (Berkeley: ASUC Bookstore, 1967), comprising elicita-
 tion procedures for a number of aspects of language acquisition. See also D.
 Hymes, R. Darnell, and J. Sherzer, A guide to the field swdy of speech use (N cw
  York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc., in preparation). J. Flavell et al., The
 development of communication and role-taking skills in children (New York:
 Wiley, 1968) provides many useful examples of situations for eliciting role-taking
  and role-switching behavior. R. G. Barker and H. F. Wright, Midwest and its
  children (New York: Harper & Row, 1954) remains an unrivalled source of in-
  sight into the observation of behavior in relation to community settings. Aspects
  of ethnographic method are discussed by Frake, Metzer, Conklin, and others in
  Tyler, Cognitive anthropology (cited above). See also M. Freilich, (ed.), Marginal
  natives (New York: Harper & Row, 1970) and A. Epstein (ed.), The craft of
  social anthropology (London: Tavistock, 1967). A book in an ethnographic spirit
  is E. J. Webb, D. T. Campbell, R. D. Schwartz, and L. Sechrest, Unobtrusive
  measures (Chicago: Rand McNally, 1966).
     C. A. Ferguson, Language structure and language use (Palo Alto, Calif.: Stan-
  ford University Press, 1971) contains articles on problems of sociolinguistic
  description and measurement by a pioneer in' the field. J. Rubin, National
   bilingualism in Paraguay (The Hague: Mouton, 1968) shows the use of a survey
   and questionnaire method in a community and at a national level. Major aspects of
   survey and related methods of description are treated in papers in J. Fishman
   (ed.), Advances in the sociology of language (The Hague: Mouton, 1971). W.
   Labov, The social stratification of English in New York City offers many insights
   into the process of obtaining socially relevant and valid speech; see also the meth-
   odological observations in his "The study of language in its social context,"
   St11diu111 G enerale 23: 30-87 ( 1970) and "Some principles of linguistic methodol-
                                                                    Appendix I     545

             ogy," Language in society I (1972, in press). Problems of fieldwork are also dis-
             cussed in R. Shuy, W. Wolfram and W. K. Riley, Field techniques in an urban lan-
             guage study (Washington, D.C.: Center for Applied Linguistics, 1968). 1

               6. Sociological Perspective
                A useful general introduction to social anthropology is R. Firth, Elements of
             social organization (Boston: Beacon Press, I 96 I (2d ed.)). The social theory rele-
             vant to sociolinguistics depends heavily on notions of diversity developed in the
             work of E. R. Leach, Political systems of highland Burma (Cambridge, Mass.:
             Harvard University Press, I 954) and A. F. C. Wallace, Culture and personality
             (New York: Random House, 1961; 2d ed., I 970). A pungent review of present
             social theory is provided by P. S. Cohen, Modern social theory (London: Heine-
             mann, 1968). Two contrastive perspectives in cultural anthropology are devel-
             oped cogently by M. Harris, The rise of anthropological theory (New York:
             Crowell, 1968) and W. H. Goodenough, Method in cultural anthropology
             (Chicago: Aldine, 1970). Basic to the analysis of linguistic interaction is the per-
             spective developed in the writings of E. Goffman, such as Presentation of self in
             everyday life (New York: Doubleday, 1959) and Behavior in public places (New
             York: Free Press, 1963), as to the underlying structure of social gatherings; ,so
             also the perspective developed by F. Barth in Models of social organization
             (London: Royal Anthropological Institute, Occasional Paper 23, I 966), and in
             Barth (ed.), Ethnic groups and boundaries: the social organization of culture dif-
            ference (London: Allen & Unwin, I 969), as to the larger social processes the con-
             dition and arise from interaction. A recent collection concerned with sociological
             approaches to interaction is H. P. Blumer (ed.), Symbolic interaction (Englewood
             Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1969). G. Bateson deals with so:me of the basic con-
             cepts of communication relevant to sociolinguistics in his contribution in D. D.
            Jackson (ed.), Communication, family and marriage (Palo Alto, Calif.: Science
            and Behavior Books, 1968); cf also J. Ruesch and G. Bateson, Communication:
            the social matrix of psychiatry (New York: Norton, 1951 ).
               A major sociological trend interacting with sociolinguistics is ethno-
            methodology. See H. Garfinkel, Studies in etluwmethodology (Englewood
            Cliffs, N .J.: Prentice-Hall, 1967); J. Douglas (ed.), Understanding everyday life
            (Chicago: Aldine, 1971); H. P. Dreitzel (ed.), Recent sociology no. 2: patterns of
            communicative behavior (New York: Macmillan, 1970), M. Speier and R. Turner
            (eds.), Stlldies in socialization (New York: Basic Books, 1971), and H. Garfinkel
            and H. Sacks (eds.), Contributions to ethnomethodology (Bloomington: Indiana
            University Press, forthcoming). See also A. Cicourel, Method and measurement
            in sociology (New York: Free Press, 1966) for a critique of sociological research
            from ethnomethodological perspective. H. Sacks 1 Social aspects of language: the
            organization of sequencing in language (Englewood Cliffs, N .J.: Prentice-Hall, in
            press) gives a more complete exposition of the principles presented in Chapter 11
            of this volume.
               Some of the impetus to sociolinguistics has come from work by social psycholo-
            gists. Notable among these is R. W. Brown, whose Words and things (New York:
            Free Press, 1958) remains a valuable discussion of many topics. Brown's Social
            psychology (New York: Free Press, 1970) is a textbook that contains extensive
            discussion of issues pertinent to sociolinguistics. A. Diebold's survey of psycho-
        /
    I       linguistic work in the second edition of C. Osgood and T. A. Sebeok (eds.),
/           Psycholinguistics (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1966), takes up a
            number of sociolinguistic topics. An excellent introduction to the field of socio-
        546    Appendix I

linguistics by a scholar versed in sociolinguistics is D. Slobin, Psycholinguistics
(Glenview, Ill.: Scott, Foresman, 1971). The papers in J. Macnamara (ed.),
Problems of bilingualism (Jou ma I of Social Issues 23(2) (1967) ) offer socio-
logical perspective on what is often conceived as a purely psychological problem;
Lj. especially W. E. Lambert, "A social psychology of bilingualism," pp. 91-109.
 Lambert's work generally is an outstanding contribution from social psychology
 to sociolinguistics.

  7. A Short List of Principal Collections, M(nwgraphs, and Journals in the
     Development of Sociolinguistics in the United States, 1953-1972 (chrono-
     logically arranged)
U. Weinreich, Languages in contact. New York: Linguistic Circle of New York,
   1953.
E. Haugen, The Norwegian language in America: a study in bilingual behavior.
   2 vols. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1953; 2d ed., Bloom-
   ington: Indiana University Press, 1969.
H. Hoijer (ed.), Language in culture. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
    1954.
K. L. Pike, Language in relation to a unified theory of the structure of human
    behavior. Part I, Preliminary edition. Santa Ana, Calif.: Summer Institute of
    Linguistics, 1954.
E. Haugen, Bi!illgualism in the Americas: a bibliography and research guide.
    (American Dialect Society, 26). Montgomery, Alabama: University of Ala-
    bama Press, 1956.
C. A. Ferguson and J. J. Gumperz (eds.), Linguistic diversity in South Asia:
    swdies in regional, social, and functional variation. (Research Center in
    Anthropology, Folklore, and Linguistics, Publication 13; International Journal
    of A 111erican Linguistics 26 (3), Part 3). Bloomington, 1960.
 F. A. Rice (ed.), Study of the role of second languages in Asia, Africa and Latin
    America. Washington, D.C.: Center for Applied Linguistics, 1962.
 D. Hymes (ed.), Lllnguage in culture and society. New York: Harper Row, 1964.
 A. K. Romney and R. G. D'Andrade (eds.), Transcultural studies of cognition.
     Washington, D.C.: American Anthropological Association, 1964.
 J. J. Gumperz and D. Hymes (eds.), The ethnography of com1111111ication. Wash-
     ington, D.C.: American Anthropological Association, 1964.
 R. Shuy (ed.), Social dialects and language lellrning. Champaign, Ill.: National
     Council of Teachers of English, 1965.
 W. Bright (ed.), Sociolinguistics. The Hague: Mouton, 1966.
 J. A. Fishman, Laniuage loyalty in the United States. The Hague: Mouton, 1966.
 W. Labov, Social strlltification of English in New York City. Washington, D.C.:
     Center for Applied Linguistics, 1966.
 S. Lieberson (ed.), Explorations in sociolinguistics. Sociological Inquiry 36 (2)
     (1966); also, Research Center in Anthropology, Folklore and Linguistics,
      Publication 44, llltemational Journal of American Linguistics 33 (2), Part 2,
      Bloomington, Indiana, 1967.
 J. Macnamara (ed.), Problems of bilingualism. Journal of Social Issues 33, (2)
      (1967).
 J. Fishman (ed.), Readings in the sociology of langullge. The Hague: Mouton,
      1968.
 J. A. Fishman, C. A. Ferguson, R. Das Gupta (eds.), Language problems in
      developing nations. New York: Wiley, 1968.
                                                             Appendix I    547

      J. Fishman, Sociolinguistics. Rowley, Mass: Newberry House, 1970.
      E. Ardener (ed.), Social anthropology and language. (Association of Social
         Anthropologists Monographs 10). London: Tavistock Press, 1971.
      J. A. Fishman (ed.), Advances in the sociology of language. The Hague: Mouton,
         1971.
      D. Hymes (ed.), Pidginization and creolization of languages. Cambridge: Cam-
         bridge University Press, 197 I.
      T. A. Sebeok (ed.), Current Trends in linguistics 12: Linguistics and adjacent arts
         and sciences. The Hague: Mouton, 1972. (Section on sociology and anthropol-
         ogy.)

        A variety of journals publish articles in sociolinguistics. The principal English
      language journals are:

      Aj,'ican Language Review. London: School of Oriental and African Studies.
      American Anthropologist. Washington, D.C.: American Anthropological Associ-
        ation.
      Anthropological Linguistics. Bloomington: Department of Anthropology, Indiana
        University.
      Joumal of Linguistics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
      Language. Washington, D.C.: Linguistic Society of America.
      Language in Society. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
      Le Mondo Lingvo-Problemo. The Hague: Mouton.
      Linguistics. The Hague: Mouton.
      Man. London: Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland.
      S outhwestem J oumal <~f Anthropology. Albuquerque: Department of Anthropol-
         ogy, University of New Mexico.




  (


/
  J
        appendix 2

       ·Outline Guide
        for the Ethnographic Study
        of Speech Use
        JOEL SHERZER AND REGNA DARNELL




          This guide stems from a search of ethnographic literature to obtain infor-
mation documenting the range of cross-cultural variability in the use of speech. 1
Ethnographies seldom explicitly describe speech use, but information was ob-
tained from some seventy-five societies (iri different degrees of detail). On the
basis of those examples, the questions presented here have been devised. The
questions are intended to serve as a stimulus for much-needed fieldwork focused
on speech, and to indicate lineslalong which such work might proceed. The ques-
tions are not a check list to be followed mechanically. The ways in which individ-
ual questions must be phrased will vary from society to society. Moreover, not
every possible question about the use of speech has been included. Within the
general range indicated by the questions in the guide, an investigator in a given
society may well focus on certain areas of particular significance.
   To avoid awkward phrasing, many questions appear in a "yes" or "no" form.
All such questions should be understood to be asking not only for a report of
 presence or absence but also for details: under what circumstances or conditions,
for what group, for what purpose, etc.? Thus, when it is asked, "Is speaking
 regarded as a satisfying activity?" the intended answer is not simply "yes" or
 "no". Probably, the answer is "yes" under some conditions for some persons in
 every society. A full answer might include "more so for older people than for
 younger," "for men but not for women," "during the winter ceremonial season,"
etc.
   The questions are accompanied by paragraphs labeled "Discussion." These
 paragraphs indicate some of the motivation for the questions, and ways in which
 they might be interpreted.

1
 The original version of the full guide was prepared under an Office of Education Grant
during 1966-1967 with Dell Hymes as the principle investigator. Research assistants were
Rcgna Darnell, Helen Hogan, Virginia Hymes, Sheila Seitel, Joel Sherzer, and K. M.
Tiwary. A full version of the guide (the questions presented here together with the eth-
nographic cx;imples on which they are based) with more detailed theoretical discussion, is
currently being prepared for publication. The authors alone arc responsible for any short-
comings in the present version of the guide.                                                 _.,

                                           548
                                                            Appendix 2     549

       The guide is subdivided into five sections:

             I. Analysis of the use of speech
             2. Attitudes toward the use of speech
             3. Acquisition of speaking competence
             4. The use of speech in education and social control
             5. Typological generalizations


    1. Analysis of the V se of Speech

        Discussion: Much of linguistic theory has been concerned with study of lan-
     guage in abstraction from its use in speech. Here we are concerned with the kinds
    of questions one would ask if language is not abstracted in such a way. We do not
     think that we are merely adding a level to the traditional linguistic description.
     Rather, we are looking at linguistic data from a different perspective, one which
    integrates language with the other components involved in its use: features of set-
    ting, participant, etc. Instead of postulating "an ideal speaker-listener, in a com-
    pletely homogeneous speech-community" (Chomsky 1965), and describing what
    is in effect the code of a single, limited form of speech, we assume a diversified
    speech community and take our goal to be a description of the many different
    ways of speaking which exist in the community. These ways of speaking and the
    relations among them are structured, or "rule-governed," just as is language. The
    usual description of a language, from this point of view, deals with only a portion,
    sometimes a somewhat arbitrary portion, of the structure of speaking in a commu-
    nity.
       The questions that follow are intended to suggest the analytical steps an eth-
    nographer might take in attempting to characterize the use of speech among a par-
    ticular group of people. (I) He or she must first discover the components (or
    dimensions) that are relevant to speech use, and what in the particular group count
    as instances of these. (2) He or she must describe the relationships or rules among
    the various relevant components. 2
    I. What are the compo11e11ts involved in the use of speech?
   Discussion: The potential components of speech use listed later have proven
useful (necessary?) to analysis of the material on which the present guide is based.
They are not to be used as a check list but rather as a guide to the kinds of factors
which enter into the relationships or rules governing the use of speech. They stand
to a complete analysis as does a phonetic grid to a phonological description; but at
the present preliminary stage of work in this field the list cannot be either exhaus-
tively specific or discrete. The items of the present list are clearly interdependent
and possibly overlapping. They have been identified at a level sufficiently general
to be maximally useful now.                 .
   In different cases, different components and different numbers of components
will prove to be relevant. It is the task of the ethnographer to show which are rele-
vant, and in what relationships, in the society under consideration. These various
relationships among components are the ways of speaking for that society. The
2See Hymes, Chapter I, for a more complete discussion of the problems involved in a de-
scription of speech usage.
         550    Appendix 2

present terminology is necessarily provisional. Work is still at a stage in which
choice among existing terms, and creation of needed new terms, is problematic.
One of the urgent tasks is development of an adequate terminology.
   A. Linguistic varieties: What are the linguistic varieties in use in the com-
       munity?
   Discussion: The community, and its members, are conceived as having
linguistic repertoires, composed of linguistic varieties. Varieties are defined in
terms of their functional roles, independently of historical provenience (same or
related languages, dialects) and of structural connection (Pig Latin, Mazateco
whistle speech). Research has shown that the same contrast in function may be
served, and the same underlying other relations entailed, by what in one case are
wholly unrelated languages, in another related dialects, in another shift in phono-
logical styles or in just certain elements (e.g., pronouns) within a single dialect and
style. What is asked for here, then, are the linguistic varieties which function in the
community, placed first of all in terms of such dimensions as formal/informal,
public/private, out-group/in-group, etc.

          I. To wh~tt extent are the identities and relationships of the linguistic
          varieties known or conscious?
          2. What language-derived verbal or nonverbal codes are in use (i.e., Pig
          Latin, thieves' cant, whistle speech, sign language, drum signaling, etc.)?

   B. Linguistic units of description: What are the local categories of speech acts,
      speech events, speech situations, and genres?
   Discussion: Neither linguists noranthropologists have as yet developed adequate
units of description for speech use. The sentence, as ordinarily treated by
linguists, is valid only for a narrowly referential function of language. It is ab-
stracted from social meaning and relationships of use of concern to us here. And it
is increasingly clear that limitation to the sentence misses generalizations, even of
the narrowly syntactic sort. The text, or discourse, is more promising, but prob-
ably too gross. The various purposes accomplished in language-how people in-
sult, show deference, command, request information, curse, greet, take leave,
etc.-do not come in sentences or whole texts. We are not sure what they do come
in, but would suggest the speech act as the minimal structural unity in a descrip-
tion of speech use. 3 In terms of conventional linguistic units (phonological, gram-
matical) it may range greatly in locus and size. Speech acts may be embedded in
larger units such as genres, on the one hand, and discourse structures, speech
events, and speech situations, on the other. It is clearly a task of the linguistic eth-
nographer, and also, we believe, of the linguist, to describe the structure of such
units. Note that the unit of description (the speech act) is included among the com-
ponents; this is because we believe that speech acts and speech events can be ade-
quately described only in relation to the other components of speech use with
which they interact.                       ·

   C. Topic: What is the topic (or topics) of the message, act, or event?
   D. Channel: Through what channels may a message be transmitted (i.e.,
      spoken, written, sung, whistled, drummed, etc.)?

" See Hymes, Chapter I, for a discussion of this and other terms needed for a description of
speech usage.
                                                         Appendix 2     551

  E. Key: What are the various keys, tones, or nwnners in which a message may
      be delivered?
  F. Participants: What are the possible categories of participants in the uses of
      speech?
        Discussion: Audience and spokesman must be considered as well as the
      more traditional sender and receiver, addressor, and addressee.
  G. Setting: What are the times and places which serve as bounds or contexts of
      speech usages?
  H. Ends: What are the ends, goals, or purposes of the speech usage under con-
      sideration?
   I. Norms of interaction: What are the specific behaviors and proprieties that
      accompany speech usages?
I I. Rules for the use of speech: What relationships exist among the components
     just described?


2. Attitudes Toward the Use of Speech
  Discussion: It must be stressed that the answers to questions in this or any
other section are often relevant to other sections as well. Thus a particular fact
about the use of speech (e.g., that children may not speak on certain occasions)
can be seen as

         I. A rule for the use of speech which can be expressed in terms of rela-
         tionships among components
         2. An attitude about the place of certain members of the community vis-
         a-vis communication or
         3. Part of the process of the learning of the use of speech

I. General attitudes toward speaking
  A. What aspects of speaking (if any) are related to conceptions of the ideal or
     typical individual, man, woman, or child? Ideal exemplars of particular roles
     (i.e., chief, warrior, spokesman, herald, father, etc.)?

       I. Is the use of speech important in the definition of roles, i.e., is the use
       of speech part of the qualification for membership?
       2. Is the use of speech instrumental in the social marking of roles?
  B. What are the characteristics of speaking well?
       Discussion: At least two foci seem possible here:

        I. Focus on the pe1formance or message, i.e., what is it about the per-
        formance or message that makes it good or effective?
        2. Focus on participant, i.e., what personal characteristics of partici-
        pants make them good or effective speakers?
        These two foci are not intended to represent two different questions;
        rather they are put forth as two aspects of a single one.

 C. What is the permissible range of speech behavior? Are there conceptions of
    idiosyncracies, exceptions, speech defects? What are the individual and/or
    societal consequences of aberrant behavior with regard to speaking?
         552    Appendix 2

 D. Is speaking regarded as a satisfying activity? Easy or difficult? Rewarding
     or not? What aspects of speaking are considered satisfying? Is speaking
     considered more satisfying under certain circumstances or for certain
     groups of people? Do people seek or are they given opportunities to display
     competence in speaking?
  E. When are people taciturn or voluble?
        Discussion: Actually, we are asking here two different questions: (1) Are
     there cross-cultural differences regarding when people are voluble and when
     they are taciturn? and (2) is the dimension taciturnity-volubility relevant to
     the society under investigation, i.e., do such concepts exist?
         I. What personality traits or personal characteristics are associated with
         differences on this dimension?
         2. Are there differences associated with different roles, social categories,
         or different stages in the life cycle?
I I. Attitudes toward languages, dialects, varieties, etc.
    A. Are there beliefs concerning the nature and origin of language and
       speech? What are they?
    B. What are the attitudes taken toward each of the linguistic varieties used in
       the community? How are these attitudes expressed? Are there concepts of
       correctness (or other normative notions) with regard to the varieties in use?
       Is one variety considered correct or standard? What are the criteria of cor-
       rectness? Who may judge correctness? Do hypercorrect forms arise?
    C. What are the attitudes takj:!n toward neighboring languages or languages
       known to exist?
          Discussion: The boundary between this question and the previous one is
       not always clear. If community A uses the language of its neighbor, commu-
       nity B, for certain functions (even if not all members of A speak B), we often
       would want to consider B one of the varieties in use in A. 4
   Final discussion for section 2: A full description of attitudes toward language
and speech would include the relative importance of speech among other means of
communication as well as of the place of speaking within social interaction as a
whole. The question of over-all communication is considered here only when it
clarifies the use of speech in a given society or when one culture does with speech
what another does with facial gesture, another through body movements, etc.


3. Acquisition of Speaking Competence

  Discussion: The use of the terms infant and child in italics in this section is in-
tended to indicate that they are ethnocentric. Our own society expects a child to
respond to training only when he can walk and talk; an infant is not expected to
meet such demands. Other societies do not make this distinction in the same way.
(See section 4, part I.) The terms thus are understood to refer to whatever cat-
egories the society recognizes, whether or not they are named.
I. Is the notion infant (distinct from child) relevant to the society's conception of
   the life cycle with reference to the acquisition of speaking competence?

,, For a fuller treatment of this problem, see Hymes 1968b:23-48.
                                                          Appendix 2     553

 II. Is there an explicit native theory (or theories) with regard to the acquisition of
     speaking competence?
    A. How are an infant's first cries or words interpreted?

          I. Is it believed that the infant will always utter certain words first?
          What are these words?
          2. What interpretation (if any) is given to an infant's crying?
          3. What interpretation (if any) is given to a child's first (or early) utter-
          ance (or utterances)'!

   B. Are there ways of explaining or contributing to [apart from explicit teaching
      (see part III)] the distribution or acquisition of speaking competence?

         1. Are any characteristics (physical, social, etc.) of the infant (child) or
         of its circumstances of birth, etc., thought to predispose or predetermine
         its later communicative behavior, especially its verbal ability? What and
         how?
         2. Are there practices [apart from explicit teaching (see part Ill)]
         thought to encourage or discourage, ensure or prevent particular kinds.of
         communicative behavior? Particular speaking skills?

II I. How are speaking skills transmitted?
   A. How are skills in language (abstracted from use) transmitted? In other
       words, how are grammar and vocabulary acquired?
    B. Are the various linguistic varieties used in the community learned in dif-
       ferent ways, in a particular order?
   C. How are skills in the use of language transmitted? In other words, how do
       people learn to greet, converse, curse, gossip, etc.?
   D. Is the learning of speaking skills a source of pride, a focus of concern?

IV. What is the general place of children in communication?
  A. Are there special varieties or uses of speech restricted to use among infants
      (children)? restricted to use between children and adults? Is there a special
      baby talk? Is it intentionally taught? Is it approved or disapproved?
  B. Can children participate in all uses of speech? If only some, which ones?
     Are there some speech situations at which children may be present but not
     participate?



4. The Use of Speech in Education and Social Control

  Discussion: Much of the ethnographic literature dealing with children or
acquisition of culture in general has been done from the point of view of culture
and personality studies in anthropology. This section attempts to show how
speech might be relevant to the description of socialization as well as how
socialization might be relevant to the study of speech use.

I. Life cycle
   A. What is the relation of speech to the definition of stages, periods, or transi-
      tions in life? Are the stages named?
         554    Appendix 2

         1. Is the use of speech important in the definition of stages, i.e., is the use
         of speech part of the qualification for membership in a class of persons at
         a given stage of the life cycle?
         2. Is the use of speech instrumental to the social marking of stages in the
         life cycle?

II. Learning and teaching
   A. Does the society have an explicitly formulated philosophy of education?
      For what purposes is it formulated (i.e., for use in child training or only in
      response to inquiry by the ethnographer)? What is the place of language and
      speech in the native theory of learning and teaching?
   B. What is the role of language (explicit verbalization) and speech in the actual
      transmission of knowledge or skills?
         Discussion: The distinction between learning by participation and obser-
      vation and learning by explicit verbalization is not always clear-cut. Rather,
      we envisage here a continuum with societies tending toward one end or the
      other.
   C. Do methods of teaching vary with recognized stages in the life cycle? Set-
      ting? According to what is being taught?

II I. Social control
   A. Does the society have an explicitly formulated philosophy of social control?
    B. What is the role of language and speech in social control?
    C. Do means of social control vary with recognized stages in the life cycle,
       membership in various social categories, setting, etc.? Do they vary ac-
       cording to the offense?


5. Typological Generalizations
I. What broad patterns in the use of speech emerge from analysis of a particular
   culture? Note especially attitudes toward speaking common throughout a
   given society, ritual idioms cross-cutting many speech events, certain social
   dimensions which are always relevant.
II. Are there. patterns of speech use characteristic of culture areas? Culture area
    is understood here to mean such broad areas as North America, South
    America~ Africa, and Oceania.
Ill. Are there patterns of speech use characteristic of par_ticular kinds of speech
     community, e.g., societies with a particular level of sociocultural complexity
     or particular types of social organization?
