            On the Analyzability of Stories by Children     327

In the sociological and anthropological literature, the focus on
norms is on the conditions under which and the extent to which
they govern, or can be seen by social scientists to govern, the
relevant actions of those members whose actions they ought to
control. While such matters are, of course, important, our
viewer's maxim suggests other importances of norms, for
members. Viewers use norms to provide some of the orderli-
ness, and proper orderliness, of the activities they observe.

    It has been common social-science practice to assume
 that social norms, like jural rules, exist somewhere out-
 side communicative acts. Many investigators accept
 norms as given and consider actions simply from the
 standpoint of whether their content conforms to or de-
 viates from independently given norms. For this point of
 view, Sacks' choice of data seems trivial: Ifit is a social
 norm that mothers should pick up babies, there is nothing
 remarkable in a mother who does just that-though if a
 mother did not, there might be a cause to seek out. Sacks,
 however, is not at all concerned with the "why" of the ac-
 tion in question, but with how the action is made in-
 telligible and interpretable in the first place. Social
 norms to him are part of the co1nmunicative code which
governs our perception of events in sornewhat the same
 way as grammar governs our perceptions -,f ·speech.
Other social scientists accept without question that the
two sentences that Sacks quotes will be understood in the
same way by everybody, whereas Sacks makes these
processes of comprehension problematical. He argues
that it is our knowledge of social structure which makes
such passages intelligible. To the extent that Sacks suc-
ceeds, his work is crucial for the study of cross-cultural
communication problems raised by Ervin-Tripp in
Chapter 7.
    A precondition for the study of social categories along
Sacks' lines is a knowledge of lexical systems. It is neces-
sary to be familiar with the total range of alternate terms
that the speaker has available for expressing a certain
kind of message in order to evaluate the significance of
his choice. Sacks' analysis therefore bears some similar-
ity to ethnoscience (see Frake, Chapter 3). However, in
attempting to relate lexical domains to the use of specific
terms in conversations, Sacks goes considerably beyond
normal ethnoscience practices. He points out, e.g., that
328   Discovering Structure in Speech

words such as "baby" can form part of two "category
collections" or semantic domains: "stage of life" and
"family." Additional relevance rules are needed to
specify which one of the possible categories applies in this
particular case. These relevance rules have functions
similar to some linguists' semantic rules. They determine
which of a number of possible interpretations holds in a
particular instance. But whereas the linguists' rules apply
only to relationships within sentences, Sacks' rules typi-
cally apply to the semantic ties between terms in different·
sentences, or sometimes, as in the passage quoted in foot-
note 2, between two sections of conversation which are
separated by long intervening passages.
   Further points of interest are that the rules of interpre-
tation go beyond speech. There is a viewer's maxim
precisely the same as the hearer's maxim. Interpretation
is also related to the structuring of narrative genres in
terms of proper beginnings and endings, a feature of natu-
ral conversation which is examined in more detail by
Schegloff in the following chapter.
    Sacks' analysis may seem to proceed overlaboriously
 for the material at hand. Yet although only two sentences
 are subjected to detailed analysis, the apparatus devel-
 oped (specifically, such concepts as categorization de-
 vice, duplicative organization, category-bound activity,
 consistency rules, etc.) is a highly general one and prom-
 ises to be applicable to analysis of all verbal interaction.
 lfwe want to understand what a speaker seeks to achieve
 with a particular utterance (as apart from the overt con-
 tent of what he says), it is necessary to be familiar with
 the social categories he uses and the cultural associations
 they carry for him. Assigning others to these categories,
 and ascribing to them certain category-related activities,
 are important ways of expressing his intention.
   The Turkish verbal dueling described by Alan Dundes
 (Chapter 4) forms a case in point. The strategy of these
 duels is to assign the opponent either to the social cate-
 gory of passive homosexual or to the category of a person
 who allows his mother or sister to undergo sexual attack.
 Both of these categories carry cultural connotations of
 cowardliness and lack of manliness and inferiority in
 comparison to the speaker, who is presumably the at-
 tacker. The end effect is that of a put down, but a put
                    On the A na/yzability of Stories by Children
                                                                   329
         down which is understandable only to one who know
         the relevant Turkish social categories and their cultura~
         implications. The referential meaning of a word here i
         less important than the associations it conveys through it!
         membership in a culturally determined category collec-
         tion. Apparently, in this verbal dueling context, words
         such as 'cow' and 'donkey' are both part of the category
         collection passive homosexual, whereas words such as
         'cowboy,' or expressions such as "my father's hairy roof."
         are part of the category collection associated with ma~-
         liness.
            Of special importance from the standpoint of socio-
        ·linguistic analysis is the view that social phenomena are of
         the same order as linguistic phenomena. The same
         linguistic corpus can be used for both the analysis of
         linguistic form and the analysis of social categories, and
         instead of attempting to correlate linguistic forms with
         social information collected elsewhere, the choice of
         linguistic forms can be seen simply as a realization of the
         social meanings and categories in somewhat the same
         way the pronunciation of a word is a realization of its
         semantic structure. Additional related readings are pro-
         vided by Frake (1964c), Gunter (1966), Halliday
         ( 1967-1968), Labov and Waletsky (1967), Wheeler
         (1967). For an application of Sacks' approach to
         problems of urban education, see Gumperz and Her-
         nandez ( 1971 ).



         In this chapter I intend, first, to present and employ several of the
more basic concepts and techniques which I shall be using. Since most of
those I shall use at this point may also be found in the paper "An Initial
Investigation of the Usability of Conversational Data for Doing Sociol-
ogy" (Sacks 1970), the discussion here may be seen as reintroducing and
extending the results developed there.
   Second, I shall focus on the activity "doing describing" and the correla-
tive activity "recognizing a description," activities which members may
be said to do, and which therefore are phenomena which sociologists and
anthropologists must aim to be able to describe. It will initially be by ref-
erence to an examination of instances of members' describings that my at-
tempts to show how sociologists might solve their own problem of con-
structing descriptions will be developed.
         330     Discovering Structure in Speech

   Proceeding in the fashion I have proposed will permit a focus on sev-
eral central and neglected issues which social science must face, most par-
ticularly, the problem of members' knowledge and the problem of rele-
vance. Let us then begin.


         Problems in Recognizing
         Possible Descriptions

          The initial data are the first two sentences from a "story" offered
by a two-year-and-nine-month-old girl to the author of the book Children
Tell Stories. 1 They are: "The baby cried. The mommy picked it up." I
shall first make several observations about these sentences. Before doing
so, however, let me note: If these observations strike you as a ranker sort
of subjectivism, then I ask you to read on just far enough to see whether it
is or is not the case that the observations are both relevant and defensible.
When I hear "The baby cried. The mommy picked it up," one thing
I hear is that the 'mommy' who picks the 'baby' up is the mommy of
that baby. That is a first observation. (You will, of course, notice that the
second sentence does not contain a genitive. It does not read, "Its
mommy picked it up," or variants thereof.) Now it is not only that/ hear
that the mommy is the mommy of that baby, but I feel rather confident
that at least many of the natives among you hear that also. That is a sec-
ond observation. One of my tasks is going to be to construct an apparatus
which will provide for the foregoing facts to have occurred; an apparatus,
i.e., which will show how it is that we come to hear the fragment as we do.
   Some more: I take it we hear two sentences. Call the first S 1 and the sec-
 ond S2 ; the first reports an occurrence 0 2 and the second reports an
 occurrence 0 2 • Now, I take it we hear that as S 2 follows S 1 , so 0 2 follows
 0 1 • That is a third observation. And also: We hear that 0 2 occurs because
of 0 1 :i.e., the explanation for 0 2 occurring is that 0 1 did. That is a fourth
observation. I want the apparatus to show how we come to hear those
facts also.
    If I asked you to explain the group of observations which I have made,
 observations which you could have made just as well-and let me note,
 they are not proposed as sociological findings, but rather do they pose
 some of the problems which social science shall have to resolve-you
 might well say something like the following: We hear that it is the mommy
 of the baby who picks the baby up because she's the one who ought to
 pick it up, and (you might eventually add) if she's the one who ought to

   1
     Pitcher and Prelinger, Children Tell Stories: An Analysis of Fantasy. (New York: Inter-
 national Universities Press, I 963.)
                      On the Analyzability of Stories by Children.   331

  pick it up, and it was picked up by somebody who could be her, then it
  was her, or was probably her.
    You might go on: While it is quite clear that not any two consecutive
 sentences, not even any consecutive sentences that report occurrences,
 are heard, and properly heard, as reporting that the occurrences have oc-
 curred in the order which the sentences have, if the occurrences ought to
 occur in that order, and if there is no information to the contrary (such as
 a phrase at the beginning of the second, like "before that, however"), then
 the order of the sentences indicates the order of the occurrences. And
 these two sentences do present the order of the occurrences they report in
 the proper order for such occurrences. If the baby cried, it ought to have
 started crying before the mother picked it up, and not after. Hearing it that
 way, the second sentence is explained by the first; hearing them as con-
 secutive or with the second preceding the first, some further explanation
 is needed, and none being present, we may suppose that it is not needed.
    Now let me make a fifth observation: All of the foregoing can be done
 by many or perhaps any of us without knowing what baby or what
 mommy it is that might be being talked of.
    With this fifth observation it may now be noticed that what we've es-
sentially been saying so far is that the pair of sentences seems to satisfy
what a member might require of some pair of sentences for them to be rec-
ognizable as "a possible description." They "sound like a description,"
and some form of words can, apparently, sound like a description. To
recognize that some form of words is a possible description does not
require that one must first inspect the circumstances it may be character-
izing.
   That "possible descriptions" are recognizable as such is quite an impor-
tant fact, for members, and for social scientists. The reader ought to be
able to think out some of its import for members, e.g., the economies it af-
fords them. It is the latter clause, "and for social scientists," that I now
wish to attend to.
   Were it not so both that members have an activity they do, "de-
scribing," and that at least some cases of that activity produce, for them,
forms of words recognizable as at least possible descriptions without
having to do an inspection of the circumstances they might characterize,
then it might well be that social science would necessarily be the last of
the sciences to be made do-able. For, unless social scientists could study
such things as these "recognizable descriptions," we might only be able to
investigate such activities of members as in one or another way turned on
"their knowledge of the world" when social scientists could employ some
established, presumptively correct scientific characterizations of the phe-
nomena members were presumably dealing with and knowing about.
   If, however, members have a phenomenon, "possible desc1iptions"
        332   Discovering Structure in Speech

which are recognizable per se, then one need not in the instance know
how it is that babies and mommies do behave to examine the composition
of such possible descriptions as members produce and recognize. Sociol-
ogy and anthropology need not await developments in botany or genetics
or analyses of the light spectra to gain a secure position from which
members' knowledge, and the activities for which it is relevant, might be
investigated.
   What one ought to seek to build is an apparatus which will provide for
how it is that any activities, which members do in such a way as to be rec-
ognizable as such to members, are done, and done recognizably. Such an
apparatus will, of course, have to generate and provide for the recogniz-
ability of more than just possible descriptions, and in later discussions we
shall be engaged in providing for such activities as "inviting," "warning,"
and so forth, as the data we consider will permit and require.
    My reason for having gone through the observations I have so far made
was to give you some sense, right off, of the fine power of a culture. It
does not, so to speak, merely fill brains in roughly the same way, it fills
 them so that they are alike in fine detail. The sentences we are considering
 are after all rather minor, and yet all of you, or many of you, hear just
what I said you heard, and many of us are quite unacquainted with each
 other. I am, then, dealing with something real and something finely power-
 ful.


         Membership Categorization Devices

          We may begin to work at the construction of the apparatus. I'm
going to introduce several of the terms we need. The first term is menz-
bership categorization device (or just categorization device). By this term
I shall intend: any collection of membership categories, containing at least
a category, which may be applied to some population containing at least a
member, so as to provide, by the use of some rules of application, for the
pairing of at least a population member and a categorization device
member. A device is then a collection plus rules of application.
   An instance of a categorization device is the one called 'sex': Its collec-
tion is the two categories (male, female). It is important to observe that a
collection consists of categories that "go together." For now that may
merely be seen as a constraint of the following sort: I could say that some
set of categories was a collection, and be wrong. I shall present some rules
of application very shortly.
   Before doing that, however, let me observe that 'baby' and 'mommy'
can be seen to be categories from one collection: The collection whose
device is called 'family' and which consists of such categories as ('baby,'
                        On the Analyzability of Stories by Children
                                                                           333
 ' mommy, , 'd add y, , . . .) where b Y " . . . " we mean that there 'l.
but not any others, e.g., 'shortstop.'                                      'ie others,
    Let me introduce a few rules of application. It may be observed th .
 member uses a single category from any membership categ . at ~fa
device,· then t h ey can b e recogmze    · d to b e d · omg adequate ,.,,re. onzation
                                          .      .         .            "J' 1ence to a
 person. We may put the observation ma negative form: It is no·t
sary that some mu 1hp e o categories rom categorization de . neces-
                           . 1     f           .      f
employe d for recogmtlon  · · t h at a person 1s   · bemg
                                                        . referred to, to bevicesd be  .
single category will do. (I do not mean by this that more cannot bma e, a
only that for reference to persons to be recogmzed             .   more need e used '
used.) W 1t t at o servat10n we can 1ormu1ate a "reference s· not
           . h  h       b        ·                  c
                                                                                  t' f be
toriness ru e, w 1c we ca t e economy ru e. t holds: A sing! is ac-
     ·   "    1    h'   h         II " h                 1   "   I             ct
                               .            . . d .                             e cate-
gory from any members h1p categorizat10n ev1ce can be referentially ade-
quate.
    A second rule I call "the consistency rule." It holds: If some popul t·
of persons 1s. bemg
                  . categorize   . d , an d 1'f a category f rom some device'sa ion
Jection has been used to categorize     .
                                             a fi1rst member of the population th    co1-
that category of other categories of the sa~e collection may be us,ed ~~
categorize further members of the populat10n. The former rule was a
reference satisfactoriness" rule; this latter one is a "relevance" rule
(Sacks, in press).
    The economy rule having provided for the adequate reference of 'baby ,
tbe consistency rule tells us that if the first person has been categorized
as 'baby,' then further persons may be referred to by other categories
of a collection of which they are a member, and thus that such other cat-
egories as 'mommy' and 'daddy' are relevant given the use of 'baby.,
    While in its currently weak form and alone, the consistency rule may
exclude no category of any device, even in this weak form (the "may"
form-I shall eventually introduce a "must" form), a corollary of it will
prove to be useful. The corollary is a "hearer's maxim." It holds: If two or
more categories are used to categorize two or more members of some
population, and those categories can be heard as categories from the same
collection, then: Hear them that way. Let us call the foregoing "the con-
sistency rule corollary." It has the following sort of usefulness. Various
membership categorization-device categories can be said to be ambigu-
ous. That is, the same categorial word is a term occurring in several dis-
tinct devices, and can in each have quite a different reference; they may or
may not be combinably usable in regard to a single person. So, e.g., 'baby'
occurs in the device 'family' and also in the device 'stage oflife' whose cat-
egories are such as 'baby,' 'child,' . . . 'adult'). A hearer who can use the
consistency rule corollary will regularly not even notice that there might
be an ambiguity in the use of some category among a group which it can
be used to hear as produced via the consistency rule.
        334    Discovering Structure in Speech

    It is, of course, clear that the two categories 'baby' are sometimes com-
binably referential and sometimes not. A woman may refer to someone as
"my baby" with no suggestion that she is using the category that occurs in
the 'stage of life' device; her baby may be a full-fledged adult. In the case
at hand that problem does not occur, and we shall be able to provide the
bases for it not occurring, i.e., the bases for the legitimacy of hearing the
single term 'baby' as referring to a person located by reference both to the
device 'family' and to the device 'stage of life.'
    With this, let us modify the observation on the consistency rule as
follows: The consistency rule tells us that if a first person has been cat-
egorized as 'baby,' the further persons may be referred to by categories
from either the device 'family' or from the device 'stage of life.' However,
if a hearer has a second category which can be heard as consistent with
one locus of a first, then the first is to be heard as at least consistent with
the second.
    Given the foregoing, we may proceed to show how the combined refer-
ence of 'baby' is heard for our two sentences, and also how 'the mommy'
is heard as 'the mommy of the baby.' We shall deal with the latter task
first, and we assume from now on that the consistency rule corollary has
yielded at least that 'baby' and 'mommy' are heard as from the device
'family.' We assume that without prejudice to the further fact that 'baby'
is also heard as 'baby' from the device 'stage of life.'
    The device 'family' is one of a series which you may think of by a proto-
 typical name 'team.' One central property of such devices is that they are
 what I am going to call "duplicatively organized.'' I mean by the use of
 that term to point out the following: When such a device is used on a pop-
 ulation, what is done is to take its categories, treat the set of categories as
 defining a unit, and place members of the population into cases of the unit.
 If a population is so treated and is then counted, one counts not numbers
 of daddies, numbers of mommies, and numbers of babies but numbers of
 families-numbers of 'whole families,' numbers of 'families without
 fathers,' etc. A population so treated is partitioned into cases of the unit,
 cases for which what properly holds is that the various persons partitioned
 into any case are 'coincumbents' of that case.
     There are hearer's maxims which correspond to these ways of dealing
 with populations categorized by way of duplicatively organized devices.
 One that is relevant to our current task holds: If some population has
 been categorized by use of categories from some device whose collection
 has the "duplicative organization" property, and a member is presented
 with a categorized population which can be heard as 'coincumbents' of a
 case of that device's unit, then: Hear it that way. (I will consider the
  underscored phrase shortly.) Now let it be noticed that this rule is of far
  more general scope than we may seem to need. In focusing on a property
  like duplicative organization it permits a determination of an expectation
  (of social scientists) as to how some categorized population will be heard



                                                                                   j
                     On the Analyzability of Stories by Children   335

independently of a determination of how it is heard. It is then formal and
predictive, as well, of course, as quite general.
  Now, by the phrase "can be heard" we mean to rule out predictions of
the following sort. Some duplicatively organized devices have proper
numbers of incumbents for certain categories of any unit. (At any given
time a nation-state may have but one president, a family but one father, a
baseball team but one shortstop on the field, etc.) If more incumbents of a
category are proposed as present in the population than a unit's case can
properly take, then the 'can be heard' constraint is not satisfied, and a
prediction would not be made.


         Category-Bound Activities

          The foregoing analysis shows us then how it is that we come to
 hear, given the fact that the device 'family' is duplicatively organized, and
 the "can be heard" constraint being satisfied, 'the mommy' to be 'the
 mommy of the baby.' It does, of course, much more than that. It permits
 us to predict, and to understand how we can predict, that a statement such
 as "The first baseman looked around. The third baseman scratched him-
 self." will be heard as saying "the first baseman of the team on which the
 third baseman is also a player" and its converse.
    Or, putting the claim more precisely, it shows us how, in part-"in
 part" because for the materials at hand it happens that there are other
 means for providing that the same hearing be made, means which can
 operate in combination with the foregoing, otherwise sufficient ones, to
 further assure the hearings we have observed. That will be done in the
 next section. Let us now undertake our second task, to show how 'the
 baby' is heard in its combined form, i.e., as the category with that name
 from both the 'stage of life' device and from the 'family' device.
    Let me introduce a term which I am going to call category-bound activi-
 ties. While I shall not now give an intendedly careful definition of the
 term, I shall indicate what I mean to notice with it and then in a while
 offer a procedure for determining that some of its proposed cases are
 indeed cases of it. By the term I intend to notice that many activities are
taken by members to be done by some particular or several particular cat-
egories of members where the categories are categories from membership
categorization devices.
    Let me notice then, as is obvious to you, that 'cry' is bound to 'baby,'
i.e., to the category 'baby' which is a member of the collection from the
'stage of life' device. Again, the fact· that members know that this is so
only serves, for the social scientist, to pose some problem. What we want
is to construct some means by reference to which a class, which propos-
edly contains at least the activity-category 'cry' and presumably others,
may have the inclusion of its candidate-members assessed. We will not be
         336     Discovering Structure in Speech

claiming that the procedure is definitive as to exclusion of a candidate-
member, but we will claim that it is definitive as to inclusion of a can-
didate-member.
   It may be observed that the members of the 'stage of life' collection are
'positioned' ('baby' . . . 'adolescent' . . . 'adult' . . . ), an observation
which, for now, we shall leave unexamined. I want to describe a proce-
dure for praising or degrading members, the operation of which consists
of the use of the fact that some activities are category bound. If there are
such procedures, they will provide one strong sense of the notion "cat-
egory-bound activities" and also will provide, for any given candidate
activity, a means for warrantably deciding that it is a member of the class
of category-bound activities.
   For some positioned-category devices it can be said as between any
two categories of such a device that A is either higher or lower than B,
and if A is higher than B, and B is higher than C, then A is higher than C.
   We have some activity which is a candidate-member of the class 'cat-
egory-bound activities' and which is proposedly bound to some category C.
Then, a member of either A or B who does that activity may be seen to be
degrading himself, and may be said to be 'acting like a C.' Alternatively, if
 some candidate activity is proposedly bound to A, a member of C who
 does it is subject to being said to be acting like an A, where that assertion
 constitutes "praising."
    If, using the 'stage of life' categories, we subject 'crying' to such a test,
we do find that its candidacy as a member of the class "category-bound
 activities" is warrantable. In the case of 'crying' the results are even
 stronger. For, it appears, if a 'baby' is subject to some circumstances
 which would for such a one warrant crying, and he does not, then his 'not
 crying' is observable, and may be used to propose that "he is acting like a
 big boy," where that assertion is taken to be "praise." 2
    The foregoing procedure can, obviously enough, be used for other
 devices and other candidate activities. Other procedures may also be
 used; e.g., one way to decide that an activity is category bound is to see
 whether, the fact of membership being unknown, it can be "hinted at" by
 naming the activity as something one does. 3

   2 Consider e.g., the following: "These children are highly aware that they have graduated

from the rank of 'baby' and are likely to exhibit considerable scorn of babies, whether a
neighbor's child or a younger sibling. This feeling of superiority is the residue of the parents'
praise for advance behavior and their inciting the child by remarks like "Only babies do
that. You're not a baby." The frequency of these remarks at this age, however, suggest that
in adult minds, at least, there is concern lest the children lapse into babyish ways" (Fischer
and Fischer in Whiting 1963 :949).
   3
     The following data is from a telephone call between a staff member (S) and a caller (C)
to an emergency psychiatric clinic. Note the juxtaposition of "hair stylist" in item 4 with
suspected homosexuality in the last item.
                        On the Analyzability of Stories by Children
                                                                               337

    Having constructed a procedure which can warrant the ca d'd
 some activity as a member of the class "category-bound acti~7ti~s~~y of
 which warrants the membership of 'cry' and provides for its be'                     b
                                                                                   and
 to 'baby,' i.e., that category 'baby' which is a member of the 'st·mg o~nd
 collection, we move on to see how it is that 'the baby' in our saget ofhfe'
 heard m. the combmed .    reference we have proposed.                    en ence rs ·
   We need, first, another "hearer's maxim." If a category-bound                . .
is asserted to have been done by a member of some category Whe activity       'f
category rs· am b'1guous ('1.e., rs
                                 · a mem b er o f at 1east two different re,d 1 . that
but where, at least for one of those devices, the asserted activity ,evrces)
                                               .
                       .
gory boun d tot h e given   category, t h en h ear t hat at least the categ rs fcate-
the device to which it is bound is being asserted to hold.                 ory rom
   The foregoing maxim will then provide for hearing "The baby cri d ,,
referring to at least 'baby' from the 'stage of life' device. The resu~t · ~s
tained from the use of the consistency rule corollary, being independ s ~ ;
that, are combinable with it. The consistency rule corollary gave eun °t
least that 'the baby' was the category from the device 'family.' The co;b~-
nation gives us both.
   If our analysis seems altogether too complicated for the rather simpl
facts we have been examining, then we invite the reader to consider tha~
our machinery has intendedly been "overbuilt." That is to say it may turn
out that the elaborateness of our analysis, or its apparent elaborateness
                                                                                            '

S:     So, you can't watch television. Is there anything you can stay interested in?
C:     No, not really.
S:     What interests did you have before?
C:     I was a hair stylist at one time. I did some fashions now and then. Things like that
S:    Then why aren't you working?                                                          ·
C:     Because I don't want to, I guess. Maybe that's why.
S:     But do you find that you just can't get yourself going?
C:     No. Well, as far as the job goes?
S:     Yes.
C:    Well, I'll tell you. I'm afraid. I'm afraid to go out and look for a job. That's what
       I'm afraid of. But more, I think I'm afraid of myself because I don't know. I'm just
      terribly mixed up.
S:    You haven't had any trouble with anyone close to you?
C:    Close to me. Well, I've been married three times and I'm-Close, you mean, as
      far as arguments or something like that?
S:    Yes.
C:    No, nobody real close. I'm just a very lonely person. I guess I'm very-
S:    There's nobody who loves you.
C:    Well, I feel that somebody must someplace, but I don't know where or who.
S:    Have you been having some sexual problems?
C:    All my life.
S:    Uh huh. Yeah.
C:    Naturally. You probably suspect-as far as the hair stylist and-either go one way
      or the other. There is a straight or homosexual, something like that. I'm telling you,
      my whole life is just completely mixed up and turned over and it's just smashed
      and I'm not kidding.
        338    Discovering Structure in Speech

will disappear when one begins to consider the amount of work that the
very same machinery can pe1form.
  In the next section I will attempt to show that the two sentences "The
baby cried. The mommy picked it up." constitute a possible description.



        Identifying Possible Descriptions

          I shall focus next on the fact that an activity can be category
bound and then on the import of there being a norm which provides for
some second activity, given the occurrence of a first, considering both of
these with regard to the "correctness," for members, of "possible
description."
   Let me for· the moment leave aside our two sentences and consider
some observations on how it is that I see, and take it you see, describable
occurrences. Suppose you are standing somewhere, and you see a person
you don't know. The person cries. Now, if I can, I will see that what has
happened is that a baby cried. And I take it that you will, if you can, see
that too. That's a. first pair of observations. Suppose again you are
standing somewhe{·e and you see two people you don't know. Suppose
further thatone cries, and the other picks up the one who is crying. Now,
if I can, I will see that what has happened is that a baby cried and its
mother picked it up. And I take it that you will, if you can, see that too.
That's a second pair of observations.
   Consider the first pair of observations. The modifying phrases, to deal
with them first, refer simply to the possibility that the category 'baby'
might be obviously inapplicable to the crier. By reference to the 'stage of
life' collection the crier may be seen to be an adult. And that being so, the
'if . . . can' constraint wouldn't be satisfied. But there are certainly other
possible characterizations of the crying person. For example, without
respect to the fact that it is a baby, it could be either 'male' or 'female,' and
nonetheless I would not, and I take it you would not, seeing the scene,
see that "a male cried" if we could see that "a baby cried."
   The pair of observations suggest the following "viewer's maxim": If a
member sees a category-bound activity being done, then, if one can see it
being done by a member of a category to which the activity is bound,
then: See it that way. The viewer's maxim is another relevance rule in that
it proposes that for an observer of a category-bound activity the category
to which the activity is bound has a special relevance for formulating an1
identification of its doer.                                                     /
   Consider the second pair of observations. As members you, of course,
know that there is a norm which might be written as: A mother ought to
try to soothe her crying baby. I, and you, not only know that there is such
                       On the Analyzability of Stories by Children   339

      a norm but, as you may recall, we used it in doing our he~ring of "The
      ~aby cried. The mommy picked it up." In addition to the fact of duplica-
      tive organization, the norm was relevant in bringing us to hear that it was
      the mommy of the baby who did the picking up. While we would have
      heard that it was the mommy of the baby for other pairs of activities in
      which the two were involved (but not any pair), the fact that the pair were
      relatable via a norm which assigns the mother of the baby that duty may
     have operated in combination with the duplicative organization to assure
     our hearing that it was she who did it.
        Leaving aside the hearing of the sentence, we are led to construct
     another viewer's maxim: If one sees a pair of actions which can be related
     via the operation of a norm that provides for the second given the first,
     where the doers can be seen as members of the categories the norm
    provides as proper for that pair of actions, then: (a) See that the doers are
     such members and (b) see the second as done in conformity with the
    norm.
        This second viewer's maxim suggests an observation about norms. In
    the sociological and anthropological literature, the focus on norms is on
    the conditions under which and the extent to which they govern, or can be
    seen by social ·scientists to govern, the relevant actions of those members
   whose actions they ought to control. While such matters are, of course,
   important, our viewer's maxim suggests other' importances of norms, for
   members.
       Viewers use norms to provide some of the orderliness, and proper
   orderliness, of the activities they observe. Via some norm two activities
   may be made observable as a sequentially ordered pair. That is, viewers
  use norms to explain both the occurrence of some activity given the occur-
   rence of another and also its sequential position with regard to the other,
  e.g., that it follows the other, or precedes it. That is a first importance.
  Second, viewers use norms to provide the relevant membership cat-
  egories in terms of which they formulate identifications of the doers of
  those activities for which the norms are appropriate.
      Now let me observe, viewers may use norms in each of the preceding
 Ways, and feel confident in their usage without engaging in such an inves-
 tigation as would serve to warrant the correctness of their usages. This
 last observation is worth some further thought.
      We may, at least initially, put the matter thus: For viewers, the usability
 of the viewer's maxims serves to warrant the correctness of their observa-
 tions. And that is then to say, the usability of the viewer's maxims
Provides for the recognizability of the correctness of the observations done
via those maxims. And that is then to say, "correct observations" or, at
least, "possible correct observations" are "recognizable."
     (Members feel no need in warranting their observation, in recognizing
its correctness to do such a thing as to ask the woman whether she is the
         340     Discovering Structure in Speech

mother of the baby ,4 or to ask her whether she picked it up because it was
crying; i.e., they feel no such need so long as the viewer's maxims are
usable.)
  In short: "Correctness" is recognizable, and there are some exceed-
ingly nice ties between recognizably correct description and recognizably
correct observations. One such tie which is relevant to the tasks we have
undertaken is: A string of sentences which may be heard, via the hearer's
maxims, as having been produced by use of the viewer's maxims, will be
heard as a "recognizably correct possible description."


         Sequential Ordering

           The rest of this chapter will be devoted to two tasks. I shall try to
  develop some further rewards of the analysis so far assembled, some
  consequences it throws off; and to show also how it is that the two sen-
  tences ("The baby cried. The mommy picked it up.") can warrantably be
  said to be from "a story." I start with the latter task.
     It ought to be apparent that the fact that the children whose talk is
  reported in Children Tell Stories were asked to tell a story is not definitive
  of their having done so. It is at least possible that the younger ones among
  them are not capable of building stories, of building talk that is recogniz-
  able as a "story," or, at least, as a "possible story."
     It happens to be correct, for Western literature, that if some piece of
  talk is a possible description it is also, and thereby, a possible story or
  story part. It appears, therefore, that having established that the two sen-
  tences are a possible description, I have also, and thereby, established
  that they are possibly (at least part of) a story. To stop now would, how-
  ever, involve ignoring some story-relevant aspects of the given sentences
  which are both interesting and subjectable to analysis. So, I go on.
     Certain characteristics are quite distinctive to stories. For example,
· there are characteristic endings ("And they lived happily ever after") and
  characteristic beginnings ("once upon a time"). I shall consider whether
  the possible story, a fragment of which we have been investigating, can be
  said (and I mean here, as throughout, "warrantably said") to close with
  what is recognizable as "an ending" and to start with what is recognizable
  as "a beginning."
     In suggesting a difference between "starts" and proper "beginnings,"
  and between "closes" and proper "endings," I am introducing a distinc-
  tion which has some importance. The distinction, which is by no means
   4
     "A late child was at times embarrassing to one woman who, while enjoying him, found
 that in public places she often overheard people saying, 'They must be his grandparents"'
 (Fischer and Fischer in Whiting 1963:934).
                       On the Analyzability of Stories by Children   341

original, may be developed by considering some very simple observation.
   I. A piece of talk which regularly is used to do some activity-as
"Hello" is used to do "greeting"-may not invariably be so used, but may
do other activities as well-as "Hello" is used to check out whether
another with whom one is talking on the phone is still there or has been
cut off-where it is in part its occurrence in "the middle" and not "the
start" of a conversation that serves to discriminate the use being made of it.
  2. Certain activities not only have regular places in some sequence
where they do get done but may, if their means of being done is not found
there, be said, by members, to not have occurred, to be absent.
  For example, the absence of a greeting may be noticed, as the following
conversation, from field observation, indicates. The scene involved two
adult women, one the mother of two children, ages six and ten. The kids
enter and the following ensues:

WOMAN:           Hi.
BOY:            Hi.
WOMAN:          Hi, Annie.
MOTHER:         Annie, don't you hear someone say,hello to you?
WOMAN:          Oh, that's okay, she smiled hello.,
MOTHER:         You know you're supposed to greet someone, don't you?
ANNIE:          [Hangs head] Hello.

   3. Certain activities can only be done at certain places in a sequence.
 For example, a third strike can only be thrown by a pitcher after he has
 two strikes on a batter.
   Observations such as these lead to a distinction between a "slot" and
 the "items" which fill it, and to proposing that certain activities are ac-
complished by a combination of some item and some slot.
   The notion of slot serves for the social scientist to mark a class of rele-
vance rules. Thus, if it can be said that for some assertable sequence there
is a position in which one or more activities properly occur, or occur if
they are to get done, then: The observability of either the occurrence or
the nonoccurrence of those activities may be claimed by reference to
having looked to the position and determined whether what occurs in it is
a way of doing the activity.
   An instance of the class of relevance rules might run: To see whether a
conversation included "greetings," look to the first utterance of either
party and see whether there occurs in it any item which passes as a greet-
ing; items such as ('hello,' 'hi,' 'hi there,'. . . ). The fact that the list con-
tains the ellipsis might be deeply troublesome were it not the case that
while we are unable to list all the members of the class "greeting items,"
we can say that the class is bounded, and that there are some utterables
which are not members of it, perhaps, for example, the sentence now
        342    Discovering Structure i11 Speech

being completed. If that and only that occurred in a first utterance, we
might feel assured in saying that a greeting did not occur.
    Consider just one way that this class of relevance rules is important.
Roughly; it permits the social scientist to nontrivially assert that some-
thing is absent. Non trivial talk of an absence requires that some means be
available for showing both the relevance of occurrence of the activity that
is proposedly absent and the location where it should be looked for to see
that it did not occur. Lacking these, an indefinite set of other activities
might equally well be asserted to be absent given some occurrence, and
the assertion in question not being discriminable from the (other)
members of that indefinite set, it is trivialized.
    It does seem that for stories it is correct to say that they can have begin-
nings, and we can then inspect the items that occur at their start to see
whether they can be seen to make a beginning. Given further that stories
can have endings, we can inspect the items that occur at their close to see
whether they can be seen to make an ending.
    While my main interest will be with the story's start as a possible proper
beginning, let me briefly consider its close: "She went to sleep." With this
the speaker would seem 'to be not merely closing but closing making a
 proper ending. It so seems by virtue of the fact that such a sentence
 reports an occurrence, or can be heard as reporting an occurrence, which
 is a proper ending to something for which endings are relevant and stand-
 ardized, that very regularly used unit of orientation, the day. A day being
 recognized as ending for some person when they go to sleep, so a story
 may be recognized as closing with an ending if at its close there is a report
 of the protagonist's having gone to sleep. This particular sort of ending is,
 of course, not at all particular to stories constructed by young children; it,
 and other endings like it, from "the last sleep" death unto the shutting
 down of the world, are regular components of far more sophisticated ven-
 tures in Western literature.
     Let me turn then to the start, to consider whether it can be said to be a
 beginning. l shall attempt to show that starting to talk to adults is for small
 children a rather special matter. I shall do that by focusing on a most char-
 acteristic way that small children, of around the age of the teller of the
 given story, characteristically open their talk to adults, i.e., the use of such
 items as "You know what?" l shall offer an analysis of that mode of start-
 ing off, which will characterize the problems such a start can be
  seen to operate as a methodical solution to.
     The promised analysis will warrant my assertion that starting to talk is,
 for small children, a special matter. That having been established, I shall
  turn to see whether the particular start we have for this story may be seen
 as another type of solution to the same problem that I will have shown to
  be relevant.
                     On the Analyzability of Stories by Children   343

     If I can then show that another solution is employed in our problematic
  utterance (the sentence "The baby cried"), I will have shown that the story
 starts with something that is properly a beginning, and that therefore, both
 start and close are "proper" beginning and end. Such, in any event, are
 my intentions.
    I begin, roughly and only as an assumption (though naively, the matter
 is obvious), by asserting that kids have restricted rights to talk. That being
 the case, by assumption, I want to see whether the ways that they go
 about starting to talk, with adults, can be most adequately seen to be solu-
 tions to the problem which focuses on needing to have a good start if one
 is going to get further than that. Starts which have that character can then
 be called beginnings.
    Now, kids around the age of three go through a period when some of
 them have an almost universal way of beginning any piece of talk they
 make to adults. They use things like: "You know what, Daddy?" or "You
 know something, Mommy?"
    I will introduce a few rules of conversational sequencing. I do that
 without presenting data now, but the facts are so obvious that you can
check them out easily for yourself; you know the rules anyway. The
sequencing rules are for two-party conversation; and, since two-party
conversation is a special phenomenon, what I say is not intended as
 applying for three- or more party conversation.
    One basic rule of two-party conversation concerns a pair of objects,
questions and answers. It runs: If one party asks a question, when the
question is complete, the other party properly speaks, and properly offers
an answer to the question and says no more than that. The rule will need
considerable explication, but for now, it will do as it stands.
    A second rule, and it's quite a fundamental one, because by reference to
it the, in principle, infinite character of a conversation can be seen as: A
person who has asked a question can talk again, has, as we may put it, "a
reserved right to talk again," after the one to whom he has addressed the
question speaks. And, in using the reserved right he can ask a question. I
call this rule the "chaining rule," and in combination with the first rule it
provides for the occurrence of an indefinitely long conversation of the
form Q-A-Q-A-Q-A-. . . .
    Now, the characteristic opener that we are considering is a question
(e.g., "You know what?"). Having begun in that way, a user who did not
have restricted rights to talk would be in a position of generating an indefi-
nite set of further questions as each question was replied to, or as the
other otherwise spoke on the completion of some question.
   But the question we begin with is a rather curious one in that it is one of
those fairly but not exceptionally rare questions which have as their
answer another question, in this case the proper and recurrent answer is
        344   Discovering Structllre in Speech

"What?". The use of initial questions of this sort has a variety of
consequences. First, if a question which has another question as its
proper answer is used and is properly replied to, i.e., is replied to with the
proper question, then the chaining rule is turned around, i.e., it is the ini-
tial answerer and not the initial questioner who now has the reserved right
to speak again after the other speaks. The initial questioner has by his
question either not assumed that he can use the chaining rule or has
chosen not to. (Note that we are not saying that he has not chosen to in-
voke the chaining rule but rather that he has instead given the choice of in-
voking it to the initial answerer. There are two different possibilities in-
volved.)
   Second, the initial questioner does not only not make his second speech
by virtue of the chaining rule but he makes it by virtue of the first
sequencing rule, i.e., by reference to the fact that a person who has been
asked a question properly speaks and properly replies to it. His second
speech is then not merely not made as a matter of either the chaining rule
or his choice by some other means of making a second speech but it is
something he makes by obligation, given the fact that he has been asked a
question and is therefo~e obliged to answer.
   Third, the question he is obliged to answer is, however, "an open one"
in the sense that what it is that an answer would be is something that its
asker does not know, and further is one that its answerer by the prior
sequence should know. What an answer is then to the second question is
whatever it is the kid takes to be an answer, and he is thereby provided
with the opportunity to say whatever it is he wanted to say in the first
place, not now, however, on his own say-so but as a matter of obligation.
   In that case then-and the foregoing being a method whereby the
production of the question "You know what?" may be explicated-we
 may take it that kids take it that they have restricted rights which consist
of a right to begin, to make a first statement and not much more. Thereaf-
 ter they proceed only if requested to. And if that is their situation as they
 see it, they surely have ev6lved a nice solution to it.
    With the foregoing we can say then that a focus on the way kids be~in t_o
 talk is appropriate, and we can see whether the beginnings of stones, if
 they are not made of the culturally standardized beginnings (such as
 "once upon a time"), might be seen to be beginnings by virtue of the
 special situation which kids have vis-a-vis beginning to talk.
    We may arrive at the status of "The baby cried" as a proper beginning,
 in particular as a start that is a beginning by virtue of being a proper
 opener for one who has restricted rights to talk, by proceeding in the ~ol- )
 lowing way. Let us consider another solution to the problem of starting
 talk under restricted rights. I'll begin by introducing a word, 'ticket.' I can
 show you what I mean to point to with the word by a hypothetical ex-
 ample. Suppose two adults are copresent and lack rights to talk to each




                                                                               d
                      On the Analyzability of Stories by Children   345
                                                                          1


   other; e.g., they have never been introduced, or whatever. For any such
   two persons there are conditions under which one can begin to talk to the
   other. And that those conditions are the conditions used to in fact begin
   talk is something which can be shown via a first piece of talk. Where that
   is done we will say that talk is begun with a ticket. That is, the item used
   to begin talk is an item which, rights not otherwise existing, serves to war-
  rant one having begun to talk. For example, one turns to the other and
  says, "Your pants are on fire." It is not just any opening, but an opening
  Which tells why it is that one has breached the correct silence, which war-
  rants one having spoken. Tickets then are items specially usable as first
  items in talk by one who has restricted rights to talk to another. And the
  most prototypical class of tickets are "announcements of trouble relevant
 to the other."
     Now it is clear enough (cf. the discussion of norms earlier) that the
 occurrence of a baby crying is the occurrence of a piece of trouble rele-
 vant to some person, e.g., the mother of the baby. One who hears it gains
 a right to talk, i.e., to announce the fact that it has occurred, and can most
 efficiently speak via a ticket, i.e., "The baby cried." That being so, we can
 see then that the opener "The baby cried" is a proper beginning, i.e., it is
something which can serve as a beginning for someone whose rights to
talk are in the first instance restricted.
    With the foregoing we have established that the story we have been ex-
amining has both a proper beginning and a proper end, and is thus not only
a story by virtue of being a possible description but also by virtue of its
employing, as parts, items which occur in positions that permit one to see
that the user may know that stories have such positions, and that there are
certain items which when used in them are satisfactory incumbents.
        12

        Sequencing in Conversational
        Openings1
        EMANUEL A. SCHEGLOFF




        Emanuel A. Schegloff is an assistant professor of sociol-
        ogy at Columbia University. He received his doctorate
        from the University of California, Berkeley. His research
        has concentrated on rules of everyday behavior, es-
        pecially as disclosed in natural conversation.
           In this chapter Schegloff begins with an American
        answer to a universal communicative problem: who
        speaks first, and what does the first speaker say? Less
        crudely, the question is, what rules govern conversa-
        tional openings, and, as Schegloff puts it, secure "coor-
        dinated entry" (i.e., what rules determine the orderliness
        and intelligibility of what takes place)? The opening seg-
        ment of conversation is perhaps everywhere especially
        advantageous for sociolinguistic research, being con-
        tinually in evidence and continually revealing. What one
        can say to anyone, and how one must deal with anyone
         with whom one speaks, may imply fundamental assump-
        tions about the rights and obligations mutually felt by
        Reproduced by permission of the author and the American Anthropo-
        logical Association from American Anthropologist, Vol. 70, No. 6,
         1968.

  1 The research on which the present discussion is based was supported in part by the Ad-

vanced Research Projects Agency, Department of Defense, through the Air Force Office of
Scientific Research under contract number AF 49 (638)-1761. I want to acknowledge, as
well, the assistance of the Bureau of Applied Social Research, Columbia University, and its
director, Allen Barton. For much of the general approach taken here I am indebted to
Harold Garfinkel and Harvey Sacks, and for specific suggestions, doubts, critical remarks,
and suggestive additions I am grateful to Erving Goffman, Alan Blum, Michael Moerman,
and especially to David Sudnow and Harvey Sacks. Responsibility is, of course, entirely
mine.
   This discussion is a shortened and modified version of chapters two and three of the
                                            346
                                                                              · · · ~




                                   Sequencing in Co11versatio11al Openings
                                                                                       347

                  members of a society-perhaps any human beings -are
                  felt to owe to each other. (In parts of Africa whole 1•
                                                .                            cln-
                  guages may be evaluated m terms of the greeting pat-
                  terns.)
                     Work such as Schegloff's calls attention to the possib"l-
                  ity and necessity of deriving a formal analysis of su~h
                  sequences (closings would be also important). Cross-cul-
                  tural work is needed to place the American rules in per-
                  spective. No one is able now to say what is universal 0
                  what is culturally specific. Nor can we do more now tha~
                  guess as to the evolutionary and historical factors that
                  ~xplain the ~ir_tual _absence of_ ste~eotyped verbal greeting
                  m some soc1eties, its elaboration mothers, or the particu-
                 lar form it takes if any.
                    The nature of the argument in Schegloff's discussion is
                 important. Familiar in linguistics, it is unusual in sociol-
                 ogy. Faced with an exception among some hundreds of
                 cases, Schegloff neither dismisses it nor explains it ad
                 hoc. He reconsiders his previous analysis in the light of
                 the exception, seeking a deeper generalization that will
                 account for both. A "distribution rule" for question-
                 answer sequences is incorporated in a more general rule
                 that treats the opening of telephone conversations in
                 terms of rules for summons-answer sequences; and this
                 rule is "structural" in the sense of being qualitative rather
                than quantitative, being usually out of awareness, yet
                deeply binding.
                    This kind of reasoning is in the spirit of Sapir's pioneer-
                ing conception of the unity of patterning in all behavior,
                verbal and nonverbal (I 949). As with Sacks' analysis of
                hearer's and viewer's maxims, Schegloff's analysis of
                summons and answer comprises nonverbal as well as
                verbal phenomena-most centrally here, the ringing of
                the phone itself as a summons, but notice also the con-
                trast between summons and greeting that depends upon

     author's Ph.D. dissertation (Schegloff 1967). It is based on the analysis of tape-recorded
     phone calls to and from the complaint desk ofa police department in a middle-sized Midwest-
     ern city. References to the "data" in the text should be understood as references to this
     corpus of materials. Names have been changed to preserve anonymity; numbers preceding
     citations of data identify calls'within the corpus. I wish to thank the Disaster Research
     Center, Department of Sociology, The Ohio State University, for the use of this recorded
     material, which was obtained in connection with studies of organizational functioning under
     stress, especially disaster conditions. The views expressed and the interpretations of the data,
     of course, are those of the author and not necessarily those of the center.




i
I.
348   Discovering Structure in Speech

whether a term of address is not, or is, accompanied by a
wave.
  The findings bring out an essential methodological
point. Analysis of speech acts, or, more generally, com-
municative acts, is not at a level super-added and simply
parallel to the more familiar levels of phonology and
syntax. Communicative acts cut across the familiar
levels, showing new relationships among their contents,
and showing relationships between their contents and
other modalities of communication, such as gesture, the
ringing of a phone, knocking on a door. A level of com-
municative acts is necessary to account for some of the
properties of purely linguistic elements, as in the different
distribution of proper names when serving as terms of
address and when serving as summons, and their dif-
ferent consequences, regarding recycling, for sentence
sequence (points 1 and 3 under the section "Summons-
Answer Sequences"). At the same time act categories
unite quite diverse linguistic material (Schegloff notes
that a turn may range from a single "mm" to a string of
complex sentences), and, as we have seen, nonlinguistic
material as well.
   Notice that Scheglotrs central body of data allows him
to control for the nonverbal modalities involved, here,
exclusively the telephone ring, while his deeper general-
ization depends upon including that nonverbal signal in
the sequence analyzed. It would be most unfortunate if
sociologists, discovering the fascination of verbal data,
were to forget such points, and to become as word bound
as most linguists.
   As does Sacks, Schegloff relates his formal analysis of
a portion of "social syntax" to norms of interaction, and
to the strategies of interaction persons employ (this time,
e.g., mothers' strategies vis'-a-vis children in employing
them). Structure, interpretation, and use are united in one
analysis.
   Schegloff himself brings out the close relation of his
work to that of Goffman and Sacks. Besides references
cited with Sacks (Chapter 11) there are several observa-
tions of interest in Kiparsky ( 1968) and a body of impor-
tant work with conversations from a people of northeast-
ern Thailand in Moerman (in press) and Douglas (1971 ).
                         Sequencing in Conversational Openings      349
                                                         I




          "And He said, Abraham; and he said, Behold, I am here."
          Genesis XXII: I

   My object in this paper is to show that the raw data of everyday conversa-
  tional interaction can be subjected to rigorous analysis. To this end, I
  shall exhibit the outcome of one such analysis, confined to one limited as-
  pect of conversation. The aspect is sequencing, in this case sequencing in
  two-party conversations, with attention directed to the opening of such
  conversations (although only one kind of opening is considered). The
  chapter proceeds by suggesting a first formulation-referred to as a "dis-
  tribution rule"-to analyze materials drawn from telephone conversation.
 The first formulation is found deficient, and the search for a more ade-
 quate analysis leads to a second formulation not limited to telephone con-
 versations alone, but able to deal with them, and subsuming the "distribu-
 tion rule" as a special case. Some properties of the second formulation-
 called "summons-answer sequences"-are detailed, and consideration is
 given to the uses of the interactional mechanism that has been analyzed.
     This work may have relevance for anthropologists for several reasons.
 First, there is a possible direct interest in the materials under investiga-
 tion; second, the developing interest in the ethnography of com-
 munication (Gumperz and Hymes 1964); and third, what I take to be a
 prevailing interest of anthropologists in the possibility of direct analysis of
 the "stuff of everyday life" so as to discover its orderly or methodical
character.
    I cannot say for what domain my analysis holds, but, as the biblical cita-
tion in the heading and references to settings other than the contemporary
United States should indicate, I do not think the findings are limited to
America today. Since cross-cultural variability and invariance are of
abiding interest to anthropologists, information on this question will have
to be sought from them. Whether this sort of analysis is possible or prac-
tical on materials from societies of which the analyst is not a member is
also not clear, and again it may remain for anthropologists to supply the
answer. [See, for example, Moerman (I 968b).]


        Introduction
          I use "conversation" in an inclusive way. I do not intend to
restrict its reference to the "civilized art of talk" or to "cultured in-
terchange" as in the usages of Oakeshott ( 1959) or Priestly ( 1926), to in-
sist on its casual character thereby excluding service contacts (as in
Landis and Burtt 1924), or to require that it be sociable joint action, iden-
tity related, etc. (as in Watson and Potter 1962). "Dialogue," while being
         350    Discovering Structure in Speech

a kind of conversation, has special implications derived from its use in
Plato, psychiatric theorizing, Buber, and others, which limits its useful-
ness as a general term. I mean to include chats as well as service contacts,
therapy sessions as well as asking for and getting the time of day, press
conferences as well as exchanged whispers of "sweet nothings." I have
used "conversation" with this general reference in mind, occasionally
borrowing the still more general term "state of talk" from Erving
Goffman.
  It is an easily noticed fact about two-party conversations that their
sequencing is alternating. That is to say, conversational sequence can be
described by the formula ababab, where "a" and "b" are the parties to the
conversation. [I am indebted to Sacks (n.d., ms.) for suggesting the signif-
icance of this observation, and some of its implications.] The abab
formula is a specification, for two-party conversations, of the basic rule for
conversation: one party at a time. The strength of this rule can be seen in
the fact that in a multi-party setting (more precisely, where there are four
or more), if more than one person is talking, it can be claimed not that the
rule has been violated, but that more than one conversation is going on.
Thus, Bales can write:

The conversation generally proceeded so that one person talked at a time, and all
members in the particular group were attending the sanze conversation. In this
sense, these groups might be said to have a "single focus," that is, they did not in-
volve a number of conversations proceeding at the same time (Bales et al.
1951:461).

When combined with an analytic conception of an utterance, the abab
specification has a variety of other interesting consequences, such as
allowing us to see how persons can come to say "X is silent," when no
person in the scene is talking. (For a psychiatric usage, see Bergler 1938.)
   The problem I wish to address is the following: the abab formula
describes the sequencing of a two-party conversation already underway.
It does not provide for the allocation of the roles "a" and "b" (where "a"
is a first speaker and "b" is a second speaker) between the two persons
engaged in the conversation. Without such an allocation, no ready means
is available for determining the first speaker of the convention. The abab
sequence makes each successive turn sequentially dependent upon the
previous one'; it provides no resources when who the first speaker might
be is treated problematically. I should like to examine the ways in which
coordinated entry by two parties into an orderly sequence of conversa-
tional turns is managed. (This general area has been considered from a
somewhat different perspective in Goffman 1953, Chapter 14; see also
Goffman 1963:88-95).
   Notice that I do not mean to identify a "turn" necessarily with any syn-
                                                    ------=~-.~"":.---=~-:...•:.._.. ::..-:~--••H~-- •-' ;••

                                                                                                ----._-:--~.




                           Sequencing in Conversational Ope ·
                                                      ,    /J/ngs           35 J
  tactic or grammatical unit or combination of units, nor w·th
                                                                  1
  In the former case, it should be clear that a turn may             a?y activity.
  from a single "mm" (or less) to a string of complex sco~tam anything
  latter, it is crucial to distinguish a single turn in whi"ch tewn ences. In the
  accomplished from two turns by the same party without 0 c'lCf            . ·
                                                                       • IVIhes are

  turn of the other. An example of the latter occurs when 'l q an ~ntervening
  repeated before it is heard or answered; an example of thue~ti~n m~st be
 line, following the inquiry "How are you," "Oh I'm fine He 01 mer 1s the
 A "turn," as I am usmg    . t he term, 1s. t hus not the same as. wh
                                                                    ow care yo u . "
 refers to as a "natural message," which he describes as "the . at Goffman
 of a sender during the whole period of time through Which sr~n behavior
 tention is continuously directed at him" (Goffman I 953: 165~ ~chus of at-
 of course, other views of the matter, such as using a period ·f ·tre are,
 "appreciable pause" to mark a boundary (as in Stephen ~ lr ~~ce or
 I 952:600 or Steinzor 1949: I 09). But unanalyzed pauses and s~l              rshler
      ·
 ambiguous              ·
               (theoretically)  as to whether t hey mark the boundary I ences are
                                                                           f,      .
         . 1ud e d m
 or are me          . 1t
                       . (as t he very t erm " pause " suggests).        o cl unr t '


          Telephone Conversation:
          The Distribution Rule

           A first rule of telephone conversation, which might be call d ,
  "distribution rule for first utterances," is: the answerer speaks
  Whether the utterance be "hello," "yeah," "Macy's," "shoe dep~:t~
                                                                                   fi. /
  ment," "Dr. Brown's office," "Plaza 1-5000," or whatever, it is the one
  who picks up the ringing phone who speaks it.
    This rule seems to hold in spite of a gap in the informational resources
 of the answerer. While the caller knows both his own identity and
 typically, that of his intended interlocutor (whether a specific person or a~
 organization is being phoned), the answerer, at least in most cases, knows
 only who he is and not specifically who the caller is. That is not to say that
 no basis for inference might exist, as, for example, that provided by time
 of day, the history of a relationship, agreed upon signaling arrangements,
 etc. To the question "whom are you calling?" a caller may give a defini-
 tive answer, but to the question "who's calling?" the answerer, before
picking up the phone, can give only a speculative answer.
    Without developing a full analysis here, the import of the gap in the
answerer's information ought to be noted. If, in this society, persons
uniformly used a single-standardized item to open a conversation without
respect to the identity of the other party or the relationship between the
two, then the informational lack would have no apparent import, at least
for the opening. This, however, is not the case. A variety of terms may be
        352    Discovering Structure in Speech

used to begin conversation and their propriety is geared to the identity,
purposes, and relationships of either or both parties. Intercom calls, for
example, are typically answered by a "yeah" or "yes" while incoming
outside calls are seldom answered in that way (In citations of data in
which the police receive the call, "D" refers to the police "dispatcher"
and "C" refers to the caller.):

#68
D:     Yeah.
C:     Tell 85 to take that crane in the west entrance. That's the only entrance
       that they can get in.
D:     0.K. Will do.
C:     Yeah.
#88
D:     Yes.
C:     Uh Officer Novelada.
D:     Yes, speaking.
C:     Why uh this is Sergeant - -
D:     Yes Sergeant.
C:     And uh I just talked to [etc.]

#123
D:     Yeah.
C:     If you can get ahold of car 83, go'm tell him to go to [etc.]

Full consideration of the problem that this answerer's information gap
presents, and some solutions to it, requires reference to aspects of conver·
sational openings other than sequencing, and cannot be adequately dis-
cussed here (see Schegloff 1967, Chapter 4).
   It may help to gain insight into the working of the distribution rule to
consider, speculatively, what might be involved in its violation, and the
reader is invited to do so. (For the illumination of normal scenes produced
by considering disruption of them, I am indebted to Harold Garfinkel; see
Garfinkel 1967 .) O~e possible violation would involve the following: The
distribution rule provides that the answerer normally talks first, immedi-
ately upon picking up the receiver. To violate the rule and attempt to have
the other person treated as the one who was called, he would not talk, but
would remain silent until the caller spoke first. Suppose after some time
the caller says "Hello?" This might be heard as an attempt by the caller
to check out the acoustic intactness of the connection. In doing so, the
caller employs a lexical item, and perhaps an intonation, that is standardly
used by called parties in answering their home phones. This would
provide the violator (i.e., the answerer acting as a caller) with a resource.
                                     Sequencing in Conversa~ional Openings                 353

         Given the identity of the lexical items used by persons to check out and to
         answer in this case, the violater may now treat the checking out "hello" as
         an answering "hello." Continuing the role reversal, he would be required
        to offer a caller's first remark.
           We may note that, without respect to the detailed substance of their
        remarks, it is a property of their respective utterances that the answerer
        typically says just "hello," whereas the caller, if he says "hello," typically
        ~hen adds a continuation, e.g., "this is Harry." Our hypothetical violator,
       m having to make a caller's first remark to achieve the role reversal, must
       then say "hello" with a continuation.
          To be sure, a caller might say only "hello," so as to invite the called
       person to recognize who is calling. This is a common attempt to establish
       or confirm the intimacy or familiarity of a relationship. To cite one in-
       stance from our data, in which a police complaint clerk calls his father:
       #497
       OTHER:        Hello
   POLICE:           Hello
   OTHER:            Hello, the letter, you forgot that letter
   POLICE:           Yeah but listen to me, the _ _ just blew up, [etc.]

      The "intimacy ploy." however, is available only to a "genuine" caller,
   and not to the hypothetical violator under consideration. If the violator
   says it, the genuine caller might hear it as a correct answerer's first remark
   that was delayed. The attempted violation would thereupon be frustrated.
      In saying "hello" with a continuation, however, the would-be violator
  Would encounter trouble. While trying to behave as a caller, he does not
  have the information a genuine caller would have. In having to add to the
  ''hello" to play the caller's part, the choice of an appropriate item depends
 on his knowing (as a genuine caller would know) to whom he is speaking.
 We may give three examples of what this bind might consist of:
     1. One common addition to a caller's "hello" involves the use of a term
 of address, for example: Answerer: "Hello?"; Caller: "Hello, Bill." Not
 ~nowing to whom he is speaking, the violator can obviously not employ
 such an addition.
    2. Another frequent addition is some self-identification appended to
the "hello." Self-identification involves two parts: (a) a frame and (b) a
term of identification. By "frame" is meant such thing~ as _'~this_ is
- - , " "my name is---," or "I am - - . " 2 Terms of 1dent1ficat1on
   2
      The latter framing item "I ·im          "is not normally used on the telephone as the frame
                            ~ be used
 for a name, alt.hough it may     '   · in· a· next item, as whe_n an or~amz~!IO~~
                                                                           · · 1.affil'  t'    · f
fer                                                                                  1 Ia \?~ '.s o -
    ~d to Provide further identification. In face-to-face mteract10n, fhis is · · · 15 not
~Ypical!y used for self-identification but only for introducing a third party. "My name is · · ·"
15
   usable in both face-to-face and in telephone interactions.
        354    Discovering Structure in Speech

include, among others, first names, nicknames, or title plus last name. We
may note that the choice both of appropriate frames and appropriate self-
identification terms varies with the identity and relationship of the two
parties. For example, the frame "My name is - - - " is normally used
only in identifying oneself to a stranger. Similarly, whether one refers to
oneself as Bill or Mr. Smith depends upon the relationship between the
two parties. Our imagined violator would not have the information requi-
site to making a choice with respect to either determination. Although
these two examples are not exhaustive of the variety of caller's continua-
tions, a great many calls proceed by use of one or more of them, and in
each case a masquerading caller, not having the simple information a gen-
uine caller would have, would have trouble in using such a continuation.
    3. An alternative continuation for a caller, whether used in combina-
tion with one of the foregoing continuations or as the caller's next turn,
suggests another rule of opening conversations: the caller provides the
first "topic" of conversation. This rule would confront a violator with the
 problem of formulating a topic of conversation that could serve appropri-
ately without respect to to whom he is speaking. Whether there are such
topics is unclear. A promising candidate as a general first topic might
 seem to be the ritual inquiry "How are you?" or some common variant
thereof. This inquiry is usable for a very wide range of conversational
 others, but not for all conversational others. For example, telephone
 solicitors or callers from the Chamber of Commerce would not be
 typically greeted in this way. As formulated here, the rule "The caller
 provides the first 'topic'" is not nearly as general as the di,stribution rule.
There are obvious occasions where it is not descriptive, as when the
 "caller" is "returning a call." A formulation that would hold more gener-
 ally might be "The initiator of a contact provides the first topic." But this
 alternative is no better in providing a continuation to "hello" that is usable
 for all conversational others. (It may be noted here that much of the anal-
 ysis in this section will be superseded below.)
    Other violations of the distribution rule are readily imaginable, and
 need not be enumerated here. My interest is chiefly in exploring the
 operation and constraints provided by the distribution rule, as well as the
 resources it provides for keeping track of the developing course of a con-
 versation. I found, in attempting to imagine violations, that without the
 proper operation of the simple distribution rule, it was difficult to keep
 track of who was who, who the genuine caller and who the violator, the
 order of events, what remarks were proper for whom, etc. Although I
 have attempted to describe the hypothetical violation clearly, I fear, and
 trust, that the reader will have been sore-pressed to follow the "play-by-
 play" account and keep the "players" straight. It may be noted, then, that
 not only does the distribution rule seem to be routinely followed in the
                         Sequencing in Conversational Openings   355

 actual practice of telephone conversationalists but it provides a format by
 which observers maintain a grasp of the developing activity.
    Finally, consider as evidence of the binding character of the distribu-
 tion rule the following personal anecdote recounted by a student. At one
 time, she began receiving obscene phone calls. She noted that the caller
 breathed heavily. She, therefore, began the practice of picking up the
 receiver without speaking. If she heard the heavy breathing, she would
 hang up. The point she wanted to make in relating this anecdote was that
she encountered considerable irritation from her friends when it turned
out that it was they calling and she had not made a first utterance upon
picking up the receiver. She took this to be additional evidence for the
correctness of the rule "the answerer speaks first." However, she has
supplied an even more pointed demonstration than she intended. It is no-
table that she could avoid hearing the obscenities by avoiding making a
first utterance; however obscene her caller might be, he would not talk
until she had said "hello," thereby obeying the requirements of the dis-
tribution rule.

     A DEVIANT CASE
   The distribution rule discussed above holds for all but one of the
roughly 500 phone conversations in the entire corpus of data. In the vast
majority of these, the dispatcher, when calls were made to the police, or
others, when calls were made by the police, spoke first. In several cases
the tape recordings contained instances of simultaneous talk at the begin-
ning of the interchange (often because the caller was still talking to the
switchboard operator when the dispatcher "came on the line"). In these
cases, a resolution occurred by the callers withdrawing in favor of the
called. That is, either the caller stopped and the dispatcher continued, or
both stopped and the dispatcher went on.
#364
D:     P?lice _Desk. .       } Simultaneous
C:     First aiders with me.
D:     Police Desk.
C:     Hello?
D:     Yes.
C:     Uh this is [etc.]
#66
D:     Police Desk.
C:     (Simultaneously giving phone number in background to operator)
D:     Hello
C:     I am a pharmacist. I own [etc.]
        356    Discovering Structure in Speech

#43
D:    Police Desk.
                                                             } Simultaneous
C:    Say, what's all the excitement .
D:    Police Desk?
C:    Police Headquarters?
D:    Yes.
C:    What's all the excitement [etc.]

   Simultaneous talk is of special interest because it is the converse of
abab, which requires that only one party talk at a time. If simultaneous
talk could be shown to be regularly resolved via the distribution rule, at
the beginning of telephone conversations, then its status as a solution to
the problem of coordinated entry would be more general. A fully adequate
demonstration might involve giving somewhat stronger explication of the
notion of one party's "withdrawal," perhaps by reference to some utter-
ance unit, e.g., a sentence, begun but not finished. (For this last point, I
am indebted to Harvey Sacks.)
   One case clearly does not fit the requirements of the distribution rule:

#9 (Police make call)
(Receiver is lifted, and there is a one second pause)
POLICE:       Hello.
OTHER:        American Red Cross.
POLICE:       Hello, this is Police Headquarters ... er, Officer Stratton [etc.]

In this case the caller talks first, while the distribution would require that
the first line be "American Red Cross," the statement of the called party.
   While indeed there is only one such violation in my data, its loneliness
in the corpus is not sufficient warrant for not treating it seriously. Two al-
ternatives are open. We might focus exclusively on this case and seek to
develop an analysis particular to it that would account for its deviant
sequencing. This would constitute an ad hoc attempt to save the distribu-
tion rule, using a technique commonly used in sociology-deviant case
analysis. Alternately, \.\'e might reexamine the entire corpus of materials
seeking to deepen our understanding of the opening sequencing. We might
ask: Is this best treated as a deviant case, or would a deeper and more
general formulation of the opening sequencing reveal properties of the ini-
tiation of talk that the distribution rule glosses over. Analysis of the case
reveals that the distribution rule, while it holds in most cases, is in fact
best understood as a derivative of more general rules. As we shall see, the
additional sequencing rules, which this case forces us to examine, clarify
properties of talk in nontelephone communication as well as in telephone
communication. The rules discussed below do not make the distribution
                              Sequencing in Conversational Openings               357

 rule superfluous, but concern more finely grained aspects of the opening
 sequence. They require that we analyze aspects of the opening structure
 that the distribution rule does not handle. The distribution rule is but one,
 if indeed a most typical, specification of the formulation to follow, and the
 deviant case is another specification. As Michael Moerman has
 suggested, the distribution rule is no less a "special case" for having many
 occurrences, nor the latter more so for having only one (in my corpus of
 materials). Not number of occurrences but common subsumption under a
 more general formulation is what matters. It will be shown that, in
 broadening the formulation of the opening sequence, a set of more inter-
 esting and formal properties of the opening sequencing structure are ex-
 posed.

           Summons-Answer Sequences,

          Originally we spoke of two parties to a telephone interaction, a
 caller and an answerer. The distribution rule held that the answerer spoke
 first. One of the activities in the material under examination seems to be
 "answering," and it is appropriate to ask what kind of answering activity
 is involved and what its properties are.
    Let us consider for a moment what kinds of things are "answered." The
most common item that is answered is a question, and a standardized
exchange is question-answer. At first glance, however, it seems incorrect
to regard the "called" party as answering a question. What would be the
question? A telephone ring does not intuitively seem to have that status.
Other items that are answered include challenges, letters, roll calls, and
summonses. It seems that we could well regard the telephone ring as a
summons. Let us consider the structure of summons-answer sequences.
    It can be noted at the outset that a summons-often called an "at-
tention-getting device" -is not a telephone-specific occurrence. Other
classes besides mechanical devices, such as telephone rings, include:

          I. Terms of address (e.g., "John?," "Dr.," "Mr. Jones?,"
          "waiter," 3 etc.)
   3 We may note here several special classes of occupational titles. Most occupational titles

cannot be used as terms of address or to summon persons of whom they are descriptive. So,
for example, one would not introduce into a sentence as a term of address, nor seek to get at-
tention via the term "secretary." There is a small collection of occupational titles that can be
used, under appropriate circumstances, as terms of address or to summon their possessors.
For example, one may either address or summon by way of"Doctor," "Rabbi," "Oflicer,"
"Nurse," etc. There is a still smaller class of occupational titles which, while not usable as
terms of address, are usable as summons items. For example, "cabby," or "ice cream man,"
etc. About this collection we may note that aside from their referential uses, e.g., "He is a
cabby," they seem to be used only as summons items.
          358     Discovering Structure in Speech

          2. Courtesy phrases (e.g., "Pardon me," when approaching a
          stranger to get his attention)
          3. Physical devices (e.g., a tap on the shoulder, waves of a hand,
          raising of a hand by an audience member, etc.)

   It is to be noted that a summons occurs as the first part of a two part
sequence. Just as there are various items that can be used as summonses,
so are there various items that are appropriately used as answers, e.g.,
"Yes?," "What?," "Uh huh?," turning of the eyes or of the body to face
the beckoner, etc. Some typical summons-answer sequences are: tele-
phone ring-"hello"; "Johnny?"-"yes"; "Excuse me"-"Yes";
"Bill?"-looks up.
   The various items that may be used as summonses are also used in
other ways.- "Hello," .for example, may be used as a greeting; "Excuse
me" may be used as an apology; a name may be used as a term of address
only, not requiring an answer. How might we differentiate between the
summons uses of such terms and other uses? Taking as an example items
whose other use is as terms of address, it seems that the following are
ways of differentiating their uses:
   I. When addr~ssing, the positioning of a term of address is restricted. It
may occur at the beginning of an utterance ("Jim, where do you want to
go?"), at the end of an utterance ("What do you think, Mary?") or
between clauses or phrases in an utterance ("Tell me, John, how's Bill?").
As summons items, however, terms of address are positionally free within
an utterance. [This way of differentiating the usages has a "one-way"
character; that is, it is determinative only when an item occurs where
terms of address (as nonsummons items) cannot. When it occurs within
the restrictions on placement of terms of address, it clearly is nondifferen-
tiating.] As a mere address term, an item cannot occur between a preposi-
tion and its object, but as a summons it may, as in the following telephone
call from the data:

#398
C:      Try to get out t'-Joe?
D:      Yeah?
C:      Try to get ahold of [etc.]

   2. Summons items may have a distinctive rising terminal juncture, a
raising of the voice pitch in a quasi-interrogative fashion:' This seems to

   • Bolinger ( 1958). We say, with Bolinger, "quasi-interrogative" because there is in Ameri-
can English apparently no definitive interrogative intonation, such that anything so intoned
is a question, or if not so intoned cannot be a question.
                             Sequencing in Conversational Openings
                                                                              359
  be typically the case when a summons occurs after a sentence has .
  begun, as in the above datum. It need not be the case when th                    already
  stands alone, as in "Jim," when trying to attract Jim's atten/ summons
                               . ...        d" .                             Ion.
     3. A term o f a dd ress 1s     mserte man utterance. By that
                                                                             1
 after the term of address is introduced, the utterance continu mea.n that
 break m  . its
              . grammat1ca   . I contmmty;
                                       . . . e.g., "Te 11 me Jim wh est d'         with no
    .                "                               .   h
 thmk of. . . . When a summons occurs m t e course of an utt         '   '     a    id You
                                                                                        . .
 followed by a "recyclmg" to the egmnmg o the utterance Th t ' It is
                            .            b    .    .    f                    erance
                  .      . h d             . d .        .                .    e u terance
 is begun agam, as m t e atum cite m pomt l above. Althou h .
 datum the original utterance is altered when started again, alteraf 1~ that
 · ·
 mtrms1c · to w h at ·1s ·mten d e d b y th e t erm " recyc 1·mg."               ion is not
    It is an important feature of summonses and answers that I'k
 tions an d answers, they are sequentrn
  ·                                            · II Y use d . Th'1s being so ' th1 e .ques-
 our ana Iys1s 1s a sequence o summons an d answer, which shall
               ·   ·                 f                                      ' e unith     of
 fort h b e a bb revmte· d as "SA" sequence. Q ues t'10n-answer sequences h           ence-II
 be "reierre d to as "QA . " W e now t urn t o an              ·
                                                        exammation  ·  of two majo s a d
 several subsidiary 'properties of SA sequences.                                      r an


   NONTERMINALITY OF SA SEQUENCES

    By nonterminality I mean that a completed SA sequence cannot pro _
 erly stand as the final exchange of a conversation. It is a specific feature pf
 SA sequences that they are preambles, preliminaries, or prefaces to so;
 further conversational or bodily activity. They are both done with tha~
 purpose, as signaling devices to further actions, and are heard as having
 that character. This is most readily noticed in that very common answer
 to a summons "What is it?" Nonterminality indicates that not only must
 something follow but SA sequences are specifically preliminary to some-
 thing that follows.
    Is the continuation upon the completion of an SA sequence constrained
in any way, e.g., in which party produces it? The very property of nonter-
minality is furnished by the obligation of the summoner to talk again upon
the completion ( by the summoned) of the SA sequence. It is he who has
done the summoning and by making a summons incurs the obligation to
talk again. With exceedingly rare exceptions, some of which will be noted
below, the summoner fulfills this obligation and talks again. It is the fact of
the routine fulfillment of the obligation to talk again that produces data in
which every conversation beginning with an SA sequence does not termi-
nate there.
   It may be noted in passing that the structure of SA sequences is more
constraining than the structure of QA sequences. H seems to be a prop-
erty of many QA sequences that the asker of a question has the right to
          360     Di.1'l'ol'eri111: Stmcture in Speech

talk again but not an obligation to do so. 5 SA sentences more forcefully
constrain both contributors to them. One way to see the constraining
character of nonterminality as a normative property of an SA sequence is
by observing what regularly occurs when the summoner, for whatever
reason, does not wish to engage in whatever activity the SA sequence he
originated may have been preli~in~y to. Here we characteristically find
some variant of the sequence: "Sam?" "Yeah?" "Oh, never mind." Note
that in the very attempt to appropriately withdraw from the obligation to
continue after a completed SA sequence, an original summoner must in
fact conform to it and not simply be silent. Even in telephone conversa-
tions between strangers, where maintaining the intactness of some rela-
tionship would not seem to be at issue, the obligation to continue talk
upon an SA sequence has been observed to hold. For example, in calling
an establishment to learn if it is open, that fact may sometimes be es-
tablished positively when the ringing phone (summons) is lifted and
"hello" or an establishment name is heard. Rather than hang up, having
obtained the required information, many persons will continue with the
self-evidently answered question "Are you still open?" (although note
here the common tendency to append to it a more reasonable inquiry, one
not rendered superfluous by the very act, as "How late are you open?"
even though that might not, on the given occasion, be of interest). The
limited rule "the caller supplies the first topic" advanced earlier may be
seen to be one partial application of the obligation of a summoner to talk
again.
   A property directly related to the nonterminality of SA sequences is
their nonrepeatability. Once a summons has been answered, the
summoner may not begin ·another SA sequence. A contrast is suggested
with QA sequences where a questioner, having a right to talk again after
an answer is given, may fill his slot with another question. Although a
questioner may sometimes be constrained against asking the same ques-
tion again (e.g., in two-person interaction: A: "How are you?" B: "Fine."
A: "How are you?"), he may choose some question to fill the next slot. A
summoner is not only barred from using the same summons again but
from doing any more summoning (of the same "other"). If, as occurs on
occasion, a summoner does not hear the answer of the other, and repeats
the summons, should the answerer hear both summonses he will treat the
second one as over-insistent. This is most likely to occur in those situa-
tions where physical barriers make it difficult for the summoned person to
indicate his having received the summons and having initiated a course of
                                                                                                       1·'·

  5
     I am indebted to Harvey Sacks for the first part of this observation. Some questions         ~/
may, to be sure, obligate their askers to talk again. The statement in the text may, therefore,
reflect a stage in the analysis of questions where such questions have not yet been closely
examined.




                                                                                                              .
                             Sequencing in Conversational Openings            361

answering. Continued knocking on the door is often met wlth the com-
plaint as the answerer is on his way, "I'm coming, I'm coming." To sum
up, the summoner's obligation to talk again cannot be satisfied by ini-
tiating another SA sequence to the same other. This does not mean, how-
ever, that one might not have, in a transcript of the opening of a conversa-
tion, two SA sequences back-to-back. As we shall shortly see, if the
nonterminality property is not met, i.e., should the summoner not fulfill
his obligation to talk again, the answerer of the first SA sequence may, in
turn, start another with a summons of his own, as in the first line below (E
has called M-the initial S): 6

M:       MacNamara (pause). Hello? (A # S)
E:       Yeah uh John? (A . . . )
M:       Yeah.
E:       I uh just trying to do some uh intercom here in my own set up and get
         ahold of you at the same time.

   We may further see the operation of the nonterminality property in a
common misunderstanding of the use of a name. Names may serve, as
 suggested above, both as simple terms of address or as summoning terms
 of address. Should a name intendedly uttered as a simple term of address be
 heard as a summons, the hearer will expect a continuation while the
 speaker will not be prepared to give one. While not a particularly frequent
 occurrence, when found, it usually occurs in the following way: X uses
 Y's name, and in so doing waves. This is a typical way to perform a greet-
ing, part of which is verbally accomplished and part gesturally ac-
complished. The lexical item perceived alone, i.e., where the gesture is
not seen, may be heard as a summons, and one who hears it in this way
will then answer it and await the activity to which it was expectably pre-
liminary. The misinterpreted sender, like he who calls merely to find out
information that the answer conveys, may feel obligated to say "I was just
saying 'hello.' "
   It is worth noting about such occurrences that misinterpreted persons
can see how they were misinterpreted: Being able to see the kind of error
involved rather than having to investigate its character, allows immediate
correction. Such availability of the nature of an error may be quite impor-
tant. One consequence may be the following. That the systematic ambigu-
ity of the term (i.e., its use to do more than one activity-here "sum-
moning" and "greeting") is available when invoked by the second party,
suggests that the summoner can see how the error could be made; he can

   " The datum is from a collection of calls to and from a public agency other than the one
from which the bulk of the data are drawn. The first two SA sequences arc indicated in
parentheses.
         362     Discovering Structure in Speech

see its methodical character. Members may be able, then, not only to
methodically detect which of two activities a term is being used for but
also to detect methodical errors in such determinations. The hope may,
therefore, be warranted that investigators will be able to describe methods
for differentiating "term of address" usages from "summons" usages,
even if the three suggestions offered earlier prove wrong.
   Nonterminality is an outcome of the obligation of the summoner to talk
again. Corollary to that obligation is the obligation of the answerer, having
answered the summons, to listen further. Just as the summoner, by virtue
of his summons, obligates himself for further interaction, so the answerer,
by virtue of his answer, commits himself to staying with the encounter.
More will be said about this matter and some of its ramifications in the
discussion of what I term the problem of "availability." For the present it
may suffice to give an example of a common situation under which the
power of this reciprocality makes itself felt. Compare, for example, two
ways in which a mother may seek to call her child to dinner from a play
area. One way would involve the use of his name as a term of address with
the request that he-return home, e.g., "Johnny, come home. It's time for
dinner." It is not an anomalous experience in this culture that such calls
may elicit no response from the parties to whom they are directed. It may
be claimed, upon complaint about this nonresponse, that the call was not
heard. Contrast with this, however, a sequence in which the child is sum-
 moned prior to a statement of the summoner's intention. If the child
 answers the summons, he is estopped from ignoring what follows it, e.g.,
 "Johnny," "Yes?" "Come home for dinner." Children may resist an-
 swering the summons, knowing what may follow it, and realizing that to
 answer the summons commits them to hearing what they do not want to
 hear. Although they may nonetheless not obey the commandment,
 claiming they have not heard, it is more difficult if they have answered the
 summons. 7

  7 The same phenomenon is presented in a rather more exalted setting in the following ex-

cerpt from Kafka's The Trial:
   He had almost passed the last of the pews and was emerging into the open space between
himself and the doorway when he heard the priest lifting up his voice. A resonant, well-
trained voice. How it rolled through the expectant Cathedral! But it was no congregation the
priest was addressing, the words were unambiguous and inescapable, he was calling out:
"Joseph K.!"
   K. started and stared at the ground before him. For the moment he was still free, he could
continue on his way and vanish through one of the small, dark wooden doors that faced him
at no great distance. It would simply indicate that he had not understood the call, or that he
had understood it and did not care. But ifhe were to turn round he would be caught, for that
would amount to an admission that he had understood it very well, that he was really the
person addressed, and that he was ready to obey. Had the priest called his name a second
time K. would certainly have gone on but since there was a persistent silence, though he
stood waiting for a long time, he could not help turning his head a little just to see what the
priest was doing. The priest was standing calmly in the pulpit as before, yet it was obvious
                            Sequencing in Conversational Openings
                                                                              363
   It is to be noted that the nonterminality of an SA sequ
obligations that produce it are mutually oriented to by the enc~ and the
interaction and may ,~ffect the very choice of an answer ti~~Ies ~-o _the
summons. A prospective answerer of a summons is attuned t O
tion of the summoner to respect the nonterminality of the s t e 0 bhga-
                                                                                i
                                                                                oug~nal

to continue the interaction, either by talk or bodily acti/tqrence (i.e.,
answer is delivered. He is likewise attuned to his oblig~ttononce ~he
answered, to be prepared to attend the summoner's obligated                    ' havmg
ior. Should he not be in a position to fulfill this listener's ob~~xt _behav-
may provide for that fact by answering the summons with a .!gatl?n, he
defer," e.g., "John?" "Just a minute, I'll be right there." Of co motion to
deferrals may, in fact, serve to cancel the interaction, as whe urs~\·. such
minute" either intendedly or unwittingly exhausts the span or° a JUst a
the summons. More will be said below about deferrals, and theircont~ol ~f
ateness, ·m our cons1"d erat10n
                              · o f t h e ·issue of avai·1 a b·1·             appiopn-
                                                              1 1ty to interact [C
                                                                                    0
pare Goffman (1953: 197): "sometimes the reply may contain an·                       .~-
                       "                       ,, Th                                1
request to h o Id o ff 1or a moment . . . .          e present analysis is int d1c1t
                                                                            '   exp    d
to explicate why this should be needed (its occurrence being ind en ed
              .      I                         h                                 epen -
ently_ estab IIShab e) by reference to t e temporal organization of the
openmg sequence.]
  We now turn to a consideration of another property of SA sequenc
one that will allow us to examine not only the relationship betw es,
completed SA sequences and their sequels but the internal structuree:~
the sequences themselves.

  CONDITIONAL RELEVANCE IN SA SEQUENCES
   The property of conditional relevance is forinulated to address two
problems. [The term and some elements of the idea of "conditional rele-
vance" were suggested by Sacks (1969).] The first of these is: How can
we rigorously talk about two items as a sequenced pair of items, rather
than as two separate units, one of which might happen to follow the other?
The second problem is: How can we, in a sociologically meaningful and
rigorous way, talk about the "absence" of an item; numerous things are
not present at any point in a conversation, yet only some have a relevance


that he had observed K. 's turn of the head. It would have been like a childish game of hide-
and-seek if K. had not turned right around to face him . . . "You are Joseph K. ?" said the
priest, lifting one hand from the balustrade in a vague gesture. "Yes," said K., thinking how
frankly he used to give his name and what a burden it had recently become to him; nowadays
people he had never seen before seemed to know his name. How pleasant it was to have to
introduce oneself before being recognized: "Yes," said K., "so I have been informed."
"Then you are the man I seek," said the priest. "I am the prison chaplain"(© copyright,
1956 by Alfred A. Knopf, Inc.).
        364    Discovering Structure in Speech

that would allow them to be seen as "absent." Some items are, so to
speak, "officially absent." It is to address these problems that the notion
of conditional relevance is introduced. By conditional relevance of one
item on another we mean: given the first, the second is expectable; upon
its occurrence it can be seen to be a second item to the first; upon its
nonoccurrence it can be seen to be officially absent-all this provided by
the occurrence of the first item.
   We may begin to explicate conditional relevance in SA sequences by
employing it to clarify further some materials already discussed. The
property of "nonterminality" may be reformulated by saying that further
talk is conditionally relevant on a completed SA sequence. In such a
formulation we treat the SA sequence as a unit; it has the status of a first
item in a sequence for which further talk becomes the second item, expect
able upon the occurrence of the first. As noted, the specific focus of this
expectation is upon the summoner, who must supply the beginning of the
further talk. Within this reformulation, if he fails to do so, that fact is of-
ficially noticeable and further talk is officially absent. It is by orienting to
these facts that an answerer may find further talk coming fast upon him
and, if unprepared to fulfill his obligation to attend to it, may seek to defer
it by answering "Just a minute," as was noted above.
   My main interest in conditional relevance at this point does not, how-
ever, have to do with that of further talk upon a completed SA sequence
but with the internal workings of the sequence itself. Simply said, A is
conditionally relevant 011 the occurrence of S.
   We can see the conditional relevance of A on S most clearly in the fol-
lowing sort of circumstance. If one party issues an S and no A occurs, that
provides the occasion for repetition of the S. That is to say, the nonoccur-
rence of the A is seen by the summoner as its official absence, and its of-
ficial absence provides him with adequate grounds for repetition of the S.
We say "adequate grounds" in light of the rule, previously formulated,
that the summoner may not repeat the S if the sequence has been
completed. As long as the sequence is not completed, however, the Smay
be repeated.
   Two qualifications must be introduced at this point, one dealing with
the extendability of repetitions of S, the other with the temporal organiza-
tion of those repetitions relative to the initial S. To take the second point
first: In order to find that an A is absent, the summoner need not wait for
posterity. In principle, unless some limitation is introduced, the occur-
rence of S might be the occasion for an indefinite waiting period at some
point in which an A might occur. This is not the case. In noting this fact, a
subsidiary property of the conditional relevance of A on S may be
formulated-the property of immediate juxtaposition.
   The following observations seem to hold: In QA sequences, if one asks
a question, a considerable amount of silence may pass before the other
                                                                     -.... - , , " . , , . , ~ , - ~ ~ ~
                                                                                              --=--~~:=;

                             Sequencing in Conversational O            .
                                                                  Pe11111gs    365
  speaks. Nonetheless, if certain constraints on the co t
  (having to do with the relation of their substantive content of his remarks
  tive content of the question) are met, then the oth n ~nt to the substan-
  heard as an answer to the quest10n.   .    S econdly, even ifer  th s .remark<    _may be
  is filled not with silence but with talk, within certain con et m~ervenmg time
  utterance may be heard as the answer to the question ( s ram~s..some later
  seen Jim yet?" Y: "Oh is he in town?" X: "Yeah, he g0~'?'' X. Have you
  "No, I haven't seen him yet.").                                      10 Yesterday." Y:

       By contrast with this possible organization of QA se
 lowing may be noted about SA sequences. The condi"t· que nces, the fol-
 an A on an S must be satisfied .         · · a constraint of inmrona.1 relev ance of
                                      w1thm
                                                                          1
 tum. That 1s to say, an item t at may b e used as an answzec. tatejurtap
   .           .              .     h                                              ·       .·
                                                                                        os1-
     .                            .
 will not be heard to constitute an answer to a summons if ·t          er   to  a summo   ns
                                                                          1
 rated from the summons. While this point may seem to . ~ccurs sepa-
 poral ordering is involved, it is far from clear that "ti~e~'P Y \?at tem-
   .
 time"    · the relevant matter. A n a Iternative,
          rs                                       ·     suggested by H or ehpsed     <
 would make reference to "nextness" plus some conception ;~.v:y _Sa~.ks,
                                                                          0
 of units of activity of finer or coarser grain by reference Pt:c 17:h. or
 "nextness" would be located.                                                            rch
     We may now note the relevance of this constraint to the "o                       .
                                                                          1 ' rmu 1ation of
 the absence of an A. When we say t hat upon A's absenc S                                 b
                   .                h A' b                                    e     may e
 repeated, we mtend t~ note t at             s Sa sTehnce may be found if its occur-
 rence does not immediately fo 11ow an ,               e phenomenon is encou t . d
                 . .                  .          .        h                          n ere
 when exammmg occurrences m a senes sue as S-short pause-S- h
 pause, or    "D"  rc k" . . . no answer . . .       "D"1c k" . . . , etc. In thiss me- ort
 chanic~[ age it may be ~f int~re~t to _note that the _very construction and
operat10n of the m~chamcal nng rs bmlt on these pnnc(ples. If each ring of
the phone be c?ns1dered a summ~ns, th:n the _Phone 1s built to ring, wait
for an answer, 1f none occurs, to nng a?am, wait for an answer, ring again,
etc. And indeed, some persons, polite even when interacting with a
machine, will not interrupt a phone, but wait for the completion of a ring
before picking up the receiver.
     The other qualification concerning the repeatability of an S upon the of-
ficial absence of an A concerns a tenninating rule. It is empirically observ-
able that S's are not repeated without limitation, until an A is actually re-
turned. There is, then, some terminating rule used by members of the
society to limit the number of repetitions of an S. I cannot at this point
give a firm formulation of such a terminating rule, except to note my
impression that S's are not strung out beyond three to five repetitions at
the most. However, that some terminating rule is normally used by adult
members of the society can be noted by observing their annoyance at the
behavior of children who do not employ it. Despite the formulation in
numerical terms, a similar reservation must be entered here as was en-
tered with respect to time above. It is not likely that "number" or
        366    Discovering Structure in Speech

"counting" is the relevant matter. Aside from contextual circumstances
(e.g., location), the requirement of "immediate juxtaposition" discussed
above may be related to the terminating rule(s). It may be by virtue of a
telephone caller's assumption of the priority or "nextness" of a response,
given the ring of the phone, that the telephone company finds it necessary
to use the phone book to advise callers to allow at least ten rings to permit
prospective answerers time to maneuver their way to the phone.
   One further observation may be made at this point about repetitions of
S. "Repetition" does not require that the same lexical item be repeated;
rather, successive utterances are each drawn from the class of items that
may be summonses, although the particular items that are used
may change over some string of repetitions. For example,
"Mommy . . . Mommy" may then shift to "Mom . . . Mom" or
"Mother . . . "; "Jim" may shift to "Mr. Smith," or "Jim Smith" (as, for
example, when trying to attract someone from the rear in a crowded set-
ting). A ring of a doorbell may shift to a knock on the door, the mechanical
ring of a phone is replaced by some lexical item, such as "hello" when the
caller hears the receiver lifted and nothing is said (as with the deviant case
introduced earlier to which I shall return later).
   While I am unable to formulate a terminating rule for repetitions of S
when no A occurs, it is clear that we have a terminating rule when an A
does occur: A terminates the sequence. As noted, upon the completion of
the .SA sequence, the original summoner cannot summon again. The
operation of this terminating rule, however, depends upon the clear recog-
nition that an A has occurred. This recognition normally is untroubled.
However, trouble sometimes occurs by virtue of the fact that some lexical
items, e.g., "Hello," may be used both as summonses and as answers.
Under some circumstances it may be impossible to tell whether such a
term has been used as summons or as answer. Thus, for example, when
acoustic difficulties arise in a telephone connection, both parties may at-
tempt to confirm their mutual availability to one another. Each one may
then employ the term "Hello?" as a summons to the other. For each of
them, however, it may be unclear whether what he hears in the earpiece is
an answer to his check or the other's summons for him to answer. One
may, under such circumstances, hear a conversation in which a sequence
of some length is constituted by nothing but alternatively and simulta-
neously offered "hellos." Such "verbal dodging" is typically resolved by
the use, by one party, of an item on which a second is conditionally rele-
vant, where that second is unambiguously a second part of a two-part
sequence. Most typically this is a question, and the question "Can you
hear me?" or one of its common lexical variants, regularly occurs.
   We may note that the matters we have been discussing are involved in
problems having to do with the coordinated character of social interac-
tion, whether they be coordinated entry into a conversation, coordinated




                                                                                 .J
                      Sequencino i I c            .         .
                                ,.,   1   onversattonal Openzngs   367

~e-~nt~y into an interrup~ed conversation, or the coordination of the activ-
ity m its_ course. In particular, we will shortly turn to a consideration of
the beanng ~f SA seque~~es on coordinated entry.
   The po~ei of the conditional relevance of A on S is such that a variety
of strong mf~rences can be made by persons on the basis of it, and we now
turn to consider some of them. We may first note that not only does condi-
tional rel~':'ance operate "forwards," the occurrence of an S providing the
expectab1ht~ of an A, but it works in "reverse" as well. If, after a period
of conversat10nal lapse, one person in a multi-person setting (and partic-
ularly when persons are not physically present but within easily recallable
range) should produce an item that may function as an A to an S, such as
"Wh at.,? " or "Y es·,
                     ? " th en another person in that environment may hear
in that utterance that an unspoken summons was heard. He may then
reply "I didn't call you." (This, then, is another sort of circumstance in
which we find an immediately graspable error, such as was remarked on
earlier.) The connection between a summons and an answer provides
both prospective and retrospective inferences.
   A further inferential structure attached to the conditional relevance of
A on S can lead us to see that this property has the status of what
Durkheim (1950) intended by the term "social fact"; i.e., the property is
both "external" and "constraining." When we say that an answer is con-
ditionally relevant upon a summons, it is to be understood that the behav-
iors referred to are not "casual options" for the persons involved. A
member of the society may not "naively choose" not to answer a
summons. The culture provides that a variety of "strong inferences" can
be drawn from the fact of the official absence of an answer, and any
member who does not answer does so at the peril of one of those infer-
ences being made.
   [Terms such as "casual option," "naively choose," and "strong infer-
ence" are used here in a fashion that may require explanation. Although
 not supplying a fully adequate explication, the following suggestion may
 be in order. By "may not naively choose" is meant that the person sum-
 moned cannot deny that some inference may legitimately be made. If
 some particular inference is proposed, then in denying it the s~1mmoned
 offers a substitute, thereby conceding the legitimacy of an mference,
 though not perhaps of a particular one. If questioned as to the warrant.for
 his inference, the summoner may refer to the absence of an answer, <t~d
 this stands as an adequate warrant. A sequence constructed to exemplify
 these remarks might be:

SUMMONER:          Are you mad at me?
SUMMONED:          Why do you think that?
SUMMONER:          You didn't answer when I called you.
SUMMONED:          Oh. No, I didn't hear you.
        368   Discovering Structure in Speech

Conversely, the following observed exchange may suggest what is in-
tended by "casual option" (or "native choice"):

WIFE:            What are you thinking about?
HUSBAND:         Who says I'm thinking?
WIFE:            You're playing with your hair.
HUSBAND:         That doesn't mean anything.

The activity "playing with one's hair" is a "casual option" (or "naive
choice") in this interaction and, therefore, the claim can be made that no
inference is warranted.]
   What sorts of inferences are involved? A first inference is "no answer-
no person." When a person dials a number on the telephone, if the
receiver on the other end is not picked up, he may say as a matter of
course "there is no one home"; he does not typically announce "they
decided not to answer." A person returning home seeking to find out if
anyone else is already there may call out the name of his wife, for ex-
ample, and upon not receiving an answer, may typically take it that she is
not home or, while physically home, is not interactionally "in play" (e.g.,
she may be asleep. The term is from Goffman 1963). If one person sees
another lying on a couch or a bed with eyes closed and calls their name
and receives no answer, he takes it that that person is asleep or feigning
sleep. He does not take it that the person is simply disregarding the
summons. Or, to use a more classical dramatic example, when Tosca,
thinking that her lover has been only apparently and not really executed,
calls his name, she realizes by the absence of his answer that he is not
only apparently dead but really so. She does not take it that he is merely
continuing the masquerade.
   It is this very structure of inferences that a summoner can make from
the official absence of an answer that provides a resource for members of
the society who seek to do a variety of insolent and quasi-insolent activi-
ties. The resource consists in this: The inference from official absence of
an answer is the physical or interactional absence of the prospective
answerer. Persons who want to engage in such activities as "giving the
cold shoulder," "sulking," "insulting," "looking down their noses at," etc.,
may employ the fact that such inferences will be made from "no answer"
but will be controverted by their very physical presence and being in-
teractionally in play (they are neither asleep nor unconscious). So,
although members can, indeed, "choose" not to answer a summons, they
cannot do so naively; i.e., they know that if the inference of physical or in-
teractional absence cannot be made, then some other inference will, e.g.,
they are cold shouldering, insulting, etc.
   We may note what is a corollary of the inferential structure we have
been describing. The very inferences that may be made from the fact of
                       Sequencing i11 Conversational Openings   369

the official absence of an answer may then stand as accounts of the "no
answer." So, not only does one infer that "no one is home," but also "no
one is home" accounts for the fact of no answer. Not only may one see in
the no answer that "he is mad at me" but one can account for it by that
fact. More generally then, we may say that the conditional relevance of A
on S entails not only that the nonoccurrence of A is its official absence but
also that that absence is "accountable." Furthermore, where an inference
is readily available from the absence of an answer, that inference stands
as its account.
   However, where no ready inference is available, then no ready account
is available and the search for one may be undertaken. Something of this
sort would seem to be involved in an incident such as the following (field
notes): A husband and wife are in an upstairs room when a knock on the
door occurs; the wife goes to answer it; after several minutes the husband
comes to the head of the stairs and calls the wife's name; there is no
answer and the husband runs down the stairs. If the foregoing analysis is
correct, we might say that he does so in search of that which would
provide an account for the absence of the wife's answer. The point made
here does not follow logically, but empirically. From the relationship of
the availability of an inference to its use as an account, it does not
logically follow that the absence of an inference entails the absence of an
account and the legitimacy of a search. An account may not be needed
even if absent. It happens, however, that that is so although not logically
entailed.
   We have now introduced as many of the features of conditional rele-
vance as are required for our further discussion. While the discussion of
conditional relevance in this section has focused on the relations between
A and S, these features are intrinsic to conditional relevance generally,
and apply as well to the relations between completed SA sequences, as a
unit, and further talk. If a called person's first remark is treated as an
answer to the phone ring's summons, it completes the SA sequence, and
provides the proper occasion for talk by the caller. If the conditional rele-
vance of further talk on a completed SA sequence is not satisfied, we find
the same sequel as is found when an A is not returned to an S: repetition
or chaining. In our data:

#86
D:    Police Desk (pause). Police Desk (pause). Hello, Police Desk (longer
      pause). Hello. (A#AA#A)
C:    Hello. (S)
D:    Hello (pause). Police Desk? (A#A)
C:    Pardon?
D:    Do you want the Police Desk?
         370   Discovering Structure in Speech

  We turn now to a consideration of the problem of the availability to talk
that provides the theoretical importance of SA sequences and opening
sequences in general. In doing so we return to the concerns with the coor-
dinated entry into an encounter, and the deviant case that required the
reformulation of the distribution rule.


         The Availability to Talk

         After having formulated a simple description for the opening
sequence of telephone calls, we encountered a deviant case that was not
described by that formulation. Rather than developing a deviant case
analysis we set out to try to deepen the formulation of the opening
sequence so that it would encompass with equal ease the vast majority of
cases already adequately described and the troublesome variant. It will be
recalled that the datum that gave us trouble read as follows:

#9
(Police make call-receiver is lifted and there is a one-second pause.)
D:         Hello.
Other:     American Red Cross
D:         [etc.]

In that piece, the caller made the first remark, whereas the distribution
rule requires that the called party makes the first remark. The foregoing
analysis provides for this occurrence as being as rule-governed a phenom-
enon as other interchanges are. Treating the ringing of the phone as a
summons and recalling the conditional relevance of an answer on it, we
find that after the receiver has been lifted, the expectation of an answer is
operative. In this piece of data, what occurs after the receiver is picked up
would have passed as a normal case of the distribution rule had it not been
noted that it was the caller, not the called, who uttered it. The SA
formulation gives us the circumstances under which it is not unusual for
that remark to be uttered by the caller: treating the ring of the phone
(which the distribution rule disregards) as a summons to which no answer
is returned. As was noted in our discussion of conditional relevance, A is
conditioned upon the occurrence of an S, and should it not occur it is of-
ficially absent and warrants a repetition of the S. Hearing, now, the
"Hello" as such a repetition provides for its status as a second summons
in such an occurrence. The structure of the datum thus is seen to be S, no
answer, S, A.
   Likewise, all the cases easily handled by the distribution rule are
handled with equal ease by the SA formulation, so long as the telephone
                                               Sequencing in Conversational Openings                         371

             ring is regarded as a summons. Thus, the rule "the called talks first"
             follows clearly from the conditional relevance of an A upon the occur-
             rence of an S; and the less general rule, the "caller provides the first
            topic," follows from the conditional relevance of further talk upon a
            completed SA sequence. The distribution rule's operation is incorporated
            within the structure of SA sequencing.
               We will now discuss the work SA sequences do by elaborating some
            properties of the component summons and answer items. The remainder
            of the present discussion, on the availability to talk and the coordinated
            entry into the sequence, will be devoted to further explicating the opening
           interactional structure.
               Many activities seem to require some minimum number of participants.
           For thinking or playing solitaire, only one is required; for dialogue, at
           least two; and for "eristic dialogue," at least three. 8 When an activity has
           as one of its properties a requirement of a minimal number of parties, then
           the same behavior done without that "quota" being met is subject to being
           seen as an instance of some other activity (with a different minimum
          requirement, perhaps), or as "random" behavior casting doubt on the
          competence or normality of its performer. (This is so where the required
          number of parties is two or more; it would appear for any activity to get
          done, one party at least must be available.) Thus, one person playing the
          piano while another is present may be seen to be performing, while in the
          absence of another he may be seen to be practicing. Persons finding them-
          selves waving to no one in particular by mistake may have to provide for
         the sense of their hand movement as having been only the first part of a
         convoluted attempt to scratch their head.
             Conversation, at least for adults in this society, seems to be an activity
         With a minimal requirement of two pa~ticipants. This may be illustrated by
         the following observations.
             Buses in Manhattan have as their last tier of seats one long bench. On

              8
          •  I touch here only tangentially on a larger area-what might be termed "11-party proper-
        ties and problems." What is suggested by that term is that for activities with a common value
        for n (i.e., two-party activities, three-party activities, etc.), there may be, by virtue of that
        common feature, some common problems or properties. For example, two-party activities
        may share some problems of coordination, or some properties as compared to three-party
        activities. Alternatively, activities that have a minimum-number-of-parties requirement may
        have common properties as compared to those whose relevant parameter is a maximum
        number of participants. It is the latter possibility that is being touched on here.
          On "eristics," see Perelman:

        {"ere there. any need for a clear sign enabling one to contrast the crit 7rion of eris tic _dial?g.ue with tha: of
         he other kmds, it would be found in the existence of a judge or arb,tor charged with g1".mg the casting
        Vote between the antagonists, rather than in the intentions and procedures of the adversaries themselves.
        Because the purpose of the debate is to convince not the adversary but the judge; because the adversary
        does not need to be won over to be be·iten. for this very reason the eristic dispute is of no great interest to
        the philosopher (1963: 166).           '   '




,,,,,
        372    Discovering Structure in Speech

one occasion two persons were observed sitting on this last bench next to
one another but in no way indicating that they were, to use Goffman's
term (1963: l 02-103), "with each other." Neither turned his head in the
direction of the other and for a long period of time, neither spoke. At one
point, one of them began speaking without, however, turning his head in
the direction of the other. It was immediately observed that other passen-
gers within whose visual range this "couple" were located, scanned the
back area of the bus to find to whom that talk was addressed. It turned
out, of course, that the talk was addressed to the one the speaker was
"with." What is of interest to us, however, is that the others present in the
scene immediately undertook a search for a conversational other. On
other occasions, however, similar in all respects but one to the preceding,
a different sequel occurred. The dissimilarity was that the talker was not
"with" anyone and, when each observer scanned the environment for the
conversational other, no candidate for that position, including each
scanner himself, could be located. The observers then took it that the
talker was "talking to himself' and the passengers exchanged "knowing
glances." The issue here could be seen to involve what Bales
(1951 :87-90) has called "targeting," and, to be sure, that is what the
persons in the scene appear to have been attending to. It is to be noted,
however, that it is by reference to the character of conversation as a
minimally two-party activity that the relevance of seeking the target is es-
tablished in the first place. In this connection, it may be remarked that
such phenomena as "talking to the air" (Goffman 1953: 159) or glossing
one's behavior by "talking to oneself," are best understood not as excep-
tions to the minimal two-party character of conversation but as special
ways of talking to others while not addressing them, of which other ex-
amples are given in Bales (1951 :89-90).
   On another occasion, two persons were observed walking toward one
another on a college campus, each of them walking normally. Suddenly
one of them began an extremely pronounced and angular walk in which
the trunk of his body was exaggeratedly lowered with each step and raised
with the next. The one encountering him took such a walk to be a com-
municative act and immediately turned around to search the environment
for the recipient of the communication. In the background a girl was
approaching. The two males continued on their respective paths and after
some fifteen to twenty paces the one looked back again to see if, indeed, it
was to the girl in the background that the gesture was directed.
   We have said that conversation is a "minimally two-party" activity.
 The initial problem of coordination in a two-party activity is the problem
 of availability; that is, a person who seeks to engage in an activity that
 requires the collaborative work of two parties must first establish, via
 some interactional procedure, that another party is available to collabo-
 rate. It is clear that a treatment of members' solutions to the problem of
                         Sequencing in Conversational Openings     3 73

   availability might, at the same time, stand as a description of how coordi-
   nated entry into an interactive course of action is accomplished. Our task is
   to show that SA sequences are, indeed, germane to the problems both of
   availability and coordinated entry, and how they provide solutions to both
   these problems simultaneously.
     We must show how the working and properties of SA sequences es-
  tablish the availability of the two parties to a forthcoming two-party in-
  teraction (and, in the absence of a completed sequence, foreclose the pos-
  sibility of the activity) and how they, furthermore, ensure that availability,
  both at the beginning and in the continuing course of the interaction. We
  noted before that the absence of an answer to a summons led strongly to
  the inference of the absence of a party or claimed the other's unavailabil-
  ity to interact. Conversely, the presence of an answer is taken to es-
  tablish the availability of the answerer; his availability involves, as we
  have seen, his obligation to listen to the further talk that is conditionally
  relevant upon the completion of the sequence. In sum, the completion of
  a sequence establishes the mutual availability of the parties and allows the
  activity to continue, and failure to complete the sequence establishes or
  claims the unavailability of at least one of them and perhaps undercuts the
 possibility of furthering that course of action.
     We may note, in qualification, that a distinction must be made between
 a party's "presence" and his "availability" to interact (as we shall later
 distinguish between his "availability" to interact and his "commitment"
 to do so). In our earlier discussion, we pointed out that the resource that
 members of the society draw upon in doing such activities as "cold shoul-
 dering," "insulting," "sulking," etc., involves the joint observability of
 physical presence, social presence (that is, consciousness and awareness)
 and the absence of an answer to a summons, indicating or claiming
 unavailability for interaction. For the insolent activity to be accomplished
 via such a contrast, obviously enough, requires the distinctness of the
 items so contrasted. Several additional illustrations may serve to extend
 the scope of our sense of this difference.
    Those who can remember their adolescence may recall occurrences
 such as the following in their high schools. In the morning, quite often as a
first piece of official business, the teacher would "call the roll." In that
case, a student, when his name was called, would respond by answering
"present" or by raising his hand. Neither party then expected that further
interaction between them would occur. Mere presence was being es-
tablished. If they went to a "proper" high school, they may have been
required to respond to a teacher's calling of their name in a recitation
period by jumping to their feet, and awaiting some further behavior by the
teacher. In that situation, their presence already established, they were
being summoned to be available for some interaction, typically some
examination. Teachers who saw a student physically present but not at-
           374      Discovering Structure in Speech

tentive to the official environment might make that fact observable to the
public there assembled by calling a student's name and allowing all to see
that he did not answer by standing up and establishing his availability. In
that way then, the properties of a summons-answer sequence could be
employed not only to establish availability or unavailability but to pro-
claim it to all who could see.
   In telephone interactions, the lifting of a receiver without further ado
serves to establish the presence of a person at the called number. It does
not, however, establish the availability of that person for further conver-
sation. Indeed, the deviant case that was introduced earlier presents
precisely this set of circumstances, and was met by further summoning by
the caller to elicit some demonstration of availability, i.e., some answering
remark. 9 In this age, in which social critics complain about the replace-
ment of men by machines, this small corner of the social world has not
been uninvaded. It is possible, nowadays, to hear the phone you are
calling picked up and hear a human voice answer, but nevertheless not be
talking to a human. However small its measure of consolation, we may
note that even machines such as the automatic answering device are con-
structed on social, ,ind not only mechanical, principles. The machine's
magnetic voice will not only answer the caller's ring but will also inform
him when its ears will be available to.receive his message, and warns him
both to wait for the beep and confine his interests to fifteen seconds.
Thereby both abab and the properties of SA sequences are preserved.
   While the machine's answer to a summoning incoming call is specifically
constructed to allow the delivery of the message by the summoner, and is
mechanically constructed with a slot for its receipt, the fact that it is a
machine gives callers more of an option either to answer or not than they

  " Note that the French may answer the phone with a remark specifically oriented to their
availability-''.i-ecoute"; while the British may respond to an interlocutor's failure to answer
a summons or question by inquiring if the "no answer-no person" inference is correct-
" Are you there?"
  After this paper had been completed, Miss Gail Ziferstein brought to my attention the
following datum (from another corpus of materials) that is relevant here and at other points
in the analysis:

 .OPERATOR:        Hello, Mister Lehrhoff?
, LEHRHOFF:        Mh hm, ..
, OPERATOR:        Mister Savage is gon' pick up an' talk to ya.} ,
  LEHRHOFF:        Alright,                              ,        simultaneous

 (52 seconds intervening)
 OPERATOR:         Hello.
 LEHRHOFF:         Yes.
 OPERATOR:         Did Mistuh Savage ever pick up?
 LEH RH OFF:       If he did, he didn't say "hello."
 OPERATOR:         Oh, o alright, smarty, just hold on.} ,
 LEH RHO FF:       heh! heh heh heh heh heh heh          simultaneous
 OPERATOR:         hhh!




                                                                                                  J
                              Sequencing in Conversational Openings             375

 have when the voice emanates from a larynx and not a loudspeaker. One
 thing that is specifically clear and differentiated between a human and
 mechanical answerer is that although both may provide a slot for the
 caller to talk again, the human answerer will then talk again himself
 whereas currently available machines will not. We have previously
 provided for the obligation of the answerer to listen to that talk, but we
 have not yet provided for the possibility that the answerer may then talk
 again, and it is to that we now turn.
    One hitherto unnoticed and important fact about answers to · sum-
 monses is that they routinely either are, or borrow some properties of,
 questions. 10 This is most obviously so in the ~ase of "what?" but seems
 equally so of "yeah?," and "yes?," which three terms, together with
 glances of the eyes and bodily alignments, constitute the most frequently
 used answer items. The sheer status of these items as questions, and the
 particular kinds of questions that they are, allow us to deepen the
 previous analysis of the obligation of the summoner to talk again upon the
 completion of the sequence, the obligation of the answerer to listen, and
 what may follow the talk he listens to.
    The obligation of the summoner to talk again is not merely a distinctive
 property of SA sequences. In many activities similar to the SA sequence,
 where, for example, someone's name may also be called, the caller of it
 need not talk again to the person called. Such activities as indicating
 someone's "turn to go," as in a discussion or game, share with "signaling"
 by rings of the telephone the fact that they are prearranged or invoke
 some shared orders of priority and relevance. Such activities much more
 directly can be seen to be pure signaling devices and not summoning
devices. That an activity starting, for example, with the enunciation of a
 name, is a summons, is provided by its assembly over its course. The
obligation of the summoner to talk again is, therefore, not merely "the
obligation of a summoner to talk again"; it is the obligation of a member of
the society to answer a question if he has been asked one. The activity of
summoning, is, therefore, not intrinsic to any of the items that compose it;
it is an assembled product whose efficacious properties are cooperatively
yielded by the interactive work of both summoner and answerer. The sig-
naling devices accomplish different outcomes. By not including questions
as their second items, they do not constrain the utterers of their first items
to talk again. Rather, they invoke prearrangements, priorities, and shared

   10 I am indebted here to David Sudnow. The notion of "borrowing properties of ques-

tions" is a difficult one. How one might prove that some item, while not a question, bor-
rowed some property of questions is not clear, in part because it is not clear how one would
prove that some item was or was not a question. The discussion that follows may, therefore,
be read as being limited to items that are, intuitively, "clearly" questions, e.g., items that
have "interrogative intonation," or that are lexically question items (e.g., "what?"), defer-
ring the issue of "borrowing properties."
         376   Discovering Structure in Speech

relevances as matters to which the addressed party must now direct his
attention.
   We now see that the summons is a particularly powerful way of
generating a conversational interaction. We have seen that it requires, in a
strong way, that an answer be returned to it. By "in a strong way" we in-
tend that the strong set of inferences we described before attend the ab-
sence of an answer, e.g., physical absence, social absence (being alseep or
unconscious), or purposeful ignoring. Moreover, it seems to be the case
that the answer returned to it has the character of a question. The
consequence of this is two-fold: ( 1) that the summoner now has, by virtue
of the question he has elicited, the obligation to produce an answer to it,
and (2) the person who asked the question thereby assumes an obligation
to listen to the talk he has obi'igated the other to produce. Thus, sheerly
by virtue of this two-part sequence, two parties have been brought
together; each has acted; each by his action has produced and assumed
further obligations; each is then available; and a pair of roles has been in-
voked and aligned. To review these observations with specific reference
to the two steps that are their locus:

SUMMONER:          Bill? (A summons item; obligates other to answer under
                   penalty of being found absent, insane, insolent, conde-
                   scending, etc. Moreover, by virtue of orientation to proper-
                   ties of answer items, i.e., their character as questions, pro-
                   vides for user's future obligation to answer, and thereby to
                   have another turn to talk. Thus, preliminary or prefatory
                   character, establishing and ensuring availability of other to
                   in~eract.)
SUMMONED:          What? (Answers summons, thereby establishing availability
                   to interact further. Ensures there will be further interaction
                   by employing a question item, which demands further talk or
                   activity by summoner.)


   We may notice that in relating our observations to the first two steps of
the sequence we have dealt not only with two steps but with the third as
well. We may now show that the span of control of the first two items ex-
tends further still. Not only is it the case that a question demands an
answer and thereby provides for the third slot to be filled ,by the
summoner, but also one who asks a question, as we noted above, has the
right to talk again. The consequence of this is that after the summoner has
talked for the second time, this talk. will have amounted to the answer to
the answerer (of the summons), and the latter will have a right to take
another turn. This provides for the J)Ossibility of four initial steps follow-




                                                                                        ,/
                                                                                    J
                              Sequencing in Conversational Openings             3 77

  ing from the use of a summons, which thus emerges as an extraordinarily
  powerful social item.U We have not yet exhausted its power.
    We may note that the item the summons elicits in the second slot is not
 adequately described as merely "a question." It is a question of a very
 special sort. Its special characteristic may become observable by contrast
 with other kinds of questions. One not unusual type of question has the
 property that its asker knows the specific content of the answer that must
 be returned to it. So, for example, radio interviewers acquainted with the
 person they are interviewing and perhaps long and intimate friends of
 theirs may nonetheless ask such a question as was heard posed to one
 musician by another who doubles as a disk jockey: "Tell me, Jim, how did
 you first break into music?" In a second type of question, while the ~isker
 does not know the specific content of the answer, he knows, ifwe may use
 a mathematical analogy, the general parameters that will describe it. So,
for example, while the doctor in an initial interview may not know
specifically what will be answered to his "What seems to be the trouble?"
he very readily takes it that the answer will include references to some
physical or psychic troubles.
    The character of the question that is returned to a summons differs
sharply from either of these. Its specific feature seems to be that the asker
of "what?" may have little notion of what an accomplished answer may
look like, both with respect to its substantive content and with respect to
the amount of time that may be necessary for its delivery. This property-
the specific ambiguity of what would constitute an answer-is clearly
seen in the use that is often made of it by those persons in the society who
may have restricted rights to talk. Thus, we may understand the elegance

   11
      That conversational oaks may out of conversational ac~rns grow is a frequent theme in
folklore. One version of such a story, starting from a somewhat different acorn, is the
following:
 On the express train to Lublin, a young man stopped at the seat of an obviously prosperous
 merchant.
   "Can you tell me the time?" he said.
   The merchant looked at him and replied: "Go to hell!"
   "What? Why, what's the matter with you! I ask you a civil question in a properly civil
way, and you give me such an outrageous rude answer! What's the idea?"
   The merchant looked at him, sighed wearily, and said, "Very well. Sit down and I'll tell
you. You ask me a question. I have to give you an answer, no? You start a conversation with
me-about the weather, politics, business. One thing leads to another. It turns out you're a
Jew-I'm a Jew, I live in Lublin-you're a stranger. Out of hospitality, I ask you to my home
for dinner. You meet my daughter. She's a beautiful girl-you're a handsome young man. So
you go out together a few times-and you fall in love. Finally you come to ask for my daugh-
ter's hand in marriage. So why go to all that trouble. Let me tell you right now, young man, I
won't let my daughter marry anyone who doesn't even own a watch!!" ("To Save Time," in
Ausubel 1948:404-405).
       378    Discovering Structure in Speech

involved in a standardized way in which children often begin conversa-
tions with adults. A phrase such as "You know what, Mommy?," inviting
a "what?" as its return, allows the child to talk by virtue of the obligation
thereby imposed upon him to answer a question while retaining a certain
freedom in his response by virtue of the adult's inability to know in ad-
vance what would have been adequate, complete, satisfactory, or other-
 wise socially acceptable answer.· (For these points I am indebted to
 Harvey Sacks.)
     Such an open-ended question does not expand what can be said beyond
 the constraints of the categorical relationship of the parties. But as com-
 pared with other kinds of answers to summonses, it does not introduce ad-
 ditional constraints. Additional constraints may, of course, be introduced
 by modifications on "what?," such as intonation or addition (e.g., "what
 now?"). [Other lexical items used as answers are (on the telephone)
 "hello" or some self-identification (e.g., "Macy's"). For a discussion of
  the ways the latter items impose additional constraints, see Scheglotf
  ( 1967, Chapter 4).]
      In other words, there are constraints on the "contents" of a speaker's
  remarks once a conversational course is entered into and some conversa-
  tional "line" is already present to be coordinated to. At the beginning of a
  conversation, however, no such "line" is already present, and the open-
  endedness of the ansJer that "what?" allows is a reflection of that fact
   and the requirement that if there is to be a conversation, it must be about
   something. The fact of open-endedness, however, does not necessarily
   imply the absence of all constraint. How much constraint is to be put, or
   can be put, on the content of some opening substantive remark may
   depend strongly on the relationship of the parties to one another, and that
   includes not only their relationship as it may turn out to be formulated but
   their relationship as it develops from moment to moment. While two
    parties who are about to be joined by an interaction medium may later be
    properly categorized as father and son, for them, as the phone rings, and
    indeed when it is picked up and the "hello" is uttered, they may be strang-
    ers. Their relationship to one another may have to be "discovered," while
    interactional work must precede the "discovery." Under such a circum-
    stance, given that strangers have restricted rights to talk to one another
    and restricted topics about which they may talk, then a completely open-
    ended "what" may be a "hazardous'.' opening for a phone conversation in
    which, at the moment of its utterance, the other may be a stranger. The
     consequences of such matters for the infrequency of answers such as
     "what" or "yes" on the phone, and for the alternatives that may be
     employed in their stead, are matters that cannot be gone into here.
       To conclude the present discussion, it may be noted that provision is
     made by an SA sequence not only for the coordinated entry into a conver- /,-
                             Sequencing in Conversational Openings               379

sation but also for its continued orderliness. First, we may note that in the
very doing of the two items that constitute SA sequences, and in the two
turns these items specifically provide for, the first two alternations of
abab are produced and that sequence is established as a patterned rule for
the interaction that follows.
    Insofar as the answerer of the summons does not use his right to talk
again to introduce an extended utterance, the work of SA sequences may
be seen to extend over a yet larger span of conversation. By "not in-
troducing an extended utterance," I mean that he simply employs one of
what might be called the "assent terms" of the society, such as
"mmhmm" or "yes" or "yeah," or "uh huh." Under that circumstance
the following may be the case: As the initial response to the summons es-
tablishes the answerer's availability and commits him to attend the next
utterance of the summoner (that is, ensures his continued availability for
the next remark), this obligation to listen and this ensurance that he will,
may be renewable. Each subsequent "uh huh" or "yes" then indicates the
continuing availability of its speaker and recommits him to hear the utter-
 ance that may follow. Availability may, in this way, be "chained," and, in
 fact, speakers with extended things to say may routinely leave slots open
 for the other to insert an "uh huh/' thereby recalling them to and recom-
 mitting them to the continuing course of the activity. 12
     It was remarked earlier that conversation is a "minimally two-party"
 activity. That requirement is not satisfied by the mere copresence of two
 persons, one of whom is talking. It requires that there be both a "speaker"
 and a "hearer." (That "hearership" can be seen as a locus of rules, and a
 status whose incumbency is subject to demonstration, is suggested by
 some of Sacks' work.) To behave as a "speaker" or as a "hearer" when
 the other is not observably available is to subject oneself to a review of
 one's competence and "normality." Speakers without hearers can be seen
 to be "talking to themselves." Hearers without speakers "hear voices."
 (But cf. Hymes l 964e on cultural variations in the definition of partici-
 pants in speech events.) SA sequences establish and align the roles of
  speaker and hearer, providing a summoner with evidence of the availabil-
  ity or unavailability of a hearer, and a prospective hearer with notice of a
  prospective speaker. The sequence constitutes a coordinated entry into
  the activity, allowing each party occasion to demonstrate his coordination

   12 It is as wry recognition of the operation and subversion of this mechanism that a stan-
 dard joke of the society may be appreciated. In it, a tired husband returns from the office,
 sinks gratefully into his easy chair and opens the evening paper to the sports page. His nag-
 ging wife, however, wishes to unburden herself of the accumulated troubles of the day and
 begins an extended monologue. Routinely, she leaves a slot of silence and he dutifully in-
 serts "Yes, dear," until, dimly aware that all is not as it appears to be, she says, "Are you ig-
 noring me?" and he replies "Yes, dear."
       380   Discovering Structure in Speech

with the other, a coordination that may then be sustained by the parties
demonstrating continued speakership or hearership. It is by way of the
status of items such as "uh huh" and "mmhmm" as demonstrations of
continued, coordinated hearership that we may appreciate the fact that
they are among the few items that can be spoken while another is
speaking without being heard as "an interruption."
 13
  A Kinesic.,Linguistic Exercise:
 'The Cig~rette Scene
 RAY L. BIRDWHISTELL




  Ray L. Birdwhistell is Professor of Communications,
  Annenberg School of Communications, at the University
  of Pennsylvania and Senior Research Scientist, Eastern
  Pennsylvania Psychiatric Institute. He received his
  doctorate from the University of Chicago and has taught
 at the University of Kentucky, the Foreign Service In-
  stitute, and the University of Buffalo. Inventor of the
 field of kinesics, for two decades he has been concerned
 with the analysis of communicative behavior as a com-
 plex whole.
     In this sketch of the development of kinesic research
 and its current status, Birdwhistell brings out the bitter-
 sweet tension so far inherent in it. Body motion is un-
 deniably essential to interpretation of communicative
 conduct, and, as Birdwhistell shows in his discussion of
 linguistic and kinesic interdependence, it sometimes
substitutes for linguistic means. Sociolinguists concerned
with the study of natural conversation are becoming in-
creasingly aware of the need for both visual and audio
records in the interpretation of interactional sequences.
Some rules of alternation thus must hold across, or be-
tween, verbal and nonverbal modalities (and rules of
co-occurrence, of course, involve them). "Movers" (like
"speakers") presumably have a competence, a charac-
terizable knowledge and ability, in terms of which they

From Kinesics and Context: Essays 011 Body /llfotion Communication
by Ray L. Birdwhistell. Copyright© 1970 by the Trustees of the Uni-
versity of Pennsylvania. By permission of the author and The Univer-
sity of Pennsylvania Press.

                                381
_J




     382   Discovering Structure in Speech

     interpret and accomplish body motion, both as an auton-
     omous mode of communication and as a mode integrated
     with language in social interaction. Because its mech-
     anisms and functions are so largely out of awareness,
     nonverbal behavior should illustrate, better than most
     forms of cultural behavior, the same kind of patterning as
     language (see Sapir I 949c:556-557). Yet units and pat-
     terns of nonverbal behavior prove difficult to determine
     with certainty; even short segments are found almost
     infinitely rich for continued analysis.
        If definitive progress is slow, it may be because "non-
     verbal behavior" conflates several aspects of patterning
     that must be discretely analyzed, a problem Birdwhistell
     discusses in terms of the relation of kinesic to extra-
     kinesic (parakinesic) phenomena. It may be that differ-
     ences between linguistic and nonlinguistic codes in means
     and functions override such common organization as the
     human brain might be expected to confer. It may be also
     that structure cannot be ascertained apart form semantic
     and "functional" analysis (see Ervin-Tripp, Chapter 7,
     for a discussion of function), and that observational
     identification, however necessary, must ultimately de-
     pend upon ethnographic consultation of native intuition
     (see Sapir 1949g, and also Hockett 1955, on the dashed
     hope that sound spectographs would solve problems of
     phonological identification).
        It is certain that the progress of the field has been slow
     because the necessarily painstaking research has de-
     pended upon a very few men. The material discussed in
     this chapter was filmed in 1956 and is part of a larger
     body of data to be treated more extensively by a group
     of anthropologists, psychologists, and linguists in the
     forthcoming The Natural History of an Interview
     (McQuown, in preparation). The linguistic model that
     has helped shape kinesic research (that of Trager and
     Smith) has been supplanted within linguistics by trans-
     formational-generative grammar. This has meant a shift
     in emphasis from behaviorally oriented observation and
     analysis to a concern with the more abstract and not
     directly observable rules relating meaning to sound
     (Chomsky and Halle 1968). But linguists of the latter
     school have not concerned themselves with modalities of
     communication apart from language, or with the differ-
     ence that their approach might make for kinesic analysis.
    A Kinesic-Linguistic Exercise: The Cigarette Scene   383

     Interest in the formal analysis of nonverbal communi-
  cation processes is rapidly increasing, howev.er. A col-
  lection of Birdwhistell's essays has recently appeared in
  paperback (1970). Work along similar lines is now being
  caITied on by several other groups of researchers con-
  cerned with diagnosis of behavior in psychiatric inter-
  views (Mahl 1968; Scheflen 1964). Of interest to stu-
 dents of social interaction is the work of Condon and his
 collaborators (1969, 1970), who, turning away from the
 earlier atomistic emphasis on isolation of phoneme-like
 units of motion, have begun to focus on "self synchrony"
 (on changes in the flow of body motion in relation to
 speech) and "interactional synchrony" (body change
 patterns of listeners in relation to the speech and body
 motion change patterns of speakers). There are indica-
 tions that this type of analysis may be particularly useful
 in the study of communication in ethnically diverse
 societies.
     Paul Ekman and his associates (Ekman and Friesen
 1969) at the University of California, San Francisco, are
 focusing on some of the broader gestural complexes an-
 alyzed in terms of their physiological properties and
 communicative function. They distinguished five major
 categories of nonverbal behavior: (I) emblems, non-
 verbal acts which have a direct verbal translation, i.e.,
greetings, gestures of assent, etc.; (2) illustrators, move-
 ments tied to speech which serve to illustrate the spoken
word; (3) affective displays such as facial signs indicating
happiness, surprise, fear, etc.; (4) regulators, acts which
 maintain and regulate the act of speaking; (5) adaptors,
signs originally linked to bodily needs, such as brow
wiping, lip biting, etc. Computer aided methods for the
isolation of these categories in video tape or film records
have been developed materially reducing the otherwise
considerable time required for analysis (Ekman, Friesen,
and Tausig 1971 ).
    In yet another direction, Cicourel and Boese have
begun a study of deaf and dumb sign language. Their
preliminary results indicate that sign language can be
described in terms of syntactic rules and rules of stylistic
contraction and emphasis much like those of spoken
language (Cicourel and Boese 1971 ).
   Every issue of the theory and description of communi-
cative conduct arises forcefully in the study of nonverbal
         384    Discovering Structure in Speech

         modalities: the relation between universal and culturally
         specific features (see Ekman and Friesen 1968); the
         relation between linguistic and other methodological ap-
         proaches (see Greimas 1968); the uncertainty as to
         adequate parameters of description and initial "etic"
         frameworks; and the paucity of adequate data and ade-
         quately trained investigators for integrating communica-
         tive form (or means) with communicative purpose. Re-
         newed interest in primate behavior and comparative
         study of signaling across species make human nonverbal
         signaling all the greater a challenge. Additional related
         readings are provided by Crystal (1969), Crystal and
         Quirk (1964), Dance (1968), Cazden, Hymes, and John
         (1971), Goffman (1964), Key (in press), LaBarre (1964),
         Rensky (1966), and Sebeok, Hayes, and Bateson (1964).


Doris and Gregory, as the camera is reloaded and again begins to record the
scene, are reseated upon the sofa. Each has a stein of the homemade beer supplied
by Doris. Doris looks from Gregory to her beer stein and at the matches which
Gregory is holding. Her left hand carries the cigarette to her mouth after her right
leaves the stein on the coffee table before them. Gregory continues: "He's a very,
very bright four-and-a-half-year-old. Why, that drawing that he brought in is very
advanced for four-and-a-half." As he talks, he opens the match folder, extracts a
match, strikes the match under the closed flap, moves the lighted match into
position and makes contact with her cigarette as he terminates his vocalization.
As he talks, Doris moves in concert with his match manipulations until her cig-
arette is lighted. She speaks: "I suppose all mothers think their kids are smart, but
I have no worries about that child's intellectual ability." A J second lag between
"child's" and "intellectual" was equaled by another between "intellectual" and
"ability." Gregory speaks, his first words coterminous with the latter hesitation
and "ability": "No, that's a very smart one." As Doris talks, her right hand drops
to the table edge and then past it slightly to the left to adjust her shoe strap before
she drops her hand backward to the couch. This movement, with its momentary
shifts, are still in concert with Gregory's, who, after Doris' cigarette is lighted,
forms a triangular movement in the air which terminates with the extinguishing
of the match and its disposal in the ash tray. This scene begins at (plus or minus
ten frames) # 12529 and is concluded by (plus or minus IO frames) # 12784.


         Introduction

        "The Cigarette Scene," an interactional sequence of some 18
seconds in duration, has remained a type site for linguistic-kinesic analysis
throughout the decade following the original work on the Doris-Gregory
                                                                                              ----   ~ 1 ·i.':
                                                                                                           ) I
                                                                                                           '11


                A Kinesic-Linguistic Exercise: The Cigarette Scene             385

  films. 1 Filming techniques have improved, budgets have become suf-
  ficiently large to permit extensive recording on sound film of half-hour
  and hour-long sequences of conversation, interview, and interaction, and
  with Jacques Van Vlack's development of the frame count B Roll, th;
  correlation of the vocalic and the movement stream has become more
  precise. Other films have attracted our research interest, but this scene
  in which Gregory and Doris contemporaneously discuss the merits of
  Doris' fou~-year-old son, Bruce, and engage in a ritua~ dancelike lighting
  of Doris' cigarette, has remained a rich, only partially analyzed corpus.
  The special cadence of this piece of interaction, which Gregory (frames
  12756-12786 and 12786-12826) terminates by a batonlike change of
  pace, marks the scene as critical and relevant to any final appraisal of the
  Gregory-Doris reciprocal. The seeming irrelevance of the body move-
  ment to the content exchanged by the participants and the glove-fit
  coherence of the rhythmic movements of the two participants to the in-
  strumental act of cigarette lighting has made the scene useful for demon-
 stration purposes. In our earlier assessments, the dramatic quality of the
 interchange masked out the significance of other behavior in the perfor-
 mance. The parakinesic category, "Rhythmic-Disrhythmic," in the first
 appraisals, subsumed data that, as our analyses became more refined;
 were to be analyzable as stress kinemes and suprasegmental kinemor-
 phemes. This present exercise attempts to bring the earlier research in
 line with some more recently developed techniques.


          Kine to Kineme ·

         As reported elsewhere (Birdwhistell 1952, 1958, 1961), . the
theory and methodology of kinesics has been consistently influenced by
that of descriptive and structural linguistics. From the initial morphologi-
cal discoveries, it has been clear that visible communicative behavior
exhibited formal properties at least analogic to those describable for
audible behavior. I have been fortunate to be in constant consultative
contact with linguistic researchers, and this contact shaped the research
design and terminology constructed for kinesic research. At the same
time, because of a deep appreciation of linguistic discipline and rigor, I

  1
    From The Natural History of an lnte,Tiew. Norman A ]\lc_quown, ed., i~ preparation,
1956- . The research for this still unpublished report was imtiated at the Center for the
Behavioral Sciences, during the summer of 1956. Gregory Bateson, Henry Brosin, Charles
H?ckett, Norman A. McQuown, Frieda Fromm-Reichmann, and .the _author selected 10
minutes of sound-filmed interview taken earlier by Bateson for exammatton. Research of the
~cene~ from this corpus given special attention has continued spm:adica)lY by ~lcQuo~n
and his students, Birdwhistell arid his students, and by Henry Brosm unttl the time of this
Writing (June, 1967).


                                                                                                     I:
        386   Discovering Structure in Speech

have reacted against the fashionable and often careless preemption of the
"etic-emic" distinctions. Throughout kinesic research, every attempt has
been made to be cautious about the abstraction of isolable elements of
body motion (kines) into manipulable classes of allokines (kinemes).
"Complementary distribution" ·is a~ idea of great methodological force
for the linguist and has proved to be an efficient tool for phonologic anal-
ysis. Because of the multiple layering of body motion behavior, both in
body part and temporal arrangement, the distributional qualities of units
of kinemorphology are more difficult to assess in the empirical data.
   At the present writing, a kineme is a class of allokines which can be
demonstrated in kinemorphs to be substitutable.
   Note: If more than one allokine is discovered to be present in the same
structural neighborhood, the kine representing it may be either:

        a. a member of more than one kinemic class or
        b. an insufficiently refined kine; or
        c. the morphology has been insufficiently analyzed and we are
        probably dealing with an intersection of levels in the behavioral
        stream

  The distinctions between kine and kineme, kinemorph and kinemor-
pheme, remain useful and efficient. However, these terms are heuristic
devices. Until we become much more secure as to the morphology and
syntactics of kinesics (even for American English movers) our emic as-
signments must be registered as tentative. The history of phonological
research is reassuring to the kinesicist timid about working models; to-
morrow's research will validate the model or obliterate it.


        Sight and Sound

        The earliest work in kinesics attempted only the crudest corre-
lation of body motion and speech behavior (Birdwhistell 1952). I had yet
to comprehend either the feasibility or necessity of sound film recording
and was, in fact, resistant to the idea early suggested by McQuown that
the future of kinesic-Iinguistic research as related to social processes
depended upon intensive and parallel phonetic and microkinesic recording
and analysis. As an anthropologist, I was attracted by grosser elements
which I felt could be abstracted and organized by the careful scansion of 1 ·
the complex message stream. The isolation of these, I believed, would 1
lead to the understanding of communication-for me then, as now, the
dynamic structure which sustains order and creativity in social interaction.
   The complex data which began to emerge as body motion research
               A Kinesic-Linguistic Exercise: The Cigarette Scene            387

  became involved in cross-cultural comparisons of humad body motion,
  and the encouragement of Henry Lee Smith, Jr., and George L. Trager to
  study body motion as a structure with its own rules of order combined to
  force me to concentrate upon the visible and silenced behavior of human
  beings. Small stretches of films and access to a slow-motion projector by
   I 956 Iaid the groundwork for the analysis of the American kinesic system.
  As research proceeded, the presence of vocalization or auditor behavior
  was not ignored. However, it was recorded at the articulatory level as body
  motion behavior-not as speech behavior. Even the preliminary attempts
  to abstract this data, however, made it clear that beyond the circumoral
  activity involved in speech production, behavior appeared which seemed
  related to or was at least usually modified by the presence of vocalization.
  It was not until the Palo Alto group 2 began its research conferences that
 the delineation of such behavior became relevant to kinesic research.
      Out of these conferences, out of the co-research with Smith and Trager,
 and out of the subsequent ongoing research at Eastern Pennsylvania
 Psychiatric Institute and at Western Pennsylvania Psychiatric Institute
 and Clinic3 came ideas which led to the isolation of a variety of circum-
 speech body behavioral abstractions. These abstractions cover behavior
characteristic of conversation, but which seems to have differing struc-
 tural properties than those which could be traced for the phenomena as-
 signed to kinesics proper.
     In the Cigarette Scene, the acts of lighting the cigarette, Gregory's
manipulation of the match, and Doris' adjustment of her shoe strap may
be termed instrwnental behavior. Moreover, the fact that Doris and
Gregory are seated for an extended conversation is, at one level, instru-
mental. To say that an act is instrumental, however, does not define it, in
itself, as without signal or message value. The performance of any act in
the presence of others must be comprehended as having the stamp of
individual and social practice. Yet, at this writing, acts such as walking,
smoking, eating, knitting, woodworking, still must be filed as "instru-
mental" and/or "task oriented" until we know more about their communi-
cative structure.~ However, as we can see from the analysis of the scene,
the assignment of instrumentality to the larger frame of behavior must not
preclude the examination of concurrent behavior, whether such behavior

  2 Gregory Bateson, Ray Birdwhistell, Henry Brosin, Frieda Fromm-Reichmann, and

Charles Hockett.
  3 The work of Harvey Sarles, William Condon, Felix Loeb, and Joseph Charny at Western

Pennsylvania Psychiatric Institute and Clinic has been invaluable both as a check upon and
as a creative incentive to the work here at Eastern Pennsylvania Psychiatric Institute.
  1 The work of Marvin Harris is an approach to this problem. See The Nature ofC11/t11ral

Things (New York: 1964). See also the review by Duane Metzger in the American A nthro-
pologist 67, no. 5, pt. I (1965): 1293.
       388   Discovering Structure in Speech

is at first glance integral to or apparently trivial to the immediate task
accomplishment. There is a temptation to see instrumental acts in a social
situation as "carriers" of other messages. Yet there is an equal justifica-
tion, from another point of view, of assigning priority to the communica-
tional act. At the moment, I am using the concept of alternating context.
Either can be the context for the other.
   There is a· second type of customary behavior which resists kinesic
analysis while having patterned form and discernible message value.
Included in this category, the demonstratives, would be such acts as
gestural mapping, the illustrative movements customary as accompani-
ments to female discussions of dressmaking and design or of cosmetolog-
ical arrangements of the hair. To the same category belong the illustrative
movements which accompany male discussions of fishing or cabinet
making and which. often accompany male discussions of sporting events.
From the limited cross-cultural data available it is clear that demonstra-
tives are conventionalized forms, but they do not appear to follow kinesic
rules, at least among American movers. No definitive demonstratives
appear in this particular scene. However, the limited tridirectional sweep
which is employed by Gregory as he extinguishes the match and which is
followed by the larger cigarette movement to change the cadence of the
scene may, as we get more comparative data, be both "instrumental" and
"demonstrative." The act is clearly, at one level, instrumental. However,
without supporting data, we cannot define the act itself as demonstrative
-the change of cadence may very well be at times, in and of itself,
demonstrative.
   The durations of both instrumental behavior and demonstrative be-
havior are often longer than that of the accompanying syntactic sentences.
This need not be so. For example, a speaker may circumscribe a shape in
the air while describing an object and the air picture may be coextant with
the nominal clause. Comparably, an instrumental act, whether referred to
in the context of accompanying speech or not, may be completed within
or beyond the stretches of the speech behavior.
   There is a third type of body behavior which, while still only crudely
understood, should be mentioned here. This behavior is characteristic of
all conversational and nonconversational interactional situations. Inter-
actional behavior includes a variety of behaviors of part or whole bodies
as they move toward or away from, or maintain careful spacing among,
participants of an interactional scene. Hall (1959, 1966) has done pioneer-
ing work in the isolation of certain aspects of these phenomena in his
work upon proxemics. Scheflen's (1966) analysis of the movement pat- ,--
terns in the psychiatric interview provides still another dimension to the /
understanding of body shifts as messageful. His study, related to Bateson
and Mead's ( 1942) earlier work of complementary, mirroring, and parallel
                A Kinesic-Li11guistic: Exercise: The Cigarette Scene          389

   movements of participants, indicates that there is a discoverable logic
  which marks segments of interaction. The work of Condo'n on "syn-
  chrony" and "dissynchrony" in interaction is further suggestive of overall
  interpersonal movement patterns which promise, as analysis proceeds, to
  supply us with measures of interactional communicative signals. 5 A num-
  ber of behavioral categories are reported as relevant to the examination of
  the interaction. Often this behavior, which ranges from the presence of a
  rhythmic cadence to the interaction to a disassociation in the behavior of
  the actors to the extent that they appear to be in isolation from one
  another, seems almost to be a running comment to the participants about
  the interaction (see also Birdwhistell 1961). Bateson's concept of "meta-
 communicational" is of relevance here. Perhaps the term "metainterac-
 tional" would leave the function of such variations in behavior more open
 for further investigation. In the case of the Cigarette Scene, going beyond
 the data provided by our corpus, Doris' activity might be interpreted as a
 demand upon Gregory for a relationship more interpersonally involved
 than he has seemed to engage in before. As hostess, she has provided
 beer. Her nonlexical request for Gregory to light her cigarette may be no
 more than an act to elicit a formalizing etiquette. At some level of analysis
 his act can be seen as the reciprocal of hers. The cadence of which we
 spoke above, which distinguishes this part of the scene from the remaining
 20 minutes, sustains itself until Gregory cuts the beat in half with the
 waved match and cigarette. This action is special and must ultimately be
 accounted for in any description of the interaction. However, the point
 being made here is that while Doris moves her hands and arms and shifts
 her body, and while Gregory moves his hands and body in a concert beat,
other things are continuing to happen. The "dance" is no more exclusive
than is her "shoe fixing" -interaction is multidimensional in time and
structure.
    To return to the data, Doris, while continuing to talk about her son,
turns away from Gregory, "reaches" for a glass which she· does not take,
drops the heel of her shoe away from her foot and then adjusts the strap
and lets her hand fall away from the shoe before it swings back to touch
the table again. Meanwhile, she has "closed" her body, moving her torso
closer to her legs as she talks about "all mothers think their kids are
smart". . . . Her hand touches the table on "but." She then turns back to
Gregory and focuses upon him as she says, "I have no worries about that
child's intellectual ability" while shaking her head with animation. Here
again is a "layer" of behavior which cannot be accounted for either in

  5 Personal communication with William Condon. His analysis of fine-grained move-

ment reveals that there is very close coordination in the fine movement of interactants in
conversation.
          390   Discovering Structure in Speech

  strictly kinesic structure or in either of the categories laid out above. The
  quality of the film makes it impossible for us to confirm the impression
. that as she talks the tonus of her face changes. Nor can we determine
  whether the tight mouth-limited smile with which the scene began, taken
  together with the tonus shift,.forms a cross-referencing signal that calls
  attention to the signal value of the complexity of her utterance. These
  phenomena which are recorded as parakinesic are detectable when we
  contrast these scenes with others in the larger film. However, "interpreta-
  tion" of these would require more data than are supplied by all of the film
  and tape at our disposal.
     Since the stretch which we are examining contains no clear examples of
  kinesic markers, these movements, which seem to be tied to particular
  semologic forms, require no discussion here. These movements custom-
  arily but irregularly appear in utterance situations in conjunction with
  ambiguous pronominals, in situations where the lexeme is ambiguous
  about tense, position, possession, and plurality, and in situations where
  adverbial clauses appear to require reinforcement or modification. The
  fact that these are lacking or submerged within other phenomena in this
  stretch may or may not be of significance. The string upon which we will
  concentrate in this discussion is Doris' "I suppose all mothers think their
  kids are smart, but I have no worries about that child's intellectual
  ability." When compared to comparable strings within the larger corpus,
  there is a kind of stereotypy here to her speech behavior. It is impossible
  from the available data to determine whether this stereotypy arises from
  the fact that she has used this sentence before in her dealings with the
  outside world, whether her words are somehow fillers for a critical rela-
  tionship shift, or, whether what we hear is not stereotypy at all but
  what Fromm-Reichmann once described in conference as the "voice of
  despair." At any rate, regardless of our rationalization, the absence of
  discernible markers is worthy of note and may become of significance as
  we come to know more about the codes of interaction.
     In this exercise our focus is upon what Doris says in this situation. It is
  not our present problem to determine what she means. At the same time,
  operating upon the assumption that description approaches explanation
  as it deals with a greater proportion of the available data, it should be
  profitable to describe our corpus more adequately. Charles Hockett
  originally transcribed this string, and his transcription was modified only
  slightly by an independent analysis by Norman McQuown. Trager-Smith
  conventions are used here, although modified slightly for Hackett's
  purposes.                                                                      1
                                                                                  ,,-
     In an attempt to get some kind of perspective upon the lexical aspect'
  of this piece, twelve women of comparable age and social class back-
  ground to that of Doris were given a typescript in standard English ortho-
                A Kinesic-Linguistic Exercise: The Cigarette Scene                 391

graphy and asked to comment upon it. All except one commented that
 this was standard "woman talk," i.e., a preliminary apology followed by a
proud statement about the child, unusual only in the presence of the "but"
 rather than the expected "and." The one exception to the "woman talk"
generalization came from an informant who said, "It's a sentence to hide
the 'but.' She is very concerned about her child." The general attitude of
these informants about the "but" was consistent with the appraisal of
the psychiatrists, Henry Brosin and Frieda Fromm-Reichmann, who
saw the central lexical signal of the sentence in the conjunction. (It
is worthy of note that four of a control group of six women, when showed
this sentence among five other sentences and asked to recall them 5
minutes later, wrote this sentence as "I suppose [one case 'guess']
all women think their kids are smart [two cases, 'bright'] and I have no
worries [one case, 'I'm not worried'] about that child's [three cases, 'my
child's'] intellectual ability.")
   Careful review of the linguistic evidence (see Charts 13. la, I b, I c)


           chart 13 .1 a

Linguistic Transcription: "I Suppose All Mothers Think Their Kids Are Smart
But"

le***                                  ?-                                     -?
fn**<
v~·~
Int   3
Str.J A    A      A
                    2
                            A         A            A
                                                         J 2 3
                                                                /
Sgm ay + spoz + ::,hi + m::,cforz + 8ink + 15er + kidz ::,r + smart
                                                                      r
                                                                      b::,t
                                                                              ?



        suppose all mothers think their kids arc smart                but




      676 683     686 691        698    702 706 710 718               725

* ?,h,r,::,,m, Vocal Segregates (Trager).
** <, Crescend (Hockett): r.. Drawling (Trager).
*** 'l', Rasp (Trager).
Phonetic transcription omitted. Circled numbers are numbas assigned 1956.
Open numbers are from edge reading of sound lilm 1967.



provides the following discussion. Doris' customary discourse pattern
contains long strings of secondary stress. Moreover, the tertiary on "I" at
the start of the string is not unusual. What is more unusual are the two
double cross junctures within such a short string. Doris customarily has
           392       Discovering Structure in Speech

           chart 13.J b

Transcription: "I Have No Worries About"

*In
VSg       hr ?-;J'/m?-?
Int
StrJ
                             2I        /\
                                                  3
                                                      /\
                                                           3
                                                                   I
                                                                       21 '-)
Sgm                       1ay + haev +now+ W-;Jriyz                         -;Jbawt +
                              I    have           no       worries           about



                             752   755            760      763                   778

*   Overloud (Trager).


           chart 13.lc

Transcription: "That Child's Intellectual Ability"

*ln/fn                -~
                      _r.,                                     >
YSg                     hr                                                  r
Int                                :                        1          I    #
StrJ                    /\         : , /\                      /            I
Sgm            5.et + cayldz :     : intilekcuwil + :ib1htiy
               that childs           intellectual    ability



         783           789                  804                            831

* > Fading (Hockett).



very long strings without terminal junctures. This is a phenomenon com-
mon in psychiatric interviews (this is not ostensibly such an interview)
and has been interpreted as a device to avoid interruption or interpreta-
tion. The segregates here again are not unusual in her speech patterning.
The paralinguistic rasp over "think their kids are smart" is consistent
with other portions of the larger protocol. The drawl over "are smart but I
have no worries about that child's" is not, in the fact that it conveys por-
tions of two syntactic sentences, a common device for her. If we were
trying to assess her meanings, the use of drawl here would deserve fur-
ther comparative attention. Studies of silence remain preliminary among
linguists. "Hesitations" and "pauses" have been remarked upon by a
number of students as worthy of study, but even when they are statis-
             A Kinesic-Linguistic Exercise: The Cigarette Scene   393

tically appraised, we still know relatively little about the conventional
use of the devices. However, in the case of Doris, the roughly t second
between "worries" and "about" and between "child's" and "intellectual"
seem worthy of note, particularly if we are in pursuit (consciously or not)
of some kind of evidence that the utterance implies that she does have
worries and among those worries, some about her child. Even though we
are not here preoccupied with meaning, it is always with us, and an in-
crease in our data might amplify our understanding of the situation. Let
us see how this sentence is marked kinesically.


         Kinesic Junctures

           From the beginning of the systematic investigation of American
 movement patterns it was evident that we were not dealing with a set of
 isolated and disconnected gestural forms. The discovery of kinesic junc-
 tures in the behavior of American (including American-English-speaking
 Canadians) movers laid the groundwork for structural kinesics. Not only
 were movement segments tied together morphologically, but longer
 segments and complex forms were joined or; separated by junctural con-
 ventions. The fact that streams of body behavior were segmented and
 connected by demonstrable behavioral shifts analogic to double cross,
 double bar, and single bar junctures in the speech stream enhanced
 the research upon kinemorphology and freed kinesics from the atomistic
 amorphy of earlier studies dominated by "gestures" and "sign" lan-
guage. Moreover, when we attempted to study interactional situations,
by means of context analysis (Scheflen 1966), the need for rigor de-
manded markers to give us some way of explicitly breaking the be-
havioral stream, of segmenting out sections for special comparative
attention. The fact that the kinesic markers, while at times coextant with
the linguistic markers, often gave us a very different shape contributed to
our assessment of data that did not seem to fit within linguistic terminal
junctures. This became particularly evident when the major body shift
which I termed the kinesic triple cross juncture served to relate and seg-
ment much longer stretches of conversational behavior. While not en-
tirely accurate, we have come to see the behavioral stretch marked by
kinesic triple cross junctures as comparable to paragraphing or stanzaing
in writing. We have not attempted the systematic research necessary to
relate this juncture to content but, as of this writing, the best statement
possible is that it is often but not always related to shifts in content or to
shifts in relationship patterning. Only further research will permit security
as to whether such phenomena as these are separate, interdependent, or
in free distribution.
         394     Discovering Structure in Speech

   During the past several years, research upon complex strings of speech
taken from conversation and compared with the production of simple and
complex statistical formulas (Birdwhistell 1968) has provided us with two
other junctural forms. The first of these, the "tie" juncture, has been
detected only in conjunction with spoken nominal constructions and will
be demonstrated (p. 395). The second, the "hold" juncture, occurs reg-
ularly in conjunction with complex strings of discourse and apparently
has a discretely semologic function. The hold juncture, involving a par-
ticular body part which holds a position while other parts continue to
perform other functions, connects included and apparently intrusive
variation in content, maintains the coherence of complex themes, and
bridges apparently trivial diversionary or explanatory discourse excur-
sions. These six kinesic junctures are working tools. The primitive state
of kinesic research does not permit us at the moment to see them either as
structurally equivalent or as of more than one level of activity. My hunch
is that the single bar and the tie juncture will turn out to be at a different
level than are the double cross, the double bar, the triple cross, and the
hold. However, this may be a result of the types of data I have been
analyzing rather than a matter of structure.


         Tentative Kinemes of Juncture
Symbol         Term                       Gross Behavioral Description
  K#      Double cross   Inferior movement of body part followed by "pause." Termi-
                         nates structural string.
  KIi     Double bar     Superior movement of body part followed by "pause." Termi-
                         nates structural strings. Homomorph in initial and medial or
                         parallel positions may be a kinemorpheme which permits K# in
                         terminal position. We have no data which illustrate coexistence
                         of a terminal Kl/ in conjunction with a complex kinemorphemic
                         construction containing "Kl/" in other positons.
  K #I   Triple cross    Major shift in body activity (relative to customary performance).
                         Normally terminates strings marked by two or more K#s or
                         K//s. However, in certain instances K#I may mark termination
                         of a single item kinic construction, e.g., in auditor response, may
                         exclude further discussion or initiate subject or activity change.
  K=      Hold           A portion of the body actively involved in construction perfor-
                         mance projects an arrested position while otherjunctural activity
                         continues in other body areas.
  Kl      Single bar     Projected held position, followed by "pause." Considerable
                         idiosyncratic variation in performance; "pause" may be momen-
                         tary lag in shift from body part to body part in kinemorphic
                         presentation or may involve full stop and hold of entire body
                         projection activity.
  K.     Tie             A continuation of movement, thus far isolated only in displace-
                         ment of primary stress, discussed below (p. 399 11).
             A Kinesic-Li11g11istic Exercise: The Cigarette Scene   395


         The Stress Kinemes                                               ....-

          Three of the junctural kinemes were isolated prior to the initiation
 of serious research and analysis designed to integrate kinesic and lin-
 guistic data. K#, K//, and, although not given separate status, K :/# were
 easily detectable as operative forms in complex kinemorphic construc-
 tions. Only as linguistic-kinesic analysis proceeded, however, did K/,
 K=, and K. emerge in that order from the behavioral stream. From this
 time on, work proceeded, in a sense, in· two directions. Microanalysis
permitted the abstraction of the kinic stream from articulatory description
to the point that complex kinemorphs could be abstracted. Fortunately,
early hunches that shifts in body part, of intensity or breadth of move-
 ment, marked movement from kinemorph to kinemorph held up in a
 sufficiently large number of cases that, as the "terminal" junctures were
isolated, their function in relation to strings of kinemorphs could be
postulated and a primitive syntactics could be derived to permit the
investigation of bounded sequence of behavior. This proved immediately
productive.
   The Cigarette Scene as a unit for study was originally chosen because
of the unique interactional cigarette lighting. While the film was being
changed, Doris reported to Gregory that a psychologist had examined her
son and felt that he did not need any special attention. The sound made by
the camera starting seemed to trigger Doris and she makes a major body
shift which is recorded as a kinesic triple cross. The termination of the
scene is marked by Gregory's body shift and match lid closing which
follows directly upon his triangular cigarette wave. The cameraman shifts
his focus and we are precluded from determining whether Doris acqui-
esces to his juncture. The fact that after a 34-frame duration of silence she
places her hand firmly on the table as she shifts indicates that she has. It is
worthy of comment that even after this m~uor shift they continue to dis-
cuss the little boy's personality.
   Doris' string, with which we are concerned here, is marked:
                        K·    K/     K# K#       K=
                                                 K/(?)
//1 suppose all mothers think their kids are smart but I have no worries
       K/                    K·        K#
about that child's intellectual ability//.
(See Charts 3a, b, and c below for correlation with linguistic transcription.)
  The kinesic single bar, noted in the phonational gap between "worries"
and "about," is questioned because while her head activity is the only
         396    Discovering Structure in Speech

part in manifest movement, it, in its activity, meets the minimal articula-
tory requirement for held part. However, there is no manifest (in relation-
ship to her ongoing movement pattern) stop in that activity. Analysis of
the film does not lead me to see the presence of the morpheme of "dead
pan," nor can I find any evidence of "destressed," discussed below under
the stress kinemes. The "hesitation" in the head sweeps is assigned single
bar status, but I hold little confidence in the assignment. It may be simply
that kinesics, like linguistics, must learn how to deal with cessations of
activity which are not codable by any prevalent classification system. The
K= is manifest; her very active torso holds over the remaining stretch. I
suspect that it is the K= which gives the impression of the presence of
aK/.
   McQuown and I had insisted that the analysis of human communica-
tional behavior was in such a primitive state that, insofar as time per-
mitted, we could not afford either in the linguistic or kinesic transcriptions
to dispense with the most microscopic recording achievable within the
state of the art. We felt that it would be more profitable in the long run to
do shorter stretches in an intense fashion than to do longer stretches of
macrorecording. In the annotated transcript which accompanies The
Natural fl istory of an Interview, the reader will find that the kinesic
"macro" is often crude and arbitrary. Unlike linguistics with its back-
ground of research, kinesics had no canons which would regulate the
size and relevance of shapes which we termed "macro." On the other
hand, the past IO years have given me little reason to vary my decision
that microanalysis is, for our purposes, sufficiently fine-grained if every
third frame of a movie taken at 24 frames a second is recorded. 6 As the
 years have passed, the micro line has continued to supply data to and
confirm hypotheses made about conclusions derived at much higher
 levels of analysis.
    Data have a way of hiding in a corpus and have in themselves little
 power of resistance to false, overfine, or overgross retrieval techniques.
 In the case of the behaviors that were to become the kinesic stress
 phonemes, two factors served to obscure them. The first of these factors
 came from an all-too-av~1ilable classification called "speech effort" into
 which I placed the nonkinemorphic activity which occurred between the
 isolated junctures. Naively and innocently influenced by the fact that
 these activities were roughly correlatable with shifts in vocalic pitch and
 stress and reinforced in my conclusions by introspective support as I
 mimicked the speech patterns, I at first dismissed such evident variations
 in movement as artifacts of speech production. The difficulty of matching

  6
    The elegant work of Condon, Sarles, Loeb, Charny, and their colleagues to my mind
constitutes a partial affirmation of this position. Moreover, there seems every reason to
believe from their reported data that an articulatory kinesics is developing which will ease
the microrecording of exotic movement systems.
               A Kinesic-Linguistic Exercise: The Cigarette Scene   397
                                                          1
speech and movement because of the crudity of 0 ur correlational tech-
niques contributed to the artifact theory. Only later, when Henry Lee
Smith, Jr., and George L. Trager worked to strengthen my knowledge of
descriptive linguistics and to sharpen my ear, did it become evident that,
while clearly production of speech strings requires effort or at least is not
Iaborless, the regularities I was becoming aware of could not (because of
their systematically variable appearance)' be so dismissed.
   Kinesic stresses are discussed at length elsewhere (Birdwhistell 1970:
 128-147). It is enough to say here that four distinct variations in move-
ment pattern, usually with the head, the hand, or the brows, serve to mark
the flow of speech. These have been termed "primary" / V/, "secondary"
I A/, "unstressed"/-/, and "destressed" /0/. At least one stress occurs
between all kinesic terminal junctures. By definition this is a primary
stress. The following example from a film may serve to illustrate the
stresses. In response to the question //What was John's last name?//,
//Doe// is marked by a single movement, //Doe//. If the emphasis is upon
John (not Harry), in the question, the question itself would be marked
with //John// under primary kinesic stress and //last name// either has a
secondary plus unstressed, two secondarys, or two unstressed.

Thus:
    V     /\                   V     /\    /\             V   --
//John's last name// or //John's last name// or //John's last name//.
The stressing is reversed if "name" not "John" is being emphasized.

Thus:
    /\    -V                   /\     /\   V          -       -V
//John's last name// or //John's last name// or //John's last name//.

The third stress of "unstressed" was derived following the isolation of
"destressed," the fourth stress which is a reduction of stress below the
norm of the produced string. In the filmed corpus was discovered:
                  I\ -          0    0   I\      V     /\   V
               //What is Johns you know Bills friends last name//.
The string takes on more form when the kinesic junctures are added:
          K// I\ -    V K= 0   0 K//\ V K# /\ V K#
          //What is Johns you know Bills friends last name//.
   Although several thousands of exercises have been run from sound
filmed data, it is still not possible to establish a rule which states an abso-
lute relationship between these kinesic stresses and junctures and the
linguistic stress and intonation patterns (by the Smith-Trager conventions)
which accompany them. In general, a primary kinesic stress tends to·
coincide with the primary linguistic stress. Yet, in more than 20 per cent
          398    Discovering Structllre in Speech

. of the cases it does not. Perusal of the data indicates that the highest point
  of loudness and pitch, when these points coincide, is usually marked by a
  kinesic primary. However, this does not always occur. A long string of
  linguistic secondary stresses or a long string of phonation at a pitch 2
  level is usually marked by destressed, but not always. In nominal phrases
  which are often marked by kinesic secondary-primary or kinesic primary-
  secondary or kinesic tertiary-primary, the kinesic stress may be consistent
  with or differ from the linguistic stresses. To summarize: while, statis-
  tically, kinesic stress patterning tends to be consistent with linguistic
  stress patterning, this is not invariable. I assume that further research at
  the semologic level and greater refinement of research with relationship to
  both linguistic and kinesic stress patterning will provide more perspective
  upon these phenomena. I am attracted by a conception of communicative
  structure which would include the possibility that, at least for American
  English, kinesic and linguistic suprasegmentals may be in free variation.
  However, I would hasten to say that the burden of proof for such a prop-
  osition would at the present state of knowledge rest upon me.
      The concept "free variation," a useful one for structural analysis, may
  be misleading to the reader concerned with either psychological or socio-
   logical considerations of meaning. All that the term is intended to desig-
   nate is the fact that forms of a given level are substitutable without special
   structural adaptation at that level. Throughout the structures of either
   linguistic or kinesic phenomena, "emic" forms are abstracted from class
   members, which are described as being in free variation with one another.
   However, there is no implication here that the choice of one of a series of
   alternatives (defined in structural terms) at any level of structure is not of
   consequence at the level of social interaction. The difference between
   /cfa/ and /oiy/ (thuh and the) may at one level of analysis be seen as trivial
   but at another be of great consequence. These forms, under certain
   morphological or syntactical analyses, may be seen as identical, but, at
   the semological level, as well as at the phonological, as absolutely dis-
   tinct. Comparably, the fact that in a stream of action the movement of the
   head may be seen to transport all kinesic .stress signals, while in another
   stream a movement of the brows or, in another, the hand is utilized for this
   activity, is of little consequence in kinemorphological analysis. However,
   this may be of definitive significance for questions asked of this data at the
   level of social interaction.                                                      ,--,
      When the tentative hypothesis is established that at certain levels of ./
   analysis we may discover, as research proceeds, structural forms from
   kinesics which are substitutable for structural forms from linguistics,
    there is no suggestion that the "choice" made by the conversant is not of
   consequence to the interaction. We are postulating an interdependence of
   linguistic and kinesic structure, not a final equivalence of semological or
    interactional function. In the discussion to follow, it will be seen that struc-
             A Kinesic-Linguistic Exercise: The Cigarette Scene              399

tural distinctions are made in the abstracted speech stream which do not
appear in the abstracted movement stream and vice versa. At one level of
analysis it is possible to say that the kinesic suprasegmental activity is
functioning to make distinctions that might have been made by the linguis-
tic suprasegmentals, and that we could not have been aware of these
distinctions if we examined only the audible aspects of the activity stream.
It is furthermore possible to say that these same (at this level of analysis)
distinctions could have been made in the linguistic stream without an
alteration in the structural activity in the kinesic stream. All that we are
saying is that unless we analyze both the linguistic and kine sic stream, we
have no way of knowing what distinctions have been made by the
conversant.
   There is a temptation to say that when one channel carries a distinction
which is not made by the other, the fuller channel carries the "real" mean-
ing. This implies that a given performance has a particular meaning. Un-
der no circumstances must the reader be misled by the heuristically
limited corpus which we are examining in this exercise. From the exam-
ination of extensive sound-filmed interactional sequences, I have every
reason to posit the proposition that in human experience there are at all
observational times many streams of meaning in process. The particular
section of the stream we analyze is always a partial one, and only as we
come to comprehend the larger rules of communicational structure will
we be able to determine the relevant meanings in particular sequences. In
short, it is my hope that as we gain more complete control of the vari-
sized forms of both linguistics and kinesics, we shall be able to examine
limited sequences with an increased control over the data we ignore when
we limit our corpus. I think a great part of the arguments popular in lin-
guistics today about "grammar," syntax, and meaning are viable only
because of the limited universe which is under scrutiny.
   The kinemes of stress combine to form a set of suprasegmental kine-
morphemes which have been tested in studies of complex sentences and
statistical formulas. These are:

               Stress Kinemes                 Suprasegmental Kinemorp/remes
                      /VI                                    /v/
              /AV /or/-V /or/-A/                             / --v /
              /V A/or/V-/or/ A-/                             I ..,.... I
              /-\/-/or/\/ /or/-\/ A/                         I -v- I
          /VKIV/or/VK#V/or/V ~v/                             I V"V 11
           /OOKl/or/OOK#/or/0011/                            /-0-/
                    /OOV/                                    I --;.y I
                     /VOO/                                   Iv I
           7 / v-v / and /-0-/ may as research develops turn out to be at a higher

level of structure. The fact that the form crosses terminal junctures may or may
not require such placement.
        400      Discovering Structure in Speech

  Charts 13 .2a, 2b, and 2c, below, will demonstrate the kinic, the kinemic,
and the kinemorphemic levels of analysis of Doris' circumlexical stress
behavior. The structural balance of this selected segment is immediately
obvious. The /K=/ is the added factor in the latter section of the utterance.
However, ignoring this, if the suspected /K// is added, our type becomes:


        chart 13.2a

Kincmorphic, Kincmic, and Kinic Transcriptions
              'Y'
K,             K·                                          #     V #
K2             V     Ki              V      /\           -K#     VK#
Ka             hn                   hn      hn                       an

        I suppose all mothers think their kids are smart but

K,   KINEMORPHIC
K,   KINEMIC
K3   KINIC


        chart 13.2b

                                    K=
                                    K/(?)
        (\                 V
                                    K=
                                    K/(?)
        hn                     hn        (torsohold)

              have no       worries         about


         chart 13 .2 c
                    'Y'
                                                      K#
                    K·
                    V          (\                     K#
                     hn        hn                     -(torsohold)

       that    child's    intellectual      ability


This balance could be related to the cadence in which Gregory and Doris
are moving in their interactional dance. On the other hand, this may be a
stylistic factor related to the production of a stereotypic utterance. At
this stage of kinesic and communicational research, however, such state-
ments remain little more than conjecture. (One of my assistants who was
proofreading this chapter points out that the sentence above, when




                                                                                _)
               A Kinesic-Li11g11istic Exercise: The Cigarette Scene                   401

spoken aloud, has the same quality of balance in its accompanying
suprasegmental structure.)
   A final task remains for this exercise. In Charts 13.3a, 3b, and 3c, the
linguistic and kinesic materials are assembled for comparison.
   A linear examination of the charts points up a series of items for special
examination:
   I. The movement of the kinesic stress from its expectable position,
                                             V   /\             /\    V
either over /mothers/ or over /all/ as in //all mothers// or //all mothers//,
                       V                       V
gives us a form //all mothers// as in //hot dog// which contrasts with
   V /\            /\ V
//hot dog// and //hot dog//.
                             V         /\
   2. The form //their kids// in the string is specially marked by the
kinesic primary-secondary form.
   3. Neither of these distinctions appear to be marked either in linguistic
stress or intonation (verboid marker?).

           chart 13.3a

Linguistic and Kinesic Transcriptions

K,                 i                         r                    #     V#
                       K
                       V      Kl           V     I\               K# VK#
                       hn                 hn     hn                        an
                        I suppose all mothers think their kids are smart but

K,     KINEMORPHIC
K2     KINEMIC
Ka     KINIC
le***                                ?-                                          -?
fn** <
VSg*' 1m                                                                          ?
Int     3        2                                        J 2 3
StrJ   II   I\   I\       I\        I\           I\          I
Sgm ay + spoz +:,hi+ rrncl ;irz + 8ink + cler + kidz ;ir + smart
       I suppose all mothers think their kids are smart                   but


@)@)@) §                     8
     676     683       686       691        698   702   706 710   718      725

           1 Phonetic transcription omitted. Circled numbers are numbers assigned 1956.

           Open numbers are from edge reading of sound film 1967.
           * ·1, h, r, ;i, m, Vocal Segregates (Trager).
           * * < , Crescend (Hockett); r.-, Drawling (Trager).
           * * * 'i', Rasp (Trager).
            402        Discovering Structure in Speech

            chart 13.Jh

K,
                                                           K=
                         ~K/('?)
                                                           K=
                   /I                             V        K/(?)
                   hn                               hn    (torsohold)-
                           have       no          worries    about

*In
VSg        hr?;:,?m'I-'>
Int
StrJ
                              2
                              \         /I
                                                      3
                                                       /I
                                                                     J 2
                                                                       /
                                                                                I2
Sgm                           ay + haev + now+ w;iriyz                              ;ibawt +

                                       have           no            worries         about

                              @)@.88@§(§
                              752      755            760       763                  778

* f: Overloud (Trager).

           chart 13.Jc

K,                                I"                                  K#
                                  K·
                                  V                   /I                            K#
                                  hn              hn                                -(torsohold)
                that    child's              intellectual            ability

* In/fn                       - f:
                              -17'<                                        >
VSg                               hr
Int
StrJ
Sgm
                         /I
                c'Sret + cayldz
                                              \            .   /I
                                             intilekcuwil + ;ibilitiy
                                                                           /J   I     r
                that childs                   intelle.ctual ability



          783           789                  804                                831

* > Fading (Hockett).


   4. The kinesic single bar between /mothers/ and /think/ is unmarked in
the linguistic stream.
   5. The linguistic stress and intonation appearing over /smart/ is absent
in the· kinesic line but may be subsumed under the kinesic / # /.
   6. The kinesic primary stress over /but/, bounded by kinesic double


                                                                                                   ...
            A Ki11esic-Li11g11istic Exercise: The Cigarette ~cene   403

cross junctures, in emphasis seems comparable to but not identical with
the rather complicated linguistic situation in which /but/ is not specially
denoted in either pitch or stress but is followed by a "pause" and glottal
stop, and is the nexal point for the paralinguistics. /But/ is included within
the rasp, which marks //think their kids are smart but// and is, at the same
time, within the drawl which covers //but I have no worries about that
childs/ /. It is furthermore excluded from the overloud which extends
over //1 have no worries about that childs//.
   7. The initial /I/ is kinesically unmarked while being at pitch 3. This
may be a function of the cigarette lighting which masks either a kinesic
stress or a pronominal marker. The second /I/ is marked with a kinesic
secondary (perhaps flavored by a pronominal marker) while she speaks
with tertiary stress over /I/.
   8. The intonation pattern of 3-3-2, as marked by Hockett, over /no
worries/ has some parallel in the primary kinesic stress over /worries/. I
think that the kinesic stress pattern of secondary-primary or primary-
secondary that might have been expected in this construction may have
been absorbed in the kinemorphic construction of "head-shaking" which
extends over //1 have no worries about that childs//.
   9. The kinesic primary stress which is pulled to a point between /childs/
and /intellectual/ to give us a form parallel to /all mothers/ is of special
interest. More statistically normal forms would have been either:
                        I\   I\       I\          V
                    //that childs intellectual ability// or
                        V    /\        /\         /\
                    //that chi Ids intellectual ability// or
                        /\   V ,,__    V           /\
                    //that childs intellectual ability//.

The /,.--.._/ recorded for the last form indicates a continuation of move-
ment which seems to cross kinesic junctures, either of single bar or double
cross. The linguistic pause, marked by Hockett, may be of consequence
in the case. The segregates and the termination of the overloud and drawl
are also to be noted here.


        Summary

        The nine points listed above are sufficient to illustrate some of the
complexities which confront the linguist, the kinesicist, or the communica-
tion analyst who would attempt an assessment of the relationship between
kinesic and linguistic phenomena at this level of analysis. This limited
segment, containing two syntactic sentences, represents an abstracted
corpus which is short enough to be subjected to intense analysis but does
        404    Discovering Structure in Speech

not seem to contain sufficient information to settle many of the questions
which come to mind. One general point may be made from these data.
Any discourse analysis, conversational analysis, communicational an-
alysis, or interactional analysis which would attend to but one modality-
lexical, linguistic, or kinesic-must suffer from (or, at least, be responsible
for) the assumption that the other modalities maintain a steady or non-
influential state.
part three




             GENESIS,
    MAINTENANCE,
              AND
             CHANGE
               OF
LINGUISTIC CODES
           14
           Social Meaning
           in Linguistic Structure:                                          .
           Code,Switching in N orway                                1




