             Culture Patterning of Speech Behavior in Burundi    73

       sociolinguistics would benefit if more researchers were to
       do so.
          Notice that while social structure is discussed first, its
       role in speech is seen by Dr. Albert as following from the
       underlying beliefs and values that are her main concern.
       Here cultural outlook is the explanatory starting point
       rather than social structure itself (as with Bernstein in
       Chapter 17). Among the many individual points of in-
       terest in this rich paper, notice particularly the "compe-
       tence of incompetence" required of peasants in the pres-
       ence of aristocrats (recalling the defensive image of
       "shuffling" and Steppinfechit imposed on American
       Negroes); the differential speech training of men' and
       women; the example of switching from formal to informal
       interaction between an aristocrat and servant, indicating
       that other aspects of speaking are predictable from the
       social position of the participants and the topic; the in-
       verse relationship between the manner ("key") in which
       an instruction is accepted by a servant and the likelihood
       of its being carried out; the prevalence of indirect refer-
       ence; the simultaneous concealment and invitation to
       disclosure of allusive narrative songs; the invention and
       interpretation of figurative and allusive speech as a gen-
       eral cultural skill; the pervasive valuing of both esthetic
       and instrumental aspects of speech. The paper is espe-
       cially valuable for its portrayal of the relations between
       cultural patterns of speaking and personal strategies.
       Another unique feature is the discussion of fieldwork
       problems. Albert lists in detail the possibility for mis-
       understanding arising from Rundi verbal strategies and
       gives practical suggestions for the ethnographer of speak-
       ing. Many of the problems of interpretation that Garfinkel
       alludes to in Chapter IO are exemplified here. For an-
       other important discussion of ethnography in a similar
       vein, see Moerman (1968b). Seitel (1969 and 1971) gives
       a highly suggestive analysis of how pronouns are used to
       convey meaning. Additional related readings are pro-
       vided by Calame-Griaule (1965), Hogan (1967), Hymes
       ( 1966a), and Samarin ( 1967).


        Like other universal categories of human behavior, speech is the
object of diverse, complementary specializations. In the context of the
        74    Ethnographic Description and Explanation

ethnography of speaking, not only the language spoken but also the uses
of speech may be assumed to have distinctive culture patterns. Ideally, a
complete anthropological description of the pattern of a culture would in-
clude the rules and uses of speech, their implementation and violation, and
relevant sanctions, positive and negative. Conversely, when inquiry is
focused on cultural patterns of speech behavior, the optimum context is
the whole culture pattern. Major intracultural variations in the uses of
speech may be assumed to be systematically related to1(he constituents of
culture patterns, including aspects of the social structure, cultural defini-
tions of the situations of action, the cultural philosophy and value system,
and their patterned interrelations.
    The traditional kingdom of Burundi 2 is a particularly fortunate case study
of culture patterning of speech behavior. Speech is explicitly recognized
as an important instrument of social life; eloquence is one of the central
values of the cultural world-view; and the way of life affords frequent op-
portunity for its exercise. Sensitivity to the variety and complexity of
speech behavior is evident in a rich vocabulary for its description and
evaluation and in a constant flow .of speech about speech. Argument,
debate, and negotiation, as well as elaborate literary forms, are built into
 the organization of society and the content of the world-view as means of
gaining one's ends, as social status symbols, and as skills enjoyable in
 themselves.                                              ·
    A highly secularized, sophisticated feudal kingdom with a population of
 approximately two million, traditional Burundi has well-defined criteria
 of rhetoric, logic, and poetics, and well-developed ideas about their uses
 and interrelations. The norms governing the uses of speech are explicitly
 differentiated according to caste, sex, and age so that the relations of
 speech behavior to social structure are easily grasped by observers. For-
 malization and stylization of speech situations are extensive and elab-
 orate, suggesting ways in which the uses of language are conditioned by
 culturally distinctive conceptions of situational appropriateness. Esfhetic
 criteria are well developed and have an extensive range of relevance. Ex-
  plicit concern with the values of truth and falsity and their situational
  relativism connect concepts governing the uses of speech to the premises
  of the cultural world-view and value system.
    The primary intention of this paper is to explore concepts and cate-
  gories that may be useful for constructing cultural patterns of speech
  behavior. The descriptive data presented were provided by informants'

    2 "Burundi" is the post-independence form of the name of the kingdom earlier included in
  the joint designation, Ruanda-Urundi. The Bantu form will be retained for the nam~ of.the
  people, viz., Barundi (singular, Murundi); "Kirundi" for the language; but for the adJect1ve,
  only the stem will be used, viz., Rundi.
'
                   Culture Patterning of Speech Behavior in Burundi   75

     verbalizations, spontaneous or by elicitation, and checked by observation
     and the comparison of the interview protocols of a variety of informants.
     Space does not permit an exhaustive account of all the relevant data.
     Organization of the material is only in small part a reflection of explicit
     informant statements about speech as such.
        Adoption of the terms "rhetoric," "logic," and "poetics" from Western
     culture is necessarily tentative and obviously entails the risk of culture-
     bound distortion. Conventional denotative meanings will be used: "rhet-
    oric" designates the norms and techniques of persuasion, as well as the
    criteria governing styles of delivery in public speaking; "logic" refers to
    the rules and uses of evidence and inference; and "poetics" refers to the
    esthetic criteria that govern discourse. The referents of these terms are
    neither precise nor unambiguous in their native cultural habitat. "Poetics"
    overlaps with "rhetoric" insofar as public address and persm~sion are
    governed by esthetic rules; the line between rhetoric and sophistry is so
    fine that it not infrequently disappears when persuasion is contrasted with
    the strict rules of logic and the ideals of literal, descriptive truth. Ad-
    mittedly of limited utility, the terms "rhetoric," "logic," and "poetics"
    nevertheless call attention to a significant and large but often neglected
    body of data constitutive of culture patterns of speech behavior. They are
    also potentially useful for cross-cultural comparisons.
       Many of the components of Rundi patterns for the uses of speech are
    familiar to Western observers. Some of the key terms and concepts are
    close or equivalent in referential meanings to their English translations.
    However, contextual meanings-meanings that arise out of the relation-
    ships among the constituent elements of discourse-vary with specific
    cultural sets of assumptions and values. The allocation of intellectual
    resources in Burundi is controlled by a hierarchy of values far removed
    from Western ideals or a scientific approach to discourse, though very
    close to that of other African cultures and many Mediterranean societies.
    Practical and esthetic values take precedence over logical criteria in all
    but a few classes of communication situation. A well-brought-up Murundi
    would suffer agonies of shame in the presence of the naked truth and
    would hasten to provide the esthetic coverings called for by the cultural
    value system. Reliance upon appeals to the emotions as the chief tech-
    nique of rhetoric is taken for granted as right and natural and indeed the
    whole ground of its utility. There are no reservations about the desirability
    of flattery, untruths, taking advantage of weakness of character or prof-
    iting from others' misfortune. Whatever works is good, and esthetic-
    emotive values are higher in the hierarchy than moral or logical principles
    in speech and other behavior. The implications for fieldwork of culture
    patterning of speech behavior will be discussed in the conclusion.
        76   Ethnographic Description and Explanation


       Social Structural Definitions
       of Speech Situations

  BACKGROUND: HIERARCHICAL ORDER
  IN THE UNIVERSE AND SOCIETY
  The importance of speech to survival and success find the primacy of
esthctic-emotive values in speech behavior follow directly from Rundi
causal theory. ln the universe at large and in society, personal power is
the sole or chief causal force; it is conceived as directed by the actor's
free choice; choice is viewed as dependent on emotional dispositions,
assumed to be unstable and changeable. There is a steady diminution of
power, hence of freedom of self-determination, and proportionally an
increase in subjection to the whim and will of superiors in the hierarchy,
from the high god (/mana), to the king (mwami), the princes (bagamva),
the nobles (abafasoni), the herders (Batutsi), the farmer-peasant caste
(Bahutu), to the lowborn pariahs (Batwa).
   In a voluntaristic-emotive universe, no event is predictable. What
actually happens depends on the good pleasure of the determining supe-
rior power. Since emotion is the source of action and is much affected by
esthetic factors, manipulation of emotions by esthetic devices is the prin-
cipal business of speech behavior. To procure a gift and protection from a
superior, to obtain a favorable judgment in a court case, to defend oneself
against calumny or accusations of wrongdoing, to oust a rival-in short, to
survive and to succeed-is everybody's concern. The particularities of
esthetic criteria .vary in content and in degree or rigor of application with
subject matter, situation, and social roles. The primacy of esthetic-
emotive values gives the impression that there is more poetry than truth
in the flow of discourse.

  SPEECH TRAINI~G
   Socialization patterns reveal the main lines of social role differentiation
as relative to caste, age, and sex. Ubukuru, seniority or superiority, is the
guiding principle of all behavior: caste order is known; the older are
superior to the younger; men are superior to women. The ideal of good
breeding and aristocracy, imfura, includes "speaking well" as one of
its principal elements. From about the tenth year, boys in the upper
social strata are given formal speech training. The "curriculum" includes
composition of impromptu speeches appropriate in relations with
superiors in age or status; formulas for'petitioning a superior for a gift;
composition of amazina, praise-poems; quick-witted, self-defensive
               Culture Patterning of Speech Behavior in Bumndi     77

 rhetoric intended to deflect an accusation or the anger of a superior. Cor-
 rect formulas for addressing social inferiors, for funeral orations, for
 rendering judgment in a dispute, or for serving as an intermediary be-
 tween a petitioner and one's feudal superior are learned in the course
 of time as, with increasing age and maturity, each type of activity be-
 comes appropriate. Training includes mastery of a suitable, elegant
 vocabulary, of tone of voice and its modulation, of graceful gestures
 with hand and spear, of general posture and appropriate bodily move-
 ments, of control of eye-contacts, especially with inferiors, and above
 all, of speedy summoning of appropriate and effective verbal response
 in the dynamics of interpersonal relations. ·
    Girls in the upper caste are also carefully trained, but to artful silence
 and evasiveness and to careful listening that will enable them to repeat
 nearly verbatim what has been said by visitors or neighbors. Faithful
 wives and daughters, servants, and feudal dependents are expected to
 recount to the men of the family anything they have heard that might be
construed as inimical to husband, father, or brother, or as helpful in com-
 batting a real or potential enemy of the head of the household. Public
speaking is unseemly for women. The proper pattern of the irnfura female
requires shyness and delicacy. However, maturity brings with it the de-
velopment of highly effective bargaining and negotiating skills for use
behind the scenes. There are many women who in fact make the decisions
presented publicly by their husbands, or who become politically or eco-
nomically powerful through skillful though discreet and private use of
intellectual and verbal talents. Except at the extreme top and bottom of
the social scale, each individual learns verbal formulas and styles appro-
priate to a variety of roles, some those of a social superior, some those of
an inferior. For example, a herder of good family must know how to show
subservience and obedience to his elders and princely superiors and also
how to address and control the peasantry; peasants develop speech be-
havior patterns to deal with their immediate and remote superiors but also
with their younger relatives, with men of their own age and station, with        !
the pariah Batwa, and with any dependents they may have.                         I:
                                                                                 ''



  FORMS OF PETITION
   Petitioning for gifts or favors is one of the most frequent and significant          l' :j'
situations of interpersonal communication. It is, then, predictably, highly                  !1!
stylized. When a man asks for cattle or a bride or a wife or a son asks the      i
head of the household for permission to smoke or drink beer or to pay a
visit to a neighbor or relative, a physical position of submission is as-
sumed by the petitioner. Kneeling in the presence of the superior is usual                   /!
                                                                                 : 1:        :,:   I


                                                                                             ,/
                                                                                             11 !


                                                                                         I   I
                                                                                         ''

                                                                                        ~
        78   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

if the matter is intrafamilial. In the formal business of requesting cattle or
a bride, the petitioner assumes a formal stance, often rising from a seated
position to stand during the delivery of the formal request. His speech has
probably been carefully composed in advance. To follow the general
formula, one refers to the gift one has brought, a prescribed number of
pots of banana beer serving as a clue to the purpose of the visit; one ex·
presses love, admiration, and respect for the excellent qualities (real,
imagi?ed,. and ?oped-for) of the superior; one expre7'es the hope that the
affection 1s reciprocated; one again refers to the gift, this time as a token
 of affection; one promises further gifts in the future; one states one's wish;
 one closes with a repetition of the praise of the superior and an expression
 of hope that the wish will be granted. Seeking cattle or a wife entails a
 series of visits, each formal, but graded as to the number of pots of beer
 presented and the verbal formulas used as negotiations proceed.
    Cues that indicate the intention to refuse requests are sometimes de-
 layed. Superiors thereby gain pots of beer or services without compensat-
 ing the petitioners, but suffer a loss of reputation through gossip that
 directs potential petitioners away from them to more profitable patrons. A
 reputation for generosity is a necessity of high status since it attracts
 followers and augments political power. Negative publicity is a sanction
 at the disposal of social inferiors, not only frustrated petitioners for cattle
 but also disgruntled wives and overworked servants. Verbalization of the
  rules of the petitioning process and the forms of petition are easily elicited
 from persons of high and low rank.
     Choice of vocabulary and of gestures and other paralinguistic elements
  tends toward the ideal set by the aristocratic superior, but realization of
  the ideal varies, expectably, with the background, training, and social and
  personal characteristics of the petitioner. Humble peasant women are
  often capable of a very good approximation to the ideal, their speech
  flowing gracefully and smoothly, their gestures fitting the words, and com·
  pliments framed in poetic figures of speech. On the other hand, some
   members of upper caste patrilineages lack the wit or the character to
  learn their speech manners. They are privately and sometimes publicl)'
   mocked for behaving like peasants: Appropriate speech behavior for
   peasants in intercaste relations is that of an inferior; their words are halt-
   ingly delivered or run on uncontrolled, their voices are loud, their ges-
   tures wild, their figures of speech ungainly, their emotions freely dis-
   played, their words and sentences clumsy. As will appear below in the
   description of respect patterns, the appropriate style for inferiors is at-
   tached to roles and situations, not to persons. The speed and apparent
   ease with which individuals switch speech behavior patterns is likely to be
   disconcerting to observers trained to expect "consistency" or socialized
   in a system of low contrast among role-relative speech patterns.
               Culwre Patterning of Speech Behavior in Burundi     79


   FORMULAS FOR VISITING,
   FORMAL AND INFORMAL
   The notion of idle talk has little place in Rundi conceptions of verbal
 behavior. So too the notion of a social call without a definite purpose is
 not entertained, 'except in rare instances, e.g., visits among old friends
 Who are also close neighbors. Self-interest is assum~d n~tu~·al and uni-
 versal. Purposive behavior, especially speech behav10r, 1s its assumed
 natural complement. Visiting is categorized acc?rding to the visitor's
 Purpose and is subject to a variety of formulas which must be learned. A
 distinction appears to be made between formal. and informal visiting.
                                                                                       1:
 Formal visitis include those made to a feudal superior to request favors, to     . 1(
 give formal thanks for favors received, to remind him of one's continuing          ..
                                                                                    ·.·1·
 loyalty, and to improve the occasion by listening to whatever gossip may
                                                                                   .!:1·
 be available. Arranging marriages and funerals and conductirig other               I.
 social transactions have their own rules. Distinguished neighbors expect           i.1
·~o be waited upon by their inferiors and occasionally confer upon their          I'I
                                                                                    ••I
                                                                                  I,! I
 inferiors the honor of a visit. In either case, it is necessary to send at       ':i:
                                                                                    1l
 least one pot of beer in advance, both to announce one's intention to visit
 and also to insure that the host or hostess will "have something to offer."
 J:Iospitality, understood as offering drink and food, is a key value in social
                                                                                  i Ii
 hfe. Visiting, even when formal, need not preclude some quiet talk of a
 Political nature, calumny or lesser gossip, plans for cooperation in ef-
 fecting the downfall of some common enemy, probing for cues as to pos-
 sible gifts, and other everyday concerns of a very politically and eco-
 nomically alert people.
    Family visits follow prescribed sets of proper formulas for verbal and
 other behavior. The heaviest constraints of formality govern visits be-
 tween a father and a married daughter, separated by a nearly total avoid-
 ance taboo. In the event of important business to be transacted, e.g., if the
 daughter wishes to break up her marriage and hence impose upon the
 father the necessity to receive her again in his household and to return the
 bride-price, intermediaries must be used, usually the girl's mother or
 some other female relative. A slightly less rigid avoidance relation obtains
 between mother-in-law and son-in-law. He is obliged to pay visits of
 respect, but he is forbidden to seek her out at her hearth;joking and levity
 a~e proscribed; each addresses the other as m11faso11i, noble, irrespective
 of their actual caste position. Nephews and nieces visiting a paternal aunt
 are bound by a strict respect pattern, tempered by the fact that the home
 of the paternal aunt is a quasi-scared sanctuary from an angry father or
 pater~al ~ncle. Diminishing degrees of formality may be traced through
 the kmsh1p system to the open, joking relations between cross-cousins
 and the spouses of cross-cousins and between grandchildren and grand-
                                                                            ---
        80   Etlznograplzic Description and Explanation

parents. These call for rough sexual joking. Occasionally, young people
take umbrage at the sexual jokes of older relatives, .but there is open,
strong disapproval of so inappropriate a response. More in keeping with
custom is a young grandson's teasing his grandmother by telling her he
will not go to bed with her because she is wrinkled and ugly, to which a
suitable response would be an offer of references of excellence of per-
formance based on long experience.
   Family attendance at funerals is expected e~en of those residing some
distance away. They are expected to comfort the bereaved and to take
over household and other chores which the bereaved are too grief-stricken
to perform. Visitors also keep an eye on the execution of the last will and
testament when it is a head of a household being mourned. After the bur-
ial, there are formal orations and pledges of help, and calves or cattle are
led through the corral in silent acknowledgment that debts and obligations
incurred by the dead man will be honored by his heirs. Quarreling among
the heirs is so common as to be almost part of the prescribed behavior.
The "manifest content" of disputes is often some trivial goods not speci-
fied in the will. To quote, one Murundi, "Brothers will fight almost to the
death over a basket of beans." The outcome is far from trivial: quarrels
test the power of the father's heir and set up a pecking order among
siblings. Departures from the family homestead may occur if one of the
sons is dissatisfied with the new order.
   Quarreling is also a semiformalized part of another prescribed family
affair, the wedding. Quarrels between representatives of the two families
start as a symbolic abduction struggle. With the help of many pots of
beer, the symbolic fight not infrequently becomes quarreling in earnest.
However·, in these as in other situations where quarreling is virtually in-
evitable, some members of the family will probably have kept sober so as
to act as sergeants-at-arms and prevent matters from getting too far out of
hand.
   Relatives and neighbors are expected to make a formal call upon any-
one who has just been through a ritual cleansing ceremony;e.g., a woman
after the birth of twins. The visit signifies that they can now "ask for fire
from that house," the symbol that normal and friendly social relations
may safely be resumed.
   A limited amount of informal dropping-in on neighbors occurs, more
often than not the visitor being led to his destination by the news that
there is a supply of beer available. Gossip flows freely in proportion to the
flow of beer, sometimes too freely for the peace of mind of participants
suffering morning-after second thoughts. As in most other cultures, drink-
ing parties tend to end in fighting, also cause for misgivings in retrospect.
   The form appropriate to a neighborly or friendly social call is some-
times used for a mission customarily assumed on behalf of friends or
                                                                    81
               Culture Patterning of Speech Behavior in Burundi
                                                                                                  ,,
                                                                                             ,    I·
      ·                                          ·        · d'      1·elative's              '.   11


relatives, viz., looking over a family into which the fnen s or                       , I'        1:

son or daughter may marry. Semiformal in pattern, such missio~s bear all                 !
the signs of being to some purpose. Each party knows at what disco~nt_ to
ta~e the other's questions and assertions. An experienc~d e~e can distm-
guish authentic from assumed industriousness and modesty Ill the poten-
tial bride, recognize the signs of a potential brutally excessive wife-beater
                                                                        0
or glutton in the would-be bridegroom, size up the tempe_rament _f the
potential mother-in-law who controls the life of a new wife. Details of              2
                                                                                         1
                                                                                             I

~he relevant skills and signs could not or would not be presented by                ·.I:,,
                                                                                    ':II!:
mformants.
   A long list of amenities, conventions, and rules are part of the Barundi's     , .i·           ;I
                                                                                                   , I
pattern of polite interpersonal relations and conversation. In the old
?ays, age-mates greeted each other in a lengthy ceremony of sung greet-
                                                                                             '     I       I
mgs, embraces, and stylized gestures; children knelt before parents or                            :'II
grandparents to pay respect and to receive blessings; feudal inferiors                       'iii
greeting a superior proceeded through the numerous steps ofan elaborate
                                                                                                  fl i
                                                                                             i',,,11.1
                                                                                             1 ·II
assurance of affection and respect that involved verbal formulas accom-                           ;j': /j.
                                                                                                 ,,
panied by touching the superior with both hands, literally from head to                           •111
foot.                                                                                        , I·'
                                                                                             I
                                                                                             I1 1,1
                                                                                                 \1
                                                                                                       I




                                                                                             '
  RULES OF PRECEDENCE
  AND GOOD SPEECH MANNERS
    The order in which individuals speak in a group is strictly determined
 by seniority. However, if the eldest present is lower in social rank than
 some other individual, age gives way before social status. Thus, a nephew
 may be older than his uncle but the uncle is of higher rank and will speak
 before him. A prince or chief may be younger than others present but
 speaks first by virtue of his higher rank. There is apparently no recorded
 confusion or conflict in the matter of determining order of precedence,
 even in very large groups. A question intended to discover what would              : 11



 occur in the event of confusion was rejected by all to whom it was pre-
 sented as irrelevant and improbable.
    The rule for servants, females, and other inferiors for behavior in the
 presence of outsiders is to speak when spoken to but otherwise to main-
 tain silence. Nevertheless, the pattern is so arranged that younger or
 socially inferior males are in due course able to express their views in
 public. At the opening stage of talk, strict order of seniority is observed.
 After the first or second round of remarks, the senior person will still
  speak first; the next in order of rank opens his speech with a statement to
. the effect, "Yes, I agree with the previous speaker, he is correct, he is
  older and knows best, etc." Then, depending on circumstances and issues,
  the second speaker will by degrees or at once express his own views, and
            82   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

       these may well be diametrically opposed to those previously expressed -
       No umbrage is taken, the required formula of acknowledgment of the
      superior having been used. If the umukuru, senior person, is aged and
      weak, his son may speak first, initiating his utterance by explaining his
      departure from the rules: "My father is old, his memory is not good, he
      wishes me to speak for him," or some other appropriate excuse is given.
      It is not unusual for the formal order of precedence to be abandoned in the
      latter part of a protracted discussion and for loud voices to be heard even
                                                        1
     among upper-class individuals.
         Caste stereotypes represent those in the upper strata of society ~is
     never raising their voices or allowing anger or other emotions to show. It
     is said that the Batutsi herders prefer to bear a grudge silently and to take
     revenge when opportunity permits, even ifit comes twenty years after the
     affront has been suffered. This applies to dealings with individuals of
    their own class. Communication with inferiors involves a different ap-
    proach that includes a kind of stylized "reverse signaling." If an underling
    quietly accepts an order, there is a good chance that he is showing re-
    spect but has no intentiqn o(carrying out the order. On the other hand, if
    he gets his resentments out of his system by shouting protest and refusal
    and by drawing his superior into a noisy quarrel, he is almost certain at the
    end to do as he has been told. Explicit references to the positive value of
   an inferior's outburst take various forms and appear to be an upper caste
   "in" thing to say.
       It is assumed that the peasants express their emotions and opinions
   freely, do not bear grudges,. and are generally warmer, more open and
   forthright, and friendler than herders. Generally, the Batutsi herders Jive
   up to the.ir reputation for dignity in public situations. They are also expe:rt
  in applying as a very effective rhetorical technique the rule that silence is
  golden. Good rhetoricians, they appreciate the utility of refraining frofll
  comment, reply, or rejoinder. The total, glacial silence of a pe1fectly
  immobile Mututsi who has chosen not to speak has to be experienced to
 be appreciated. To all appearances, the silence can be maintained in-
 definitely and in the face of every known technique of provocation,
 domestic or imported. In family conclave or political caucus, silence or
 avoiding the topic intended for discussion on the part of the ranking per-
 son present effectively cancels the proceedings. It is understood by all
 attending as total disapproval. Also, it can directly block discussion. Ap-
plication of the principle of seniority is such that a superior's silence or
evasion of the issue effectively silences all his social inferiors. At the verY
top of the social hierarchy, all the skills and patterns of refined behavior
are fully controlled, but they are modified by the value of princely mag-
nanimity and benevolence. A prince of the blood may unbend, a Tutsi
rarely if ever.




                                                                                     J
                      Culture Patterning of Speech Behavior in Burundi      83


               Respect Patterns
               and Role Relativism
                 An intelligent man must measure the character of his interlocutor
        and select style and content for his speech accordingly. It would be an
        Unforgivable blunder for a peasant-farmer, no matter how wealthy or able,
        to Produce a truly elegant, eloquent, rapid-fire defense before a herder or
       other superior. However, the same peasant who stammers or shouts or
       f~rces a smile from a superior by making a rhetorical fool of himself when
       his adversary is a prince or herder may, with a change in the situation in-
       voJ_ving his superiors, or as a judge in a local or family affair, in a ~ou?cil,
       or m making a funeral oration, show himself an able speaker, a d1gmfied
       man who speaks as slowly and as intelligently as ever a highborn herder
      could. The accent will be different; the figures of speech will more likely
      be drawn from agriculture than from herding and only in the rare instance
      reflect knowledge of courtly life; the gestures of the muscular arms and
      ~eavyset body and the facial expressions will not be like those of the long-
      hmbed, slim-boned narrow-headed "Hamitic" Batutsi herders, but they
      Will not lack studied grace and dignity.                                    ·
   · In his role as rhetorician, the fortunate peasant is skillful and not at all
     the humble, mumbling fool he plays before his caste superiors. He is in
     control of alternative, appropriate patterns. Or, if he cannot make a fine
     speech, he has a legitimate excuse in his inherited caste inferiority. There                     'I

    are highborn men who speak badly, either because nature failed to endow
                                                                                               ,I     ,1
                                                                                                        I
    them with the intelligence, innate verbal ability, and grace assumed to be
    the biological inheritance of the herders or because drink, disease, or
    private disaster have destroyed their character. Failure to speak clearly
   and well, clumsy and wild gestures and allowing emotions to show, earn
   such unfortunates the epithet muhutu, peasant, whose socially stereo-
                                                                                                iii'.
   typed speech pattern they employ for want of the power to do better.                         ,,'

                                                                                                1:,
      In Kirundi, as in French and other languages, the second person singu-                     i!
  lar is the familiar, the second person plural is the respect form. In ad-
  dressing a superior, the plural must be used. Thus, to thank an inferior,
  one may say urakoze, but to thank a superior, it must be murakoze. The
 nonverbal signs of respect are numerous. In effect, they consist of the
 :"hol_e set of signs defining the charactedstics of social inferiority. The
 mfenor walks behind the superior, drinks and eats after the superior has
 begun or only after he has finished. If the superior is of princely rank,
 ~obody may be present during mealtimes, the taster remaining but squat-
ting with his back to his master. The inferior talks only after the superior
h_as spoken. He inclines his head in respect, and the body, too, must
signal humility, obedience, and respect.



                                                                                              ''11

                                                                                          j
        84   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

   A highly formal respect situation, once official business is completed,
may abruptly change into easy, informal discussion. The redefinition of
the situation may be presumed to follow some sign from the superior,
probably a change from the formal stance prescribed for official business
to "at-ease." In response, the social inferior drops the plural form of
address, and the bodily stance and use of voice are transformed from
"humble respect" to "relaxed." Particularly if the s'ubject of discussion
is cattle, the Barundi's favorite subject for bull-sessions, informality pre-
vails. Voices rise higher as differences of opinion are defined and de-
fended, the expression of various emotions being permitted and even ex-
pected for this topic. The debating pair may easily be constituted of a
highborn prince and lowborn cowherd in his employ, but once the signal
for informal discussion has been given, the respect pattern becomes not
merely irrelevant but improper. However, it was pointed out by both
upper- and lower-caste persons that a judicious inferior will not allow
himself the liberty of too enthusiastic disagreement despite the permis-
siveness, nor overlook any cues to future opportunities for requesting a
gift or otherwise assuring or improving his position. Batutsi, male and
female, also adjust their speech behavior up and down the situational
scale. A gracious, silent lady of good family may be obliged to excuse
herself to attend to an emergency in the corral. Her voice rings loud and
sharp as she chastises the offending herder or servant girl, and there may
be an accompaniment of sharp slaps. Returned to her visitors and hostess
role, she resumes the ladylike pattern, the transitions apparently effortless
and expected. By contrast, if a peasant girl imitates too closely the speech
and manner of the upper caste, she must put up with teasing and the ac-
cusation of absurd affectation.

  AMENITIES AND CONVENTIONS
   A full inventory of the amenities and conventions that gover~ verbal
communication would properly include numerous minor rules for
speech. There are few word taboos. It is forbidden to tell what one has
eaten for dinner, or to mention the name of a dead person in the presence
of relatives, and euphemisms are in order when referring to excretion.
Violations of the rules are breaches of good taste, and verbal bad manners
are likely to be condemned by a graceful gesture and the expression
n'ishano, "how shocking!" The Rundi technique for avoiding an un-
wanted visitor is familiar: a child or servant is sent to announce that no-
body is home. It is perfectly proper for a servant or child to enter a room
where company is being entertained and to whisper some message to the
host or hostess. It is understood that something has gone wrong or that
another visitor has arrived. (An outside observer trained to a different
and negative evaluation of whispering in company has to make an adjust-
               Culture Patterning of Speech Behavior in Burundi   85

ment to local mores-perhaps more of a strain than learning the meaning
of some totally new element.)
   As in other communities, there are polite formulas for numerous oc-
casions, e.g., greetings, thanks, apologies, or terminating a visit. Men
usually offer thanks for hospitality and leave. Women will offer their
excuses: "I must go home now, there is nobody watching the house," or
"I must go home now, or my husband will beat me." Rundi women may
not properly leave their homes without permission from their husbands,
so that reference to the common and socially-accepted practice of wife-
beating means simply that permission to leave the house had not been
requested. It is as likely to be offered as an excuse by a peasant woman
as by a lady so distinguished for her gentility that she has been selected
as governess in a princely residence. (Again, an outside observer may
have to overcome a certain "culture shock" the first few times the threat
of a beating is daintily offered in farewell.)

  PARALINGUISTIC
  AND KINESIC SIGNS
   To comprehend Rundi communication fully also requires knowledge of
conventional gestures, sometimes replaced by statements, e.g., the action
or phrase, "I pull up grass for you" is a sign of subservience and gratitude.
Among the nonlinguistic vocal signals is one that in the United States is
the Indian war cry, in Iran the populace's cheer for the shah, but in
Burundi, the cry of alarm sent out into the hills to solicit help when animal
or human marauders threaten a household.
   Paralinguistic and kinesic signs have been indicated above as intrinsic
to specific speech situation behavior. Possibly the radical, highly visible
physical differences among the several castes of Barundi facilitate ex-
plicit naming and explaining of non-verbal signs, and categorizing them as
"Tutsi" or "Hutu." For the outsider learning the culture, however, the
subtleties are not so easily or quickly mastered. For example, open mock-
ery was the corrective initial treatment applied to the error of assuming
that anyone over six feet tall was a Mututsi. Detailed accounts of speech
and gesture patterns used as cues by the Barundi were offered as aid to the
ignorant foreigner. Not only authentic Batutsi and Bahutu, short and tall,
but also several Bahutu who came by their elegant Tutsi manners hon-
estly as servants in upper-caste households, were introduced as visual
aids. Instruction continued throughout the fieldwork period. The initial
error apparently seriously traumatized the staff and neighbors. Presum-
ably their own pride required that the observer, fitted into the social
system as a member of the upper caste, learn to recognize and to use the
appropriate role patterns. Again, the extraordinary sensitivity of Barundi
to speech behavior and the ease of verbalization associated with their
         86   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

socialization and social control patterns not only brought into prominence
the fact of cultural patterning of speech behavior but also much facilitated
the research.

  SUMMARY OF SOCIAL
  STRUCTURAL VARIABILITY
    The patterning of speech behavior in Burundi in rel.aiion to social struc-
  ture involves rules governing the specific relationships among those
. present in a speech situation according to caste, age and sex, kinship,
 friendship, contiguous residence, or political-economic ties. Distinctions
  are made according to the social roles of those present; the degree of
  formality, publicity or privacy; and the objectives of the speech situation.
 Together, social role and situational prescriptions determine the order of
  precedence of speakers, relevant conventions of politeness, appropriate
  formulas and styles of speech, including extralinguistic signs, and topics
  of discussion. Socialization and sanctions are also determined by the
  social role-situational complex.es 'Yithin which discourse occurs.



         Ubgenge: The Allocation of
         Intellectual Resources

   ETHNOEPISTEMOLOGICAL VALUES
    The conceptual context of the uses of intellectual resources, among
 which speech ranks high in many societies, is the cultural world-view and
 value system. Understanding the patterning of the content and style of
 speech in Burundi depends in part upon awareness of the cultural concep-
 tions of truth, falsehood, and fiction and of their value priorities and inter-
 relations. The key concept to the norms and values associated with the
 uses of language is ubgenge, "successful cleverness." Ubgenge chiefly
 applies to intellecttial-verbal management of significant life-situations.
 Situational adaptability is a permanent condition of action. Hence, the
 specific manifestations of ubgenge are numerous and diverse. The clever-
 ness of a rogue; the industriousness of a virtuous man whose overlord
 gives him a cow as a reward for virtue; the skill of a good psychologist-
 rhetorician in persuading a generous, impulsive-or inebriated-superior
 to give him a cow, although he had done nothing to earn it; the skill of a
 medical curer; the success of a practicaljoker who has victimized a simple-
 minded peasant or feeble-minded boy; the wise and just judgments of the
 abashingantalze, the "elders," in courts and councils; and the technologi-
               Culture Patterning of Speech Behavior in Burundi    87

 cal accomplishments of Europeans are equally good examples of ubgenge
 -for they all succeed in bringing something good to their designers. In
 effect, success is beautiful and good, and the beautiful is more likely to
 succeed than the inelegant. Factual accounts of the use of ubgenge and
 fables and legends of successful cleverness evoke strong, positive,
 esthetic appreciation.
    In the Rundi vocabulary, the distinctions made between fact and ficti~n,
 knowledge and conjecture, truth, error, and falsehood, are close eqmv-
 alents to those of Western culture. Their hierarchical order and situa-
 tional relativity, however, reflect Rundi interpretations of the values of
 survival, esthetics, and the satisfaction of desire. Lexical distinctions are
 made between literal truth and fact, outright lies, errors, misleading others
 and being misled or ill-informed, offering a hypothesis without sufficient
 prior knowledge, foolishly offering an explanation despite ignornnce in
 ?rder to seem knowledgeable, and formulating a hypothesis or making a
 Judgment on the basis of satisfactory evidence. Oriented more to persons
 and personalities than to abstract principles, the Barundi also name these
 degrees of difference of reliability in substantives designating types of
 persons. Context distinguishes shades of meaning of kuvuga, to speak;
 kumva, to hear, to understand, to conceive of; and kurnenya, to know, to
 observe, to perceive. Culturally distinctive referents have also to be
 noted. Labeling a man a liar does not reflect a tendency to falsify factual
 statements, but rather denotes an individual guilty of breaking a promise
 to give a gift or to do a favor. Of especial emotional impact is calumny.
 The calumniator who reports evil of a man, with or without good grounds,
 !s perhaps more feared than any social threat, even witchcraft in some
                                                                                         ,,
 mstances, since it may lead to deprivation of property, protection of a                 '!
 superior, or loss of life itself.                                                           I
    The cultural requirement of the fine rhetorical style applies to all public
                                                                                         :1
 speaking, though methods and techniques vary with objectives. Logic is
 the correct method for the umushinga11tahe, whose goal is to arrive at a
 sound judgment-as a judge presiding in a formal court of law or infor-                  '
 mally adjudicating a family dispute, offering counsel at the behest of a          I''   !
 political superior, or decision-making and problem-solving generally in
                                                                                  I,
 the conduct of life's serious business. Sophistic rhetoric is the natural and
 acceptable resort of self-interested individuals, whether they are seeking
 to win a lawsuit or to procure a gift or protection from a superior or to
 satisfy a desire or to fulfill a need. The usual techniques include evasions,
 falsehoods, flattery, and other calculated appeals to and attempted manip-
 ulations of the emotions.
   Adults of both sexes in all caste and age groups learn both logical and
rhetorical techniques and criteria and the situations in which they are


                                                                                         ,,f     I




                                                                                    • !.i

                                                                                         ~
                                                                                     '
                                                                                    .
        88   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

applicable. A well-developed ethnopsychology is as pervasive through all
types of speech situation as is the esthetic. The emotive and esthetic are
twin necessities of discourse. The relative frequencies of logic-oriented
and rhetoric-oriented speech situations and their specific objectives de-
pend on age and position in the social structure. The higher a man is
placed, the less often need he defend himself, for the fewer are his su-
periors. On the other hand, they are more likely to be highly intelligent
and powerful and therefore dangerous. Defenses against numerous clever
inferiors competing for favor have also to be mounted with greater fre-
quency, the higher the individual's place in the social-political-economic
hierarchies.


  UMUSHINGANTAHE: LOGICAL
  AND RHETORICAL IDEAL VALUES

    The highest ideal of public weaking is associated with the role of
 umushingantahe. Informants of different age, caste, and social roles agree
 on the criteria and can verbalize them without hesitation. A good judge is
 intelligent, in complete command of the arts of logic, a fine speaker-
 i.e., he speaks slowly and with dignity, in well-chosen words and figures
 of speech; he is attentive to all that is said; he has a good memory, en-
 abling him to compare different reports of events; he cannot be bribed;
 and he is an able analyst of logic, empirical evidence, and the vagaries of
 the human psyche. Initiation as 11mushi11ga11tahe comes late-usually not
 before forty-five. It is restricted to men of means who can pay for the
 costly initiation party and who have demonstrated their ability, usually in
 a prolonged apprenticeship of attendance at cases conducted by those re-
 puted to be good judges. The qualifications stipulated for judges are ex-
 plained as indispensable to the resolution of conflicts. It is assumed that
 the self-interest and emotional involvements of disputants and witnesses
 will lead them to falsify evidence, to exaggerate accounts of damage or
 make excessive claims for compensation, and even to perjure themselves.
Testimony is likely to be contradictory. All human relationships involve
 matching wits, but in law cases and political strategy councils, there is a
 premium on good judgment based on clear logic and control of reliable
 information.
    Principles for the analysis of testimony are readily verbalized by court
judges. They closely resemble the principles in use in the Western world.
Contradictory statements cannot both be true, so a choice must be made;
the discovery of the truth depends upon evidence; in its evaluation, the
credibility of witnesses has to be weighed; eyewitness testimony is the
most reliable. So insistent is the demand for direct evidence that where it
is possible and relevant, a judge may adjourn court and go in person to



                                                                               J
               Culture Pattemini of Speech Behavior in Burundi     89

verify statements, e.g., respecting the location of a boundary marker be-
tween properties. Usually, however, such direct examination is not pos-
sible. To get at the truth, judges will subject principals and witnesses one
at a time in closed interrogation sessions to repeated questioning if con-
tradictory testimony has been given. After sifting and winnowing to come
to a conclusion as to the actual facts, the judge will probably recall each
one who has testified, confront him with his own contradictions or the
heavy weight of probability against him, and usually contrive to get an
admission as to the true state of affairs.
   The use of psychological observation imd principles is part of the
judge's apparatus, an adjunct to logical analysis and fact-finding. Rules
for detecting lies, exaggerations, and other departures from fact, and for
spotting subtle cues to distinguish guilty from innocent nervousness or
eloquence, are easily and even proudly verbalized by experienced elders.
In addition, the judges have mastery over appropriate rhetorical tech-
niques for wearing down stubborn witnesses, quieting overexcited ones,
browbeating by silence or scorn, and various other devices that experi-
ence has shown will give the judge, hence the truth, the upper hand. There
is no tolerance for the technique of "strategic obfuscation" used by many
Barundi to the despair of trial lawyers andjudges during European trustee-
ship government, viz., calculated inconsistencies in accounts of events
directed (often with great success) to so obscuring the truth that no case
could be made.
   In dealing with domestic disputes, judges are concerned primarily with
psychological and social factors and proceed to fact-finding only if it is
relevant. For example, a judge must discover from the spoken words and
the general demeanor of a couple demanding a divorce whether a divorce
is in keeping with their wishes and best interests or whether in truth they
wish to save face by having the court order them back together again. In
settling quarrels between father and son, a judge has a doubly difficult
task. Custom has it that the elder is never wrong. The judge must discover
what really happened. If in fact the father is at fault, he must find a way to
tell him so and to impose a suitable mild penalty on the son without openly
stating that it is the father who is in the wrong.
   Determination of appropriate principles and techniques for each case
is an integral part of ubgenge, as much for the cleverness of a judge as for
the wisdom of any mature person in the conduct of life's business. Each
one must make judgments-to decide whether a wife should be kept or be
sent back to her father and the bride-price refunded; to choose as the heir
the son who will be best able to carry on the responsibility of head of the
family; to select spouses for sons and daughters; to choose or dismiss
feudal inferiors; to choose or to abandon a feudal superior. Truth, as fact
tied into a web of sound logical organization, is indispensable where sound
judgment is the objective.
        90   Ethnographic Description and Explanation


 THE SURVIV AL VALUE OF
 DISCRETION AND FALSEHOOD
    Though truth is necessary for judgment, it is not useful for survival or
practical success. The Barundi make no bones about this. The proverb is
often quoted, "The man who tells no lies cannot feed his children." An-
other proverb warning against truth reveals further the awareness of the
Barundi that speech is not simply an instrument of social life but is often
a weapon: "Truth is good, but not all that is true is good to say." Truth is
not valuable in itself but is relative to other values. It is positively re-
quired when judgment is needed, positively dangerous when a person
must defend himself or wishes to maintain or better his position.
     The need for discretion, a halfway house between literal truth and bald
lie, is understood as either not speaking at all about delicate matters or as
refurbishing facts so that they wear an innocent face. Discretion is ap-
 propriate to a wide variety of situations in life. Its specific character de-
 pends on specific situations and actors. 19,, political matters (probably the
 chief concern of Barundi at every level of the society) discretion is neces-
 sary as a self-defensive measure. Information about the misbehavior or
 the faults of a political superior is best concealed, at least until such time
 as he has lost status and is thereby deprived of power to harm. Loyalty to
 a superior is defined largely in terms of what is said about him. If one
 spreads praises abroad-and amazina, poems based on praise-names
 composed for a superior are one of the formalized means of demonstrating
  loyalty-then one may hope for a reward. The formula "I shall sing your
  praises" is an often spontaneous response to a gift and a significant token
  of devotion. It has already been mentioned that social inferiors can use
  as a sanction against superiors publicizing his lack of generosity or other
  defects. However, if one speaks ill of a superior or plots against him, the
  disloyalty will bring down heavy punishment on the guilty one if it reaches
  the superior's ears.
      Among socio-political "equals," that is, those seeking favor with the
  same political superior, calumny is the chief weapon, discretion the best
   shield. Given the importance and quantity of verbal report in gossip and
   in calculated calumny and praise that may reach the ears of the superior,
   safety absolutely requires concealing faults and devising means to coun-
   teract calumny, whether or not it has a basis in fact. No one is so high or
   low in the social scale, no one so secure in the affections of a superior or
   inferior, as to be able to afford the luxury of speaking the unedited truth.
    Few if any individuals are so lacking in intelligence and in an esthetic
    sense of graceful, appropriate discourse as to blurt out truths without
    restraint or to reply truthfully to questions from the inquisitive. In rela-
                 Culture Patterning of Speech Behavior in Burundi      91

    tions between husband and wife and in family relations generally, verbal
    discretion is a serious matter. A lazy wife or a sterile one may or may not
    be sent back home. A disloyal woman, by definition, one who speaks ill of
    her husband, will surely be severely punished and rejected. A disobedient
    son may be tolerated and even procure his share of the inheritance, but a
   disloyal one may be disinherited.
       In lesser matters than life and property and position, discretion still has
   its place. One may discuss with close friends and neighbors the problems
   created by a spouse who is a bit slow-witted, but not broadcast the fact
   far and wide. If one suspects that a neighbor is a witch, one refrains from
   mentioning it in his presence. There is no point in accusing him, it is said,
   for he will say, "Death is not afraid to come, whether you speak of it or
   not," or, "Whom have I killed? Have you caught me at it?" There are,
  then, some truths not to be spoken aloud to anyone; some to a faithful
  spouse or a blood brother but nobody else; some to close relatives or
  neighbors. Only rarely is any statement so innocent that it is not necessary
  to consider the possibility that it will bring trouble. That words are power-
  ful realities is a fundamental truth of the Rundi system of belief and
  behavior.
      There is a premium, practical and esthetic, on rapid, graceful, and
  more-than-plausible falsehood. Especially if anyone is directly accused of
  wrongdoing, on-the-spot composition of an effective defense is necessary.
  In general, a man is safer when he thinks quickly and lies, mixing the
 right amount of flattery for his superior with the other ingredients of his
 discourse, than when he tells the truth, good though the truth may be in
 some situations. There seems no anxiety, where lies are told or false ac-
 cusations made, as to the possible consequences of subsequent discovery
 of the facts. If one survives the critical moment, it is explained, one may
 find a way to deal with an ungainly or inconvenient truth if and when it
 appears. The time gained by on-the-spot inventions of defense is asso-
 ciated with an optimistic interpretation of the uncertainty of the future.
 Escape to another part of the country; a generous gift to the right per-
son; a change in mood of the feudal protector or accuser; in fact, any-
thing may happen.
     A cool head counts for more than a high I.Q. in realizing the practical-
esthetic-emotive values of effective speech. Everyone knows the rules.
Everyone plays the game of matching wits through verbal parry and
thrust. Differences of individual skills, the likelihood of fortuitous cir-
cumstances, and the inherent instability of emotions make it certain that
there will be few dull moments. Uncertainty of the outcomes of verbal
manipulations of one's affairs is built into the system and is part of the
game, enjoyed when the outcome is favorable, lamented when it is not.
       92    Ethnographic Description and Explanation



 AN ILLUSTRATION OF
 UBGENGE IN ACTION

   A full account of rhetorical styles and techniques and of situations in
which they are to be used would be necessary to a full description of the
role of ubgenge in speech behavior. A single illustration must suffice to
indicate the way in which Rundi values, esthetic and practical, operate in
behavior. It is contemporary in theme, traditional in form, and enjoyed
equally for its success and elegance of design. For what such assurance
may in fact be worth, the narrative was sworn to as having actually oc-
curred-but, of course, not to the narrator. A Murundi chief, who will
remain nameless, of course, was very rude to a young Murundi agricul-
tural officer. Instead of doing as he was told, viz., collecting a labor force
to start a coffee plantation, the chief went off to drink with one of his
favorite tenants. His delinquency discovered, the chief was roundly
 scolded by the agricultural officer and_,,assured that a report would be
 made to the higher authoritities, i.e., to the Belgian senior agricultural
 officer of the region. In due course, the summons came. The chief or-
 dered his wife to fill three huge baskets with food and he dressed in his fin-
 est robes. With his porters carrying the baskets, he proceeded to the office
 of the Belgian administrator. He was accused of refusing to provide work-
 ers to plant coffee, of rudeness as well as disobedience to the junior officer
 present, of permitting his cattle to browse on the plot designated for the
 coffee plantation. On hearing the accusation, the chieflooked very grieved
 and surprised. "Sir," he said, with all the respect and elegance his educa-
 tion enabled him to muster, "I have never seen this person. Since he
 knows my lands, perhaps he is the one about whom my tenants com-
 plained a few weeks back as demanding beer and getting drunk and dis-
 orderly." He waited for a moment for his statement to take effect, count-
 ing on the suspicion of a na,tional weakness for beer and tendency to false
  report to be transferred from him to the junior officer. He then went on,
  "I am here because I have heard that you are suffering from famine. Here
  are the few humble baskets of food I could assemble in haste, but do not
  fear, there are many more on the way. I wish you all health." Of course,
  the administrator was furious with his junior officer and very favorably
  impressed by the chief. The officer was punished, the chief courteously
  released. On the way home the chief passed a church. Being a good
  Christian, he stopped to pray. He addressed himself to God, confessing
  his false accusation of the young agricultural officer, a fellow-Murundi
  and a fellow-Christian. He explained to the Lord that he knew he had
  sinned, but he begged forgiveness. "O God, surely you will pardon me.
  Since you did not save me, I had to save myself."
                    Culture Patteming of Speech Behavior in Burundi    93



             Literary Form and Literal Truth

       THE ESTHETIC HIERARCHY
       OF SPEECH FORMS
        Practicality, esthetic values, and literal truth in different proportions
     characterize most Rundi discourse that satisfies cultural criteria for
     ~Peech. Descriptive precision and literal description are relevant not only
     In the fact-finding situation of judgment but also in discussion of objects
     of central interest. Kinship, economic matters, and social control-especi-
     ally where they involve the ownership and inheritance of land and ca,ttle-
     as well as speech itself, are matters in which direct, precise discourse is
     called for. Literal descriptions of cattle and agriculture involve vocabu-
     laries of minutely detailed discriminations beyond the capacities of an
     outsider to appreciate. Barundi are intensely interested in human psy-
     chology, and the extensive vocabulary and shrewd generalizations of the
    ethnopsychology supply linguistic evidence of the cultural concern with
    motives, emotions, intelligence levels; and personality types.
       Although the demand for esthetic composition and delivery applies to
    descriptive discourse as to all speech, factual accounts are at the bottom
    of a culturally defined series of steps of esthetic complexity. Public ad-
    ~ress may be placed at the midpoint. At the top of the esthetic scale is the
    rich tradition of oral literature. The various types of literary composition
    have well-defined social and practical functions and communication con-
    tent often of great significance, but esthetic criteria are most stringent for
    Poetry, prose (including the narration of historical events), songs, pro-
    verbs, and stylized conversational formula. While criteria for everyday
    conversation are near the bottom of the scale, elegance of composition              i:
                                                                                     l,,1
                                                                                     ( 11
    and delivery, figures of speech, and the interpolation of stores and prov-       '.'I


    erbs are expected and employed.
      THE PREEMINENCE OF
      INDIRECT REFERENCE

       Praise-poems (amazina, literally "names," figuratively, "praise-names,"
    are composed to honor a generous superior or the author's valor in battle.
    l-Iighly refined literary-rhetorical skills, composition and delivery of         i:
    amazina are included in the speech training of young boys of good family.
    •he form is fixed but the contents are created impromptu. The naturally
    alliterative character of Kirundi as a Bantu language is reinforced by con-
    scious selection of assonant words in the construction of praise-names
    and figures of speech. There are slight though perceptible modifications in
    Wording and number of verses as authors repeat their steadily increasing




h
                 94   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

         store of amazina on appropriate occasions. Nobody borrows the amazina
         of others, except to learn composition, but each must demonstrate his
         own abilities. For some, virtuosity earns wide fame. An elderly man with
         a long history of bravery and gifts of cattle may fill three of four hours with
         his chanted recitation.
             The amazina in fact are repositories of Rundi history. This is not im-
         mediately evident from their content. The chief requirement for esthetic
         accomplishment in literature is indirect reference. The value and delicacy
         of a composition depends on the remoteness and subtlety of the allusion.
         Composition of amazina is primarily for the upper castes, where in anY
         event the criteria for elegant speech behavior are determined. However,
          there are also farmers' arnazina of sorts, praise-poems to honor hoes,
         bees, and other things of interest to them. A prosperous peasant may
          compose praises for the patron who has given him cattle. Clever cow
          thieves, much-dreaded members of the community, may compose ama-
          zina in self-praise: since the punishment for stealing cattle is immediate
          crucifixion if the thief is caught in the act and since precautions against
          stealing are elaborate, a cow thief'who lives to tell the tale has earned the
          right to his amazina.
              A large stock of traditional figures of speech and inventions of new
           ones are used in ibicuba (songs composed by cowherds in praise of their
           herds), in hunting songs, lullabies, tales, fables, and riddles. Thousands of
           proverbs, old and new, are in some cases direct, but in others more or
           less stlb'tly allusive. Cultural skill in inventing and interpreting figurative
           speech and allusions is general, but indirect reference also operates to
           define boundaries between in-groups and out-groups in various situa-
           tions. At a princely court, a man may sing a tale full of allusions under- ·
           stood only by the prince himself or only by a few of those present. The
           incomprehensibility of the allusions is in itself meaningful. Listeners know
            something is in the wind, and they are not slow to inquire and to find out.
            If the information were not intended to be made public, it would not have
            been presented at a)l; if it were common knowledge, the allusions would
            not have been incomprehensible. Like the rhetorical technique of strict
            silence, the poetic technique of not quite telling all has positive informa-
            tion content of great significance.
               News is carried from one neighborhood to another by individuals on
            various types of business, but especially by a sort of self-appointed
            minstrel who sings the news, accompanying himself on a seven-string
            zither. Great humor, sly and stinging in many cases, is part of the per-
            formance, and indirect reference is characteristic. Indirectness of refer-
            ence through figures of speech is a popular device in polite social inter-
            course. Gratitude for a gift of beer and cigarettes, both much enjoyed,
             requires more than a simple word of thanks, e.g., from a visitor who had
             been ill at the time such a gift was given to him: "I know a man who named
             his child lnzokira, 'I shall be saved'. For, first he received beer and then



--.....---------~·
              Culture Patterning of Speech Behavior in Burundi     95

he received tobacco. Through these, his spirits and his health were re-
stored." Discussing the hardships of life, an old gentleman may re-
mark: "Once I was strong, and now I am weak. Indeed, in the daytime,
the sun shines strongly, but at night it is gone. And for me, it is now night."
   A request to a superior for a trifling gift, e.g., a new pair of shoes, does
not take the form, "I am a poor man, you are rich; please give me money
for a new pair of shoes; as you see, these I have are torn to shreds."
Rather: "One does not hide one's misfortunes; if one tries to hide them,
they will nevertheless soon be revealed. Now, I know a poor old man,
broken in health and ill; there is a spear stuck in his body and he cannot
be saved." A terminal gesture directs attention to a pair of ragged old
tennis shoes, one of the pair held together by means of a "spear," i.e., a
safety pin.
   In addition to idioms, i.e., locutions that are incomprehensible if taken
literally, there are in Rundi discourse a number of stylistic conventions
that would make statements incomprehensible or misleading if taken
literally. Speaking of a revolutionary (there was much domestic political
disturbance in the 1920s), it is conventional to say, "Nobody knows who
he is; nobody knows his family." The speaker knows perfectly well and
~ill go on to tell in great detail the history of the patrilineage in question,
Its alliances, successes and failures and ultimate destruction: the conven-
tional introduction is a negative ~alue judgment or outright insult. If
anyone says of a man, "He has no children, there will be nobody to bury
him," this must not be taken literally, especially ifit is said in the presence
of the man's sons. It means that some of his sons have died, literally,
"He fathered many, but many have died." In a somewhat lighter vein, the
statement, "I went to X's house but there was no beer," means in fact
that only a few quarts were downed, but either the total available supply
Was small or the number of visitors great, or the reception was not friendly
enough, so there was no point in staying on, one's thirst would not be
quenched. The name traditionally given to an eleventh or twelfth child is
Bujana, "Hundreds," signifying that the family is a large one. Stylized
exaggeration is also common in practical contexts, notably in economic or
political negotiations, claims for damages, and in praises-a generous
person may be called mwami, king, or Jmana, God.


  FICTIONAL FORMS FOR FACTUAL
  DATA: AN ILLUSTRATION
   Generally, what men must understand is other men. All else is fit at           I    '
                                                                                  ''
best for imigani, tales, fables, and proverbs. The deity is far above
~an and beyond human comprehension. There are tales of Imana's crea-
!1on of the universe and of his benevolent dispositions toward men, but it
IS futile to wonder about his nature or why he created things as he did.
         96   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

 The natural environment is a passive instrument of various powers.
 Storms, lightning, midday sun, and heavy rain tend to be unfriendly to
 man and hence require ritual attention. Otherwise, nature is not impor-
 tant. Techniques and commodities introduced from European culture are
 warmly welcomed and much admired, but they are not human and there-
 fore do not stir intellectual curiosity.
     Life is here and now., so the past and future are of little interest. Older
  men may entertain the younger generation with family history or accounts
 of wars and political events of the past in which they have participated or
  to which they have been eyewitness. These automatically become fiction
  to the listeners because of the remoteness of the events and the require-
  ment for literary embellishment, especially allusiveness and figures of
  speech, in the style of narration. A single illustration may suffice to indi-
  cate the way in which historical events are likely to be presented.
     The leader of the Abadagi was a man named Gahezeri Binyori Dagi. He
  asked Mwongereza for one of his daughters in marriage. This was a trick,
  for he only wanted to obtain passage through the property of Mwongereza.
  Once he had married the girl, he asked for permission to hunt elephants.
· Mwongereza asked him to pay the hunting tax, but Dagi refused. Dagi
  then went to Mbiiigi to ask him for a place on which to settle. While
  they were talking, Mwongereza appeared. He asked Mbiligi, "What did
  Dagi say to you?" Mbiligi answered, "He has asked me for a place on
  which to settle." "Be careful," warned Mwongereza, "he is deceiving
  you. He wants to take over all your property and then chase you away."
  After that, Dagi fought with Mwongereza, whom Mbiligi helped. They
  killed Dagi, and after that Mwongereza and Mbiligi became good friends.
     Once a few indirect references and some Africanized eponyms are
  understood, the tale is a fairly straightforward though condensed account
  of World War I in Central Africa. Dagi is the Rundi version of Deutsch
  and means "the German." The plural prefix, aba-, makes of Abadagi
 "the Germans," who were in control of Burundi prior to World War I.
 Mwongereza is "the English," the word composed of the singular per-
  sonal prefix 11111-, modified to mw- before a vowel, and -Ongereza, the
  Rundi rendering of "English," reflecting the interchangeability of "r" and
 "[" in interme_diate positions. Mbiligi, with mu- reduced for euphony
  tom-, is "the Belgian." The rest is history. The Germans are represented
  by Dagi, an eponymous treacherous adventurer; the marriage is a simple
  symbol of alliance; European interest in the ivory trade is suggested by
  the reference to elephant hunting; "killing," in the story and in other
  literary forms, is stylized exaggeration for reference to inflicting damage
  or defeat; the subsequent shift in alliance that excluded Germany but
  made England and Belgium friends is also a familiar process in Rundi
  history and needed no comment. It is taken·for granted that each narrator

                                                                                       r
                                                                                   I
               Culture Patterning of Speech Behavior in Burundi   97

will invent his own way of telling a story and, if he can, a new way for
each telling. Multiple versions of historical events are common. The same
is true of other nonvital types of discourse, e.g., origin tales or descrip-
tions of nature and of natural events. ·

  IMPLICATIONS FOR FIELDWORK
   Attention to at least the most salient and accessible features of the
 cultural patterning of speech behavior in Burundi was in part a necessity
 imposed by the speech-oriented content of the pattern, in part a by-
 product of field research directed to the cultural philosophy, especially
the value system. Consequently, the description offered above is in many
 respects defective. It is incomplete descriptively, and the analytic model
 reflects an inelegant mixture of informants' and observer's categories and
 information. The methods and techniques of ethnophilosophy by which
the fieldwork research was conducted are resistant to orderly, complete
specification, but even if explicated would not be applicable without
modification to a study intended primarily to describe the cultural pat-
terning of speech behavior. Nevertheless, even a rough approximation to
such a pattern is useful as a starting point for exploring the potential
instrumental utility of knowledge of the speech behavior pattern of the
culture for the conduct of ethnographic research generally and for pro-
jecting possibilities for substantive studies in the ethnography of com-
munication which are focused directly on speech behavior.
   The potential for misunderstanding verbal behavior in Burundi and con-
sequently for misperceiving other behavior is obviously high. There is a
proportionately high necessity for understanding the uses of language in
the context of the culture's social structure, world-view, and value system.
Awareness of radical discrepancy between expected and observed verbal
behavior came early in the fieldwork. Specifically, earlier research on
values had proceeded on the assumption that the relevant data were not
easily accessible. For example, it was assumed that value judgments and
evaluations were relatively infrequent and obscure in discourse and their
elucidation by informants problematic. However, it was immediately
obvious that the Barundi habitually terminated descriptions of events or
persons or observations about cattle or the weather with an appropriate
moral proverb or other evaluative statement. In general, no utterance or
discussion seemed complete until a value judgment had been rendered.
By contrast, seemingly innocuous questions, for example about child-
rearing or food, were often met with silence or evasion. Apparently, there
are no intrinsically innocent or taboo topics for all societies. Preoccupa-
tion with speech as an instrument of survival and success and as an iden-
tifying criterion of social status was evident if not intrusive in general
        98   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

discussion. The assumptions and values expressed and the techniques
described and observed bore a startling resemblance to those of Plato's
enemies, the Sophists. Clearly, a revision of expectations and constan_t
awareness of the cultural assumptions of the observer were in order.
   Reasonable progress in fieldwork became po sible only as the local
                                                 1
speech behavior pattern was learned. To obtain a reasonably clear, cor-
rect, and comprehensive set of data, it was necessary to find ways around
the high cultural evaluation of clever lies and evasions and to devise
means to penetrate the elegant but often incomprehensively subtle literary
allusions. For Barundi (and possibly for a number of similar societies in
Africa and the Mediterranean countries), the rules of procedure for data
gathering included: (l) avoiding direct questions, except in such matters
as asking which road leads to Kitega or Nyabikere; (2) learning the cues
by which individuals signal an intention to use sometimes lengthy dis-
quisitions superficially concerned with religion or custom merely as a
request for a gift; (3) locating verbal and other cues by which individuals
unconsciously signal either ignorance of the subject on which they are
pretending to give information or intentional distortion-for example,
one elderly gentleman, the easiest to deal with, invariably told a whop-
ping lie each time he volunteered his assurance that he did not lie; (4)
seeking and comparing alternative accounts of institutions, customs, or
events since only rarely do different individuals lie about or conceal the
same facts; (5) learning good language manners to minimize interpersonal
friction and incomprehension; and (6) more generally, learning in detail
 the patterns .of language use and specific meaning-in effect, playing the
game of matching wits with informants, albeit against high odds.

  "LEARNING THE LANGUAGE" AS
  LEARNING SPEECH BEHAVIOR
   A culture patte~n of speech behavior is in principle easily researched.
As we know, however, it must be made an object of inquiry since neither
data nor patterns insist upon being observed. In the normal course of
research, language and its accompanying signs are used instrumentally to
obtain information on whatever subject we are researching, whether kin-
ship or political behavior, world-view or linguistic structure, even seman-
tic fields and ,taxonomies. As an instrument of research, it does not at-
tract our attention. To make it an object of early, intensive study as part
of learning the language imposes a special strain. It is a condition of nor-
mal, instrumental language use that language behavior be or become
unconscious.
   The analogy between enculturation of the young and the anthropologi-
cal fieldworker's induction into the ways of the culture he is studying,
though of limited utility, is instructive with respect to some of the prob-
                        Culture Patterning of Speech Behavior in Burundi   99

           !ems of speech behavior study. For the ethnographer, as for the young
           members of society, the language is the chief means of communication
          and enculturation. Command of the language and culture requires far
          ~ore than control of lexicon and syntax, and more than control of para-
          hnguistic and kinesic signs. Good speech manners may be more useful
          than technical control of the linguistic features of language, in much the
          same way that native speakers' intonation contours are more conducive
          to efficient communication than an extensive vocabulary or impeccable
         grammar.
             To all appearances, language learning is the medium by which the
         Young learn not only the social roles which they will have to 1 perform or
         to recognize but also the conceptual and value system. Inculcating speech
         ~ehavior patterns is part of the process. Only some parts of the encultura-
         hon processes to which the young are subject are verbally explicit or in
         the form of such easily observed behavioral signs as spankings for punish-
        ments or sweetmeats for rewards. It is here that the analogy between
        c.hild language learning and ethnographer's language learning begins to
        break down. Ethnographers are not children and cannot be taught as
        children are. Rather, they are adult strangers and can expect to be treated
        as members of that category. Not only are sanctions different but also
        exposure to nonexplicit instruction is limited. Further, unlike the child in
        Pro_cess of learning his mother tongue, the ethnographer already has his
        native language and the complex of behavioral and conceptual patterns
        ~cquired with it. These complicate further the usual difficulties of master-
       I~g even the mechanics of a second language acquired relatively late in
       hfe. To some extent, beliefs and values and role-playing directives ap-
       Propriate to the new language may be unconsciously absorbed in the
       course of learning it. For a full representation or awareness of the speech
       behavior pattern, such unconscious learning of culture with language has
       to be shifted to the level of consciousness. Errors resulting from extension
       of our native-speaker habits of thought to the new language are pointed
       and easy lessons in correct speech behavior.

         DENOTATIONS FOR TRANSLATING
          Knowledge of local patterns of speech use is necessary even for the
        ?1Undane business of correct literal interpretation of discourse. In study-
       ing _kinship or color terminology, we are now far too wise to look for
       equivalents to the terms found in the investigator's language and culture.
       The difficulties presented when the observer's language lacks an equiva-
       l~nt term to one in the culture being studied are readily overcome by
       circumlocution. Such difficulties have the merit of being immediately
       ev~dent to the observer. By contrast, as various anthropologists have
       Pointed out, when an equivalent word exists in the language of the ob-




!tr:
        I 00   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

server, there is a genuine threat to reliability. Each specific instance must
be discovered and dealt with. Not only is the cufrural-contextual meaning
likely to be different but also the "same" words may not have the "same"
referents. There is no apparent obstacle to asking a literal Kirundi equiv-
alent to the English question, "How many children do you have?" But if a
man answers, he will state only the number of his sons, if a woman, only
the number of daughters. There are distinct words for children (abana),
sons (ahalzungu) and daughters (abakobwa), but custom has it that only
the same-sexed offspring will be counted. Further, paternity and maternity
are highly valued, and their value is numerically determined. "Total"
offspring (abana base) includes the stillborn and those who died in infancy
or childhood as well as the living. For accurate census data or merely to
keep track of the living, it is necessary to ask a different question in
Kirundi, viz., "What is the numberofboth sons and daughters now alive?"
In principle, the idiomaticity of apparently straightforward discourse has
to be kept in the forefront in language-use learning.

  NAMING CATEGORIES
  OF DISCOURSE
   Seemingly familiar forms and ideas, it should be reiterated, are po-
tentially a threat to reliable perception and reporting. That literary form
is not a reliable index to the functions of discourse is one of the general-
izable implications for theory and method of the examination of Rundi
speech behavior. The priority of esthetic and practical valu~s over literal
truth and the e}plicit situational relativism of criteria governing the uses
of language and intellect reflect that culture's social system and ethno-
epistemology. The necessity for culturally specific interpretation of what
is habitually identified as literary form is indicated by scattered data on
many cultures. For example, poetry cannot properly be classed as ex-
clusively or even primarily an esthetic phenomenon when, as is so often
the case, its main significance is religious. Styles of forensic and political
rhetoric vary widely. The demand for fiery oratorical style is strong in
Burundi and many other places, but is explicitly deplored elsewhere, for
example, among Navaho and Zuni Indians and in many parts of the pres-
ent-day United States. Appropriate subjects and situations for literal
description, as well as the hierarchy of interest in different types of knowl-
edge-e.g., psychological, natural, supernatural-are also cultural vari-
ables that enter into the patterning of speech behavior. The uses and
values of truth, although the concept of truth may be highly uniform,
show variations other than those encountered in Buru!)di. For example,
among Navaho Indians, the value of truth-telling is very high. A sharp
line is drawn between in-group and out-group. Truth is for the in-group.
             Culture Patterning of Speech Behavior in Burundi   101

Lying to outsiders or performing other negative acts toward them will
either be given different names or different evaluations, or both.
   Literary style can be misleading to the researcher. That a curer or
rain-maker uses ritual formulas and a collection of bones or feathers is not
a relevant datum for evaluating the ernpirical efficacy of the totality of
his procedures. The same holds when customary technology is explained
as a gift of the gods or of culture heroes. These rationales are not "scien-
tific" in form or content. Nevertheless, trial and error have in every
society produced reasonably and sometimes highly reliable empirical
sciences. To infer from the ritualistic procedures and literary form that
the procedures are so much hocus-pocus is to be misled by appearances
and is contrary to scientific criteria, which call for suitable technical
training, laboratory facilities, and observation of the behavioral com-
plexes and actual consequences of the uses of mythical or ritual for-
mulas. This is not to say that all ritual formulas are science in disguise
but rather to emphasize the culture-bound distortion introduced by treat-
ing style as a universal clue to the referential significance of terms or
statements or formulas.
   Multiple versions of the "same" events cannot be interpreted as though
the Western rationalistic demand for strict consistency and uniform,
standard description were universal. Different versions of origin tales or
so-called mythopoeic history may well be the product of conscious art
and effort as in Burundi, not signs of confusion about facts. Many types
of discourse regarded as nonfiction in the West, on religious and secular
subjects, are found in multiple versions and literary form in many soci-
eties. Before we know with what name to label samples of discourse, we
need to know the cultural assumptions about the nature of truth and its
range of relevance, as well as the prescribed literary forms for communi-
cating different types of subject matter in different situations. Informants
may be relied upon to know about matters of such importance and wide
dispersion in their culture.
   In principle, anthropological inquiry is free from invidious comparison
with the observer's culture, where it does not bend over backwards to
make kindly interpretations. Yet, it is not improbable that some sense
of obligation to play fair or to show a culture in a favorable light affects
the selection, naming, and presentation of materials in what is intended
as objective reporting. Here, it seems a courtesy due the Barundi to state
that we are all well aware that although our highest ideals are different
from theirs, the practices in their explicit system of rhetoric and in our
actual practice bear a close resemblance. In Western culture, the tricks of
the rhetorician's trade, altering or concealing truths, hatching plots, and
various other aspects of practical speech behavior would perhaps be
called sophistry rather than rhetoric. It is a happy accident that the
          102   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

  Barundi make explicit and accept as right a set of rhetorical norms dia-
  metrically opposed to the ideals but excellently descriptive of the prac-
  tices found in Western culture. The contrast makes for high visibility and
  suggests that for the sake of objectivity and in the interest of full descrip-
  tion, knowledge of cultural values governing the uses of speech should be
  treated as intrinsic to the method and theory of studies of speech behavior.
     Omitted from the description of Rundi speech behavior were several
  special languages (court language and a variety of formalized "talking
  with tongues" used in an obsolescent possession cult); oaths, insults,
. and curses; and speech situations not open to strangers (e.g., political
  caucuses, some illegal religious and curing ceremonies, and story-telling
  sessions after dark within the house's). The full list of types of discourse and
  speech situations discriminated in any culture has in all likelihood to be
  sought within the culture and degrees of publicity and privacy discovered.

    SPEECH AS BEHAVIOR:
    DATA COLLECTION
    Speech is usually an adjunct to or instrument of other behavior, but it is
 the primary identifying characteristic of s·uch phenomena as oratory,
 story telling, gossiping, and joking. Studies of speech behavior require
 data on both adjunct and primary speech events and theory and methods
 appropriate to behavioral research. Looking beyond accidental and trial-
 and-error discoveries, we may suggest some types of data and tech-
 niques relevant to study of the cultural patterning of speech bt;havior.
    Speech is so important and pervasive in any society that at least those
 with the reputation for wisdom or success are probably capable of stating
 the norms that govern the uses of speech. Moreover, enculturation in-
 cludes instruction of the young not only in the mechanics of speaking but
 also in the patterns of speech behavior. Hence, virtually any adult and
 probably many young people are potential sources of relevant informa-
 tion, direct or inferential. With speech behavior, as with other phenomena,
 once alerted to the subject, we perceive it with increased frequency and
 attention. It is probably easiest to start with observation of primary
 speech events, i.e., formal speech making, recitations of oral literature,
 courtroom proceedings, and whatever situations bear the extra-linguistic
 signs that define the role of "a speaker" in contrast to "an audience." In
 due course, an inventory could be made of the cultural answers to such
 questions as, "On what occasions-and of whom-are formal speeches
 expected?" "When are tales, or poems, or riddles in order?" "Who is
 qualified or permitted to tell myths and legends?" Observation and ques-
 tioning would normally be directed not only to language but also to con-
 ventional paralinguistic and kinesic signs. Comments about gestures,
 voice loudness, and voice control are pertinent data. Value judgments,
!--
                                                                                                    .   ---- ~. - ~- . .:--.:.-
                                                                                                                       -




                      Culture Patterning of Speech Behavior in Burundi
                                                                                  103
      spontaneous or elicited, should yield cultural criteria gover .
      of speech and related extra-linguistic signs.                         nmg each class
         In general, fixed verbal formulas-conventional phrases .d.
                                                          .      .          , 1 1orns
      -though part of the recor d , are not rewar d mg as mforrnatio O b               • spells                      I'
      ing. Their literal meaning may be lost, or their significance ~ ,? 0 ! speak-
      their own right m.ay oversha.dow their significance as verba~s hthings" in
      Even the most hterate or hterary speaker of English WouJ~ ~00.rnena.
      ficulties if asked to say more about "good-bye" than that it is                 e m dif-
      of "God be with you," or to account for the malicious pow a ~ontraction
          · · the Lord's Prayer backward s.
      rec1tmg                                                                  er mher ent 1n ·
         Examination of adjunct speech behavior is more cornpJ                          .
      bedded in nonspeech situations, is far greater in quantity a e~. ht            1 ls ern-
      more varied in type than primary speech situations, is l~s; r~ ough far
                                                                                  1
      neatly categorized either in the local lexicon for speaking beh , e.ly to be
      any existing external analytic schemes.                                     c1vior or in
         Socialization and social control explicitly directed to Jangu
      probably easiest to begin work with. Nevertheless, practicat~~;se ~re
                                                                                     1                                I
      must be expected. Only rarely in any culture is even a small part f cu Ities                                    'I
                                                                                                                      l'f
      instruction explicit, systematic, and localized in time and place ~. s?eech
             ·
      occasions    cior cnhc1sm
                          · · ·  or correc t'ion are no t east·i Ypre d'1ctable Pr'
                                                                                  · 1rn1Iarly
                                                                                        .       '
      we must observe speec h events m w 1c positive or negative c mc1pally '
                                              .   h'    h    . .                ·
                                                   ·
      are addressed to or ma d e a b out an mexpenenced     ·         or inexpert ornments
                                                                                      s eak
      "Don't mumble'"      · and "Spe·1k
                                      ' when you are spoken to'",       · ,u.e typical
                                                                                    . p of ther.
      inglorious stuff of which we must construct our pattern. The criti .                   he
      someone 1s  . spea k'mg too muc h , w h en 1t  . occurs, must be checked       c1sm, t. at
      the language bemg spo en smce, not m requent 1Y, even a laggard agamst
                           ·     k     ·           ·  f                                       b
      condemned as verbose if he is speaking a dialect or language in wh~~ he
      listener is not fluent. Consistent criticism of an individual for speak:~ : e
      little ~robably refl_ects a cultu:al norm of corre~t quantity of speech fo~· t~~
      occas10n and social role. It 1s both relevant mformation and a basi c
                     · ·
      furt h er quest10nmg.   "Ta lk'mg out of turn " may a Iso b e noticed and scrit-
                                                                                   ior
      icized. I~ short, talk about talk should be noted and inquiry directed to its
      explanat10n.
I.        Observations about the speech components of behavior of any kind                                        'I I
      may be useful in themselves and as cues to additional information. For
      example, an aside offered during the conduct of a law case in Burundi
      gave useful hints: "His aunt is speaking for him. He is too young to plead
      his own case." Inquiry into the ways in which pleading skills are acquired
      and criteria for ascertaining maturity in their use is then obviously in
      order, especially since adults of both sexes serve as their own advocates.                                  ::
       Proverbs, axioms, or advice about good or correct speech will probably
      turn up in the course of time and can be used as a basis for eliciting more
       detailed information about the importance of speech, its powers, and its
       limitations.
        104   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

   Some of the norms governing speech, characteristically for norms in
general, may be violated only at the risk of negative sanctions, while
others may be violated with impunity. It is therefore desirable to pursue
inquiry beyond discovery of the contents of the norms that define good
speech, correct speech, elegant speech, or whatever criteria are employed
in the culture. Barundi know and say that a well-brought-up woman
(imfura) does not shout at or beat a disobedient servant. She corrects him
gently, as a mother corrects a wayward child. But when specific violations
are discussed, it is stated that the ideal is rarely if ever carried out in
practice, excepting in the disagreeable sense that by and large mothers
systematically shout at and beat their disobedient children. Such a rule
belongs in the presentation of the pattern, but as an ideal which few if any
persons are expected to realize. Alertness to cultural concessions to
ideals and rules is appropriate not only for language behavior as such but
also for other types of institutionalized signs. For example, a law case in
Burundi is officially closed when the judge, plaintiff, defendants, and
witnesses drink beer together. The accompanying verbal form asserts that
all are now friends, that none will hold a grudge against the judge, and that
the plaintiff and defendant will resume friendly relations. According to
informants who know about or have been directly involved in litigation,
this is a sham. It is only the battle that has ended; the war goes on. The
principals will sooner or later find a fresh cause for litigation. The loser
will probably slander the judge by asserting that his decision was influ-
enced by a bribe, and he will quarrel with the witnesses for having failed
to support him more effectively.

  SAMPLING AND PATTERNING
    Observation of speech behavior, noting spontaneous statements that
are obviously or potentially about speaking, systematic questioning, and
confirmatory observation should produce the data required for a compre-
hensive view of speech behavior. Construction of the culture pattern from
the data, however, requires some principle of simplification and selection,
as well as a model for organizing the data. In the nature of the case, ad-
junct speech behavior situations are nearly as numerous and varied as the
totality of situations. Appreciation of their significance depends on un-
derstanding the general characteristics of the situations in which speech
occurs. Since no individual controls an entire culture, a well-chosen
sample of persons and situations is needed to construct the over-all
pattern.
    Ideally, the observer will uncover the speech patterns associated with
 all the social roles and speech situations distinguished in the culture.
 Simplification of the task is afforded by the complementarity between
 behavioral or institutional definitions of social roles and modes of speech
              Culture Patterning <~f Speech Behavior in Burundi   J05

 as indicators of variability of social roles. Systematic shifts in lexicon or
 syntax, extra-linguistic signs, style, and permitted or appropriate topics
 and types of comment are among the defining characteristics of social
 role variation. They are also cues for differential definitions of situations,
 as distinguished by the persons in the culture. Complementarity between
 speech behavioral indices and nonlinguistic defining characteristics of
 social differentiation may be assumed to hold in any culture, but it is
 obvious that the descriptive details and actual categories will vary with
 each culture.
    Somewhat more difficult to demonstrate and to characterize is inter-
 dependence between speech behavior patterns and the cultural world-
 view and value system. Far less is known about cultural logics and
 epistemology than about social structure. The exploration of the rela-
 tionship between the allocation of intellectual resources and the uses of
 speech in Burundi suggests that there are deep-lying interdependencies
 between the world-view and value system on one side and patterns of
 speech behavior on the other. Research in ethnophilosophy requires at-
 tention to language in as many of its aspects as knowledge and time allow.
 In the course of such research, language use, almost of its own weight,
moves out of the status of instrument to the status of a distinctive and
substantive subpattern in its own right. This is perhaps only to say that
speaking is behavior, and like other types of behavior, it is internally
patterned within the general pattern of the culture.
    Ethnophilosophy offers only one avenue of approach to the study of
culture patterns of speech behavior. Refinement of methods and concepts
is obviously needed. Moreover, not until'more is known of each of the
many aspects of speech behavior can specific linkages among the research
results of different specializations be reliably established, e.g., between
the lexicon and morphology of a language and the characteristics of the
world-view of its speakers, or between the universal features of cognition
or learning and the specific patterns of cultures and personalities, or be-
tween semantic fields or taxonomies and conceptual systems, or between
patterns of speech behavior and related patterns of nonverbal behavior.
Since the flow of human speech fills a reservoir of nearly infinite capacity,
its study does not lack for materials with which to work.
          3

          Struck by Speech: 'The Yakan
          Concept of Litigation                        1



          CHARLES 0. FRAKE




          Charles Frake is Professor of Anthropology at Stanford
          University. He received his doctorate at Yale University
          and has taught at Harvard. His fieldwork in the Philip-
          pines, first with the Subanun of Mindanao and currently
          among the Yakan, has been the basis for analysis of
          several spheres of cultural behavior and cognition, in-
          cluding kinship, ecology, and religion. His current in-
          terests include the development and structure of Philip-
          pine creole Spanish. The present paper is reprinted from
          an original appearing in Law in Culture and Society
          (Nader 1969).
             Frake's study exemplifies what has variously been
          called the "ethnoscience," "ethnographic semantics," or
          "new ethnography" approach to anthropological analysis
          (Frake 1964c; Conklin 1962; Sturtevant 1964). It utilizes
          the heuristic principles of descriptive linguistics in order
          to improve the validity of ethnographic field investiga-
          tions. The aim is to discover the ways in which members
          of a community themselves categorize their own be-
          havior and thus to overcome the tendency to superim-
          Reprinted from Laura Nader, editor, Law in Culture and Society
          (Chicago: Aldine Publishing Company, 1969); copyright © 1969 by
          the Wenner-Gren Foundation for Anthropological Research, Inc.
  1 Field work among the Yakan in 1962, 1963-1964, and 1965-1966 was supported by a

United States Public Health Service Grant under the National Institute of Mental Health
and by an auxiliary research award from the Social Science Research Council. The state-
ments in this paper are at a level of generality applicable to the Basilan Yakan as a whole and
represent knowledge t~at any adult Yakan could be expected to have. Yakan expressions
are represented by a linguistically motivated orthography, but certain canons of traditional
phonemic analysis are ignored ("a," for example, represents both /a/ and /e/ where this
contrast is neutralized). This practice enables dialect differences to be accounted for by
special rules applicable to a uniform orthography. /q/ is a glottal cathc, /e/ a mid-front
vowel, /j/ a voiced, palatal affricative.
                                             106
                Struck by Speech: The Yakan Concept of Litigation                 107

             pose one's own analytical categories, while aiming at a
             description that goes beyond mere observation and
             recording.                     ·
               The methodological influence of linguistics appears
             in the attention to segmenting and classifying events
             within the stream of behavior. The informal norifestive
             nature of the relevant Yakan situation or scene, e.g.,
             means that the occurrence of litigation could not be
            recognized from the physical setting but only from the
            content and structure of the talk itself. The natural start-
            ing point for the analysis is, therefore, the Yakan's own
            legal terminology. The relevant named speech events are
            classified by the method of focusing on contrast within a
            frame to determine what counts as "the same" and "dif-
            ferent." In this litigation is found to be definable within a
            set of four contrasting, successively inclusive speech
            events. These events constitute a set in virtue of being
           instances of the native category of"talking to each other."
           These speech events themselves were defined in response
           to a query such as "What are they doing?" The dimen-
           sions that underlie the set of speech events are identified
           as focus, purpose, role, and integrity of the event. Focus
           denotes the topic of the discussion. Integrity denotes the
           distinctiveness of the event and its occurrence in relation
           to others of the same or different scale (i.e., whether it in-
           cludes or is included in others, is int~rruptible, is clearly
           bounded, etc.).
              Having placed litigation as one kind of Yakan talk,
           Frake describes the nature and structure of litigation
          itself. From one standpoint, the description is an example
          of the ethnography of law. But note that it differs from
          more conventional ethnographies in that it concentrates
          on the Jonns of litigation, how members recognize that
          grounds for a case exist. As Frake puts it, "What we are
         ,trying to formulate are the conditions under which it is
         'congruous, neither humorous nor deceitful, to state that

   The ethnographic record upon which this description is based includes the investigator's
observations of court sessions, transcriptions of forty-three tape-recorded trial sessions at
all jurisdictional levels, and informants' interpretations of the content of these observations
and texts. In addition, by living in Yakan households during the entire field period, the in-
vestigator was continually exposed to conve·rsations related to litigation. Special acknowl-
edgement is due to Samual Pajarito and Reuben Muzarin for assistance in recording and
transcribing court sessions and to Hadji Umar of Giyung for many long discussions about
Yakan law.
108   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

one is engaged in litigation. These conditions are the
semantic features of concept in question." Frake views
the Yakan legal system as a system of symbols or a "code
for talking." His description attempts to give the rules of
interpretation by which speakers evaluate this code.
These rules are seen as being of the same abstract nature
as the linguists' deep structure. The view of culture im-
plied here is quite similar to that of Goodenough (1964)
and Garfinkel (Chapter I 0).
   Frake's description is also a contribution to the ethnog-
raphy of speaking, specifying the place of various verbal
genres and particular acts of speech within the overall
cultural activity, or speech situation, e.g., choice between
complaint and gossip to initiate a charge; limorok "to
slip through," i.e., to inadvertently tell A in the presence
of B about a litigable offense of C, where B is likely to
inform C; the dependence for compliance with a ruling on
persuasive use of the elaborate verbal trappings that ac-
company the ruling; admonition and prayer as two of the
three outcomes of it ruling. (A monographic study would,
of course, give detailed analysis of each of these in its
own right.) Other aspects of speaking enter, as with the
forensic ability that is one of the qualifications of a judge,
and the specification of norms of interaction governing
allocation of speaking time and right to speak.
   Ethnographic semantics has an important part in the
description, regarding the criteria for an act to be inter-
pretable as an "offense" and two of the three possible
defenses against an accusation; each concerns the rela-
tion between a concept and instances of it. With regard
to lexicon, notice also that it is social prestige, rather than
intellectual impact, that accounts for the prevalence of
loan words in Yakan legal discourse. The idiom, or se-
mantic structure, of kinship is employed for the relations
among the participants on each side of the dispute; the
event is under the sign of speech itself, for the article's
title refers to the principals on each side, who are "struck
by speech."
   The concluding comparison between two cultures
points to the importance of this type of analysis for the
proper interpretation of speech. Although the terms for
litigation in Yakan and Subanun are superficially the
same, they reflect different speech events and imply
               Struck by Speech: The Yakan Concept of Litigation             109

            different things about the social relationships among
            participants. Two Yakan engaged in litigation probably
            are not serious enemies. This is not necessarily the case
            among the Subanun. The background knowledg~ fur-
           nished by this kind of analysis is thus an essential pre-
           requisite for sociolinguistic work because it deals with
           basic problems of segmentation in speech events. Abra-
           hams and Bauman ( 1970) and Faris ( 1968) provide ad-
           ditional related readings.
              For an attempt to apply Frake's procedures to the
           ethnographic study of drug culture in the United States,
           see Agar (1971).



                          tiyaq ku tmv1vaq bissiih.
                          (Here I am struck by speech.)
                          (Remark of an accused in a trial.)

    .       The Yakan legal system is manifest almost exclusively by one
  kin? of behavior: talk. Consequently the ethnographer's record of obser-
  vations of litigation is largely a linguistic record, and the legal system is a
  Code for talking, a linguistic code. In this chapter we focus initially on a
  s~all part of this talk, that representing the concept of litigation. Then,
  Without giving a full description we attempt to illustrate how a definition
  of this concept guides a descri~tion of the legal system, enables us to
 rel~te litigation with other activities within Yakan society, and finally,
 Points the way toward meaningful comparisions with legal systems of
 Other cultures.
    •he Yakan are Philippine Moslems inhabiting the island of Basilan
 1
  ocated off the southern tip of Zamboanga Peninsula, a western extension
?f the island of Mindanao. Southwest of Basilan stretches the Sulu arch-
telago, a chain of small islands extending some 200 miles to within a
;w.    mil.es of the northeast coast of Borneo: ~ome _6_0,_000 Yakan share
   asilan s 1,282 square kilometers with Chnstian F1hpmos concentrated
~long the north coast and with Taw Sug and Sama! Moslems living mostly
~~ coastal villages. all around the island. 2 The Y akan ~re close ling~istic
1 n of the sea-fanng Sama!; but, unlike them, practice an exclusively
 and-oriented economy: diversified grain, root, and tree-crop agriculture
0
  ~ Ploughed fields and swiddens commercial copra production, and cattle
~~Isi~g, _Supple~entary econo~ic activities include ?lantation labor,
   stnbution of cigarettes smuggled from Borneo by theJr Moslem broth-
 2
Z There are also Yakan speakers on Sakol, Malanipa, and Tumalutab islands just east of
 amboanga City. These communities are beyond the scope of this discussion.
        I IO   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

ers, and banditry. These economic activities bring the Yakan into close
contact with the Philippine economy, political system, and army. Having
been given this much information, the anthropological reader has prob-
ably already classed the Yakan as "peasants," which is all right as long as
it does not bring to mind a downtrodden, economically exploited, cultur-
ally deprived people submerged by the weight of some "great tradition."
   Houses, mosques, and graveyards dot the Yakan countryside rarely re-
vealing any obvious patterns of spatial clustering. Each, however, rep-
resents the focus of a pattern of social alignment. Houses are occupied by
nuclear families, independent units of production and consumption. The
family is the unit of membership in a parish, a religious and political unit
under the titular leadership of a mosque priest (qima,n). Parishes are
alliances of independent families; affiliation is by choice, not by residence
or kinship ties. Parishes comprise only several dozen families and any
family has a network of social relations with kin and neighbors extending
beyond the parish. Ancestors, buried in conspicuously decorated graves,
define networks of cognatic kinship ties among the living. Although these
networks are unsegmented by discrete, corporate groups of any kind, the
Yakan talk about groupings of kin in ways that would do credit to a social
anthropologist. Note, for example, the contrast between pa?Jlwt baqiralz
'the unrestricted, non-unilineal descent group defined by an ancestor
(female) named Baira' and ,qusba baqirah 'the kindred centered around
an ego named Baira.' Like the legal expressions we are about to discuss,
this talk about social groups must be understood as a part of social be-
havior as well as a description of it.


        Defining Litigation

          A description of a culture derives from an ethnographer's ob-
servations of the stream of activities performed by the people he is study-
ing. As a first step toward producing an ethnographic statement, the in-
vestigator must segment and classify the events of this behavior stream so
that he can say, for example, of two successive events, that one is "dif-
ferent" from the other and, of two non-successive events, that they are
repetitions of the "same" activity. If the ethnographer claims his people
do X three times a week, verification of his statement requires not simply
counting occurrences of X but also assessing the criteria for distinguishing
X from all the other things people do during the week and for deciding
that all the different events construed as instances of X in fact represent
the "same" activity. Information about what is the "same" and what is
"different" can only come from the interpretations of events made by the
people being studied.
   Within the stream of behavior observable in Yakan society, there are
some events which ai·e difficult to characterize initially except as "a group
               Struck by Speech: The Yakan Concept of Litigation                  /II

of people talking together." There seems to be no focus of activity other
than talk, no distinctive settings, apparel, or paraphernalia. We might
postulate that all such cases are manifestations of the ·same category of
cultural activities, that they are all repetitions of the same scene. At a
very general level we could justify this decision. All these activities can be
labelled magbissiih 'talking to each other' in response to a query such as
magqine siyeh 'what are they doing?' But, as the English glosses indi-
cate, this categorization is not particularly informative, especially to an
observer of the scene. To discover a more refined categorization we must
attend to the way the Yakan talk about talking.
  Yakan, like English, provides a large number of linguistic expressions
for talking about a great variety of aspects of speech behavior. Of these
we sort out for consideration the following set of semantically related
expressions, all possible responses to the query "What are they doing?"
(Only the variable portion of the response is shown. 3 Some of these forms,
especially /wlwm, have different, but related, meanings in different con-
texts. Etymological information is given for later discussion.):

           I. mitin (<English) "discussion"'
           2. qis1111 "conference"
           3. nunvpakkat (<Arabic) "negotiation"
           4. lwkum (<Arabic) "litigation"

   The structure of inclusion and contrast relations manifest in the use of
these terms to denote events is shown in Fig. 3. I. Let A, B, C, D represent
situations that can be labelled as miti?J, qiswz, mmvpa/dwt, and /wkum re-
spectively. Then it is the case that miti?J can label the set of situations
[ABCD], qistm the set of situations [BCD], riunvpakkat the set [CD],
whereas lz11kun1 can only label [D]. Thus these expressions form an or-
dered series, the situations labelable by a given term including all those
labelable by each succeeding term. However, it is also the case that mili?J
can be used to contrast situation A with each of the other situations (A
not B, C, or D) as in the exchange:
   ,nagqisun qenteg siyelz 'They seem to be conferring'
   du1naqi11, magmiti!J hadja qiyan 'No, they're discussing'
The form hadja 'just, merely' specifies that mitiry is to be construed in
its minimal sense, but its use is not obligatory to convey this sense. Sim-
ilarly qisun, mawpakkat, and lwkum can be used to contrast B, C, Dre-
spectively with each of the other situations. We have then a case of the

  3 In response to magqine (<N 'active'+ pag 'mutuality'+ qine 'what') 'what is the mu-

tual activity or relationship'/', the forms cited, all unanalyzable morphemes, replace qine
'what': 111agqi11e siyelz 'What are they doing?' 111agqis1111 'Conferring with each other.' Note
also: 111a[.?qi11e siye/z 'How are they related to each other?' 11wgpo1)ti11aqi/z 'As siblings.'
  1
    Single quotes enclose English glosses. These are to be assigned the meaning given to the
Yakan expressions for which they substitute.               ·
         112      Ethnographic Description and Explanation


                       mitin



                                        qisun


                                                       mawpakkat




                 A                B                C
                                                            I    hukum


                                                                    D
          -----------------w
               -------------X
                                              --------y
                                                             ----z
         A, B, C, D: Situations represented     w, x, y, z: Features of meaning
         figure]./
Semantic structure

use of the same forms at different levels of contrast, a situation common
in semantic representation (Frake 1964d), and one that has caused some
controversy over interpretation (Bright and Bright I 965 :258).
   In the use of the same expression at different levels of contrast, there is
in Yakan a distinction between those cases, such as the present example,
in which use at the less inclusive level is specifiable by a deemphatic
particle (e.g., /zadja 'just, merely') and those in which it is specifiable by
an emphatic particle (e.g., teqed 'very, true, real'). Contrast
   magmitin hadja qiyan 'They're just discussing' (and not 'conferring,'
   'negotiating,' etc.)
with
   magpovtinaqi teqed qiyan 'They're real siblings' (and not 'half-sib-
   lings,' 'cousins,' etc.)
The use of the same term at different levels of contrast results, in the
former case, from a specification of the basic general sense of an expres-
sion. In the latter case it results from an extension of the basic specific
sense of an expression. Cases of specification, ~uch as the present ex-
ample, can be interpreted as manifestation of "marking," a phenomenon
widespread in linguistic representation in phonology and morphology as
well as in semantics (Jakobson I 957; Greenberg I 966). Semantic marking
means that given two expressions, A and B, sharing some feature of mean-
ing x but differing with respect to some feature y (and in that sense con-
trasting), that the difference is not
   term A represents the meaning: xy
   term B represents the meaning: xy
            Struck by Speech: The Yakan Concept of Litigation      113

 but rather
    term A represents the meaning: x _
    term B represents the meaning: xy
The use of term B necessarily implies feature y, but the use of term A does
not necessarily say anything about the presence or absence of y. Term B
is marked for y. In our series each term is marked for a feature (or fea-
 tures) not necessarily by its predecessor:
    miti?J 'discussion': w
    qisun 'conference': wx
    nzawpakkat 'negotiation': wxy
    hulwm 'litigation': wxyz
The next task is to characterize the features of nieaning represented
above as w, x, y, z; w being what the set has in common and x, y, z being
successive increments to this common meaning.
    At the outset we should be clear about just what linguistic and cognitive
operations of our informants we are trying to account for. It is not simply
a case of determining the perceptual cues for distinguishing one object
from another. If a Yakan sees some people engaged in mutual speech
behavior (that categorization he can make perceptually) and wants to
know what they are doing, he will in all probability ask them. In this case
the object of categorization, a group of people engaged in some activity,
is aware of what it is doing. This awareness is, in itself, an attribute, a
necessary one, of the category. Just as in classifying a plant one might
apply a test of taste or smell to determine a criteria) property, in classify-
ing these speech events one applies a test of eliciting a linguistic response
from the performers of the activity. It is impossible for people engaged in
'litigation' or in 'conference' not to be aware of what they are doing and
not to be able to communicate their awareness. For people engaged, say,
in 'litigation' to be able to state that they are 'litigating' is a necessary
condition for the activity to be 'litigation,' but it is not a sufficient condi-
tion. They might be lying or, more probable in Yakan life, they might be
joking. Being funny is a prominent goal of Yakan speech behavior and
semantic incongruity is a standard way of adding humor to speech-but
the effect is dependent on the hearer's ability to recognize the incongruity.
What we are trying to formulate, then, are the conditions under which it is
congruous, neither humorous nor deceitful, to state that one is engaged in
'litigation.' These conditions are the semantic features of the concepts in
question. Our evidence for semantic features does not come from in-
formants' statements about the linguistic representations of these con-
cepts (though such explicit definitions of terms are often useful guides for
 preliminary formulations) but from informants' interpretations of the
 situations which the concepts represent. Our aim is not to give an elegant
formulation of minimal contrastive features but a statement that reflects
            114    Ethnographic Description and Explanation

the various dimensions of speech behavior revealed in the use and inter-
pretation of these expressions.
  Let us consider first the features common to the whole set, those that
distinguish all events construable as miti1J 'discussion' from other things
Yakans do. This set of events includes the events labelled by the other
expressions. Then we will consider what each successive term adds to
these common features. Four dimensions of speech behavior appear to be
involved in contrasting "discussion" with other activities:

miti1J 'discussion'
   I. Focus. The focus of 'discussion' is on the topic of messages. There
is a subject of discussion. Excluded are speech events in which the focus
is on message form: story-telling, riddling, exchanging verses, joking,
prayer (which, being in Arabic, has no semantic content for the Yakan).
   2. Purpose. The purpose of the gathering is to talk. Excluded are ac-
tivities in which the intent to accomplish something other than talking is
responsible for the gathering of participants.
   3. Roles. Speaking time is distributed among the participants. Each
role in the scene, whatever its other characteristics, is both a speaking
and a listening role. Excluded are monologues in which speaking time is
monopolized by one person. 5
   4. Integrity. Integrity refers to the extent to which the activity is con-
strued as an integral unit as opposed to being a part of some other activity.
A 'discussion' must have sufficient integrity not to be construable as
incident to or accompanying some other activity. A 'discussion' can
occur within the context of another kind of event, but only as a recog-
nizably bounded interruption, as when participants disengage from some
other activity to talk something over. (This dimension will sound Jess
fuzzy when we consider its relevance to the contrast between 'litigation'
and other kinds of 'discussion.')
   The expression mitil) 'discussion' necessarily implies only these
features. Each of the succeeding expressions in the series adds some
necessary implications along one or more of these dimensions (Table 3.1).

qisun 'conference'
   I. Focus. The subject of discussion is an issue, some topic that pre·
sents a problem to be decided: when to plant rice, when to go on a trip,
what price to pay in a transaction.
   2. Purpose. A 'conference' has an expected outcome, a decision about
the issue. Participants meet in order to reach a decision, and, if a decision
is made, the conference is concluded.                                       ;'
                                                                           I
  5
      The mutuality of the behavior is represented by the prefix pag in the sequence N ~
pag > ,nag. See footnote 3.
             Struck by Speech: The Yakan Concept of Litigation          115

   3. Roles. No added implications.
   4. Integrity. No added implications.

nunvpakkat 'negotiation'
   I. Focus. The issue in 'negotiation' is a disagreement, a topic over
Which participants have conflicting interests.
  2. Purpose. The decision is a settlement, a legally binding resolution of
the disagreement.
  3. Roles. Participants are divided into two protagonistic sides. Wit-
nesses may be present.
  4. Integrity. No clear added implications. Although mawpakkat is
more likely to refer to an integral event than qisun, and quisun than mitiy,
these are not necessary implications.

 hukum 'litigation'
     I. Focus. The disagreement is a dispute, a disagreement which arises
from a charge that an offense has been committed. A dispute can also be
handled by negotiation, but the topic of litigation is necessarily a dispute.
A dispute handled by litigations is a case.                                      ,
    2. Purpose. The settlement takes the form of a legal ruling based on
Precedent and having special sanctions .
  . 3. Roles. In addition to protagonists and optional witnesses, 'litiga-
~Ion' requires a court, a seat of neutral judges who control the proceed-
ings and attempt to effect a ruling.
    4. Integrity. 'Litigation' is always an integral activity. If it is inter-
~Upted by a different kind of activity, eating, for example, there is a new
instance of litigation, a different court session. 'Discussion,' 'confer-
~?~e,' and 'negotiation,' in their minimal senses, can occur as parts of
 litigation,' but 'litigation' cannot occur as a part of these other activities.

                                                                                     , I'

                table 3.1                                                              i I
                                                                                     ; : '
                                                                                       I I
      Semantic Features
                         Topic        Purpose,'   Role Structure     Integrity
                                                                                      ii
      'discussion'    subject        talk         undifferentiated   mimimal
      'conference'    issue          decision     undifferentiated   minimal
      'negotiation'   disagreement   settlement   opposing sides     moderate         i'
                                                                                      I'

      'litigation'    dispute        ruling       court              maximal



  Each expression in our series, except the terminal one, has a maximal
and minimal sense, depending on whether the speaker intends to include
or exclude the meanings marked by succeeding expressions. 'Mere dis-
        116    Ethnographic Description and Explanation

cussion' (rnitit] hac{ia), the minimal sense of nzili!J, implies the features
listed as common to the whole set, but the topic is simply a subject to
discuss, not an issue to be decided, a disagreement to be settled, or a case
to be ruled on. The purpose is to talk, but there is no expected outcome
which terminates the event, no decision to be reached, no settlement to be
negotiated, no ruling to be handed down. Role structure is undifferentiated
and integrity minimal, although still greater than that implied by magbissah
 'talking to each other.' A ,niti!] in its minimal sense more closely re-
 sembles an American 'bull session' than what we would call a "meeting."
     'Mere conference' applies to situations in which the issue is not a
 dispute, the decision not a settlement, and role structure remains undif-
 ferentiated. 'Mere negotiation' applies to situations in which, though the
 disagreement may be a dispute, the intended outcome is a settlement that
 is not a legal ruling and that is reached without the aid of judges.
     The flexibility of reference afforded by this semantic structure, the
 ability to be ambiguous about whether a general or specific sense is in-
 tended, reflects the fact that these expressions are used not only to talk
 about speech behavior, but their use is also a part of the behavior they
 describe. A Yakan uses terms like nzawpakkat and /zulwm not simply to
 give serious answers to probes for information but also to further his own
 objectives in speech situations by advancing a particular, perhaps osten-
 sibly incongruous, interpretation of an event and by representing this
 conceptualization linguistically in an effective way. He can, for example,
 call for a 'conference' without immediately committing himself to an
 interpretation of the divisiveness of the issue; he can call for a 'discus-
  sion' without implying there is an issue at stake.
      For these reasons stylistic features of expressions, selections among
  alternative linguistic representations of a given conceptual distinction,
  figure importantly in their use and effect their semantic properties. In our
  set, mawpakkat is considered more learned than the other terms, all of
  which are ordinary, everyday words. Although the word is widely known,
  it occurs most often during 'litigation' when 'negotiations' are being
  talked about. In other contexts the notion of 'mere negotiation' is more
  likely to be referred to as qiswz, using 'conference' in its general sense. It
  is probably a consequence of this stylistic difference that the semantic
  contrast between mmvpakkat and qisun seems less sharply drawn than
  that between the other pairs of expressions. In direct questioning about
   the meaning of these terms, many informants have stated offhand that
   mmvpakkat and qisun mean the same thing. No one has said that of hukunz
  and any other term in the set. The same informants will still agree that if,
   for example, several guests at a festivity get together to decide when to
  leave, this is a case of qisun but not of rnawpakkat. The two expressions
  are not synonymous, but the difference between them is somewhat harder
   to uncover than in the other cases. The concept of 'negotiation' can also
             Struck by Speech: The Ya/am Concept of Litigation          117

be represented by expressions referring to the distinctive aspects of the
event, for example:
    pagsulutan 'agreement, settlement-not including :Jegal rulings
    (hukuman)'
    qalegdalz (<Spanish) 'to settle a dispute by any means'
   ja11jiqa11 (<Malay) 'negotiated contractual promise'
    Any citation of Yakan legal terms illustrates another property of these
expressions, that is, the large percentage of forms that are loan words
 from the languages of both of the "great traditions" impinging on the
Yakan: Arabic and Malay of the Malaysian-Moslem tradition, English
and Spanish of the Filipino-Western tradition. 6 These loans have been
acquired through contact with intermediary languages (Taw Sug and
Zamboanguefio) and their prevalence is not a reflection of a crushing im-
pact of either Moslem or Western legal concepts upon Yakan Jaw but of
the stylistic coups a speaker of Yakan scores by displaying a knowledge
of foreign words. This process apparently has a long history. Many loans,
such as lwkum (<Arabic), are now completely assimilated and are not
now recognized as foreign. The term 1nitir;, currently much more popular
than alternative designations of 'discussion,' seems to be on the verge of
losing its loan-word aura. English Joans used in current litigation include:
wantid, /10/dap, kidnap, wadan ('warrant'), supena/z, pospon, pendiy,
qokelz ('approval'), and qistodok ('strategy' from "stroke").


         Describing Litigation

          Our formulation states that litigation is a kind of topic-focused
 mutual speech behavior whose distinctive attributes pertain to the content
and role structure of talking. An observer of Yakan litigation would have
difficulty finding anything else that sets it apart from other activities.
There are no distinctive settings, no courtrooms, for litigation to take
place. A site for a trial should be neutral and should require no one to play
a host role, a role which requires the offering of food. A typical result of
these considerations is to meet on the porch of the house of one of the
judges (in Yakan terms "on" the house but not "within" it). But a wide
variety of other activities take place here as well. There are no distinctive
paraphernalia associated with litigation: no law books, no gavel, no judges'
bench, no witness stand. There is no provisioning of participants. They
may smoke and chew betel, but the rules for soliciting and proferring
smoking and chewing makings are the same as for other informal gather-

   6 The source of etymological information on Malay and Arabic loans is Wilkinson's

( 1932) dictionary. Yakan expressions are marked as Malay loans only when there arc
phonological grounds for distinguishing loans from inherited cognates.
        118   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

ings. There is no distinctive dress associated with litigation-no judges
robes-and participants do not dress up to go to court as they do to go to
ceremonies. If one were to make a cut in Yakan activities between festive
and nonfestive, formal and informal, litigation would clearly fall ~n the
nonfestive, informal side. As speech-focused activity, litigation is outside
the domain of ceremonies, feasts, technological tasks, and other object-
focused activities. We must, therefore, organize a.description of litigation
along those dimensions of speech behavior fo4rid to be significant.


  CASES
  The topic of litigation is a 'case' (p{ikalag < Malay < Sanskrit), a 'dis-
pute' brought to court. A 'dispute' arises when an identified part is
'charged' with an 'offense' and the accused counters the charge. To make
a charge is to publicly proclaim a particular interpretation of an act. To
counter a charge is to advance another interpretation. Clearly the key
descriptive problem is to state the rules for interpreting an act as an of-
fense. Equally clear is that these rules cannot be perfectly consistent in
their formulation or straightforward in their application. There must be
room for argument if there is to be litigation.

   Offenses. 'Offenses' (salaq) are a subset 'of 'wrongs' (duseh), those
wrongs against persons that can lead to a dispute. There are also wrongs
against God (tuhan), such as desecrating a Koran; wrongs against this-
world supernaturals (saytan < .Arabic), such as cutting down a tree they
inhabit; and wrongs against ancestors (kapapuqan) now in the other world
(qahilat < .Arabic), such as selling an heirloom. But these beings need
not rely on courts to seek redress.
   The Yakan employ a large number of linguistic expressions for talking
about different kinds of offenses along a variety of semantic dimensions
dealing with the nature and consequences of acts as well as with the social
relationships between offender and victim. The saliency or' dimensions
with respect to one another can vary in different portions of the domain.
For example, physical assault with intent to kill (bonoq) and sexual as-
sault (hilap from Arabic, and many other expressions) are terminologically
distinguished unless the offense is also a wrong against God, as is the case
if victim and offender are primary kin or primary affines. There is one
term, sumbay, to cover these grievous sins against both man and God.
One might say that the contrast "sex vs. killing" is neutralized when an
expression is marked for "interference by God." (It might be noted that
sexual relations are often designated euphemistically or facetiously by
metaphors based on expressions for killing or fighting. "To make a killing"
in Yakan does not refer to business success.) We will state here only a few
                   Struck by Speech: The Yakan Concept of Litigation     119

         general inferences about the nature of the concept of 'offense' which have
         been drawn from Yakan talk about particular kinds of offenses.
           At the most general level, for an act to be interpretable as an offense, it
         must be a threat to a dapuq relationship. The term dapuq occurs together
        Wi~h a possessive attribute in response to the same query that elicits kin-
        ship terms and other relationship expressions. Unlike kinship relations,
        ho':"'ever, a person may be dapuq of an object as well as of another person.
        Bemg someone's or something's dapuq implies having an economic in-
        terest in it and a responsibility for it. The notion includes, but is broader
       than, that of ownership. To be a dapuq of a person in no way implies that
       the person is one's slave. One is dapuq to his children, his legal wards, his
       ~pouse, and to himself. To be a dapuq of an object does not necessarily
       imply that one has rights of use, possession, or sale but only that one has a
       !egitimate interest in its use or disposal. A water source, for example, has
      Its dapuq (dapuq boheq), those who use it and who would suffer economic
      loss if it were destroyed, but no owner. The dapuq of a mosque (dapuq
      l~l1Jgal) is not its owner-there is such a person-but the entire congrega-
      tion. The dapuq of an inheritance (dapuq pusakaq) is a potential heir. Any
     threat to a dapuq relationship can be interpreted as an economic threat, a
     ~hreat whose gravity is expressible in pesos and centavos. All offenses,
     lllcluding murder, can be compensated for by money. The purpose of
     Yakan litigation is not to mete out punishment but to award compensation
     for injury.
         There are two ways in which an act can be an offense. First, it can
     challenge a person's status as a dapuq, usually in the form of a claim that
     some other person is properly the dapuq of a given object or person.
    ~econd, an act can damage an object or person in such a way as to reduce
    It~ ~conomic value to its dapuq (including, in the case of persons, the
    victim himself). Since a given object or person is likely to have more than
    0
       ne dapuq, an offense generally produces several plaintiffs. A sexual as-
    sault, for example, is an offense against the victim (dapuq badannen 'dapuq
    of one's body'), her parents (dapuq qanakin 'dapuq of the child'), and, if
    married, her husband (dapuq qandahin 'dap11q of the wife').

       Charges. It is up to a victim of an offense to make a charge (tun tut); all
     Yakan law is civil law. He must furthermore determine the identity of the
     offender and assume responsibility for the identification. Offenses in
     Which victim and offender do not meet face to face or in which the victim
    does not survive are difficult to prosecute. Even though theft, ambush
    shootings, and murder are among the more common, and certainly the
    most complained about offenses in Yakan life, they rarely reach the
    courts. It is largely sex and, to a lesser extent, fights and property disputes
    that keep court agendas full.
                                                                                            '
                                                                                           'I




L
                                                                                         'I
        120    Ethnographic Description and Explanation

   An initial charge can be made in the form of a complaint (diklamuh <
Spanish) to a court or even by directly confronting the accused. More
often an accuser will utilize gossip channels to make his charge known
to the accused. In this way he can feel out the response of his opponent
before being irrevocably committed. A way out is left open through deny-
ing the truth or serious intent of the gossip. One of the dangers of Yakan
life is limorok (literally 'slip through'): 'inadvertently instigating a dispute
by incautious gossip in the presence of someone who is likely to relay the
accusation to be accused.'
   There are three strategies available for countering a charge:

         I. One can deny the validity of the accuser's definition of the of-
         fense in question, disputing the meaning of a concept. Does, for
         example, the notion of sexual offense include all acts in which a
         male makes unnecessary physical contact with a female not his
         spouse or only those acts 1n which a male has sexual designs on
         the woman?
         2. One can deny that the act in question has the properties to
         qualify it as an instance of an offense, disputing what really hap-
         pened. For example, granted any physical contact as described
         above is an offense, did any such contact actually occur in the
         particular instance?
         3. One can deny responsibility for the act because (a) someone
         else did it; (b) the accused was provoked by the accuser; (c) the
         accused was incited by some third party (a much stronger excuse
         for wrong-doing among the Yakan than among ourselves); (d) the
          act was unintentional.

 To deny a charge is at the same time to make a charge against one's ac-
 cuser, for a false charge is in itself an offense. It threatens the economic
 interests of the accused. The set of arguments propounded by one side in
 a dispute to counter the charges of the other is their daqawah (<Arabic)
 or "case" in the sense of "the defense rests its case."

     Disputes. Once a charge has been made and countered, a dispute exists.
  Disputants may simply decide to live with the dispute, they may attempt
  to dispose of each other, or they may seek a settlement. If they decide on
  the last course of action, they may either 'negotiate' or 'litigate.' In 'nego-
  tiation' two opposing parties meet to settle a disagreement by mutual
  agreement. The disagreement need not be a dispute (i.e., the outcome of a
  charge). Negotiating a contract, property settlements, marriage (which
  involves all of the preceding) are cases to point. Negotiations are often
· sufficient to handle minor disputes and are necessary for major disputes
  difficult to place under the jurisdiction of any Yakan court. An agreement
               Struck by Speech: The Yakan Concept of Litigation       121

   is specific to the negotiating parties and need not derive from legal prec-
   edents. The breaking of an agreement, however, is an offense and can re-
  sult in a dispute taken to court. MmTiages are made by negotiation but
  dissolved by litigation. To settle a dispute by litigation it must be reported
  to a court at which point the dispute becomes a legal case. The party that
  considers itself offended against should report first, but often by the time a
  case reaches court there is such a complex of charges and countercharges
  that any distinction between plaintiff and defendent becomes obscure.

     COURTS
      What distinguishes litigation from other methods of settling disputes is
   the presence of a court (saraq < Arabic), a set of persons performing the
   role of judge, who are ostensibly neutral on the issue and whose task it is
   to formulate a settlement. The Yakan court has few of the tangible mani-
  festations of its Western counterpart: professional judges holding an
  office, court houses, explicit and continuous schedules, and well-defined
  jurisdictions. On the other hand, a set of judges is not recruited ad hoc to
  try each case that appears. Particular sets of judges meet more than once
 and may try more than one case in a single session. Furthermore, there is
 a fundamental difference between a single case appearing again in a sub-
 sequent session of the same court-a continuation of a single trial-and a
 case appearing again in a different court-a retrial of the same case. One
 may also report to a court when the court is not in session, to file a charge,
 for example, or to seek asylum. The crucial problems in a description of
 Yakan courts are those of legal authority and of jurisdiction: How are
 persons recruited to the role of judge? How are cases assigned to partic-
 ular courts?

   Judges. To act as a judge, a person must be a parish leader with the
 ability and knowledge to perform the role and sufficient political power at
 the jurisdictional level of the court to make his voice effective. Parish
 leadership is not a political office with formal rules of recruitment but a
 position achieved by accumulating influence and prestige by a variety of
 means: religious learning, economic success, military prowess, forensic
 ability, acquisition of a title, pilgrimage to Mecca, election to a local office
in the Philippine political system (councilor or barrio captain), or simply
growing older. (The most common expression for a leader is bahiq 'elder'.)
Typically parish leadership is vested in a small group of close kinsmen,
each specializing in one or more of these routes to power. One man may
be the priest and litigator, another the entrepreneur, another the fighter.
Larger political groupings are informal and unstable alliances of parishes.
To exert leadership at this wider level, one must also be a leader at the
parish level. One does not rise to higher positions; one merely extends the
        122   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

range of his influence. An exceptional position is that of titular tribal
chief (datuq) of all the Yakan, a hereditary office now held by the West-
ernized son of a Christian Filipino escaped convict, who, during the latter
part of the Spanish regime, fled to Basilan. There he assumed political
leadership over the Yakan and achieved formal recognition of his position
by both the Spaniards and the Sultan of Sulu.

   Jurisdiction. The jurisdiction of a court is a function of the social dis-
tance between the judges who/comprise it. This distance, in turn, is a re-
sponse to the need to preserve neutrality with respect to the cases brought
before it. The rule for assignment of a case to a court is to maintain mini-
mal social distance between court and protagonists consistent with pre-
serving neutrality. This rule has the effect that the greater the social dis-
tance between protagonists and the more serious the case, the higher the
jurisdiction of the court that can try the case. If both protagonists belong
to the same parish, then one or more of their own parish leaders may be
found who, by kinship and other dimensions of social affiliation, are
equidistant from both sides. If, however, the protagonists belong to dif-
ferent parishes, the court must comprise representatives of both parishes.
The seriousness of a case is measured by the number of active supporters
recruited by each disputant. As the number of supporters surrounding
each disputant increases, that is, as each party of protagonists grows
larger, the further afield one must go to find judges who are not involved
on one side or another. Because of these considerations, there is a certain
 ad hoc nature to the formation of courts as adjustments are made to handle
 particular cases. Nevertheless, three basic jurisdictional levels can be
 distinguished: parish, community, and tribal.
    The tribal court, composed of leaders appointed by the tribal chief,
 meets in the yard of the chief's Western-style house in the town of Lami-
 tan. Although in theory it is sort of a supreme court for all the Yakan,
 handling cases local courts have failed to settle, in practice its jurisdiction
 and its composition is geographically limited to the side of the island
 where the court meets. Parish courts are generally formed ad hoc to try
 relatively trivial disputes-fights among young men, for example,-among
 parish members. Occasionally a parish trial will be conducted with the
 absolute minimum personnel: two disputants and one judge. The bulk of
 litigation occurs at what might be called the community level. In most
 areas there are regular court sessions about once a week. Adjustments are
 made in these courts to handle particular cases. Any court intermediate
 between a regufar community court and the tribal court is an ad hoc for-
 mation to handle a special case. Before reaching the tribal level, however,
 there is a limit beyond which jurisdiction cannot be stretched, where
 judges who are neutral and at the same time sufficiently close socially to
 act together cannot be found. Disputes at this level may be referred to the
            Struck by Speech: The Yakan Concept of Litigation     123

tribal court, to government courts, or a settlement by negotiation may be
attempted. Frequently, however, disputants resort to violence at this
point.

   Other roles. Added to the basic role structure of litigations-a court and
two opposing sides-there is a further differentiation of roles within each
party of protagonists:
   I. The principal, the one primarily involved in the original dispute, the
person who, as the Yakan say was 'struck' by speech (tawwaq bissalz) or
who 'collided' with litigation (lumavgal si hukum).
  2. His guardian, the one who assumes responsibility for accepting or
rejecting a ruling and complying with it. The guardian may be the principal
himself, a parent or parental surrogate, or a spouse.
  3. Senior and peer supporters.
The Yakan talk about this role structure in the language of kinship using
an ideal model in which the principal is a child, the court his peers, the
guardian his parent, and his supporters his senior and peer kin. A final
role is that of witnesses, who may be called by either side or by the court.

   Rulings. The intended outcome of litigation is a ruling (/wkuman) on a
case handed down by the court. The crucial fact shaping Yakan legal
rulings is that the court has no powers of coercion to force compliance
with a ruling. It must resort to persuasion. What distinguishes a ruling
from an agreement arrived at by negotiation consists largely of the elab-
orate verbal trappings that go along with a ruling and lend it a sacrosanct
aura. The ideology expressed in talking about rulings during the process
of proclaiming them should not be taken as an expression of the manner in
which rulings are actually derived but as part of the behavior of making a
ruling in the most effective way. The basic principle for actually arriving at
successful rulings seems to be the same as those for agreements; namely,
to give each side somewhat less than full satisfaction but something better
than the worst they might expect. In other words, to effect a compromise.
The basic objective of both litigation and negotiation is to eliminate a
dispute, to reestablish normal social relations between the disputants. It is
not to do justice whatever the cost.
   A ruling may call for one or more of three acts: payment of a fine
(multah < Spanish, qt1taq < Malay < Sanskrit), listening to an admoni-
tion (nasilwt < Arabic, pituwah < Arabic, toqan) from the court, and
performing a prayer (duwaqah < Arabic) of reconciliation. A fine, in
turn, has one or more of three components: a compensation for the of-
fense, an amount serving to "wipe away" any sin against God associated
with the offense (which the court collects), and a payment to the court the
baytalnu7l (<Arabic 'treasury'). Fines are calculated in ten-peso units
(laksaq) and paid in Philippine currency (PI = $.25). In proposing a ruling
                                                          I
            124    Ethnographic Description and Explanation

  the court must explain in detail how the amount was arrived at, relating it
  to traditional fines for the offense and to the particular exigencies of the
  case at hand. In one case involving two youths who had been in a fight,
  one side claimed damages for bodily injury and presented a medical bill
  for the amount of P 180.25 from a Christian Filipino physician. The court
. suggested a fine of P 100 to be paid to the injured party explaining its
  decision as follows:

        P 120         For paying the medical bill (principle: never give full
                      satisfaction)
        -     50      In recognition of the countercharge of collusion between
                      the plaintiff and the physician; The court was careful to
                      state it did not necessarily believe the countercharge
                      but, since there were no witnesses, account must be
                      taken of the possibility
              50      For the offense against the plaintiff
        _m            For the plaintiff's responsibility in instigating the fight
        P 100

    If an aclrnonition is part of the ruling, it is given in the form of a lecture
 by the court to both sides at the end of the trial. It is designed to make
 both parties feel their share of responsibility for the dispute, to smooth
                          1
 ruffled feelings, and to warn of the grave consequences of repeating the
 offense. Admonitions are especially common in rulings over marital dis-
 putes and fights among youths.
    If a prayer of reconciliation is called for, it is performed at a later time
 as a different scene, a religious ceremony. Its performance involves ex-
 penses, instructions for the payment of which is an important aspect of
 the ruling. The prayer unites the former disputants in a divinely-sanc-
 tioned ritual-sibling tie. A call for prayer is especially common in cases
 of violence.
    Upon suggesti~g a ruling the court argues for compliance, not only by
 carefully justifying the form of the decision but also by pointing out the
 dire consequences of refusal to comply .. God and the ancestors may mete
 out sickness upon the offender and his kin. Opponents may resort to
 violence against the offender and his kin. The offender's kin, under threat
 from these sanctioning agents, may withdraw support or even disown the
 offender. Judges threaten to wash their hands of the case and withdraw
  political support, and finally the case may be referred to Philippine gov-
 ernment legal system with its expensive lawyers and prisons. See Fig. 3.2
 for a portrayal of these sanctioning forces converging on an offender.
     If the litigants agree to the ruling, those who are called upon to hand
  over money almost never pay in full on demand, this being a rule in all /'        I

  monetary transactions. They ask for ta7Jguh, a deferment of part of the
             Struck by Speech: The Yakan Concept of Litigation              125

          ANCESTORS                     GOD




                                                prison, fees   GOVERNMENT
                                                                 COURTS




         OPPONENT                  THE Y AKAN COURT
         figure 3.2
Sanctions and sanctioning agents

payment until a specified later date. As might be expected, failure to pay
tal)guh when due is itself a major cause of disputes.
   If a court fails to formulate an acceptable ruling, the litigants may at-
tempt to take the case to another Yakan court, seek redress in a govern-
ment court, or drop attempts to settle the dispute by litigation. Another
alternative is to turn the decision over to God. In a religious ceremony,
each disputant swears (sapah) on the Koran to the validity of his argu-
ments in the case. God decides who is right and announces his decision by
inflicting fatal illness (kasapahan) upon the person who swore a false oath
or upon his kin. Swearing is a serious matter, rarely resorted to in fact.
The threat of it, however, figures prominently in legal debate. One can
protect himself from false charges by challenging his opponent to parti-
cipate in a swearing ritual. In several recorded cases, young men saved
themselves from conviction on charges of sexual assault by this tactic.
The fact that God may punish not only the offender but also his kin may
seem capricious to Western moralists; yet it greatly increases the effec-
tiveness of the punishment. Support of one's kin is crucial in a dispute, but
they will be extremely reluctant to carry this support to the point of swear-
ing unless they are firmly convinced of their kinsmen's innocence. Also, if
the disputants are in any way related to each other, as is often the case,
this relationship tie must be dissolved before swearing. Consanguineal
kinship ties can be formally broken in a religious ceremony. The term for
the ritual payments required to disown a kinsman is tallak from the Arabic
word for the formula spoken by a husband to divorce his wife (Yakan
divorce is not that simple).

  PROCEDURES AND SCHEDULES
   Our formulation of the concept of litigation states that litigation is an
integral activity never performed as part of another scene. It is a maximal
           126     Ethnographic Description and Explanation

unit of planning and scheduling. The description of the manifestations of
this aspect of the concept requires a statement of the constituent structure
of the scene-the sequence of parts that make up the whole-and of the
scheduling of litigation with respect to other scenes in the society.

   Procedures. Unlike mere negotiation or conference, litigation is con-
ducted according to definite procedural rules. Although these rules are
much looser than those of Western courts, they are, by Yakan standards,
fairly strict and explicit. During procedings, judges frequently make
reference to general rules governing the speech conduct of court sessions
such as the following:

            I. Speaking time is a free good available in unlimited quantity to
            any person present as long as what he says is relevant to the case.
            2. A speaker has the right to finish before being interrupted.
            3. Judges have the right to call on a person to speak, but one may
            speak without being called upon. 7
            4. Litigants should address all their arguments to the court.
            5. Overt expression of anger, and especially any violence, must
            be avoided. Allowance should be made for the necessity, in litiga-
            tion, for people to say unkind things about one another. Dispu-
            tants must be a)lowed to accuse, judges to admonish.
            6. Each party of protagonists, as well as the judges, has the right
            to confer in private whenever necessary.
            7. A continuous period of time should be allotted to each case
            during a single court session.

  Although there is some variation in the type of case, the usual sequence
of events is as follows:

             I. Presentation of the case by the person to whom it is reported
             2. Taking testimony from each side and from witnesses
             3. Interrogation by the court
             4. Arguments from each side presented together (one side does
             not present its complete case and then defer to the other side)
             5. Private conference of the judges
             6. Presentation of a ruling
             7. Further argument (optional but inevitable)
             8. Private conference of each side (optional)
             9. Expression of acceptance or refusal by each side
           I 0. · Final decision for disposition of case

  7   The question of someone refusing to testify never seems to arise.
               Struck by Speech: The Yakan Concept of Litigation              12 7

          11. Payment of fines, listening to courts admonition (if required)
         12. Ritual handshaking (salanz < Arabic) with the judges signal-
         ling the termination of a·trial session

   Steps 2-4 often occur simultaneously. Steps 5-9 may be repeated sev-
 eral times.

   Sclzedules. Fixed timing is not an attribute of litigation as it is, say, of
some calendrical religious ceremonies and agricultural activities. Court
sessions are fitted into vacancies left by the schedules of other scenes. As
a matter of convenience, community courts generally have regular sched-
uled meetings (Friday afternoon after Mosque service is a favorite time),
but these are easily accommodated if schedules conflict. The tribal court
meets two afternoons a week. Court sessions must be scheduled between
meals with allowance made so participants can return home to eat. The
five daily prayers of Islam, performed in most localities only by a few
religiously inclined individuals, cause no problem. If someone wants to
say a prayer, he can always go off and do so.


          Comparisons
         In this section we make a few summary comparisons with another
 Philippine legal system. The purpose is not to offer an explanation of these
differences but to demonstrate that the ethnographic approach argued for
here, rather than hampering cross-cultural comparison as some critics
seem to fear, provides a basis for determining which units are comparable
and points up significant dimensions of comparison.
   The Eastern Subanun are pagan swidden agriculturists inhabiting the
interior of Zamboanga Peninsula on the island of Mindanao. 8 The Yakan
and Subanun are not in direct contact but they speak related languages
and, along with other central Malaysian peoples, share many basic
technological and social-organizational features. Subanun communities
are much smaller and more scattered, although the basic principles of
settlement pattern are the same: nuclear family household dispersed in
individual fields. The difference is that the Yakan practice continual ex-
ploitation of privately owned fields and groves. Both groups have long
been subject first to Moslem, then to Christian, cultural influence, political
authority, and economic exploitation. The Yakan accommodated where
necessary and resisted where possible. They became Moslems, they par-
ticipate in Philippine politics, and they market copra. At the same time

   " Reference is to the Eastern Subanun of the Li pay area of Zarnboanga de! Norte studied
in the field in 1953-1954 and 1957-1958.
        128   Ethnographic Description and Exp/anati y
                                                     1
they have retained a marked cultural distinctiveness, some freedom to
run their own affairs, and, above all, their land. The Subanun, on the other
hand, retreated or succumbed entirely. They have remained pagan and
retained temporary economic and political independence at the price of
increased isolation and loss of land. Perhaps not unrelated to this differ-
ence in adaptation to external pressures is a marked difference in the
behavior of the two peoples today: the Subanun drink whereas the Yakan
fight.
   There is among the Subanun a set of activities that, in contrast to other
Subanun activities, can be defined in much the same terms as Yakan
litigation: an integral speech event concerned with settling disputes by
means of a ruling formulated by neutral judges. A brief description of
litigation in one Subanun community appears elsewhere (Frake 1963).
Here we will restrict ourselves to a few comparisons along the dimensions
of topic, role structure, outcome, and integrity.

   Topic. Subanun legal cases arise in much the same way as Yakan ones
except that they need not be initiated by a plaintiff. A judge can try some-
one for an offense even if no complaint has been made. It seems ridic-
ulous, however, to call this criminal Jaw since the offenses in question are
generally slanderous or flirtatious remarks made by an incautious drinker,
often not at all resented by the victim. Otherwise the definitions of par-
ticular kinds of offenses are similar. (A major difference is that the Yakan
consider sexual relations with an affine as incestuous wheteas the
Subanun practice le,virate and sororate marriage and sororal polygyny.)
There are great differences, however, in the kinds of offenses that occur
(violence is almost unknown among the Subanun) and the types of cases
that reach court. Adultery, for example, fills the agendas of Yakan courts
whereas it is rarely the overt basis of a Subanun legal case. This is not a
comment on Subanun virtue but on the weakness of their legal sanctions.

   Outcome. The rulings of a Subanun court, like those of the Yakan,
generally demand financial compensation (but fines are calculated in units
of twenty centavos rather than of ten pesos), and may call for admonitions
and rituals of reconciliation. But, not only does the Subanun court have no
legal sanctions of force to back up a decision, there is also little realistic
threat of illegal force it can bring to bear. The Subanun offender may fear
a certain amount of social censure-a real enough sanction to be sure-
but he need not fear a shotgun blast interrupting his evening meal, the
outcome of more than one Yakan dispute. The Subanun also lack an
Almighty God to mete out justice when litigation fails. For this reason,
"a large share, if not the majority, of legal cases deal with offenses so
minor that only the fertile imagination of a Subanun legal authority can
magnify them into a serious threat to some person or to society in general"
            Struck by Speech: The Yakan Concept of Litigation      129

 (Frake 1963 :221 ). Yakan courts too cannot cope with the full range of
 offenses committed, but the Yakan, by absolute standards, commit much
 more serious crimes. A Parkinsonian cynic viewing Yakan and Subanun
 life ·and law might conclude that the severity of crime increases with the
 ability of a legal system to cope with it.

     Role Structure. Subanun courts are always formed ad hoc to try a par-
  ticular case. There are no court schedules or regular meeting places. The
  role of judge is open to any adult male with the ability to formulate suc-
  cessful decisions and performance in the role is largely a route to com-
  munity leadership rather than a result of it. Unlike the Yakan, where a
. parish priest is generally a political leader as well, Subanun roles of legal
  and religious authority are quite distinct and typically filled by separate
  individuals. Subanun litigation less often musters bodies of kin in support
  of disputants, partly because there is usually less of common interest at
  stake, and kin do not share collective responsibility under mortal and
  divine sanctioning agents.

   Integrity. The striking difference between Subanun and Yakan litiga-
tion, and one that does not derive from differences in socioeconomic
complexity in any obvious way, is the place of the activity in the overall
structure of cultural scenes. Subanun activities are sharply divisible into
festive and nonfestive scenes, the former always involving feasting and
drinking (Frake 1964b). Subanun litigation is festive behavior, performed
as part of a larger scene and accompanied by eating, drinking, and merry-
making. In this respect it is the same kind of thing as the performance of
religious offerings, and the two activities in fact often occur together as
parts of the same festivity. Subanun litigation, then, is less of an integral
unit of performance and scheduling than the comparable Yakan activity.
Subanun legal arguments, as they develop in the course of drinking, ex-
habit more obvious attention to message form. Litigants and judges em-
ploy esoteric legal language often arranged into verse and sung to the tune
of drinking songs (Frake 1964a). Thus whereas the Yakan try relatively
serious cases in scenes of informal discussion, the Subanun devote them-
selves to trivial disputes in scenes of formal festivities. This difference is
crucial to any functional interpretations of litigation in the two societies.
Participation in litigation has different meanings and different conse-
quences in the two societies because of it.
4                                          /
The Strategy of Turkish Boys'
Verbal Dueling Rhymes
ALAN DUNDES, JERRY W. LEACH, AND BORA OZKOK




Alan Dundes is Professor of Anthropology and Folklore
at the University of California, Berkeley. He received his
doctorate in folklore at Indiana University, and he has
taught at the University of Kansas. Dr. Dundes has
played a leading part in the revitalization of folklore as a
discipline in the United States. Much of his work has
been concerned with the structural definition and analysis
of folkloristic genres, such as folktales, superstitions, and
riddles. He has also been active in colJecting and inter-
preting folkloristic features of contemporary popular
culture. Jerry W. Leach has done graduate work at Cam-
bridge University, England, and at the University ,of
California, Berkeley. Bora Ozkok, a native of Turkey, is
a graduate student at the University of California,
Berkeley.
   This chapter focuses on verbal dueling, a welJ-defined
genre of oral art which can be found in many parts of the
world. As the authors point out, however, folklorists' ac-
counts of these phenomena tend to be confined to de-
scriptions of content or ad hoc lists of elements or sty-
listic characteristics. Folklorists have failed to show how
the forms in question are used in actual interaction and
what they imply about language usage in relationships in
the societies in which they occur. This chapter attempts
to overcome these limitations. By analyzing Turkish
verbal duels within the conceptual framework of the
ethnography of communication in terms of the structural
relations among constituent factors, it opens up new pos-
sibilities for evaluating the communicative devices in-
volved in speech play and comparing them to other more
                            130
The Strategy of Turkish Boys' Verbal Dueling Rhymes      131

common interaction processes in Turkey and elsewhere.
   Turkish verbal duels do in fact show most of the char-
acteristics of speech events in general. Interaction typ-
ically revolves around a culturally specific range of topics.
In this case the topic is homosexuality, including sexual
attack on a person's close relatives, manliness, courage,
etc. There are rigid constraints on message form, with
exchanges consisting of two parts: a challenge 'and a
reply, which are linked both through content and form
(rhyme). Similarly, there are limitations on speakers and
audiences: Only teenage boys can participate. Like the
telephone conversations analyzed by Schegloff (Chapter
12), dueling exchanges in Turkey have clearly defined
sequencing rules which determine who gets the floor and
under what conditions. There are further stereotyped
openings and closings, which function to channel what
can be conveyed in a manner similar to that described by
Frake in his discussion of Subanun drinking behavior
(1964a).
   A number of features of communication are illustrated
which have clear counterparts in every sequence of the
interaction. One of the most important features is the
contrast between overt topic or content, on the one hand,
and communicative goal, or function, as Ervin-Tripp
(Chapter 7) calls it, on the other. Topics such as sex-
uality, manliness, etc., are not used for the information
they convey by themselves. Sexual submission serves as
a symbol for interactional inferiority. The actual com-
municative intent seems to be to put one's opponent
down or to test his ability to maintain presence of mind
in interaction. Compare the Turkish material with Ervin-
Tripp's example of a husband who, upon entering a room,
finds his wife talking to a lady friend and is told: "We
were talking about our next sewing club meeting." In
this case, the husband takes the hint and withdraws. As
with sex in Turkish duels, the topic is introduced in that
case because of what it implies about restrictions upon
participants not because of its inherent content.
   Note also the semantic strategy of the duels. The
opponent singles out central, potentially ambiguous fea-
tures of the speaker's challenge and by placing them in a
new environment alters their meaning so as to make them
reflect on the speaker. There is some similarity with
common children's word games such as the following:
 132   Ethnographic Description and Explaru;tion

   A: I love that dog.
   B: Why don't you marry it?

  In terms of the concepts developeo/6y Sacks in Chapter
  11, the change of environment forces the reassignment of
  an item from one category collection to another.
     Participation in verbal duels requires both specific
  linguistic skills and general cultural knowledge. A com-
  petent performer must know a large number of set
  rhymes, he must display ingenuity in inventing new
  metaphors and combining them within the constraints
  imposed by the medium. This suggests that verbal dueling
  among boys may serve as an important language social-
  ization device. Labov's recent extensive study of verbal
  behavior in black' ghetto peer groups illustrates a similar
  case of this type of speech play (Labov et al. i 968).
  Labov's attempt to describe the grammatical competence
  of peer groups in culturally reali.stic settings led to the
  discovery that what folklorists have variously called
  "sounding" or "playing the dozens" (Abrahams 1964;
  Kochman 1969) is a daily occurrence in ghetto areas and
  forms an integral part of interaction within ghetto peer
  groups. Analysis of transcripts of such sounding sessions
· show that the very process of competing with others
  (i.e., the necessity of topping one's opponent's "sound")
  may cause a speaker to produce highly complex and in-
  volved syntactic constructions of the type usually thought
  to be lacking in lower-class uneducated speech. How-
  ever, these same black children, when interviewed alone,
  by white or black interviewers, away from their peers,
  frequently may seem unresponsive, communicating only
  in brief and stereotyped statements. When speech per-
  formance is investigated only in these contexts, speakers
  may be considered as lacking in verbal skills. Clearly,
  failure to respond in formal interviews cannot be under-
  stood simply in the framework of linguistic competence,
  in the way that that term is usually defined. One must
  also deal with the social meaning which the interview
  setting carries for respondents. This is a classic illustra-
  tion of the fact that communicative competence involves
  more than just grammatical skills.
     After analysis of the forms and symbolic content of a
  number of sequences, the authors turn to the place of
        The Strategy of Turkish Boys' Verbal Dueling Rhymes    133

       verbal dueling in the society in which it occurs. Taboos
       on obscenity perhaps account for apparent neglect of this
       genre in previously published work, but grafitti and folk-
       tales indicate that it is well known. The authors.attempt
       to explain the involvement of men in the genre and its
       general meaning by arguing that symbolic sexual dom-
       inance is a predominant theme in terms of the encultura-
       tion experience in the male life cycle.
          An alternate explanation, more in line with the the-
       oretical position taken elsewhere in this volume, would
       be to turn away from the search for psychological motiva-
       tion, disregard the literal meaning of the key terms, and
       view them as symbolic of the community's most deeply
       ingrained social taboos or notions of boundary. The duel
       thus tests the performers' ability to manipulate these
       emotion-charged topics within the constraints imposed
       by the speech event. By besting his opponent in this
       dangerous and potentially explosive situation, he demon-
       strates his fitness as a member of the peer group and
       ultimately his social communicative skill.
          To the student of verbal interaction, the importance of
       verbal dueling lies in the fact that it illustrates, in rit-
       ualized and vivid form, some highly important and, so
       far, relatively little understood aspects of the communi-
       cation process, and thus materially contributes to our
       understanding of the social basis of verbal interaction.
       For an additional related reading, see Paulhan's (1913)
       book. Many of the articles in Kochman (in preparation)
       deal with similar matters within the context of Afro-
       American culture, especially Labov's "Rules for Ritual
       Insult." Peter Seitel (l 971) gives a highly interesting and
       suggestive analysis of the communicative uses of prov-
       erbs in Africa.



        The underlying strategy of specific traditional verbal encounters
has not received much attention from anthropologists and folklorists.
Anthropologists speak at length of joking or teasing relationships in gen-
eral, but rarely do they describe in detail actual verbal duels or provide
anything remotely resembling explication de texte. Folklorists, who tend
to be text rather than context oriented, do at least present reasonably
complete texts of insults, taunts, retorts, etc. However, more often than
          134     Ethnographic Description and Explanation

  not, these texts are presented in no particular order other than the arbi-
  trary one imposed by the collector. Given this presentation of the data, it
  is virtually impossible to reconstruct even an approximate idea of a live
  verbal battle in which the texts might appropriately be employed. In
  Roger Abrahams' valuable study of the dozens, e.g., the classic American
  Negro example of verbal dueling, he first lists thirty different dozens in-
  sults ("raps") and then follows them with a separate list of twelve dozens
· replies ("caps") (1962). It is conceivable, of course, that it really doesn't
  matter which reply follows which initial insult. Yet, there is obviously a
  particular order or sequence in any one actual dueling encounter. For
  those students who are interested in understanding folk rhetorical strategy
  (e.g., what strategic factors influence a verbal duel participant to choose
  one retort rather than another), it seems clear that knowledge of the par-
  ticular sequence of exchanges is absolutely essential. Thus full transcrip-
  tions of observed or at least participant-reported hypothetical verbal
  duels must be collected if we are ever to attempt to analyze underlying
  strategies.
     The study of strategy in verbal duels is part of what has been termed
  "the ethnography of speaking folklore" (Arewa and Dundes 1964). The
  ethnography of speaking folklore refers to the rules governing the use of
  both whole genres of folklore and particular exemplars of those genres.
 Thus it is not just a matter of describing the general function of one type
  of insult but also of describing the particular rationale underlying.the use
  of one particular insult by one particular individual to another particular
  individual on .one particular occasion. Admittedly, the determining factors
  involved may not be in the conscious mind of the duel participants. Nev-
  ertheless, like so many of the "rules" of culture, they may be articulated
  after careful analysis. If there is to be any fruitful study of the dynamics of
  the transmission or communication of folklore, then the particulars of the
  processes in which the folkloristic materials are employed must begin to
  receive the critical attention of folklorists and anthropologists. If folklore
  is a code, then folklorists must consider the rules of usage of that code by
  examining its concrete contexts. As an illustration of "the ethnography of
  speaking folklore," we shall briefly examine one type of verbal duel found
  throughout Turkey. 1


   1
     Although almost all of the materials in this paper were provided by one of the co-
 authors, Bora Ozkok, who was himself an active participant in the tradition, spotchecking
 with more than twenty other Turkish students revealed that the same or similar texts were
 common in Istanbul, Ankara, Adana, Erzurum, and Izmir. Professor Ilhan Basgoz of In-
 diana University also had personal knowledge of the tradition and we are indebted to him
 for several useful comments on the paper. The undoubted popularity of the tradition tempts
 us to speculate about the possibility of its relationship to the alleged sexual indignities suf-
 fered by the famed Lawrence of Arabia, when he was captured by Turkish forces at Deraa.

                                                                                                    r'
                                                                                                J
         The Strategy of Turkish Boys' Verbal Dueling Rhymes    135


        Some General Features of Turkish
        Verbal Dueling

          Among Turkish boys from about the ages of eight to around four-
teen, there is a traditional form of ritual insult exchange which depends
upon an individual's skill in remembering and selecting appropriate retorts
to provocative insults. While it is possible that some of the initial insults
or curses might be known by girls and women, it is quite unlikely that the
retorts are similarly known. Moreover, in the absence of evidence to the
contrary, it seems doubtful that the elaborate mechanics and tactics of
engaging in these linked retort contests are familiar to many Turkish
females. For that matter, the very existence of this verbal dueling tradi-
tion seems to be little known by professional students of Turkish culture,
judging by lack of allusions to it in the Turkish scholarly literature. Most
 probably, the same obscenity which keeps the tradition out of the reach of
 most Turkish women has tended to keep it out of the province of scholars.
Still it seems incredible that none of the anthropologists who have con-
ducted ethnographic fieldwork in Turkey have so much as mentioned the
tradition.
    The tradition includes the following general principles:
    I. One of the most important goals is to force one's opponent into a
fernale, passive role. This may be done by defining the opponent or his
 mother or sister as a wanton sexual receptacle. If the male opponent is
thus defined, it is usually by means of casting him as a submissive anus, an
anus which must accept the brunt of the verbal duelists's attacking
phallus. A more indirect technique is to disparage or threaten the op-
ponent's mother or sister, which is a serious attack upon his male honor.
Thus the victim either has to submit to phallic aggression himself or else
 watch helplessly as phallic aggression is carried out upon his female ex-
 tensions: his mother or sister. Of course, the victim normally does not
 simply remain passive. Rather he tries in turn to place his attacker in a
 passive, female role. Much of the skill in the dueling process consists of
 parrying phallic thrusts such that the would-be attacking penis is frus-
 trated and the would-be attacker is accused of receiving a penis instead.
 According to this code, a young boy defends and asserts his virile standing
 in his peer group by seeing to it that his phallus threatens the anus of any
 rival who may challenge him. It is irnportant to play the active role in a
 homosexual relationship; it is shameful and demeaning to be forced to
take the passive role.
   2. The retort must end rhyme with tlze initial insult. This is a critical
stylistic principle as opposed to the overall structural or content require-
ment just noted. It clearly involves a fairly demanding and restrictive
        136    Ethnographic Description and Explanation

rule. In most instances, there are specific rhymed retorts for given in-
sults, and if one is the victim of such an insult, he is expected to come
back with the most appropriate traditional retort. It is thus to an individ-
ual's advantage to memorize as many of such traditional retorts as pos-
sible inasmuch as such memorization thereby arms him against any sud-
den attack. Failure to respond in rhyme will almost certainly invite a
scathing comment from one's opponent. However, even worse than not
answering in rhyme or in what is adjudged good rhyme is not answering
at all. If one does not or cannot retort to a phallic insult, one essentially
admits that he is reduced to the female receptive role.
   Within the general necessary requirements of content (one's phallus
must enter one's opponent's anus) and texture (the retort must rhyme
with the immediately preceding insult) there is still some room for in-
dividual skill. This skill entails making editorial judgments upon the qual-
ity of the previous verbal thrust and also making a judicious selection of
either another attack formula or a sufficient defense formula from the
large fund of available formulas. So long as one fulfills the minimal content
and rhyme requirements, one can continue to duel. In some of the fairly
lengthy sequences of linked retorts, the participants must often be able to
seize upon an actual or. alleged "mistake" in the attacker's previous text.
Often it is just one word or the quality of the rhyme which forms the basis
for the selection of an appropriate traditional response formula. In one
sense, an individual is almost honor-bound wherever possible to take part
of the previous text as the point of departure for the continuation of the
duel. With such a folk esthetic principle, two evenly matched youths may ,
produce quite an extensive/ series of linked retorts. Frequently, con-
siderable word play may be required to keep the linkage going. In sum-
mary then, an important part of the strategy would seem to entail selecting
a retort from the repertoire, the selection to be based in part upon one or
more "weak" elements of one's opponent's text as well as upon the exi-
gencies of the rhyme requirement. At the same time, the retort should be
sufficiently clever so as not to provide that same opponent with potential
ammunition for a good thrust in return. In addition, the pace is fast and the
retorts are supposed to be quickly and flawlessly delivered.


        Brief Exchanges

        Before examining some examples of the lengthier strings of linked
rhymed retorts, it might be well to consider several brief exchanges (in
these and all following examples the first line gives the Turkish text, the
second line a literal English translation, and the third, in parenthesis, a full
idiomatic English translation, if required):
                                       ~==========:··11:
                                                                                  I
                                                                                  :! ,;

         The Strategy 0 ,1· T       .                                             'Ii··
                                urk1s/z Boys' Verbal Dueling Rhymes               11:;
                         J                                            137         I'
          Speaker A:                                                              Ii
                             Ay1                                                  :I
                                                                                  II,
                             bear
                                                                                  :I:I I
          Speaker B:
                             Sana    girsin      keman yayi
                             You to enter let it violin bow
                                                                                  ,11,,,
                             (May the bow of a violin enter your anus.)                'i'

Ay1 meaning 'you b       , .                           .
notes a clumsy b ·   ear   1s a commonly   used
                                              . insult
                                                    .  m Turkey. Bear ·con- ,1     I
    I 'M         ' ig, and supposedly stupid animal. The convent10ncl
re~ Y ay the bow of a violin enter your ass' illustrates the rhyme re-
qu1rement. Yay, ('bow' in the possessive form) rhymes with ay1 ('bear'). In        I:
theory, there are many other word forms which rhyme with ay1 and which
could hwe b           d                                               d" ·    1
         '    een use . However, there are in fact only two tra 1t1ona
retorts t~at We know of to the ay1 insult. The bow of a violin is particularly        I
appropnate because of its length, its smoothness, its unusualness in t~is
context, and perhaps even because the nuances of the repeated bowmg
motion suggest. the possibility of repeated penetrations of the opponent's             i ,:
                                                                                       I I
~nus. The mo~10n of the bow thus gives it an advantage over more sta-
tionary potential Phallic symbols such as a winnowing fork or a hoe. (Of
course, the latter are ruled out by the rhyming pattern.) One informant,                  ',
                                                                                             '
when asked to comment on the violin bow image, suggested that the most                       I

habitual homosexuals-i.e., the ones with larger or extended anuses-
would "require the longest and biggest instruments."
   Another traditional retort to ay1 is:

      Sana     koysun       (speaker' s own first name) day1
      you to put let him                                mother's brother
      [Let a real man like (B's name) put his penis in your anus.]

Incidentally, day1, the mother's brother, in terms of the qual~ty o~ t~e
relationship is the familiar uncle, the uncle with whom one canJoke. fhis
is in contrast with amca, the father's brother, the more formal uncle, to              I.
whom one must invariably show respect.

                        Speaker A:        fhyar
                                          cucumber

                        Speaker B:        Gcitiine       uyar
                                          ass your to fits
                                          (It fits your ass.)


Hiyar meaning 'you cucumber' is a_ pithy _insult. There are, as a matter of
fact, a number of idiomatic usages mvolvmg the cue.umber.
        138   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

                          H1yara         bak!
                          cucumber to look at
                          (Look at that cucumber!)
                        H1yarhk          etme!
                        cucumberness act not
                        (Don't act like a cucumber!)

'Look at that cucumber' or 'Don't act like a cucumber!' are representa-
tive. Cucumber is an insult not because of any literal sense but rather
because of its fancied resemblance to the male organ. Cucumber basically
implies stupidity. A speaker who is called a cucumber (which would be
somewhat analogous to being called a "prick" in American argot) must
reply under pain of admitting that he is indeed a cucumber. By using the
traditional retort Gotiine uyar, he neatly turns the insult back upon his
opponent inasmuch as he has asserted that the "cucumber" fits the in-
sulter's ass. At this point B, the second speaker, having rhymed uyar
with luyar, and having placed his phallus deftly in his opponent's anus, has
earned the advantage of the verbal duel.
   Although most of the brief exchanges do not involve a great deal of
choice on the part of the boy trying to retort, there are some insults which
may be answered by quite a variety of standard responses. For example,
if speaker A tells speaker B

                           Has        siktir
                           Come on penised get
                           (Get fucked.)

B may choose one of a number of possibilities. While has siktir literally
refers to "getting penised," i.e., fucked, figuratively, it is normally used
to tell someone to "get the hell out of here." However, the second speaker
will normally use the literal sense as the basis of his comeback. He might
say:

          Siktirdigin            yere      mum     diktir
          penised got that you place to candle set up
          (Put a candle at the spot where you got yourself fucked.)

The second speaker thus implies that his opponent has already been
sexually assaulted and he specifically tells him furthermore that the place
where this occurred, e.g., a particular room, a clearing in the woods, or
wherever, should be memorialized by placing a lighted candle there. This
mockingly sanctifies the "holy" place. The brief exchange may end at this
point, but the first speaker could reply
          The Strategy of Turkish Boys' Verbal Dueling Rhymes       I 39

                A blan            wirsa     ba11a      siktir!
                older sister you there is if me to penised get
                (If you have an older sister, let me fuck her.)

Here the first speaker wishes to avoid the passive role as signaled by
having a lighted candle mark the spot where he was supposedly in the
habit of accepting a male phallus. So instead he launches a would-be
phallic attack against the older sister of the second speaker. A verbal
sexual attack on a speaker's mother or older sister is a tactic commonly
resorted to in these duels.
   It should be noted that not all the traditional retorts to has siktir are in
strict rhyme. One such alternative response is

                  fl as  sik    istiyorsan ' I stanbula    git!
                  good penis want if you Istanbul to go
                  (If you want a good penis go to Istanbul.)

This retort informs the initial speaker that if he wants a good prick, he
should go to Istanbul, the latter presumably being the hometown of the
second speaker. Once again, the obvious principle is that when one is
confronted with the threat of being sexually assaulted, one attempts to
sexually assault the attacker in turn.
  Still another possible retort to Has sikter is

T abii      siktir
Of course penis it is
(Of course it's a prick!)

                          p(l(;ac1*  kemigi      mi                 za1111ettin?
                          butcher's shinbone (question marker) think did you
                         (Did you think it was a sheep's shinbone?)
* Pa~·ac1, kemigi is the sheep's shinbone, obtained from a butcher, used to make
broth.

In this case, there is a play on the word siktir, which can mean 'get fucked'
as the causative form of the verb sikmek ('to penis'), but which can also
mean 'Indeed it is a prick.' The second speaker pretends to ignore the
first and more usual meaning in favor of the second meaning. By so doing,
the second speaker implies that the first speaker is stupidly unable to
recognize a penis when he sees one.
   It is perhaps worth noting that the retort tradition is so well entrenched
that sometimes routine innocuous statements are converted into excuses
for an exchange:
         140    Ethnographic Description and Explanation

               Speaker A:       Hayrola
                                What's going on?

               Speaker B:       Gotllne       girsin      karyola
                                Ass your to enter let it bedstead
                                (Stick a bedstead up your ass.)

  In this instance, the simple innocent question 'What's going on?' is
 .answered with 'Stick a bedstead up your ass.' However, this is almost a
  play on the whole retort convention, and it probably would not be taken
  seriously as an invitation to duel by either participant. In true duels, there
  is a serious atmosphere of jousting insult. In this case, there was abso-
  lutely no offense meant by the initial remark, and its utilization as an ex-
  cuse for a retort is facetious. Nevertheless, the rules of the convention are
  observed karyola ('bedstead') rhymes with H ayrola ('What's going on?'),
  and a large, unlikely object is shoved up the victim's anus. Boys familiar
  with the retort tradition must always be alert for playful traps of this kind.
  In practice, almost any word or phrase can lead an unwary boy into com-
. mitting himself to the dupe's role. When one of the authors of this paper
  wrote to one of his friends in Turkey for examples of the retort tradition,
  e.g., he was victimized. The friend, after giving some examples of the
  tradition, ended his letter by asking, "Bora, you know this airplane that is
  bringing you this letter?" Bora naturally said yes to himself, expecting
  some comment about the airplane. The next line in the letter was:

                            Sana      girsin!
                            you to    enter let it
                            (May it enter your anus.)

meaning 'May that stick up your ass.' In casual conversation, the same
danger prevails. The only defense is not to say evet ('yes' or 'yeah') when
someone says, "Do you know the car we're driving in?" "Do you know
the weather today?" etc. If one silently nods rather than saying, "Yeah,"
the attacker cannot shove the car, weather, etc., up the prospective
victim's anus.
   Before proceding now to the extended exchanges, it should be men-
tioned that in a few instances the second speaker simply buries the first
speaker with a list of rhymes. In these cases, the first speaker is not given
an opportunity to reply at all. He must stand and take the punishment.
One such example is afforded by the use of the precipitating insult lnek,
one of the many Turkish insults involving an animal term of abuse.

                   Speaker A:      lnek
                                   cow
                                                                                       ,··
                                                                                   I
          The Strategy of Turkish Boys' Verbal Dueling Rhymes         141

                   Speaker B:       U stiine       binek
                                    top your to    ride let's
                                    (Let me ride you.)
                                    Dagil            gidek
                                    mountain to      go let's
                                    (Let's go to the mountain.)
                                    Seni    sikek
                                    you     penis let's
                                    (Let me fuck you.)

This exchange involves speaker A calling B a cow-a female animal-
followed by B's reply, 'Let me ride you. Let's go to the mountain. And
there let me fuck you.' In a variant from Adana, the retort is:

                  Ustiine        binek
                  top your to    ride let's
                  (Let me ride you.)
                  Hale be       gidek
                  Aleppo to     go let's
                  (Let's go to Aleppo.)
                  fl alep   y1/ald1
                  Aleppo    flattened
                  (Aleppo was flattened.)
                  I c;ine        t1kild1
                  inside your    to stick in
                  [It (Aleppo) was crammed inside (your ass).]

This implies that the opponent's anus is so large that not only could an
entire city fit in it but a city totally flattened with all of its ruins (e.g., col-
lapsed walls) could be accommodated. Whether or not the flattening of
Aleppo is supposed to be caused by the severity of A's sexual assault on
B is open to question.
  The burying or overwhelming of an initial attacker may consist of more
than four lines. A fairly elaborate response of this type is the following
reply to still another domestic animal insult:

 Speaker A:       Esolesek
                  son of a donkey
 Speaker B:       Essoglu            essek        baban
                  (Y~ur father is the ~in of a donkey.)

                  Seni    siken      roban
                  you     pemsmg     shepherd
                  (The shepherd who fucks you.)
        142   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

                c; obc111   da     ben
                shepherd    so     me
                (That shepherd is me.)

                A /elm         1111                  agz1mn            pay1111
                get did you    (question marker)      mouth your's     share
                (Did you get your mouth's share? (i.e., You sure got the
                answer you deserved)?)

                Y edin       mi                   la/Ii   day1111
                eat did you (question marker)     hairy   mother's brother my
                (Did you eat my hairy prick?)
                0      .1·ijzlerini    atlattr1m
                that   words your      make jump I
                (Your words don't get to me.)
                G jjfiinii    patlattr1m
                ass your      explode I
                [I .burst your ass (i.e., by means of a massive ejaculation).]
                0        soz/erin     havaya
                that     words your   air to
                (Those words that you gave me go to the air (mean nothing
                to me).)

                G otiin i   tavaya
                ass your    frying pan to
                (Your ass goes into the frying pan.)
                K oprii   alt,       cam       cam
                bridge    below      glass     glass
                (Beneath the bridge is lots of broken glass.)
                Seni    siken        am cam
                you     pemsmg       paternal uncle my
                (My paternal uncle fucks you.)
                Koprii   altt       boy boy
                bridge    below     length length
                (Underneath the bridge are varying lengths.)
                S eni   siken      kovboy
                you     pemsmg     cowboy
                (The cowboy fucks you.)

First of all, it should be noted that although the whole retort can be used
as a single reply, it actually consists of separate sections. Speaker B might
well have paused after 'Did you eat my hairy prick?' to see if A had any-
thing to say. The following atlatmm/patlatmnz couplet could be held in
          The Strategy of Turkish Boys' Verbal Dueling Rhymes       143

  abeyance to squelch anything A did say. The same is true for the havaya/
  tavaya lines and for the final four lines concerned with kOprii ('bridge').
  On the one hand, B might elect not to use so much ammunition at once but
  rather to save some of his salvos for the duel which may ensue. On the
  other hand, B's rattling off such a list of retorts might, tactically speaking,
  be the most effective course of action.
    In this elaborate retort sequence are a large number of allusions which
 are not clear at first glance. The shepherd, for instance, seems to have
  special significance because he lives his life alone, often far from human
 society. Frequently, he has only animals for companionship. According to
 one informant, it is the shepherds' presumed sexual relations with donkeys
 and dogs which are thought to make their penises larger than normal.
 Thus speaker B, by assuming the identity of a shepherd, takes on super-
 phallic characteristics. (The same informant also indicated that it was a
 sin to have sexual relations with animals that one eats. Hence there was
 supposed to be no intercourse with cattle or sheep. Donkeys and dogs,
 however, are not eaten and thus may serve as possible sexual partners.
 Assuming that intercourse with any animal is in some sense a "sin," the
 distinction between animals one eats and animals that one does not eat is a
 most interesting one.)
    The reference to 'mouth's share' in 'Did you get your mouth's share?'
 refers to an answer in kind. In other words, your mouth issued a verbal
 challenge or insult; now it is being paid back in kind. It may or may not
 also refer to fellatio. Certainly, the next line 'Did you eat my hairy prick?'
 does suggest oral-genital contact. However, the informant said that it was
 the ass which "ate" the hairy phallus. The allusion to bursting the victim's
 ass is a self-congratulatory bit of hypermasculinity. One's phallus is so
 large and so powerful that the opponent's passive anus cannot contain it
 and, consequently, the poor anus quite simply falls apart. The explosion
patlamnz implies orgasm, and, more precisely, it is the power of the or-
gasm or ejaculation which destroys/bursts the victim's anus.
    The broken glass under the bridge is somewhat obscure. Possibly,
broken glass cam cam was introduced primarily for rhyming purposes.
However, the area under bridges in Turkey-as elswhere-is often a
favorite trysting place for homosexuals, and homosexual activities do
occur there. The broken glass may suggest certain physical danger (cas-
tration?) to the body. Probably, the varying lengths "under the bridge"
refer to various sized phalluses, which might also cause pain. The refer-
ence to the U.S. cowboy may be like the reference to the shepherd. The
cowboy, like the shepherd, spends much of his time alone with animals
with whom he is thought to enjoy sexual intimacies. A cowboy is tough;
he carries a gun; he has a large phallus. Thus B heaps ignominies upon A
by having A submit to sexual attacks from shepherds, cowboys, and B's
father's brother.
                144     Ethnographic Description and Explanation



                Extended Duels

                Having sampled several short examples of rhymed retorts, one
        may be better able to appreciate what is involved in an extended duel.
        Here is an example of such a duel. Individual A, angered at individual B,
        says to him,

                                    A nan m            a, 111
                                     mother your's    cunt
                                     (Your mother's cunt.)

        This is a serious insult and B, the addressee, may respond in one of several
        ways. He may go and physically strike A, or he may reply using exactly
        the same words or he may elect to respond with a retort. Ifhe chooses the
        latter alternative, he has to end rhyme with ami. B could reply to A,

                                 Baba111111     kc/le      dame
                                 father my's    hairy      roof
                                 (My father's hairy roof.)

        This retort stresses the role of B's father as the protector of B's mother.
        The parts of the retort which carry meaning are 'father' and 'hairy.' To-
        gether they mean that the retorting person has a father with a hairy prick
        and that this father, acting as the protector of the mother, will sexually
        assault the first speaker as a matter of revenge. The word dam1 ('roof' in
        the possessive) is used primarily for the sake of rhyme. However, in the
        context of this retort, danu, following as it does the words Babanun ktlh,
        takes on the meaning of 'phallus'. (Also, since a roof covers a house, the
        implicit reference may even be to A's having been "covered" by B's
        father, that is, that A has submitted to a phallic attack by B's father.)
           Now A is on the spot. Having started by mentioning the vagina of B's
        mother, he suddenly finds himself attacked by the hairy phallus of B's
        father. He must try to retort in turn. Examining B's rhyme, he quickly
        realizes that one part of it makes little sense. B said dam1, which literally
        means 'roof,' and this gives A an opportunity to criticize B's retort. A
        could say:

               Onu ijy/e         demezler
               that t.his way say don't they
               (They don't say it that way.)
               Peynir    ekmek   yemez/er
               cheese bread eat don't they
               (They don't eat bread and cheese.)




.....
         The Strategy of Tu 1·k·,        ,
                                 1                                                 !.
                                  sh Boys Verbal Dueling Rhymes      145
      Ben de        seni sik,, 1                                                 I ,;
                                                                                 I.·
                                ezsem
      I      too You Penis don't 'f I
      (If I don't fuck You)            1
                                                                                 '.
                                                                                 I'
      Bcma    (speaker's na 111 ,,)    l                                         I•

                                ~     c emez 1er
      me to (speaker's name)          say don't they             :
      [They won't cal] me Ahmet (or whatever the speaker's name is).]
A_ tense and fast-moving duel is now in progress. B must now come up
with another ~nswer. He realizes that now he himself as well as his mother
is under possible sexual attack. A has criticized his preceding retort and
has articulated the guiding principle of the dueling code: If I, A, do_n't
fuck you, B, they, the other males, our peers, will not honor me by calhng
me by 1?1Y name. ,B, sizing up the situation, spots the weak point of _A's
rhyme. !hey don teat bread and cheese,' as a part of A's retort, has h~tle
to do with the context. It apparently has neither literal nor figurative
relevance and is there perhaps only because yemezler ('they don't eat')
provides a rhyming base for demezler ('they won't call') in this, pa~ticuh~~-
rhyme scheme, which involves end rhyming in Jines I, 2, and 4. With this
potential weak spot in mind, B mounts a new assault:

              Uyduramac/111            yan g1tt1
              make up couldn't you side went it
              (You couldn't fit in the rhyme; it/what you said
              went to the side/missed the target.)
              Ananm           amana (or ammdan) kan      gitti
              mother your's to (or from) cunt     blood went
              (And blood went to or came from your mother's
              cunt in the process.)

This is a good thrust and a good rhyme. The only pro bl em 1s
                                                            · t h a t the same
                                                                            .
word gitti is used at the end of each line to produce the rhyme. Here 1.s a
good point upon which A might base his counterattack. A's retort, usmg
the I, 2, and 4 line end-rhyme scheme, could be:                     ·

                    Uyduramadm             ya11c1g11w · .
                    make up couldn't you side its to of 1t
                    (You didn't make a very good rhyme.)
                   Bin devenin ka11c1g11w
                   ride camel's female to
                   (You ride a female camel.)
                   A nan         ~·ama§ll' y1kar~en   .
                   mother your laundry washing while
                   (While your mother was washing clothes)
        146   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

                  Sabun     kgc111iJ        amc1g11w
                  soap     escapes cunt her to
                  (Soap slipped into her cunt.)

First, A tells B that his rhyme is inferior (referring to the double use of
gitti). Then he insults him further by saying that he, B, is not even able to
ride a male camel, only a female one. The subsequent reference to B's
mother implies that her cunt is so large that anything-even the soap used
in washing clothes, can gain access to it!
   At this point, B cannot argue abo4t the quality of A's rhyme. It is clear
that the rhyme in B's previous retort (which used gitti twice) was not up
to par and that A has used a very good rhyme yanc1g11w, ka11c1g111a, and
a1nc1g111a in his last retort. B therefore changes tactics and retorts as
follows:

                 0      laflari     atlatt1k
                 that words make jump did we
                 (Those words don't have any effect on me.)
                 Ananm                   a1111m    patlatt1k
                 mother your's cunt blew up we
                 (We blew up your mother's cunt.)

   It would appear that B is on the defensive. He may be running out of
rhymes and he is seemingly helpless against the onslaught of a good rhyme
from A. This may be ,why, instead of basing his rhyme upon a selected
aspect of A's previous rhyme, B retreats to the position that A's entire
retort doesn't make sense, taking care to rhyme atlatt,k and patlatt,k. B
does, however, attempt to burst A's mother's vagina. A, in replying to the
challenge that his words don't make any sense and to the phallic attack
on his mother, might offer the following:

                  0       laflar     lwvaya
                  that words air to
                  (Those words have no meaning.)
                  Ta,xak/ar        tavaya
                  testicles frying pan to
                  (Testicles go into the frying pan;)
                  Bir     giit     ver      bana
                  One ass give me to
                  (You give a piece of your ass)
                  Ahmet   (speaker's name)     agaya
                  A hmet  (or speaker's name) Mr. to
                  [To me, Mr. Ah111et (or speaker's name).]
          The Strategy o" T
                          'J   lirkisfz Bo    ,
                                             Ys Verbal Dueling Rhymes    147
Note the high quality f h
Iu1vaya, tavaya and o• t e rhy me m        ·    .
        .        '       agaya A .         . this retort·. J1'nes 1' -,
                                                                     ? and 4 with
masculme that he does            ·     imphes that B is no good and is so un-
well cut off his testicles ~~dneed his t~sticles. B might therefore just as
thereby castrates B. Ba .           put them m a frying pan and cook them. A              I
iating process by askin;n: ~;asculated ~, A then completes the,humil-
thereby converted B fr                Present his anus for penetration. A has                  ·,'
kind to this excellent rhom a male. to a female. If B is unable to reply in
                                                                                          I'
verbal duel.               Yme, then m some sense A is the "winner" of the
                                                                                          II,
   Let us now turn to the stn
pose A calls B lbne wh· h c tegy of another extended verbal duel. Sup-                    't

important to note th~t thtc. ~eans passive homosexual. It is extremely
homosexuality in gen          e /nsu~t refers to passive homosexuality, not to
                            I
being the active homera · n this context there is nothing insulting about
                         asexual In a h omosexuaI re Iat10ns   .   h'1p, t h e ac t'1ve
Phallic aggressor ga1·ns status·· the        ·    . .                       .
status. This distinct'     b       '     passive v1ct1m of such aggress10n loses
passive female roleionh' etween
                              h . horn osexuaI roes    I m · w h'1c h 1t
                                                                      · 1s
                                                                         · on Iy th e         I,,

ture. It' is found    , w_ tc bnngs d_iscredit is not limited to Turkish cul-
(lngham 1968·
Jbne as follow~:
                  23 :{j  m rural Mexican verbal dueling known as albures
                     · n any event, B might respond to A's calling him
                                                                                               I     i,

       Speaker A:       lbne                                                                   I


                        passive homosexual
       Speaker B:       Sen ibneysen           bana ne'!
                        you a queer if you me to what
                        (What is it to me if you are a passive homosexual?)

B could answer A's 'You queer' with 'What is it to me if you are a queer?'
Note that B ends with 11e, thereby rhyming with A's initial lbne. As de-
scribed earlier, the individual attacked tries to make the initial attacker the
victim of an attack instead. It is analogous to children's disputes in Amer-
ican culture in that the rhetorical device consists of repeating the initial
insulter's pronoun so as to refer back to him. One child says to another,
"you're crazy." The second might reply, "That's right, you're [or you are]
crazy," pretending that the first child's exact words are correct, but cor-
rect only when uttered by the second child in reference to the first child.
The device is not terribly sophisticated, but it is apparently reasonally
effective. In this case, B says, if it is A who is the one who is queer, what
is that to me? In other words, B not only calls A a passive homosexual,
but he completely disassociates himself from A's problem. It is then A's
turn. He might well, with a new tack not really connected to the preceding
couplet, insult B by using one of the many animal insults such as:
        148    Ethnographic Description and Explanation

                               it    oglu     it
                               dog son of dog
                               (son of a dog)

A calls B a 'son of a dog.' If B is alert, he may reply,

                   iti     Allah yarat1111s
                   dog the God created
                   (God created the dog.)
                   Anamn         amtm kim kanatmts?
                   mother your's cunt  who made bleed
                   (Who made your mother's cunt bleed?)

The logic of B is that a dog is certainly (like all of us) a god-created, legit-
imate animal. There is nothing wrong with a dog. A dog is a legitimate
being and the son of a dog is likewise a legitimate being. But while it is
perfectly all right for Allah to make a dog, it is obviously not all right for
anyone to make A's mother's cunt bleed. The cunt bleeds presumably
because of the great phallic force applied to it. The implication is that A's
mother is a prostitute who sleeps with anyone who comes along. A could
parry this insult in the following way:

                 Anamuz      sahibi var
                 mother my's owner there is
                 [My mother has an owner (i.e., A's father).]
                 Bacuun        da am1 dar
                 sister your's so cunt tight
                 (Your sister has a tight cunt.)
                 Baltceden     balcan    getirip
                 garden from eggplant bring and
                 (They bring eggplant from the garden.)
                 Bac1111n        amtna sokarlar
                 Sister your's cunt to stick they
                 (They stick it in your sister's cunt.)

First of all, we can see that A has duplicated the technique employed by
B in B's last retort. Remember that B had responded to A's initial 'son of a
dog' insult in two steps. He began by setting the record straight with
respect to being a son of a dog and he ended by going on to attack A's
mother. In this retort, A does much the same. He starts by correcting the
record with respect to the question of the ownership of or access to his
mother's vagina. A points out that his father is the one and the only one
who "owns" A's mother and her sexual parts. Having answered B's
         The Strategy of Turkish Boys' Verbal Dueling Rhymes       149

attack, A goes on to an attack of his own, in this case, an attack on the
virginity of B's sister.
   The virginity of a male's sister is almost sacred in terms of Turkish
family norms. The honor of the family depends upon it. A penis enters
her only when she marries and the penis is that of her husband. When A
refers to B's sister's tight vagina, he is referring to her virginity, but when
he mentions that an "eggplant," i.e., phallus (the eggplant which grows in
Turkey is long and thin), has entered B's sister's vagina, he is saying that
B's sister is no longer a virgin. B's allusion to A's sister's initial virginity
is not so much a compliment as a means of underlining the contrasting
ruthless violation of that virginity. B must now defend the honor of his
family. Perhaps he can only muster the following rather mediocre retort:

                 Bac1y1     kansttrma
                 sister the mention don't
                 (Don't mention my sister.)
                 A nantn        amuw koydurma
                 mother your's cunt      place cause to don't
                 (Don't force me to enter your mother's cunt.)

This is almost an indirect admission by B of his acceptance of defeat. He
asks A not to mention his sister. Still, he does make a last effort to insult
A by saying that if A does mention his (B's) sister, then he, B, will be
forced to retaliate by having intercourse with A's mother.
   One final example of an extended series of linked retorts should suffice
to demonstrate the nature of this extraordinary tradition. In this example,
there are especially instructive instances of the use of metaphor and allu-
sion. Frequently in verbal duels, it is the nuance which is most important.
It is the connotation, not the denotation, which may cause the greatest
concern. Unfortunately, these subtleties are not always obvious from an
examination of the text alone. This is why informants must be encouraged
wherever possible to spell out "oral literary criticism," that is, their
interpretations and understandings of particular words and phrases
(Dundes 1966b).
   In this example of an extended verbal duel, there are not only cryptic
suggestive metaphorical descriptions which the uninitiated will probably
not easily comprehend but there are allusions to other specific verbal
dueling routines as well. In other words, one of the duel participants may
test his opponent's knowledge of the entire tradition by referring to one
or more of the shorter discrete retort sequences, several of which have
been discussed here. Readers of the following verbal duel may decide for
themselves how much or how little they could understand from just the
texts alone.
  Two young boys, say about twelve years of age, are talking. The subject
         150       Ethnographic Description and Explanation

is their penises. One claims that his penis is big (an obvious point of pride
among both boys and men). The other boy contends that his penis is just
as big. Now the first boy, A, should say something else, something more
about his penis, something "impressive." So he says,

                                        Kara     kaslt
                                        black    eyebrowed

A says 'black eyebrowed' meaning that his penis has black hair around it.
The acquisition of abundant or at least sufficient pubic hair is another
point of phallic pride among young boys. "Eyebrow" is immediately
understood by the second boy, B, to refer to the hair around A's penis.
He may be a little overwhelmed, but his answer, which rhymes with the
first boy's boast, is just as impressive. He says,

                                          Sogan        bas It
                                          onion        heilded

This refers to another desirable phallic attribute, namely, that the head of
a penis is just as big as an onion. B has thereby matched A's boast with a
boast of his own. It is worth noting here that there is a well-known boys'
song which lists these phallic characteristics:


~J.¥jjUJ±UJ JIJJIJJ J JIBlg fJ JJ JJIJ
     ba-~·i   so gan. gi   bi or-tasi yi Ian gi bi    di -bi or mari gi- bi ham   hili   bili   bili   hom



figure 4.1


                                     Ba~·1           sogan         gibi
                                     head its        onion         like
                                     Orta st    yilan              gibi
                                     middle its snake              like
                                     Dibi              Of/11(//l    gibi
                                     bottom its        forest       like
                                     Bam bili bili bili bom

 Here is a valuable insight into Turkish body esthetics. The head of a penis
 should resemble an onion. The middle of the penis should be as round and
 as smooth as a snake. The bottom should have a 'forest' of pubic hair
 around it. (The last line Bam bi/i bili bili born is nonsense, but it does
 connote happiness. In this case, the happiness is that of a boy attaining
        The Strategy of Turkish Boys' Verbal Dueling Rhymes     151

the three stated requisite attributes of an ideal penis.) This boys' song
thus confirms the appropriateness of the terms of the verbal duel.
  In any case, A, realizing that B has matched his boast kara kasli with
sogan ba.yh, tries a new gambit:                        ·

                            Agz1111      art1
                             mouth its opened
                             (opened its mouth)

'Opened its mouth' in this context means that the second speaker's fe-
male sex organ has opened its mouth as a gesture inviting sexual inter-
course. Since the second speaker, B, is a male, the retort reverts to his
wife. However, since B is too young to be married, the insult indirectly
applies to his mother or sister. B immediately answers,

                         I' r111e      ka~·tt
                         inside its to escaped it
                         (penis enters open mouth)

The retort means that the second boy suddenly sticks his penis into the
'open mouth.' He thereby changes the intended meaning of A's retort by
making it sound as though A had said that his (A's) own mother's sexual
organ had opened its mouth to him (B). A realizes that he is obligated to
impress B with a new rhyme. He offers

                              Dedi hastay1m
                              said sick I
                              (I am sick.)

Decli 'said' is a semiliterary word, a kind of formal quotative. It is espe-
cially used by wandering minstrels at the begining of sentences in their
poems. Here it has no significance other that that of a child imitating an
elder. By saying 'I am sick,' A means that he is "sick" with love or, as we
might put it in American slang, sexually "ho(' for B's mother or sister.
However, B is quick to counter with

                              Dedi ustay1m
                              said expert I
                              (I am an expert.)

Note that the rhyme requirement is strictly observed: ustayun rhymes
with hastayim. B, by stating that he is the expert, tells A that he, B, is a
great lover and that he would accordingly be greatly appreciated by A's
mother or sister. One should realize that even though 'mother' and 'sister'
are not specifically mentioned, they are definitely implied.
       152    Ethnographic Description and Explanation


       Duels as Tests of Verbal Skills

          At this point, the duel may cease to be a matter of strategy and
become more a matter of memory testing. In this form of the duel there
is no absolute winning or losing per se. Nevertheless, there are some
governing unwritten rules with respect to gauging the outcome. It is the
first boy who is the aggressor. He begins with an initial boast or insult.
The second boy must come up with an appropriate rhymed retort or an
acceptable portion thereof The first boy can only "win" if the second boy
fails to respond with a rhyming retort. So long as the second boy succeeds,
the first boy must go on proposing other retorts, each time posing a dif-
ferent word which the second boy must counter with a proper rhyming
 word. The first boy is, however, obliged to use only traditional retort
 sequences. He cannot make up new retorts. Thus, in effect, the first boy
 tests the second boy's knowledge of the verbal dueling tradition. The
 Dedi routine might continue in the following manner with A saying,

                                Dedi inek
                                said cow
                                (you cow)

A, by calling Ba cow, is testing B's familiarity with the standard retort(s)
to the cow insult (seep. 141). If B knows a retort, he will simply say;

                               Dedi binek
                               said ride Jet's
                               (Let's ride.)

The 'Let's ride' (binek) is the crucial rhyming portion of the traditional
retort to the inek insult. B has "won" that portion of the match. A may
continue,

                              Dedi siktir
                              said penised get
                              (Get fucked.)

 Again, if B knows one of the usual retorts, he may reply,

                            Dedi mum        diktir
                            said candle set up
                            (set up a candle)

 In this unusual form of the duel, the retort need not be linked. In fact, the
 order of the retort couplets may be quite loose. In essence, A is simply/
         The Strateiy of Turkish Boys' Verba/ D11eli11i Rhymes   153

testing B's knowledge of the whole tradition. So what B needs at this point
is a good memory rather than a good sense of tactics and strategy. Pre-
sumably, only boys very familiar with the tradition and very well armed
with a considerable repertoire would conduct the duel in this fashion.
   The fact that one boy can, in the course of a duel, test a second boy's
knowledge of the different retort traditions supports the notion that these
traditions are well established and well known. To be sure, there may be
some Western-educated Turkish youths who are not familiar with this
type of verbal duel, but there is evidence that the tradition has permeated
Turkish male youth culture and this includes urban youth. For instance,
 the tradition finds expression in the graffiti found on bathroom walls, that
 is to say, in what has been termed "latrinalia" (Dun des 1966a). Inter-
 estingly enough, the same kind of verse linkage so prominently charac-
 teristic of the oral encounters occurs in the latrinalia. A common latrinalia
 verse in Turkey, found written in various boys' public school bathrooms
 is as follows:                                            -

                   Ba1111 yazan         Tos1111
                   this   writing one Tosun
                   (This was written by Tosun.)
                   Okuyana        kos1111
                   writing one to place let him
                   (Anybody who reads it is fucked by him.)
                          ,                       '


This boasting taunt 'This was written by Tosun: anybody who reads it is
fucked by him,' has both the rhyme and content features of the oral insult.
Tosun is a man's name as well as a word for young male ox. It implies
masculinity but it also has a slightly humorous connotation. Naturally,
the key reason for using Tosun is that it conveniently rhymes with kosun.
  Now if someone enters the men's rooms and reads the insult, he will, if
he is well versed (pun intended!) in the tradition, be tempted to reply. He
would almost certainly write the following traditional retort:

                     Ok11d11 b111111 Molla
                     read    this    Molla
                     (This was read by Molla.)
                     Tos1111 iot111111 kolla
                     Tosun ass your watch for
                     (Tosun, watch out for your own ass.)

 Here are the familiar elements. The first verse contained the phallic at-
 tack. The reply warned the attacker that the attacker's ass might be the
 ass which is attacked. It is clearly the my-penis-up-your-anus strategy,
 and furthermore, like the oral duel, it may continue. A third person may
        154     Ethnographic Description and Explanation

enter the bathroom and take note of the exchange thus far. Assuming the
role of the first writer and addressing a retort to Molla, the second writer,
he might write,

                   Og/11111 Molla sen toysun
                   son my Molla you inexperienced
                   (My son Molla, you are so inexperienced;)
                   Tosun sana     yine  koysun
                   Tosun you to again place let him
                   (Let Tosun fuck you again.)

This gives the advantage back to the initiator of the exchange. Notice the
skillful word play. The original rhyme was on Tosun and kosun. This
third verse rhymes toysun and lwysun. Note also that the third person
does not' add a new name. Rather, since the duels are almost invariably
dyadic and it is "Tosun's" turn to answer, the third person speaks on
behalf of Tosun.
   Still another indication of how well-known the verbal duel rhyming
tradition is may be found in a Hodja folktale. The Hodja figure is, of,,
course, the national character of Turkish folklore, and there are scores of
tales about him. In a striking example of metafolklore (Dundes 1966b ),
the very nature of the dueling rhyme tradition becomes the subject of the
following humorous folktale:
   One day Hodja was coming home, riding his donkey from the forest,
with wood he had cut for the day. A friend of his stops him and asks him
what he is carrying. Hodja answers, "Odwz" ('wood'). The friend im-
mediately replies with a rhyme:

                             Ben    de sana     kodum
                                    so you to placed I
                             (So I fucked you.)

   Hodja is really mad at his friend. But he just can't come up with a rhyme
like his friend's in order to put him down. So finally he says,

                        Bugiin giiizlerden ne?
                        Today days from what
                        (What day of the week is it today?)

His friend answers, "Parzaetesi" (Monday). "Ben de smut lwdwn" ('so I
fucked you'), says the Hodja. The friend protests, "But Hodja, the rhyme
doesn't fit." Hodja, red with anger, answers,

              Uysada      lwdum uynwsada             kodum
              fit if even place I fit not if even placed I
              [I fuck you if it fits; I fuck you (even) if it doesn't fit!]
             The Strategy of Turkish Boys' Verbal Dueling Rhymes     155

        As in so many of the Turkish Hodja tales, the Hodja, in childlike or fool
     fashion, is unable to operate successfully in the adult world. Yet he is no
     ordinary fool; he is a wise fool, as are so many trickster figures. Although
     he is slow-witted (he couldn't think of a rhyme), he is also quick-witted
     (he made a good retort anyway). The opposition is exemplified with re-
     spect to the rules of verbal dueling. On the one hand, the Hodja takes it
     upon himself to ignore or violate the established norms: He forgets about
     the rhyming requirement. On the other hand, when questioned about this
     breach, the Hodja has the last word by which means he in fact conforms
     to the norm, i.e., he successfully threatens placing his penis in the anus of
     his friend! Perhaps this suggests that the phallic thematic principle takes
     priority over the stylistic rhyme principle.
       The Hodja narrative also tempts us to speculate that there may be a
     symbolic parallel between the rhyme requirement and the entire penis-in-
     anus image. 0Qe has to place his penis in his opponent's anus, but he has
     to make this threat in rhyme form. The rhyme form, like the opponent's
     anus, are the limiting boundaries into which the phallic thrust must go.
    Just as the penis must be bounded by the anus, so the verbal insult must
     be couched in rhyme form. With this reasoning, there does seem to be
     precedent for Hodja's violating the rhyme rule. Judging from some of the
     verbal duel texts previously cited, one can see that a particularly strong
     phallus is capable of bursting the anus. If bursting one's opponent's anus
    is an assertion of hypermasculinity, then the Hodja's breaking the rhyme
    convention may possibly be similarly construed. On the one hand, he is so
     phallic that he penetrates his opponent whether it (it being the content in
     the rhyme scheme and/or perhaps the presumably large phallus itself) fits
    or not! On the other hand, the apparent violation of formal rhyming
    contraints on form of content may be nothing more than an intentional
    sort of clumsiness.
       At this point, regardless of the validity of the suggestion that the rhyme
    scheme may be sy~bolically parallel to the anus with respect to contain-
    ing or restricting phallic thrusts, there can be no doubt whatsoever that
    the verbal dueling tradition exists in modern-day Turkey. In fact, there is
    evidence that a similar if not cognate tradition thrives in modern Greek
    folklore and northern African Arabic cultures. Most probably, this form
    of male verbal dueling occurs throughout" the Near East. It also shares
    some features in common with verbal dueling in Africa generally (Mayer
    1951) and also with the African-derived form of verbal dueling found in
    the United States known as "playing the dozens," among other terms. It
    is, however, apparently more similar to the Mexican albures (Ingham
    1968:231-236) than to the American Negro dozens. But the question of
    the distribution of verbal dueling among the peoples of the world is an-
    other matter altogether. Even if verbal dueling as a form were universal,
    the specific content would surely vary with individual cultures. The issue
    thus is the significance of the tradition as it is found in Turkish culture.



L
        156   Ethnographic Description and Explanation

  What cultural/psychological needs does the tradition attempt to fill?
Here we must enter the ever-treacherous area of interpretation. The
empirical evidence of the tradition's existence is clear enough; we are
similarly confident about our analysis of verbal strategies; the meaning of
the tradition in the context of Turkish culture is not as obvious and may,
of course, be controversial. Nevertheless, we assume that the thematic
content of the linked rhyming retorts must be intimately related to Turkish
male psychology.


       Cultural Meaning of the Tradition

         One of the most curious features of Turkish psychology or per-
sonality concerns an apparent paradox. On the one hand, Turkish world
view is said to be fatalistic such that individuals are almost totally de-
pendent upon the wishes and whims of a higher power, e.g., the Will of
Allah and the inevitability of Kismet (fate). On the other hand, there ap-
pears to be a very positive attitude toward aggression. Courage and
strength are highly valued male ideals. One of the most popular national
sports is wrestling, and military deeds are greatly esteemed. Many
Turkish boys look forward with great anticipation to their military service.
The question is whether Turks are fatalistic dependent, or whether they
are actively aggressive, or whether they are both. ls it possible for an
individual to be docile and obedient, often to the point of what Westerners
would regard as obsequiousness, to seniors and at the same time be ac-
tively engaged in proving his manliness through various socially sanc-
tioned forms of aggression? Is there, in fact, a culturally caused insoluble
problem arising from any attempt to reconcile these seemingly contra-
dictory behavior patterns?
   We believe that one of the origins of or, should we say, one of the con-
tributing factors to the formation of specific world-view paradigms is the
enculturating experience implicit or explicit in the dominant parent-child
sets of relationships in any given culture. If the childhood experience is
relevant to the study of world view, then it is logical to look into the
Turkish boy's childhood for possible precursors for the "dependent-
aggressive" conflict. In the Turkish childhood experience, it is clear that
sex and age are critical social factors. In Turkish culture, there is con-
siderable sex segregation. Furthermore, men decidedly dominate women.
Publicly women are definitely subordinate to men. There is also the factor
of age. The young are subordinate to the old; children are subordinate to
parents. How does all this affect the young Turkish boy?
   The Turkish boy learns that since men dominate women, he can assert
himself with respect to his sisters and even his mother. In the world of
women, even a little boy has status. But just as soon as this little boy
          The Strate1;y of Turkish Boys' Verbal Dueling Rhymes     157

  leaves the world of women to join the segregated society of men, he sud-
  denly finds that he has junior, very junior, status. He is at the bottom of
  the social pecking order. He discovers that men do rank one another. In
  the rural oda, the room in some village houses where meri and only men
 congregrate, for example, he learns that ranking oneself with regard to
 one's peers is crucial and that even the seating order in the oda may reflect
 the public evaluation of any one individual's status (Stirling 1953 :35).
 Thus, though the boy wants status, he finds he doesn't have much.
     It is possible that the boy's extremely low status in the men's society is
 essentially equivalent or analogous to the low status of women. In other
 words, little boys have learned that men should be aggressive and forceful
 with regard to male-female relations, and so the little boys were while
 they lived in the world of women. But once having entered the world of
 men, the little boys soon realize that their own relationships to older men
 must, in fact, entail the assumption of passive, deferential roles quite
 similar to what they understand are the roles of women vis-a-vis men. Yet
 there is an additional critical feature of Turkish boyhood which may well
 bear upon the specific nature of the verbal duel pattern. This feature is
 circumcision.
    The circumcision of boys was traditionally performed without anes-
 thesia, typically when the boy was in the four- to eight-year age range
 (Oztiirk 1964:346). It is, in this light, entirely appropriate for Pierce to
 have begun his Life in a Turkish Village (1964:4-8) with an account of a
 circumcision. 1t has been suggested that circumcision performed at this
 age may be perceived by the child as an aggressive attack (Cansever
 1965 :322, 326). Cansever, in his interesting study of the psychological
effects of circumcision on Turkish boys, suggests further (pp. 322, 325)
than circumcision, perceived by the child as symbolic castration, may
lead to confusion concerning sexual identity such that boys may later
tend to assume feminine traits. Cansever also indicated that some boys
regarded females rather than males as the perpetrators of the castrative
circumcision (although circumcision is in fact pe1formed by a male-in
villages it is often the barber). Cansever explained (p. 328) that the Turk-
ish child's initial close contact with the mother, in .contrast with the child's
relationship with a distant father-Bradburn's study (1963 :464) indicates
that Turkish males find their fathers to be "stern, forbidding, remote,
domineering, and autocratic"-may partially explain why a female rather
than a male is perceived as the primary castrator. The great trust in the
mother has been betrayed. She is blamed for having allowed the "castra-
tion" to take place. But whether it is the father or mother who is blamed
for the traumatic ritual, the fact remains that the "higher powers" upon
whom the child depended have betrayed his trust, and they have betrayed
this trust with respect to a particular part of the body: the boy's phallus.
    If circumcision is regarded by the young boy as a serious aggressive
          158    Ethnographic Description and Explanation

    attack, and this is precisely what Cansever found from the results of
    standard psychological tests, then it is not illogical for the young boy to
    focus upon this part of the body as a means of combating future forms of
    aggression. In fact, from psychological data alone, one might well be led
    to hypothesize that boys would want to punish attacking males by dem-
   onstrating to these males their considerable priapic prowess. Thus to
   gain status among one's male peer group, one would need to prove that
   one's phallus was in perfect working order and in fact was sufficiently
   powerful to place one's opponents in the passive, feminine position. In
   addition, if some old men as practicing pederasts demand that young
   boys assume the female position, then as these young boys become older
   and seek to attain a man's status, they must insist, in turn, upon the active,
   male role. In other words, the shift from the boy's female passive role to
   the man's male active role is an intrinsic part of the process of becoming
  an adult male.
        There is another facet of the circumcision experience which may be
  related to the verbal dueling tradition. If Cansever is correct-and he
  does have supporting data-in stating (1965 :328) that it is frequently
  females who are perceived as the castrators, then it would be pe1fectly
  appropriate for a young male to perform some act of retaliatory damaging
  mutilation upon an analogous portion of the female anatomy. One such
  technique might be causing a vagina to burst or fall apart. Another might
  be to have the original injured party, the phallus, cause the vagina to
  bleed. After all, the bleeding of the newly circumcized phallus of the
  young boy was thought to have been caused by the castrating mother!
 Certainly, the repeated references to making mother's cunt bleed can be
 more logically explained by this than by, say, references to menstruation.
     Circumcision does, then, appear to be a critical factor in the boyhood
 of Turkish males. And one cannot help but notice that it usually occurs at
 an age immediately preceding the initial participation in the verbal dueling
 ti;adition. Cansever puts the problem caused by circumcision among
Turkish youth in this way: "The Turkish male, with his strivings towards,
on the one hand, bravery, courage and endurance to pain, and on the other
hand total submission to authority, particularly father figures, might rep-
resent a good example of the conflict between masculinity and homo-
sexuality" (1965 :329).
     In the light of all this, there does seem to be some basis for maintaining
that the verbal dueling pattern among young Turkish males is a vivid
dramatization of the whole dilemma. It is in quasi-ritual form a con-
cretization, an externalization, of what is undoubtedly a crucial internal
psychological'dilemma for most young boys. The problem is that to belong
to the world of men in Turkish culture, a boy needs to prove that he is a
man, not a woman, and one of the ways of proving this is to demonstrate
through act or symbolic words that one has a powerful, aggressive phallus.
           The Strategy of Turkish Boys' Verbal Dueling Rhymes     159

   Yet the difficulty is that such existence in the world of men necessarily
   involves the danger of being put in the female position by a more powerful
   male. Just as women in a male-dominated society can do little more than
   serve as passive victims of male aggression, so boys and weak men may
   be forced by the same society into similar passive roles. Young boys,
  under the threat of having been castrated, a threat caused by a culturally
  induced misreading of circumcision, must do their best to avoid being
  like women in serving as helpless victims of male phallic aggression. In
  this sense, Turkish male personality is not unlike that of Algerian males
  as described by Miner and De Vos ( I 960). In analyzing the psychological
  characteristics of Algerians, Miner and De Vos remark that "The fear
  of retreating into passive homosexuality is one of the dangers besetting
  an individual who retreats from genital masculinity in the face of sub-
  conscious castration threat," and they also comment on the Algerian
  males' unconscious fear of being penetrated, as would be the case of
  one assumed a passive homosexual role (1960:141, 138; cf. Ingham
  1968:236).
    Turkish male verbal dueling serves in part as a kind of extended rite
 ~f passage. Like most if not all puberty initiation rites, the duel allows the
 young boy to repudiate the female world with its passive sexual role and
 to affirm the male world with its active sexual role. The fact that the re-
 pudiation of the female role seems to involve the partial enactment of
 that role by males is in accord with Bettelheim's general theory of initia-
 tion rites in which males, envious of female organs, seek to usurp female
 sexual powers and activities (1962:45; cf. Burton and Whiting).
    The verbal duel, then, offers the opportunity of penetrating one's fellow
 male but also the danger of being penetrated in turn by that same fellow
 male. The homosexual relationship involves dependence coupled with
 mistrust: dependence upon friends who will not attack but mistrust in the
fear that they might attack. Just as the higher powers upon whom the
young boy depended suddenly launched an emasculating attack (circum-
cision), so one's peers upon whom one depends may suddenly threaten
one's masculinity. In the verbal duel, a boy must try to aggressively hand
out at least as much as-and hopefully a bit more than-he is forced to
take. To the extent that Turkish world view contains an oppositional
contrast between fatalistic, passive dependence and individualistic, active
aggression, the presence of both kinds of behavior in the verbal dueling
situation makes sense. The Turkish proverb "Some· said he was deli,
some said he was veli" says much the same. Deli 'insane' refers to de-
structive, aggressive behavior, while veli 'saint' has connotations of
passivity and stability (Oztiirk I 964:349). The point is that an individual
must be both. The inconsistency is consistent. Each Turkish male must
be both deli and veli.
   One last detail concerns the Turkish male concept of friendship. The
          160     Eth11ographic Description a11d Exp/a11ation

most commonly used word for 'friend' is Arkada,}'. Without presuming
etymological expertise in Turkish, one is nevertheless tempted to remark
that arka means among other things the backside of the body and cfo1· is a
suffix implying fellowship or participation. A friend is thus literally a
back participant or a "backfellow." It is, in short, someone who is trust-
worthy and who can therefore be allowed to stand behind one. One must
be careful who one allows to enter one's back zone. A nonfriend might
take advantage of such a position to initiate an aggressive attack. Only a
true friend or "back" can be trusted not to do so. To trust to the protec-
tion of someone is:

                            Birine arka vermek
                            One to back give to
                            (to give one's back to someone)

This and many other traditional metaphors involving the arka root suggest
that friendship is semantically related to a safe backside. 2 If these philo-
logical materials are relevant, as they would seem to be, they would tend
to support the idea that an active penis attacking a passive anus has been
a critical psychological configuration in Turkish culture for some time.
   In any event, whether the ritual phallic penetration of an opponent's
anus is a long-standing tradition or not, it seems safe to conclude that as
the 'verbal dueling technique exists in twentieth-century Turkey, in city
and in village, it is hardly an isolated, unimportant bit of esoterica. Rather
it is a dynamic functioning element of Turkish culture, an element which
provides a semipublic arena for the playing out of common private prob-
lems. The duel affords the young Turkish boy an opportunity to give
appropriate vent to the emotional concomitants of the painful process of
becoming a man.
    In the spirt of this essay, we should like to close by asking the reader:
"Do you know the chapter you just read?" (Reader: Yes.)

                                    Sana      girsin
                                    you to    enter let it

   2
     Among the traditional words and phrases found in A. D. Alderson and Fahir lz, eds.,
The Concise Oxford Turkish Dictionary (Oxford, 1959) and Mehmet Ali Agakay, ed.,
Tiirk(e SOzlllk (Ankara, 1966) which we might cite in support of our hypothesis are: ( 1)
arkas1pek-literally, he has a lot of back; figuratively, one who has protectors or one who
trusts somebody or one who trusts in a strong place. (2) arkalamak-literally, to back, to
support, or to back up someone; figuratively, to help by giving trust to someone. (3) arkada.)·
de[!//, arka tas1-literally, he's not a friend, he's a back stone (a stone in the back); figura-
tively, he's hardly a friend. This might be said about friends who do one harm. (4) ard111a
kadt1r arik-literally, open up to the backside; figuratively wide open. (5) birinin arkas1111
s1va11wk-literally, to plaster (as in construction) someone's back; figuratively, to flatter
someone insincerely, to butter up.
    5
