units (Pike 1964). The dialectologi;;ts' failure to agree on dialect and lan-
guage boundaries could thus be attributed to a tendency to emphasize sur-
face differences at the expense of structural relationship. Variations
recorded in fieldwork are of equal significance only if they alter the struc-
tural relationships among elements. While speech may change from place
        6   l ntroduction

to place and person to person, grammatical systems tend to be more
stable and less subject to change. With increased analytical refinement,
the notion of languages and dialects as discrete wholes seemed saved, or
at least salvageable. Henceforth it was argued that comparative state-
ments, generalizations about verbal behavior and linguistic change must
be based on emic analyses, not on raw field data. Homogeneity of lan-
guages and dialects was to be sought at the level of structural abstrac-
tion.
   Edward Sapir's article on the psychological reality of phonemes dramat-
 ically demonstrated the importance of the notion of linguistic structure
 for our understanding of human cognition. Using evidence from his own
efforts to train nai"ve natives to transcribe the sounds of their language,
Sapir shows that his subjects' phonetic accuracy is significantly affected
by the phonological system of their own native language. He explained
what at first hand seemed to be errors in transcription by demonstrating
 that these errors occur where structural and phonetic reality conflict, and
that the former takes precedence over the latter. Gillieron's quest for
 unbiased native transcribers is thus demonstrably futile. All human
 beings, informants and linguists alike, tend to prejudge or edit the sounds
 they hear. Linguistic structure is more than a mere scholarly construct.
 Structure constrains and potentially predicts the speaker's perception of
 verbal stimuli.
    Furthermore, since linguistic constraints operate largely below the
 level of consciousness, speakers themselves cannot be expected to pro-
 vide adequate explanations for their own verbal behavior. Information on
 language structure must be discovered indirectly by trained investigators.
 Emphasis on phonetic accuracy gave way to a search for techniques
 which would enable the linguist to overcome his own perceptual limita-
 tions so as to discover the system of a second language.
    The demand for better and more systematic analytical tools was es-
 pecially strong among the growing numbers of American anthropologists
 and linguists who, following the pioneering work of Gatchett, Boas, and
 others, had set out to record and preserve the many languages spoken by
 American Indians. Information on these languages at first derived in large
 part from word lists or text translations collected by missionaries or gov-
 ernment officials. As scholarly interest in tribal cultures deepened and
 linguistic skills increased, anthropologists began to record indigenous
 tales and myths as part of their regular ethnographic descriptions. A na-
 tive speaker, usually someone well versed in tribal traditions, would dic-
 tate texts which the investigator would then record phonetically as best he
 could. Even the most careful investigators, however, frequently failed to
  note important aspects of these tales and tended to misinterpret the
                                                      Introduction   7

speaker's utterances. It became evident that the systematic analysis of
linguistic form and of phonological and grammatical structures had to take
precedence over evaluation of content. Anthropological linguistic analy-
sis at the level of sound had to precede that at the higher levels:of syntax,
semantics, and culture.
   Among the most valuable accomplishments of this period is the devel-
opment of techniques which go beyond the mere recording of data to
enlist the native speaker's assistance in improving the validity of the
linguist's perception of sound. In order to determine if what was recorded
as different was actually different, or whether what was transcribed as
similar was actually similar, the method of variation within a frame was
employed. This method consists of contrasting like items varying only in
one feature. Thus, if an investigator wanted to test his transcription of the
English 'i' in 'bid,' he would search for other items in the speaker's vocab-
ulary, such as 'bed' and 'bead,' which shared the initial 'b' and the final 'd'
and differed only in the vowel. In this way, by keeping the elicitation
frame constant, he could concentrate all of his attention on one feature.
The method served both to discover new distinctions and as a way of ear
training or drill, helping the linguist to overcome the limitations imposed
by his own phonological system. Linguistic analysis became an integral
part of the fieldwork process. Moreover, since all speakers of a language
are equally affected by the subconscious perceptual constraints of the
system, structural linguists came to prefer intensive work with a single in-
formant to the dialectologist's language surveys. ;
   As anyone who has tried it can attest, the linguist-informant elicitation
procedure just described is not at all simple. Most na·ive speakers are
unaware of the formal features to which the linguist wishes them to attend
and think of language only in terms of meaning. The process thus involves
learning for both the linguist and the informant. Not any native can serve
as an informant. Linguists working in this tradition tend to search out
"good" speakers of the language, people with both the time and leisure to
work over a long period of time who had sufficient intelligence and verbal
ability to learn the required task (Samarin 1967). Statistically, their
sample is thus always biased.
   The interview setting, furthermore, is often formal and contrived and
almost always quite different from the settings within which people
usually interact. Some of the best-known work of the Sapir era was, in
fact, based on the speech of native speakers who had long been isolated
from other native speakers of the language. Sapir's informant on Nootka
was a student in a Pennyslvania college. Benjamin A. Whorf derived his
basic data on Hopi from an Indian resident of New York City (Hoijer
1954). Even those linguists who worked in or near actual communities
        8   Introduction

often found it necessary to do most of their elicitation in their own
quarters, away from the distracting noise of the native community.
   In spite of these limitations, however, the success of the new elicitation
procedures and the analytical techniques built upon them is well known.
As compared to earlier grammarians, descriptive linguists achieved a
unique degree of explicitness and replicability. Armed with the new meth-
odological tools, any two investigators making independent study of simi-
lar data could expect, with fair certainty, to arrive at similar or at least
comparable results.
   The new techniques of structural analysis earned for linguistics the rep-
utation of the most scientific of the social-science disciplines. But these
techniques proved to be quite limited in their application. Single isolated
utterances, rather than entire texts, became the chief units of study, with
meaning-and to some extent even syntax-frequently deferred for later
attention. Minor dialect variations, loan words, and other diffusionary phe-
nomena were also frequently dismissed as either marginal or not relevant
for formalization.
   The result was that much potentially important information on speech
behavior was lost in the process of converting etic into emic categories.
The notion of grammars as internally consistent systems, which must be
explained in their own terms without reference to outside information,
furthermore led to a reaction against earlier, premature, cross-language
generalizations. It became fashionable to emphasize the infinite variabil-
ity of phonemic and grammatical structures (Joos 1962).



        Generative Gram mar

          Fortunately, many of these limitations in scope proved to be
short-lived. During the 1950s, when some of the basic problems of
phonology and word morphology seemed settled, interest turned once
more to syntax and semantics. Concern with meaning in the makeup of
sentences led to some fundamental changes in notions of grammatical
structure, changes which were in some ways every bit as basic as those as-
sociated with the shift to descriptive linguistics. The key factor in these
theoretical developments was Chomsky's demonstration that mere tax-
onomic analysis and classification of phonological and morphological
units fails to explain some very basic grammatical relationships. Sentence
pairs like the by now well known "he is eager to please" and "He is easy
to please" are, Chomsky argues, overtly similar, yet native speakers of
English have no difficulty in recognizing that in the first item "he" refers
to the subject of "please," i.e., the one who does the pleasing, while in the
                                                    I 11trod11ctio11   9

second item "he" refers to the object, i.e., the one who is being pleased. In.
order to account for such underlying grammatical differences it is neces-
sary to recognize two distinct levels of syntactic structuring, a level of
"deep structure" dealing, among other things, with grammatical rela-
tionships (subject-object-verb, modifier-noun, etc.) and a level of surface
structure representing the overt arrangement of phonological forms in
actual sentences.
   The relationship of sound to meaning thus proves to be much more
complex than the earlier descriptivists had imagined. Segmentation and
analysis of utterance elements does not automatically lead to an under-
standing of the basic mechanism of language. The goal of linguistic
description therefore shifts from taxonomy of texts to grammar as a
theory of the speaker's "linguistic competence," i.e., a set of abstract
rules which account for his ability to generate and understand sentences.
   This change in research paradigm has some important consequences
for linguistic elicitation procedures. While much of the basic data for
grammatical analysis continues to be collected in linguist-informant inter-
view sessions of the type just described, the investigator, in order to prove
the speaker's ability, takes an increasingly active role in the elicitation
process. Rather than simply collecting speech forms and classifying them,
he seeks ways of challenging his informant by asking him to perform gram-
matical operations on sentences, i.e., changing sentences from active to
passive, positive to negative, singular to plural. He may himself test his
own understanding of grammatical rules by creating new sentences and
ask the informant to judge their grammaticality. The linguist thus ceases
to be an impartial observer and increasingly takes on the role of an active
experimenter.
   Whereas descriptive linguists had seen their work as being closely
related to the ethnographers' descriptions of foreign cultures, the genera-
tive grammarians' interest in grammar as a model of speakers' knowledge
or ability takes them into the realm of the human. Chomsky explicitly
characterizes linguistics as a branch of cognitive psychology. Generative
grammar has a profound effect on psychological theory. The notion of
linguistic competence clears the way for radically new approaches to cog-
nition (Miller, Galanter, and Pribham 1960) and has made significant con-
tributions to our understanding of human learning (Smith and Miller
 1966).
   It must be emphasized, however, that generative grammar studies
speakers as individuals, not as members of specific groups. Speakers' abil-
ities are dealt with at a very abstract level, with emphasis on those abili-
ties that are shared by all humans. Recent linguistic research has in fact
provided increasing evidence for the universality of basic grammatical
processes, and much attention has been devoted to the formalization of
        JO   /11trod11ction

universal grammatical rules (Chomsky and Halle 1968; Bach and Harms
1968). However, generative grammarians see the theory of grammars as
having little relevance as an explanation for the social basis of verbal
behavior (Hymes 1969).


        Typology of Language Situations

          Apart from grammatical theory, the last two decades have also
seen an expansion in the depth and range of empirical research on the
verbal habits of human groups. The Prague School linguists' writings on
diffusion and stylistics (Garvin 1969; Sebeok 1960), Weinreich ( 1953) and
Haugen's (1953) work on language contact as well as the British linguists'
studies of dialect and register (Halliday, McIntosh, and Strevens 1964)
had served to dispel the earlier structural preconceptions that formal anal-
 ysis is applicable only to internally homogeneous systems.
     Interest in problems of diversity grew as descriptive linguists working
 as ethnographers, second language teaching specialists, or government of-
 ficers began to come in close contact with the complex societies of Asia
 and Africa. In these societies it was by no means unusual to find several
 distinct and sometimes unrelated languages spoken in what for reasons of
 communication density and on political and administrative grounds would
 have to be regarded as a single community. Bilingualism, bidialectalism or
 diglossia, as Ferguson ( 1964a) has called it, seemed to be the rule rather
  than the exception. Since speakers may alternate among such distinct
  local speech varieties in much the same way and for the same com-
  municative ends as monolinguals select among styles of the same lan-
  guage, there is good justification for treating these communities as single
   multilingual or multidialectal speech communities.
      During the last two decades descriptive linguistic analysis has with
   increasing frequency been applied to such diverse groups and the re-
   sulting descriptions compared with independently collected cultural and
   social information. As a result, the scope of linguistic fieldwork has also
   been broadened. The growing political importance of hitherto almost un-
    known languages, the unsuspected intricacies of language distribution in
    the so-called developing nations, called attention to the lack of first-hand
    information on verbal communication practices. Linguists began to go
    beyond structur11l analysis of grammatical systems to concentrate directly
    on the language usage of human groups and to record how the varieties in
    questions were used in particular nations, geographical regions, market
     networks, etc. To this end it became necessary to account for the fact that
     the grammatical characteristics of a language variety are not always
     directly related to its communicative functions and that the same lan-
     guage may have quite different functions in different social groups.
                                                   lntroductio11   II

    A major sociolinguistic goal is to devise schemes for the comparative
study of language distribution which allow for the comparison of social
systems in terms of what languages are spoken, by how many people in
what contexts, and in terms of what the local attitudes to these languages
are. In one of the first attempts to deal with this issue Stewart ( 1962) clas-
sifies languages along two dimensions: inherent characteristics and com-
municative function. The first dimension distinguishes among such cat-
egories as (l) standard languages, with highly condified literary norms;
 (2) vernaculars, or spoken idioms having no literary style;(3) classical lan-
 guages, preserved only in texts; (4) creoles resulting from recent pidgini-
 zation processes, etc. The second category distinguishes between ( l)
 private or in-group media; (2) languages of wider communication used as
 scientific idioms; (3) trade languages, etc. Building on Stewart's classifica-
 tion, Ferguson ( 1966) has worked out a system of national language
  profiles capable of providing statistically codable information on language
  situations in nation states, comparable to the comparative sociologists
  cross-cultural studies of social variables.
     During the last few years several large-scale countrywide surveys have
  been undertaken in Africa by teams of linguists, psychologists, and other
  social scientists. In these surveys structural and historical analysis of
  local languages and dialects is supplemented by sociological survey infor-
  mation on language usage and attitudes to local languages and tests of
  mutual intelligibility and multilingual ,competence (Ferguson 1971;
   Prator 1970). Other interdisciplinary studies have focused on politics and
   language planning, the processes by which formerly low prestige vernacu-
   lars are transformed into standard languages. Haugen's (l 966) detailed
   history of this process in Norway shows how minor differences in
   grammar and pronunciation, which do not affect mutual intelligibility, have
    nevertheless caused major political problems over the last century. J. Das
    Gupta ( 1970), a political scientist, demonstrates that questions of lan-
    guage reform are intimately connected with pressure group politics and
    the competing aspirations of rival political power groups in modern India.


           Recent Social Dialect Studies

           A second major source of r~ew sociolinguistic data derives from
  the adaptation of dialect survey techniques to the study of language usage
  in modern urban settings. The linguistic survey of Scotland, which leans
  in part on J. R. Firth's notions of context of situation ( 1964), was the first
  to take account of the fact that wherever education is widespread local
  languages always coexist with the standard languages of the schools and
  of public affairs. Such standard language features were found to have
   quite different distribution patterns than local dialect features thus dem-
        12   lntrod11ctio11

onstrating the fact that speech variation is primarily a function of net-
works of social relationships (Barnes 1954) and is only indirectly depen-
dent on geography.
   In the United States, Labov's now classic study of English in New
York City (1966) while building on the work of the Linguistic Atlas of
the United States (Kurath 1941) makes a radical break with the cum-
bersome and often unreliable traditional dialect questionnaire interviews.
Rather than seeking out long-term local residents who are regarded as
"good dialect speakers" and surveying all significant aspects of their
speech as his predecessors had done, Labov begins by isolating a limited
number of locally current phonological and grammatical features, those
which are most frequent in everyday usage, most subject to interpersonal
and stylistic variation and which carry the greatest amount of social infor-
mation. He charts the distribution of these class-stratified features in a
sample of speakers sufficiently large to be representative of the area as a
whole, using elicitation techniques designed to record talk in a variety of
formal and informal contexts. When mapped along the dimensions of
stylistic variation and social identity of speakers, the distribution of
dialect variables proved to be a highly accurate index of both social class
and ethnic identity, as reliable as the best of the conventional sociological
survey measures.
   Labov's New York study has provided the impetus for a new tradition
of social dialectology in urban United States, much of it focused on the
speech of low-income minority groups: Blacks, Puerto Ricans, Chicanos,
etc. One aim is to provide linguistic information for curriculum reform in
urban primary schools. Typically these studies employ tape-recorded
questionnaire data with statistically representative population samples
and seek to relate the distribution of linguistic variables to the sociol-
ogist's measures of such factors as class, educational achievement, sex,
status, etc. (Wolfram 1969, Shuy, Wolfram, and Riley 1969).
   The recent surveys of bilingualism and bidialectalism have brought
about some important insights on attitudes to language and language ster-
eotypes. It has been shown that speakers regularly use dialect variables
as a basis for judging their interlocutors' social background, prestige and
 personality characteristics. Such conscious judgments are often indepen-
 dent of the speakers own subconscious use of similar variables in his own
natural speech, so that a speaker may downgrade others for using speech
features which he himself also employs. Wallace Lambert (1967) in his
 well-known "speech guise" exp"eriments has built on this phenomenon to
 develop some highly interesting measures of ethnic stereotypes.
   Historical problems arising from the findings of urban dialectologists
 have also led to a revival of the long dormant research on pidgin and
 creole languages. Many of the so-called nonstandard features of Afro-
                                                   l 11troductio11   13
                              )

American dialects have their source in Carribean Creoles, which in turn
seem to derive from West African pidgins. Attempts to explain some of the
historical processes involved here are leading to renewed questioning of
some of the basic assumptions regarding the interplay of linguistic and
social factors in borrowing, diffusion, and related types of linguistic
change (Hymes 1971 ).
   The above approaches to language and society, termed correlational
here because they seek to compare results from what are seen as two dis-
tinct types of enquiry, have served to establish the study of speech behav-
ior as an important subdiscipline of language study requiring field elicita-
tion procedures and analytical tools which go considerably beyond those of
linguistics. While the recent work in theoretical linguistics with its empha-
sis on formalization and its insistence on maintaining a strict distinction
between linguistic and nonlinguistic data has played a determining role in
shaping our understanding of grammatical rules, of the relation of
linguistic to cognitive processes, and in advancing our knowledge of lan-
guage history, speech community studies on the other hand are equally
essential for the study of ongoing processes of linguistic change for the
development of linguistic indices to the study of social phenomena and
for most areas of applied linguistics.
   In the realm of theory, speech community studies have shown that the
question of structural uniformity of languages is largely a matter of the
linguist's basic assumptions: the extent to which his analysis is abstracted
from everyday behavior and above all of the field elicitation procedures
he employs. When studied in sufficient detail, with field methods designed
to elicit speech in significant contexts, all speech communities are lingujs-
tically diverse and it can be shown that this diversity serves important
communicative functions in signaling interspeaker attitudes and in pro-
viding information about speakers' social identities. Speech communities
vary in the degree and in the nature of the linguistic relationship among in-
tracommunity variables and it is this relationship which is most respon-
sive to social change and most revealing of social information.
   Studies of the incidence of linguistic variables have thus opened up
many new avenues of research and have achieved some important
breakthroughs in the study of language usage and linguistic change, yet
important as they are, such correlational studies of linguistic and social
variables also leave unanswered a number of basic questions concerning
the nature of the relationship of linguistic to social facts.
   Why is it for example that in some societies, such as those of South and
Southeast Asia, major distinctions of language maintain themselves in
spite of centuries of intensive contact, while elsewhere as in Europe,
North and South Americas groups tend to give up their native tongues
after only a few generations? While it is true that in most cases bilingual-
ism leads to convergence or decrease in language distance among the
                                                                                ~I

        14   introduction

varieties concerned, a number of cases have been reported where the op-
posite seems to occur. Certain features of upper-class dialects in India,
for example, can be explained only on the assumption that they are
neologisms created in response to contact with other groups (Ramamijan
I 967). Similarly in the United States the increasing participation of
Blacks in public life seems to be leading to the creation of new local pres-
tige dialects which emphasize distinctness from standard English. How
do we explain the fact that language conflict between competing in-
tergroup aspirations and interethnic stereotypes are symbolized by what
to the linguist are almost trivial linguistic differences? There seems to be
almost no correlation between the linguistic distinctness of relevant vari-
ables and the social information they carry. The urban dialectologists' at-
titude studies moreover show that variable selection like the choice of
grammatical features is largely subconscious and is independent of overt
attitudes (see also Blom and Gumperz, Chapter 14). If this is the case and
if variable selection does communicate social information, then how and
in what way is this information communicated? What does the speaker
have to know to speak appropriately? Clearly these questions cannot be
answered by mere descriptions of linguistic variables. No more than the
structural linguists' taxonomic approach to phonem,es and morphemes
could account for the relations of meaning to sound. What is needed is a
more basic enquiry into the nature of communication processes, an
enquiry which extends the notion of linguistic competence to enquire into
the nature of communicative competence and the sociolinguistic rules
which enable us to use and produce appropriate speech.
   The remainder of this introduction will deal with some of the basic con-
cepts and elicitation techniques relevant to this type of enquiry as they are
described in this volume and from related writings (for a discussion of
 sociolinguistic rules see Ervin-Tripp, Chapter 7).


        Some Basic Sociolinguistic Concepts

         Before starting discussion of individual concepts it is necessary to
comment on the assumptions about social structure that these concepts
imply. Correlation sociolinguistics sees the relationship of linguistic to
social ·categories as a match between closely connected but nevertheless
independent systems. Language is regarded as a set of rules enabling
speakers to translate information from the outside world into sound.
Social categories are part of this outside world along with physical envi-
ronments, cultural artifacts, myths, etc. The model is one of social struc-
tures seen as fixed jural rules. When these rules are followed behavior is
said to be normal, failure to follow rules constitutes deviant behavior
(Schegloff, Chapter 12). Like physical objects such jural rules are
                                                   l ntrod11ctio11   15

 regarded as measurable by measures which are independent of com-
municative processes.
   An approach to social theory which is somewhat more in line with
sociolinguistic findings is the interactionist approach exibited in the writ-
ings of Goffman (1965), Garfinkel (1967), and Cicourel (1966). Noting
that most individuals in everyday situations have considerable freedom in
choosing which of several role relationships to enact, interactionists deny
the parallel between social and physical measurement. They point out
that information on social categories is obtainable only though language
and that sociological measurement therefore always involves both the in-
formant's and the investigator's perception of the categories that are being
measured. This perception is seen as subject to the same culturally deter-
mined cognitive processes that ethnographic semanticists (Frake,
Chapter 3) have discovered to be operative in human naming behavior.
Just as the meaning of words is always affected by context, social cat-
egories must be interpreted in terms of situational constraints.
   Concepts such as status and role are thus not permanent qualities of
speakers, instead they become abstract communicative symbols, some-
what like phonemes and morphemes. Like the latter they can be isolated
in the analyst's abstract description but they are always perceived in par-
ticular contexts. The division between social and linguistic categories is
thus obliterated. Communication is not governed by fixed social rules; it
is a two-step process in which the speaker first takes in stimuli from the
outside environment, evaluating and selecting from among them in the
light of his own cultural background, personal history, and what he knows
about his interlocutors. He then decides on the norms that apply to the sit-
uation at hand. These norms determine the speakers selection from
among the communicative options available for encoding his intent.
   In analyzing the factors entering into the selection of communicative
signs, it is important to distinguish between the perceptual clues and
background information that serve as the input to the selection process
and the actual stages that the analyst must postulate as part of his explan-
atory theory. The former are like the acoustic signals through which
speech is identified as speech, whereas the latter are equivalent to the
linguist's abstract grammatical categories. We assume that a speaker
begins with a certain communicative intent, conscious or subconsious. He
may want to ask for something specific: a favor, some information, or he
may want to persuade the other or simply talk to be sociable. One of his
first steps is to determine what if any limitations the environment imposes
on his choice of interactional stategies. Each culture classifies its sur-
roundings into discrete categories of environment (Blom and Gumperz,
Chapter 14), e.g., home, church, public square, classroom, etc. (see also
Fishman, Chapter 15). The speaker must scan his surroundings to
        16   I 11trod11ctio11

decide which classification applies. Simultaneously the speaker utilizes
his knowledge of his audiences and their possible social identities (Good-
enough 1965a) to determine what role to enact. Social rules, therefore, are
much like linguistic rules, they determine the actor's choice among cul-
turally available modes of action or strategies in accordance with the
constraints provided by communicative intent, setting, and identity
relationships.          ·   ·

       Speech Communities
         To the extent that speakers share knowledge of the com-
municative constraints and options governing a significant number of
social situations, they can be said to be members of the same speech com-
munity (Gumperz 1964; Hymes, Chapter I). Since such shared knowl-
edge depends on intensity of contact and on communication networks,
speech community boundaries tend to coincide with wider social units,
such as countries, tribes, religious or ethnic groupings. But this rela-
tionship is by no means .a one to one relationship. The adequacy of ex-
isting methods for delineating communities or other types of social
groupings has been a subject of considerable controversy in recent years
(Moerman I 968a; Barth I 969). It is not always possible to assume that a
functioning community exists merely from information about ethnic iden-
tity, territorial boundaries, or genetic relationship about language
varieties. The existence of shared values and of regular communication
patterns requires empirical investigation.
   As was mentioned above, members of the same speech community
need not all speak the same language nor use the same linguistic forms on
similar occasions. All that is required is that there be at least one language
in common and that rules governing basic communicative strategies be
shared so that speakers can decode the social meanings carried by alterna-
tive modes of communication. Ervin-Tripp (Chapter 7) and Albert
(Chapter 2) discuss relevant communication problems.
   While it is true that all speech communities are linguistically and
 socially diverse there is some relationship between the size and ecological
 characteristics of the communicating group and the nature of this diver-
sity. In small face to face groups, where speakers have detailed knowl-
edge of each others background and personal affairs, the signalling of
social information is less important than in large diverse industrial so-
cieties (Das Gupta and Gumperz 1969).

         Speech Events
      The basic unit for the analysis of verbal interaction in speech
communities is the speech event (discussed in detail in Hymes, Chapter
                                                    l ntroduction   17

 1). The speech event is to the analysis of verbal interaction what the sen-
tence is to grammar. When compared with the sentence it represents an
extension in size of the basic analytical unit from single utterances to
 stretches of utterances, as well as a shift in focus from emphasis on text to
emphasize on interaction. Speech event analysis focuses on the exchange
between speakers, i.e., how a speaker by his choice of topic and his choice
of linguistic variables adapts to other participants or to his environment
and how others in turn react to him. It is this emphasis on exchanges as
stressed in this volume by Dundes (Chapter 4), Mitchell Kernan (Chapter
5), Sacks (Chapter 1 l), and Schegloff (Chapter 12) that distinguishes the
interactional approach to sociolinguistics from the correlational study of
language and society, and from recent linguistic analyses of larger utter-
ance units (Halliday 1971; Hasan 1972) from the structural analysis of
myth (Barthes 1966) and the philosophers' discussion of speech acts
(Searle 1969). Speech event analysis derives its empirical validity from
the fact that, as Hymes (Chapter 11) and Albert (Chapter I l) have
pointed out, members of all societies recognize certain communicative
routines which they view as distinct wholes, separate from other types of
discourse, characterized by special rules of speech and nonverbal behav-
ior and often distinguishable by clearly recognizable opening and closing
sequences (Frake 1964a; Sacks, Chapter 11 ). Like the verbal duels
described by Dundes (Chapter 4) and the signifying, marking, and other
routines discussed by Mitchell-Kernan (Chapter 5) these units often carry
special names. Although speech events are popularly thought of as units
of content or activities, their social significance derives from the rela-
tionship they establish between certain types of content and certain types
of verbal routines. Following the usual linguistic practice such restrictions
can be analyzed along two dimensions: (1) the syntagmatic, involving the
temporal ordering of subunits, including allocation of rights to speaking,
and (2) the paradigmatic, referring to the selection among alternates
within a contextual frame.
   Just as sentences consist of ordered sequences of clauses, phrases, and
words, conversations subdivide into episodes (Watson and Potter 1962)
or discourse stages as Frake ( 1964a) has called them in his highly
revealing and suggestive analysis of ~:peech events in a Philippine tribal
group. In some societies, such as the Burundi described by Albert in
Chapter 2, verbal encounters begin with highly ritualized introductions,
where wording is relatively predetermined and they end with similarly
ritualized codas. In order to communicate effectively under these condi-
tions a speaker must know how to insert his message between such rit-
ualized sequences. A dramatic example of the communicative impor-
tance of order in conversation is provided by Schegloff (Chapter 12) in his
analysis of opening gambits in telephone conversations. Schegloff shows
how expectations about sequencing affect the interpretation of the social
        18   Introduction

significance of messages and can in turn be manipulated for com,
municative ends.
   Paradigmatic constraints govern selection among the constituent
factors in speech events described by Hymes (Chapter I) as well as selec,
tion among the linguistic variables which will be discussed below. Of par,
ticular interest for our understanding of social interaction processes is
Sacks' (Chapter 11) utilization of constraints on topic selection as a basis
for the semantic analysis of speakers' social categorization practices.
Sacks works out empirical procedures for determining the social cat-
egories which speakers use to regulate everday conversation and demon-
strates that social categories, at the interactional level at least, are in es-
sence semantic categories.
    Although speech event analysis has in large part focused on bounded,
readily isolable sequences, where the form of what is said and done is
relatively narrowly constrained, it is clear that not all interaction is
analyzable into such discrete and ritualized units. In everyday informal
interaction choice of linguistic form tends to be much less constrained and
 events often merge into one another without perceptible boundaries. But
 even in such informal situations the notion of speech events is important
 in determining the analysis of social meaning. Whenever particular Jin,
 guistic forms or other formal features of speaking are associated with par,
 ticular activities or with particular identity relationships, the formal fea,
 tures in question come to symbolize the cultural values attached to these
 environments. Such association between linguistic form and extralinguis,
 tic context can be used for communicative ends when, as in the cases of
 metaphorical code switching discussed by Blom and Gumperz (Chapter
  13) or in some of the instances of signifying discussed by Mitchell-Kernan
 (Chapter 5), contextually marked modes of speaking are used in other
 than their normal context. In these cases, values associated with the origi-
 nal context are mapped onto the new message. The association between
 linguistic forms and social meanings is part of a community's rules of
 speaking and is used to interpret social meanings even by those speakers
 who themselves do not ordinarily engage in the event in question. Thus
 speech events are cognitive phenomena that play an essential part in man-
 aging and interpreting everyday communications.



         Sociolinguistic Variables

       How are social meanings encoded linguistically'? Despite the
narrowing in the scope of linguistic analysis, the problem has never been
completely neglected. Sapir (1964) and his students (Haas 1964;
                                                     Introduction   19

 Newman 1964) are responsible for some highly interesting studies of
grammatical differences in the speech of men and women and expressive
 speech forms in non-Western societies. Differences between high and low
status styles in formal and informal speech have been described in con-
siderable detail, e.g., in Java (Geertz 1960), Korea and elsewhere (Howell
 1969). All these studies take as their point of departure structural data of
the type collected in the course of ordinary linguistic analysis. A more
general notion is the notion of sociolinguistic variable.
   Linguists concerned with language usage had frequently observed con-
 siderable variation in the pronunciation of phones in some words. Some
had explained this phenomena by postulating two alternating phonemic
 systems (Pike and Fries 1949). Others, noting the frequency with which
such variations occurred in linguistically diverse communities, preferred
to analyze them as shifts between allophones of phonemes within the
same system (Ferguson 1964a; Gumperz and Nairn 1960). Labov, using
elicitation techniques capable of generating stylistically differentiated
speech samples from large numbers of speakers, found similar phenom-
ena among monolingual residents in New York City. In particular he
noted that variations in the pronunciation of certain words were so exten-
sive as to cut across the articulatory range of what structural dialectol-
ogists using traditional field techniques had analyzed as distinct
phonemes. The vowel in 'bad,' e.g., could be homophonous with the [I·] in
'beer,' the [el in 'bear,' or the [re·] in 'bat.' Three distinct phonemes thus
seemed to collapse into a single articulatory range. Since there is no pho-
netic basis for isolating distinct articulation peaks within this range,
Labov argues that any attempt to deal with such shifts by postulating al-
ternation between distinct systems is without empirical foundation. They
must be treated as variables within a single system. He goes on to suggest
that the descreteness of phonemic systems is an artifact of the linguist's field
practice of abstracting rules from the speech of one or at most a few infor-
mants and of deemphasizing variation. Intensive study of speech behavior
should, in any one speech community, reveal both phonemes and vari-
ables. While phonemes are characterized by pronunciations clustering
around definable articulation peaks, variables are defined by a starting
point and a scale of values varying in a certain direction. The values along
such scales are conditioned by social factors in a manner analogous to
that in which phonological environments condition the phonetic realiza-
tions of allophones.
   Although the term variable, as used by Labov, applies primarily to pro-
nunciation phenomena, similar types of socially determined variation
have also been found in morphology and syntax and in the lexicon.
Fischer's (1958) study of the alternation between 'ing' and 'in' in such
English participles as 'going' and Geertz's ( 1960) analysis of high, middle,
                                                                           -1


        20   Introduction

and low speech levels in Javanese are cases in point. Particular attention
has been devoted to pronouns and terms of address such as the second
person singular tu and vous in French (Brown and Gilman 1960) or their
equivalents in Russian (Friedrich, Chapter 9), Korean, and Japanese
(Martin 1958; Howell 1967), which serve both as symbols of social struc-
ture and indexes of social change.
   Not all grammatical or lexical alternates in a language can automati-
cally be regarded as sociolinguistic variables, however. Since the same
language may be spoken in a number of socially distinct societies, it must
be demonstrated that selection among alternates carries social signifi-
cance for some groups of speakers. Furthermore, since social meaning is
always embedded in reference, it is useful to speak of sociolinguistic vari-
ables only when alternates are referentially equivalent, i.e., when they sig-
nify the same thing in some socially realistic speech event. Items with the
same or similar dictionary meanings may not be substitutable in actual
conversation and, per contra, some variables are semantically equivalent
only in specific contexts. An example will illustrate the problem. Few
would ordinarily claim that the words 'wife' and 'lady' are homonyms in _
English. Yet they are used as such in the following extract from an invita-
tion to an army social quoted in a recent issue of the San Francisco Ex-
aminer: "Officers with their ladies, enlisted men with their wives."
Referential equivalence here underlines social differences.
   The concept of the variable as discussed here is a general one, referring
to the selection of elements or strings of elements at any component or
level of linguistic structure (i.e., phonology, syntax, or lexicon). It is im-
portant to note that as long as the condition of referential equivalence in
some speech event is met, the values or alternates of such a variable need
not be confined to items normally considered part of the same language or
dialect. As it was just pointed out, in some societies the shift between
linguistically distinct codes may carry social meanings equivalent to the
selection of stylistic alternates in others. In his analysis of kinship termi-
nology in this volume Tyler (Chapter 8) finds it necessary to deal with
 Koya and Telugu forms as part of the same system. He sets up rules
which select among these alternates in terms of group membership of
speakers and addressee.


        Linguistic Repertoires

        The totality of linguistic resources (i.e., including both invariant
forms and variables) available to members of particular communities re-
fers to the linguistic repertoire of that community (Gumperz 1964b).
This concept is advanced to account for the fact that the linguist's gram-
matical analysis seldom matches verbal behavior of actual populations. A
                                                       Introduction    21

grammar of English, for example, deals with the linguistic competence of
speakers in a number of societies in England, in the United States, or even
in India, Africa, and elsewhere. Speakers in these societies differ not so
much in the way they speak English but in the fact that in their everyday
interaction they alternate between English and various other local dia-
lects or even languages. The concept of the repertoire enables us to cap-
ture these distinctions and thus uniquely describe the speech behavior of
a population in terms of their selection within particular clusters of
linguistic variants or sets of grammatical systems.
   The mere listing of variables is however not enough. It becomes neces-
sary to show how these component varieties are kept distinct in com-
munication. In the process of analysis, the boundaries between sub-
systems must be determined. There is evidence that variables tend to be
selected in co-occurrent clusters. In other words, the speaker's choice of
a particular value of a variable is always constrained by previous selec-
tions of variables. Thus, if a speaker varies between [i·], [d, and [re·] in
'bad' and, in addition, has alternates 'ain't,' 'is not,' 'going,' and 'goin' ,' he
is most likely to say, "This ain't gonna be [bi·d]," in some situations and,
"This is not going to be [bred]," in others. It would be unusual for him to
say, "This is not going to be [bi·d]." It is important to note that socio-
linguistic selection constraints which generate such co-occurrences cut
across the normal components of grammar (see Ervin-Tripp, Chapter 7;
Blom and Gumperz, Chapter 14). Their study, therefore, extends the
application of linguistic analysis to data not ordinarily considered a part of
grammar.
   The existence of sociolinguistic rules, selecting co-occurrent clusters of
variables, lends some empirical validity to notions such as code, variety,
dialect, or language. Whenever features in several components of
linguistic structure alternate simultaneously, we can speak of switching
among entire speech varieties rather than choice among individual fea-
tures. Note that when a language variety (whether dialect, style, language,
or whatever) is defined in this way (i.e., when the speech event is used as a
starting point, the unit in question emerges from the analysis), we need no
longer, as in the traditional field methods just discussed, start by asking in-
formants to speak in a particular style or dialect with the concurrent risk
that their attitudes will interfere with their response.


         The Genesis and Maintenance of
         Speech Differences

        How do different subgroups, co-resident within a larger social
unit, develop different ways of speaking? Bernstein's notion of code
explained in Chapter 17 represents one of the first attempts to deal with
        22   /11/rod11ction

this problem in cross-cultural terms. According to Bernstein, the key to
the acquisition and maintenance of different patterns is the socialization
process. While basic grammatical competence is innate, the network of
social relationships in which the individual interacts and the com-
municative tasks that these relationships entail ultimately shape the way
in which he uses language. Such patterns of language usage are referred to
as "linguistic codes" (see prefatory to Chapter 17). Once learned, a
linguistic code constrains the individual's perception of h:s and his in-
terlocutor's social role, just as lexical structures constrain the individuals
perception of features in the physical environment. Intrasocietal dif-
ferences in social relationships and especially in family role systems give
rise to different linguistic codes and thus to differences in role perception.
Following Bott ( 1957) a scalar distinction is made between closed or posi-
tional family role systems and open systems. Closed systems emphasize
communal values stressing status distinctions and propriety in speech and
lead to "restricted codes," a way of language usage which is highly
formulaic. Open or person-oriented role systems, on the other hand,
emphasize individual creativity, and ability to "take the role of the other"
and lead to elaborated codes which are more suited to the transmission of
new information and more acceptable to novel situations.
    Bernstein's earlier largely exploratory work has led to some highly
 interesting studies in the area of socialization and has pioneered the use of
 linguistic indices to the study of socialization and social control (Cook
 1972). Several linguistic analyses of interviews with mothers and children
 have revealed some important social differences in the use of sentence
 connectives, noun modifiers, deictic pronouns, etc. (Turner and Mohan
  1971; Hassan 1972). In the present state of our knowledge there is, how-
 ever, no evidence to assume that the distinction between restricted and
 elaborated codes corresponds to class-related differences in verbal skills.
 On the contrary, Labov (1969) using elicitation techniques which relied
 heavily on natural conversation and on his knowledge of culture specific
 speech events such as "sounding" found that the very children who in
 school or in interviews with strangers tend to speak only in short, seem-
 ingly truncated utterances of the type usually characterized as instances
 of restricted codes, show themselves to be highly creative and effective
 communicators when interviewed in settings which they perceive as cul-
 turally realistic or when their natural interaction with peers is recorded.
    An alternative explanation of the issues raised by the distinction
 between elaborated and restricted codes, one which relates the problem
 to more basic communication processes is suggested by Garfinkel's
 (Chapter I 0) concept of indexicality (see Cicourel 1968 for a discussion
 of this concept in relation to socialization). Indexicality refers to the fact
 that the interpretation of communicative acts always without exception
                                                    lntroductio11   23

depends upon the speakers background knowledge. For this reason the
spoken message is always an imperfect realization of what was in the
minds of the speakers and hearers. Background assumptioned may be sig-
naled as part of the message through choice of words, speech style or
stress and intonation; or they may be implicit in the actors' view of the
speech event. Seen from this point of view, elaboration and restriction are
simply two different modes of signaling or calling upon background
knowledge. Elaborated messages are messages where the maximum com-
munication load is carried by words; restricted messages, on the other
hand, rely on other nonlexical communicative devices (e.g., code
switching, stress, intonation, etc.). The greater the reliance on words, the
more accessible the message is to others who do not share similar speak-
ers' knowledge or personal background. In many written and spoken
formal (elaborated) communications an interpretation at the level of dic-
tionary meanings of words is adequate. Elaborated codes in this sense are
thus more suited for cross-cultural communication and are typically
taught in school systems. The fact that so much of literature and art relies
on nondiscursive devices suggests that elaborated codes are not always
the most effective means of communication.


        Some Implications for Fieldwork

         Although the preceding discussion of sociolinguistic concepts
does not give a complete theory, it does however carry some clear
implications for what is or is not adequate fieldwork. Throughout this dis-
cussion evidence has been presented for the close interdependence
between linguistic data and elicitation procedures. Since language choice
is largely subconscious, and since the signalling of social information is
crucially dependent on context, the study of social meaning requires field-
work techniques capable of challenging the verbal skills employed by
speakers in everyday interaction. It is evident that the linguist informant
method described earlier is riot in itself adequate for this task. Single
person informant interviews are essential starting points for the discovery
of basic grammatical information; yet, once this information is known,
such methods seem hardly suitable for eliciting natural conversations.
The very artificiality of settings where speech samples must be produced
on demand, apart from the customary circles of friends and family, is
hardly likely to generate the .subtleties in selection of speech forms, shifts
in formality, intimacy, etc. by which members categorize each other in
every day interaction. Even a highly skilled writer has difficulty in
reproducing natural conversations. Certainly an ordinary informant
cannot be expected to do it. At best the linguistic informant interview
        24   Introduction

yields samples of a single speech style, generally relatively formal speech.
The setting in such interviews tends to reduce to a minimum the very type
of linguistic devices by which social meaning is conveyed in normal in-
teraction.
    The common linguist's practice of asking speakers to speak in a particu-
lar language or dialect, furthermore, implies the assumption that the
delimitation of such entities presents no elicitation problems, and that
both linguists and informants agree on what forms should be omitted from
consideration and what forms included. This practice begs the question.
Variants are not always assigned to particular languages on the basis of
their grammatical characteristics alone. Religion, ethnicity, socio-
economic position of speaker and similar social criteria may play a more
important role than a grammatical similarity or difference (Ferguson and
Gumperz 1959). Since in such a diverse community the linguist's request
to a speaker to produce particular forms of languages may be interpreted
by speakers as a request to behave in a certain way (i.e., to be formal or
informal), or to emphasize otherwise some aspect of his social personal-
ity, the social implications of linguistic forms thus elicited may seriously
affect the validity of the linguist's analysis, for in effect, the question has
filtered out significant aspects of the potential corpus of data.
    The definition of sociolinguistic variables in terms of referentially
equivalent units in some natural speech event defines a basic task of
sociolinguistic fieldwork: to generate socially conditioned variations in
speakers natural performances. The basic elicitation method can be
regarded as an extension of the linguist's practice of studying the same
 linguistic forms in different linguistic environments. What is constant here
 is the basic message and what is varied is the social relationship. The
 search for natural speech or "good" language is therefore abandoned in
favor of efforts to sample significantly different speech events. Such
sampling of speech in a representative range of events clearly requires
 some knowledge of the rules of speaking discussed by Hymes (Chapter
  I). Mere behavioristic observation of daily activities is not enough. Albert
 (Chapter 2) basing herself on her own analysis of Barundi speech lists in
 detail some of the difficulties the observer may encounter and suggests
 field procedures for learning rules of speaking. Yet it would be premature
 to demand that all sociolinguistic analyses start with a complete taxonomy
 of speech events in particular societies. This is a major task in itself,
 equivalent to furnishing a description of a whole culture. A more practical
 goal would be to begin with a significant and representative range of dif-
 ferent contexts. But even for this task it is necessary to find some consis-
 tent criteria of defining or singling out particular contexts.
     Frake (Chapter 3) adapts the ethnoscientist's analysis of native termi-
 nological systems to the definition of speech events (e.g., litigants) among
                                                    Introduction   25

the Yakan. Albert (Chapter 2) points out that ritual events-ceremonies,
formal greetings, and speech making-are more sharply defined, and thus
more easily separable from other events, than everyday happenings.
Labov achieves contrast in setting by contrasting formal interview ses-
sions in which speakers are asked to perform such tasks as reading word
lists or reciting paradigms with more natural conversations. In these con-
versations he generates further variations by alternately involving his re-
spondents in neutral, emotionally charged, or humous subjects. Blom and
Gumperz utilize the anthropologist's ethnographic data to organize local
discussion groups with different social characteristics in order to compare
their treatments of similar conversational topics. Bernstein's more recent
studies adopt the social psychologist's role-play technique to test the
speaker's ability to respond to a variety of communicative tasks.
   The need to generate natural speech frequently makes it necessary for
the investigator to concentrate on group interviews rather than working
with single individuals. The role of the interviewer in such groups is sim-
ply to act as an observer who may introduce a topic, but who then allows
group processes to determine further treatment of the topic. Although it
would seem difficult to induce people to speak normally while a tape
recorder is operating, it has been found that when speakers are inter-
viewed in groups, the social obligations among members frequently lead
them to disregard the recording instrument and to behave as if they were
unobserved.
   Obviously, the investigator's skill in managing interaction is an impor-
tant factor in sociolinguistic elicitation. If the investigator wishes to vary
social stimuli, he must be able to predict which stimulus will produce what
reaction. The most successful investigators are those who can utilize their
own background knowledge of the culture in elicitation. It is not enough,
as some behaviorally oriented students of natural speech suggest, simply
to observe performances. The investigator must find ways of testing the
speakers' ability to vary their performances. Hence his success depends
on his knowledge of sociolinguistic rules.
                                                                                 --1




        Plan of the Book
          This book has three major divisions. Each part addresses itself
to a question at the forefront of sociolinguistic research. Part I is con-
cerned with how ways of speaking are shaped by both cultural values and
social institutions. Part 2 is concerned with how the rules of conversation
and address can be discovered and adequately stated. Part 3 is concerned
with how varieties of language arise and come to be appropriate to specific
social and cultural contexts-why they persist, why they change, and why
they disappear.
   The three divisions of the book are not independent, nor can they be.
Aspects of the structure and. meaning of speech h~ve a unity such that
focus on one aspect involves consideration of each of the others. To ask
about the meaning of a pattern of speech (I) involves being able to rec-
ognize an instance of it, that is, to describe its structure. The structure of
speech in a given segment of interaction (2) is not fully intelligible apart
from the context of values and institutions in which it is embedded. Each
of these aspects is intimately bound up with the genesis, maintenance, and
change of language varieties or codes (3). A topical index has been pro-
vided to help trace the connections among parts of the book.
   If the three divisions of the book form an integrated whole, the different
questions along which major divisions of the book are organized reflect
somewhat different sources of interest in the emerging field of socio-
linguistics. The first major division indicates the place of speech patterns
in the nexus of the cultural or social institution in which it occurs. The
second major division of the book focuses on discovery and descriptive
methods used in current sociolinguistic analysis. The third major division
focuses on variance in linguistic codes in terms of their genesis, main-
tenance, and change. It is, in effect, a synthesis of the first two major
divisions.
   In Part 1, Hymes suggests a general frame of reference for ethno-
graphic description and comparison. In addition, the volume includes, as
                                     26
                                                Plan of the Book    27

 an appendix, a short field guide by Darnell and Sherzer, listing some basic
 questions relevant for comparative study. Hymes shows the relationship
 of the ethnographic approach to other work in the first section and in the
 sections which follow. Albert provides a sensitive perspective on the
 significance of speech in one particular society. Her work serves as a
 useful datum point for a number of the articles which follow. In a similar
 vein, Frake analyzes an institution which, he observes, "is manifested
 almost exclusively by one kind of behavior, talk." He carefully analyzes
 native categories for kinds of talk, and for settings in which they occur.
 He concludes with an instructive contrast between these features in two
 cultures. Dundes and his collaborators provide a vivid analysis of a par-
 ticular speech genre, a verbal form of social strategy. This strategy, verbal
 dueling, is important throughout much of the world. Mitchell-Kernan
 discusses several common Afro-American speech acts. By means of skill-
 fully selected examples from everyday interaction, she shows how rhetor-
 ical devices reflecting these events are used to enrich conversation and to
 convey subtle nuances of meaning. Roberts and Forman are also con-
 cerned with explaining the presence or absence of a genre in a particular
 society, and with what motivates differential involvement in it. The par-
 ticular value of this study, apart from the fact that it describes a particular
 case, is its use of a comparative cross-cultural method combined with
analysis of individual variation in our society, in terms of a model of the
 role of verbal genres, such as riddling, in socialization. Thus, Part I is
designed to provide the reader with a sense of speech as part of larger
cultural patterns of behavior, using data drawn from a broad geographical
sphere-Africa, Turkey, the Philippines, and the United States.
    While Part I may strike many linguists as ethnographic, Part 2 may
 strike many social scientists as primarily of concern to linguists. In this
section, as in the first, however, the analysis is rooted in social science:
Ervin-Tripp is a social psychologist, Tyler and Friedrich are anthro-
 pologists, Garfinkel, Sacks, and Schegloff are sociologists. Birdwhistell is
an anthropologist with training in social psychiatry and, like many of the
other contributors, with training in linguistics as well.
    Studies of the sort in Part 2 are, and must be, concerned, like those in
Part I, with the kinds of settings of speech events, with what underlies
and brings participants into them, as well as with the difficulties that are
involved in providing accounts of the events themselves. What may make
the studies in Part 2 seem instances of "linguistic" rather than "social
science" subjects of inquiry is that they point the way toward a formal,
that is, explicit, account of some specific segment of behavior. In a variety
of ways such studies reflect the fact that speech manifests kinds of knowl-
edge and abilities (kinds of competence), largely outside the range of
immediate individual awareness, that can be characterized just as can the
        28   Plan of the Book

competence that underlies language proper. Such analysis may be said to
extend the notion of "rule-governed creativity" (cf. Chomsky 1966, 1968)
to speech-from the structure of sentences to the structure of their use.
   The charter for this generalization can in fact be found in the work of a
linguist who was an anthropologist, Sapir, and an anthropologist who was
something of a linguist, Malinowski, both of whom came to be concerned
with "living speech" (Sapir I 949a:592-593; Malinowski 1964:63). Sapir
recognized the continuity of linguistic form with the patterning of all
cultural behavior (1949c). Malinowski viewed language as a mode of
action, not merely as a countersign of thought (1935). In this synthesis of
language, thought, and behavior, the goals of leading schools of linguistic
theory and ethnography converge (Goodenough 1964).
    In Part 2 Ervin-Tripp provides the first general survey of kinds of rules
and forms of statement in sociolinguistic study of interaction. Her paper
is an invaluable introduction to the subject, and embodies original re-
search as well. Tyler takes a subject central to social life and social
anthropology, kinship; and whereas anthropological formal analysis of
kinship has tended to neglect context just as much as linguistic analysis
of sentences, Tyler shows the necessity and possibility of taking context
formally into account. Friedrich uses interaction as described in Russian
novels to show the subtlety and power of a grammatical choice when,
although in itself a detail, it is deeply embedded in social life.
    Garfinkel sketches a central concern of the movement of which he is
the pioneer and which is gaining increasing recognition in modern soci-
ology: to recognize the data of verbal interaction as neither trivial nor
 "degenerate" but rather as an artful accomplishment, one with profound
 import for understanding man's nature. Developing this theme, Sacks
 seeks to make us see everyday, taken-for-granted behavior as presuppos-
 ing complex rules of interpretation, as being something to wonder at and
 wish to explain. He suggests that children early sense and make skillful
 use of some of these rules. Schegloff, taking data that might have been
 treated only statistically or by content analysis, attends strictly to its
 formal structure. Finding an exception to a generalization that accounts
 for 99 percent of the cases, he does not dismiss it, but discovers a deeper
 generalization. Schegloff's rules govern nonverbal as well as verbal be-
 havior. Birdwhistell shows that nonverbal signals can countermand or
 repl~ce speech; from that standpoint, he demonstrates in precise detail
 that the study of speech in interaction is part of the study of communica-
 tive conduct as a whole.
    Between Parts 1 and 2, we noted, there is an apparent difference of
 scale; the significance of the genres dealt with in 1 is immediately ap-
 parent, and in dealing with them one can learn something without techni-
 cal analysis of actual speech. One lesson of the kind of work represented
                                                 Plan of the Book    29

in Part 2, however, is that it is in the nature of communicative interaction
for matters of great significance to be presupposed or expressed in slight
cues. Language-physically a matter of little marks and displacements of
air-is itself an example. The more that patterns and meanings of be-
 havior come to be shared, the more likely is it that bits of behavior, seem-
ingly trivial or unnoticed, are for the persons involved not trivial but eco-
 nomical. Our present understanding of the complexity, rapidity, and
 power of the human brain makes it no surprise that much of communica-
 tive behavior must be understood on the analogy of an improvised motet
or fugue.
    Part 3 takes up a subject initially linguistic, but recast in the larger con-
text that the preceding sections provide. The multiplicity of forms of
speech has interested mankind from earliest times. For much of human
history the most salient form of change has been that which has produced
the several thousand different languages now found in the world; some of
the great achievements of historical lingui~tics have been in discovering
common ancestors and past contacts among languages now separate, and
in establishing the methods by which this could be done. Folk explana-
tions of diversity have been replaced with work based on the simple yet
fundamental fact that language changes, inevitably and continually, and
that, to the extent that communities become separate, subsequent changes
in each, being independent of those in the other, eventually will produce
distinct forms of speech. Recent work in theoretical linguistics has added
depth of understanding of the form of change, and of ways in which it may
depend upon common, even universal, properties of linguistic structures.
Beyond recognition of the fact of change, however, lies the question of its
cause and mechanism. Explanation has been sought in the speech organs,
habits of articulation, the brain, the patterning of language itself-opera-
tive perhaps in terms of a cumulative drift, a functional gap, or the dis-
continuity between generations. The facts of "language history"-the
conquest, extinction, or migration of populations, contact with other
languages and new environments-causing new needs and providing
new models, have, of course, been taken into account; but seldom has
explanation been sought in the matrix of social relationships in which a
language is used. Such relationships have been seen as a factor contrib-
uting to the diffusion of :::hanges but not usually as a source of change.
Change, like structure, has usually been considered something to be ex-
plained within linguistics itself.
   Change, moreover, has been conceived essentially as change with re-
spect to some one form or variety of a language, so far as explicit theory
has been concerned, seldom as change in the functional role of a language.
Seldom has persistence been seen as the other side of the coin, and
equally in need of explanation. Rarely have modern linguists conceived
        30   Plan of the Book

the locus of persistence and change as the repertoire of a community-as
lying in the relations among, and constituency of, a set of forms of speech.
The existence of a set of alternative forms of speech is characteristic of
every community, however, and by far the dominant process of change,
today and for the future, is not diversification of whole languages (genetic
diversification will rarely, if ever, occur again), but differentiation of the
resources of languages into new functional varieties, together with the
integration of different languages into new functional unities-for ex-
ample, the development of new standardized varieties from former trade
argots or pidgins, on the one hand, and specialization and revitalization of
the role of surviving vernaculars, on the other, in new nations.
   In this book we can broach only the issues most closely tied to social
interaction. An essential step is to get at the social meaning of alternative
forms of speech. Blom and Gumperz investigate the relation between a
standard and a local dialect, and show the meaning of each to depend
upon participation in different types of social relationships. Their ap-
proach provides a quite general way of studying any choice of form of
speech, whether whole language, dialect, or style. Notice that it shows (as
does Labov's work) that usage may be as much out of awareness as gram-
matical structure; self-report by informants would not suffice. Fishman
seeks to relate fine-grained study of interaction to study of larger social
systems through the concept of domains of lan~uage choice. He provides
information on a situation in which an immigrant group alternately uses
two wholly distinct languages, and where, situation and participants and
even topic sometimes remaining constant, the expressive import of the
choice is made manifest.
   Both Barth and Bernstein deal with cases of shift from one form of
speech to another, Barth between distinct ethnic groups, Bernstein within
a single society. Barth succinctly analyzes a case in which neither gross
"prestige" nor demonstrated dominance-the usual catchall explana-
tions-can account for change of language and of linguistic boundaries.
Explanation must be sought in the choices available within two contrast-
ing types of social system and in the relationships of power and authority
internal to the ethnic groups in question.
   Bernstein argues that contrasting types of social interaction-partic-
ularly, of social control within the family-may introduce a boundary
within a single society, by giving rise to distinct "linguistic codes" that
express and perpetuate distinct orientations toward social reality. Where
 Blom and Gumperz dealt with maintenance of forms of speech, and Barth
with shift from one to another, Bernstein deals with their genesis. Where
social scientists, Durkheim and others, have sometimes seen correlations
between type of society and type of language, Bernstein seeks to explain
the mechanism by which such a link could come about, relating division of
                                                Plan of the Book   31

 labor, class structure, family role systems, social control, and speech in a
 general theory. Nowhere is it more explicit that the unit of ordinary
 linguistic work, the named language, "English" or the like, is inadequate
 as a basis for understanding the meaning of language in social life. When,
 as in the case of Bernstein's work, the phonology, lexicon, and grammar
 are essentially the same from the standpoint of ordinary linguistic anal-
 ysis, the need for new units and modes of description is evident.
    Bernstein here develops his concepts of elaborated and restricted
 codes. Notice that they are more complex than the simple dichotomy they
 are usually taken to be. The same person may command more than one,
 and there may be varieties within each type, differing as to primary
 orientation toward persons or objects. Bernstein's suggestions as to the
 implications of these concepts for education are controversial (he him-
 self has been critical of their application to the American situation), but
 the body of work on which they are based remains the most substantial
 of any so far.
    Fischer shows that a difference between two related languages in a
 phonological detail (and also perhaps in other features) fits with a general
contrast in outlook, social structure, and the role of speech between the
 two societies. Thus he shows the outcome, aided by geographical separa-
tion, of what may have begun as differential use of common linguistic
means. In addition, he suggests that the feature with regard to which the
languages differ has a universal expressive value, thus implying the pos-
sibility of inferring from phonology something of the orientation of the
social worlds languages occupy. Like Bernstein and Labov, Fischer sees
a social origin for linguistic change; again like both, his conception of such
origin requires a description of language use as well as language structure.
   Where Fischer deals with a stylistic feature, Labov demonstrates that
the central phonological systems of languages change in ways that cannot
be explained apart from social motivation. Linguists have tended to see
social factors as secondary, contributing to the diffusion of changes whose
source must be sought elsewhere. Labov shows social factors to be pri-
mary, and argues that the fact of inevitable, continual change in language
is due to a further fact, namely, that at any given time some features of
language are variables with social meaning, and differentially selected for
use accordingly. Thus, whereas some sociolinguistic research requires
linguists to add to the r,;cope of their interests, commonly, it might be felt,
to choose to "go beyond language," Labov shows that to explain a matter
already regarded as part of linguistics-sound change-one must go out-
side language, to the social matrix of speech with which, in one way or
another, all the contributions to this book are concerned.
part one




   ETHNOGRAPHIC
      DESCRIPTION
           AND
     EXPLANATION
          1
