         in Koya Kinship 'T enninology'
         STEPHEN A. TYLER




          Stephen A. Tyler is associate professor of anth
                           .    .                         ,    ropo 1ogy
          at Tulane Umvers1ty.
                         .   .          He received his doct ora t e f rom
          Stanford Umvers1ty and has taught at Tulan . d h
              .    .    f C .,,       .                       e an t e
          Umvers1ty o a 1horma, Davis. The present ch t ·
            · 1        · d          .                          ap er 1s a
          slight y revise version of an original paper first             b-
          lished in the American Anthropologist (Tyler 1966{:nd
          draws on several
                      .       years
                                  ,     of fieldwork among the K oya, m  ·
          central India. Tyler s current interests center on formal
          analysis of culture, kinship, language, and social structure.
             Tyler himself puts his chapter in context in the follow-
          ing words:

          "The a~alysis of kinship terminologies has traditionally operated
          only with the genealogical denotata of the nominal stems of kin
          terms, with little reference to the social and linguistic contexts
          in which kin terms are used. Such analysis has usually resulted
          in the delineation of a single, unitary structure. Problems of

          Revision of "Context and Variation in Koya Kinship Terminology" by
          Stephen A. Tyler. Reproduced by permission of the American Anthro-
          pological Association from the American Anthropologist, Vol. 68, pp.
          693-707 (June, 1966).

   1 The research on which this chapter is based was carried out in India in 1962-1963, sup-
ported by a Foreign Area Training Fellowship from the Ford Foundation. An earlier version
of this chapter was presented at the Timber Cove Conference on "Approaches to Inter-
personal Relations in South and Southeast Asia," April 9-12, I 965, sponsored by the Insti-
tute of International Studies, University of California, Berkeley. It has benefitted from the
conference discussion, and from specific suggestions made by David M. Schneider, Ge_ne
Hammel John Gumperz, and Alan Beals. Yehudi Cohen and David Olmsted read earlier
drafts and provided useful comments, and some suggestions by Dell Hymes are incorporated
in the present formulation, revised from the original paper (Tyler 1966).

                                            251
252   Discovering Structure in Speech

alternation are seldom systematically accounted for; one reason
for this failure is that an explanation of it requires information
on the social and linguistic environments as well. Focusing on
alternation indicates that there is no single, unitary structure of
kin terms defined solely on the basis of genealogical compo-
nents. This implies that typological analysis or formal analysis
is based on genealogical criteria (Hammel 1965) alone is apt to
obscure important data. It also indicates that the traditional
"genealogical method" is an inadequate field method-if the
ethnographic aim is to predict "who will be called what" (ab-
stract provided with the original publication).

This is a point which has been made by several social
anthropologist critics of the earlier componential analyses
(Schneider 1968, 1969).
   This chapter thus focuses on the speech event as
source of data for analysis and on the rules of alternation.
The subject matter is central to social life, and to social
anthropology. Formal analysis of kinship terminology
(often called componential analysis) is a subject of con-
troversy to those who equate it with a highly abstract
linguistic approach that neglects social realities. Tyler
shows here that there need be no conflict. Indeed, he
adapts a standard device of formal analysis in linguistics
(use of rules involving a slant line to indicate the par-
ticular environment in which a form or structure occurs)
in order to deal with social diversity in use of terms.
Formal analysis is a way of being explicit and succinct.
Tyler shows that because of their explicitness and suc-
cinctness, the operations involved in such analysis may
lead to unanticipated discoveries. Whether the final
 analysis is adequate or not depends on the adequacy of
 the elicitation questions and on the use of data obtained
 by the investigator who employs it. An interest in
 context-sensitive rules (as the kind of statement em-
 ployed by Tyler is known in linguistics) is indeed likely to
 be a major avenue for more adequate integration of lin-
 guistic and social analysis. Geoghegan ( 1970) provides a
 similarly ethnographically realistic formal analysis of
 address terminology.
   Tyler cites variations in kinship terminology that can
 be ascribed to dialect differences but focuses on alternate
 terms which, although pertaining to two different lan-
 guages, are part of the repertoire (Gumperz 1964a) of a
      Context and Alternar·10      . K
                                11 111   oya Kinship Terminology   253
     single speaker The erro f 1. . .                                .
     of a smg          ·
              · 1e 1anguag       · r1o 1m1tmg analysis to a matena
                                                                 .     1
         I  .     h"
     re atJons 1p betwe    '   e Is c
                                    h  ear from. the outset. Nor 1s the
       .                       en t e terms m the two languages a
     simple one of use                f
                     .       , now o one language now of the other.
     Rat h er choice of t             f              '
               .'        . . erms rom one language or the other
     (and, m certain interesting cases, choice of semantic
     st~ucture) depends more specifically on social features; in
     this case, on the religious, as well as ethnic, identity of the
      speaker and hearer.
          Within any one language's set of terms there are al-
      ternative subsets of terms, depending upon' such features
      of context as formality, co residence in a patrilaterally
      extended household, and intimacy; and choices apply not
      only to the part of the term that designates a relative but
      also to pronouns and suffixes that occur with it. Among
       the contextual factors determining choice are joking re-
       lationships, composition of audience (e.g., presence or
       absence of the one referred to), major cultural scenes
       such as weddings and festivals, and a particular genre of
       wedding songs sung in competing rounds between the
       parties of bride and groom. Age of the speaker, use in the
       home, relative status, and friendship are also noted. The
       derivative suffixes are closely tied to formality and re-
        spect. Interesting here are the correlation of frequency of
        use with those audiences containing the relatives most
        likely to be critical of lack of respect, and the tying of
        formal behavior to only certain phases and participants in
        a wedding. As Tyler observes, a complete analysis would
        entail analysis of all those conditions that define scenes
        and relationships as formal, etc. (see Frake, Chapter 3).
        The present chapter serves to show that formal analysis
         of terms can be extended into a systematic relationship
         between the full range of cultural contexts. Additional
         related readings are provided by Romney and D' Andrade
         (1964), Tulisano and Cole (1965), Geoghegan (197 la),
         and Pas sin ( 1966).


        Kinship terminologies, like most other linguistic phenomena, are
  ually analyzed as a single unitary structure. Alternate forms may not be
~~together excluded, but they are ~eldom explained, either formally or
functionally. The following is a typical example:
        254    Discovering Structure in Speech

the language is particularly prolific in terms of endearment . . . for the formal
"father," Sinhalese has appa, appocci, and tatta as alternatives for piyc1 . . . .
When complications of this sort are ignored, the structural pattern of Sinhalese
kinship terminology is identical to that of the Tamil . . . . Practical usage does
not correspond strictly to this formal design . . . the terms ayiyii (elder brother)
 and malli (younger brother) may be used indiscriminately, even of individuals
 who should, according to formal principles, be classed as nwssina (cross-cousin)
 (Leach 1960: 125-126, English italics mine).

   There is no mention of the environment in which these alternate forms
occur, nor is there any indication that the kin types denoted by these
alternate forms are structurally equivalent. Aside from notable exceptions
(Schneider 1953, 1955; Frake 1960; Fischer 1964), anthropologists seem
to have remained content with the simple environmental differentiation of
terms of reference and terms of address. Other than this rather rudimen-
tary classification, interest in alternate forms has been expressed in terms
of historical reconstruction (Spoehr 1947) or culture change (Bruner
 19 5 5). This is not to denigrate these approaches; for as long as one is con-
cerned only with typology, historical reconstruction, or culture change,
 the methods may be adequate. But in the realms of functional and formal
 analysis many significant data are neglected by these methods. For ex-
 ample, it is the boast of formal analysts that formal analysis will provide
 the minimum information for deciding "who will be called what" in any
 given kinship system (Lounsbury 1964:352). Yet I know of no formal
  analysis that has dealt adequately with the problems of alternate usage.
 To be sure, problems of synonymy and homonymy have been discussed
  (cf. Wallace and Atkins 1960:64-65, 67-68), but no system has been
  fully analyzed to account for these factors. To some extent this failure
  may be attributed to the fact that most formal analysis has been concerned
  with lexical items or, more appropriately perhaps, with the nominative
   stems of kin terms. It is my contention that, so construed, formal analysis
   does not provide the minimum information for deciding who will be called
   what in any kinship system (cf. also Swartz l 960:397; Hymes l 964a:26;
    l 964b:97-98).
       Elsewhere I have argued that a part of the variation occurring in kinship
    terminologies can be explained by the contradictions entailed in the role
    systems of the class of kinsmen denoted by a given term (1967; cf. also
    Schneider 19 5 5: 17). In this chapter I want to explore further implications
     of role specificity for variations in terminology. Specifically, I will attempt
     to relate terminological variation to the contexts in which terms of refer-
     ence are used. In essence, the problem of variation here is the same as
     that, for example, in phonology. What are the restrictions on the occur-
     rence of a given form, and/or in what environments does a given form
         Context and Alternation in Koya Kinship Terminology         255

occur? My general aim is to provide a statement of the contexts in which
variant forms occur, and thus to fulfill one part of the minimum require-
ment of the ethnography of kinship-the prediction of who will be called
what.


        The Ecology of the Speech Community

          Following Gumperz (1961, 1964b), the delimitation of the
"natural unit" to be used is based on patterns of communication. Within
any given geographical area it is possible to arrive at any number of such
units, depending on the level of abstraction desired; but for the purposes
of this chapter the communication matrix is limited to direct face-to-face
contacts among people who are socially defined as kinsmen. Justification
for this procedure lies in the fact that such a limitation partially obviates
the necessity for a rigorous definition of communication networks on the
basis of frequency counts.
    Starting from any ego in a Kaya village it is possible to trace a widely
 ramifying group of people who are classed as kinsmen (cuTTaaku). 2 In
 this particular region the class of kinsmen may include people who are
 non-Kaya. It may include members of various Telugu-speaking castes
 and Koya- and Telugu-speaking members of the Christian caste.
    Members of all these groups are resident in villages along the banks of
 the Godavari River and in close proximity to the road from Bhadrachal-
 lam to Nugur. Within the villages, it is common for each group to be
 physically separated into distinct hamlets, which are named for the sub-
 group occupying them. All the constituent groups of the population are
 further segmented by occupational specializations and kin-group align-
  ments. Occupational specialists include blacksmiths, stoneworkers, and
  religious performers and practitioners; kin-group alignments include
  clans, lineages, phratries, and castes.


          Types of Alternation

          At the level of abstraction that refers to the whole Koya tribe, it
  is possible to demonstrate that alternations in the use of terms of refer-
  ence for kinsmen occur at the phonological, morphological, and lexical
  levels. For example, the term aaN e (sister's son) among the Gommu

    2
      The transcription is broadly phonetic. Long vowels are marked by double vowels,
  retroflex consonants by upper case letters.
        256   Discovering Structure in Speech

Koyas is realized in another dialect area as aaN De. In still other area
there is an isogloss D/R, especially in pronominal endings. Thus, GuTTa
Koya has eelaaRi (younger sister) and Gommu Koya has eelaaDi. Other
variants occur in morphology, particularly with reference to the distribu-
tion of plurals. More important, however, for present purposes, are the
variations occurring within a communication network where dialect dif-
ferences are minimal.
   Within a group of socially defined kinsmen and, further, within the
subset that interacts with some frequency, there exist lexical and morpho-
 logical variations inexplicable by simple reference to dialect differences.
 Table 8.1 records a set of alternate lexemes used by a single informant for
 the group of people classed by him as kin.


        Lexical A lternation-1

         Taken in traditional terms, the items in list 1 are Telugu and the
items in list 2 are Koya. Isolating the terms in this fashion, however, is
misleading, for all forms occur in the linguistic repertory of a single
speaker. Considered as such, certain complications arise. For almost the
entire set of kinsmen there would appear to be alternate lexemes. The
problem would be simple_ if a bilingual Koya used items from list l when
speaking Telugu and items from list 2 when speaking Koya. We would
then have a simple case of code switching in which a Koya speaker em-
 ploys the Koya terms when speaking to a Telugu. Since most Telugus
 know little if any Koya, the relationship would be asymmetrical. In a
 given linguistic interchange involving the use of kin terms, the speaker's
 choice of the appropriate term would be determined by: ( 1) the kin relation
 obtaining between the speaker and hearer (or between the speaker or
 hearer and the person referred to), and (2) the linguistic repertoires of
 both speaker and hearer. Thus, given a Koya speaker and a Telugu hearer,
 the term chosen would be Telugu. Such switching would be facilitated if
 the semantic structures of the two codes were identical. The situation to
 be described, however, is somewhat more involved.
     The semantic distance between the two kinship codes is relatively slight.
  A componential analysis reveals the structure of the two codes, outlined
  in Table 8.2. The components are: (l) sex; (2) generation; (3) cross versus
  parallel; (4) relative age. For convenience, the component of relative sex
  of speaker is omitted and the relative age of linking relative is subsumed
  under relative age. The relative effectiveness of each component is indi-
  cated in the preceding table. It will be noted that the parallel-cross distinc-
  tion does not obtain in the Telugu system at the +2 and-2 generations. In
         Context and Alternation in Kaya Kinship Terminology                 257

         table 8.1
          Generation                      Telugu          Kaya

Grandparental (+2)
    FaFa                            taata              daadaal
    MoFa                            taalll             taataa/
    FaMo                            avva               emma
                                    avva               kaako

Parental (+ 1)
    Fa, FaBr, MoSiHu                ayya,               eyya,
                                      taNDri,             tappe
                                      nayana,
                                    /1(/{l/1(/

    MoBr, FaSiHu, WiFa, HuFa maama                      maamaal
    Mo, MoSi, FaBrWi           aama,                    evva,
                             talli                        talluru
    FaSi, MoBrWi, WiMo, HuMo atta                       pooye
Own (0)
   EBr, Emale parallel cousin       ll/111{1            enna
   Emale cross cousin, ESiHu    baava                   baaTaal
   ESi, Efemale parallel cousin akka                    ekka
   Efemale cross cousin, EBrWi  vodina                  enge
   YBr, Ymale parallel cousin   tammuDu                 tammuNDu
   Ymale cross cousin YSiHu     baamaaradi              eruNDu
   YSi, Yfemale parallel cousin cel/elu,                eelaaDi
                                  celli
    Yfemale cross cousin, YBrWi marada/11               eendaaDi
 Children's (-1)
     So, (x)BrSo, (o)SiSo            koDuku,            marri
                                       kummaruDu,        peeka
                                       abbayi
     (x)SiSo, DaHu, (o)BrSo          alluDu             aaNe
     Da, (x)BrDa, (o)SiDa            ammayi,            mayyaaDi
                                        k11t11ru,       piikiDi
                                     biDDA
     (x)SiDa, SoWi, (o)BrDa          kooDa/11           koDiyaaDi
 Grandchildren (-2)
     SoSo                            ma11amaD11          tammuNDu
     DaSo                            manamaDu            eruNDu
     xDaDa                           manamaraal          eelaaDi
     SoDa                            manamaraal          eendaaDi
          Note: These are minimal ranges of application of the terms to kin. For a fuller
          treatment, as well as formal analysis and discussion of morphology, see Tyler
          1964, 1965, 1967. (x) indicates male speaker; (o) indicates female speaker. E and
          Y denote elder and younger respectively. The remaining abbreviations are stan-
          dard: Br Brother, Da Daughter, Fa Father, Hu Husband, Mo Mother, Si Sister,
          So Son, Wi Wife. A parallel cousin is a child of one's mother's sister (MoSi) or
          father's brother (FaBr); a cross cousin is a child of one's mother's brother (Mo Br)
          or father's sister (FaSi); i.e., in the chain of consanguineal kin through whom one
          is related, the sex of the links remains the same ("parallel") or changes ("cross").
           258       Discovering Structure in Speech

            table 8.2
Telugu
                         Male                                     Female

       Parallel                     Cross         Parallel                        Cross

+2                    taata                                    avva
+I   ayya                           amma       mawna                            atta
      llllllll                      akka       baava                            voe/in a
 0
      tamm11D11                     cellelu    baamaaracli                      maraclal11
-I    koD11k11                      kuturu     all11Du                          ko0Dal11
-2                     manamaDu                                mwzamaraal

Koya


+2     claaclaal                    taataal     emma                            kaako
+I     eyya                         maamaat     evva                            pooye
       enna                         baaTaal     ekka                            enge
 0
       taam11ND11                   eruND11     eelaaDi                         eenclaaDi
-1     marri                        aaNe        mayyaaDi                        koDiyaaDi
-2     tamm11NDu                    er11NDu     eelaaDi                         eendaaDi
             Note: Certain aspects of morphology have been omitted. For details, see Tyler
             1967. In Koya tamm11N D11 in O and -2 generations is analyzed as a pair of hom-
             onyms, and similarly for the other pairs (eruNc/11, eelaaDi, eendaaDi) in the
             younger sibling/cousin and grandchild generations (cf. Tyler 1964). As indicated
             with Table 8.1; "parallel" indicates that the consanguineal links in the relation-
             ship are all of the same sex, and "cross" that this is not so; thus ayya (Fa, FaBr,
             MoSiHu) is +I, Male, Parallel; amnw (Mo, MoSi, FaBrWi) is +I, Female,
             Parallel; maama (MoBr, FaSiHu, WiHu, HuFa) is+ I, Male, Cross; etc.


all other respects, the two systems are coordinate. Hence, in terms of
semantic structure, the transform (for a Koya speaker) from one system
to the other is fairly simple. It entails only the following rules. 3

                 1. [Koya] {FaFa
                            MoFa

                 2. [Koya] {FaMo
                            MoMo
                                         --       [Telugu] Parent's Fa

                                                  [Telugu] Parent's Mo

                 3. [Koya] foSo
                            DaSo

                 4. [Koya ] {SoDa
                             DaDa
                                          --      [Telugu] Child's So

                                                  [Telugu] Child's Da

   3
     The notation system used is that developed by Romney (1964). m indicates male,ffe-
 male, a any sex, ± an ascendant link, -a descendant link, o a sibling link. Since grandson is
 the reciprocal of grandfather, the reciprocal operation (*) says to read * as±. The first mem-
 ber of an expression is ego; e.g., English father would be a+ m.
         Context and Alternation in Koya Kinship Terminology     259

These relationships can be restated in a notation system developed by
Romney (1964), in which the first member of any expression is ego; a
indicates person of any sex; m indicates male, f female; + indicates an
ascending link, - a descending link, and O a sibling link. English father
would thus be a+ m, daughter a - f.

        I. {a+ m+ m

        2.
            a+f+m
           {a+ m+ f
                           --     a+a+m

                                  a+a+f
            a+f+f
        3. {a- m- m
            a-f-m
        4. ra-f-f
            -m-f
                          --      a-a-m

                                  a-a-f

The individual rules show little or no advantage to the formal notation
system. An advantage does appear, however, when we try to state the
generalization that underlies the individual rules. Notice that the rules
apply just in the case of relatives two generations removed from the
speaker (ego). Rules l and 3, and likewise rules 2 and 4, thus could and
should be united. In words,

5. [Koya] male lineal relative, two generations removed, through
a male link, and male lineal relative, two generations removed,
through a female link [Telugu] male lineal relative, two genera-
tions removed.
6. [Koya] female lineal relative, two generations removed,
through a male link, and female lineal relative, two generations
removed, through a female link [Telugu] female lineal relative,
two generations removed.

Since grandson and grandfather are reciprocals of each other, that is, the
same except for the direction in which generatio·n is counted, it is possible
to define a symbol, *, for a reciprocal operation (that is, read * as±), and
to state the generalizations of 5 and 6 much more economically and
clearly:

        5. {a* m*m
            a* f * m
        6. {a* m * f
             a* f * f
                          --     a* a* m

                                 a*a*f

The simplification takes advantage, not only of reciprocal * but also of the
symbol a, representing either sex. Indeed, taking further advantage of a,
- - -., ., _-_ _. ., .~. ._-, ~,. .,. . y.---


                                     260        Discovering Structure in Speech

                    all the rules can be expressed in a single succinct statement:

                                        a* m * a
                                     7 {                          a* a* a
                                      · a* f * a -

                    In words, wherever two terms for a lineal relative two generations re-
                    moved are differentiated in Koya by the sex of the lineal link, they are
                    not so differentiated in Telugu.
                      To complete the statement of the rules, it is necessary to provide data
                    on the environment in which this transform is permissible. Since we have
                    said that such a transform occurs when a Koya speaker refers to a kins-
                    man in a linguistic interchange with a Telugu-speaking kinsman, this can
                    be formulated as follows: 4

                                         a* m * a
                                                                  [a * a * a/K - T]
                                     8. {a * f * a        -
                    This is to be read: the kin types comprise under a * m * a and a* f * a are
                    realized as a * a * a in the environment of a Koya speaker and Telugu
                    hearer.
                      For all significant environments, the distributional statement is:

                                     9. [a* m * a]            _        a*a*a          -T
                                         a*f*a                         a*a*a
                                                                   {   [:: r* */J -
                                                                       a *m *a
                                                                                         t
                                                                                      elsewhere
                                                                       a* f * a

                    That is, to take the particular case of reference to a grandfather (a+
                    a+ m), the kin types father's father and mother's father are realized as
                    parent's father in the environment of a Kaya speaker and Telugu hearer;
                    they are realized as either parent's father or as father's father and mother's
                    father (separately) in the environment of a Kaya speaker and a Telugu
                    Christian hearer; in all other environments they are realized as father's
                    father and mother's father (separately). (The parallel statement, mutatis
                    mutandis, would hold for grandmother (a+ a+ f), grandson (a - a - m),
                    and granddaughter (a - a - f).

                         4
                             The notation / denotes "in the environment of." Thus,
                                                    a + f + m-a + a + m/k-t
                                                    a+m+m
                     indicates that a + m + m and a + f + m are both realized as a + a + m in the environment
                     of a Koya speaker and a Telugu hearer.




                                                                                                            rd
            Context and Alternation in Koya Kinship Terminology   261

       The added variation with regard to -t requires a further restriction of
    the social environment. To my knowledge, this alternation occurs only
    Where a Kaya Christian male is married to a Telugu Christian female. In
    these cases, the linguistic repertories of husband and wife in kinship
    terminology tend toward isomorphy, and code switching probably occurs
   only when the presence of his wife's relatives, for example, the husband
   Would use the appropriate Telugu term in speaking to her.
      In general, at the level of semantic structure these two transform rules
   plus the accompanying distributional statement enable one to predict the
   appropriate denotata of a term. Once these operations have been per-
   f?rmed, the lexical realization of the remaining categories involves only a
  simple process of substitution, or word-for-word translation, for example,
  a~N e-aalDu/k - T. Realization of the appropriate lexeme can be pre-
  dicted on the basis of the foregoing rules, with the exception of a Koya
  Christian speaking to another Christian (k - k, k - t). For k - k, the
  following additional statements are necessary:

                        a - f- m-manamaDu /k _ k
                        a - f - f-manamaraal

   That is, when referring to a daughter's child (son or daughter), Koya
   Christians use the term from the Telugu list in Table 8.1.
      Lexemic realization for these categories when a Koya Christian's
   addressee is a Telugu Christian (k - t) is dependent on the transform
   occurring in rule 9, above:
     The rules are to be read: (l) when father's father and mother's father
   are merged as parents' father, and son's son are merged as child's son,
   one's daughter's son is called manamaDu in the environment of a Koya
   Christian speaker and a Telugu Christian hearer; under the same cir-
  cumstances one's daughter's daughter is called manamaraal; when the
  merger does not occur, then (in the same environment) one's daughter's
  :on is called eruNDu, one's daughter's daughter_koDiyaaDi. That is, in
   he _one case a Telugu, in the other a Koya term 1s used.
     Smee Koya and Telugu are both Dravidian languages, many of the kin
- terms are cognate. Some are related by quite simple sound changes, for
  etxample, Telugu a-, Koya e- (avva, evva); Telugu -D, Koya -ND-
 ihanzmuDu, tammuNDu). Note, however, that the semantic :ange of
    ese cognate forms varies. amma in Telugu denotes Mo, while Kaya
 enzma denotes FaMo; Telugu taata denotes FaFa amd MoFa, while
 Koya taataal denotes only MoFa. Given the phonological similarity of
 these terms, one might expect a certain amount of inte1ference. This does
 not seem to be the case here-although it could ·be argued that in other
 areas, where differences occur in the extent to which Koyas dominate the
        262    Discovering Structure in Speech

ecology of the speech community, interference stemming from these
sources could be a cause of changes in the terminological system. This,
however, is outside the domain of this chapter.


        Lexical Alternation-I I

         The second type of lexical alternation relates more to situational
alternates within a kinship code than it does to varieties of codes. In the
preceding schedule of terms, it will be noted that within each of the codes
certain categories have alternate lexemes. These occur with terms for
father, mother, younger sister, son, and daughter in the Telugu code, and
for father, mother, son, and daughter in the Koya code. There are two
problems involved here: (1) Are the denotata of all variant forms equival-
ent; (2) if so, are there environments that limit the distribution of some
variants?
   In the case of taN DRi/ nayana/ ayya/ naana, the first two denote father
and father's brothers, with appropriate morphemes denoting relative age,
that is, a+ m(om) 0 • 1• 5 naana, however, denotes only an actual father
(a+ m), and ayya denotes father's brothers (a+ mom), but not father.
In summary:

              taN DRi/nayana denotes a+ m(om) 0 •1          [Fa(FaBr)]
              naana          denotes a + m                  [Fa]
              ayya           denotes a + mom                [FaBr]

Since ayya and naana are not structually equivalent to the other terms,
they need no longer concern us here. taN DRi is generally regarded as the
more formal and respectful term; nayana is less respectful and more in-
formal. The major variable for these two then is the extent to which one
wishes to confer respect on the referent. In summary statement:

                              a+ m(om) 0 •1//F/taNDRi
                                           //If/ nayana

  F indicates formal and If informal. The set of situations in which in-
formality is permissible for this range is unrecorded.

            For eyya/tappe:      eyya denotes a+ m(om)         Fa (FaBr)
                                 tappe denotes a + m           Fa
            For evva/talluru:    evva denotes a+ f(of)         Mo (MoSi)
                                 talluru denotes a+ f          Mo

  5 Parentheses indicate an optional expansion; superscript numbers indicate the number of

times the expansion may be employed. Thus a+ m(om)0 •1 will generate a+ m and a + mom.
          Context and Alternation in Kaya Kinship Terminology          263

   For anna/talli I have been unable to isolate significant differences in
either denotata or environment, other than a general impression that talli
more frequently denotes a+ f and may be more formal than amma. For
lack of better data, these two will be considered synonymous in the do-
main of kinship reference.
   It should be noted that all these structural differences have the effect of
transforming the system at the + I consanguineal level from bifurcate
merging to bifurcate collateral.
   cellelu/celli differentiate at both structural and environmental levels.
cellelu denotes younger sister and younger female parallel relatives (fY) 5
that is a(+a 1) 0 •1 o(aj-)0 •1fu, (i = j), while ce/li denotes only YOUNGER
SISTER (aofY) unless one's female parallel relatives reside in the same
patrilaterally extended household. In this case the structural differentia-
tion is negated. celli in reference to a younger sister is further differentiated
from cellelu as "sweet" (tiyyani) usage. I have little data on the specific
environments in which "sweet" usage is permissible, but believe its use is
restricted to the home among consanguineal kin. In terms of the speaker's
intention, celli denotes an intimate relation between speaker and younger
sister. These distributions are formulated as:

                     a(+a;) 0 •1 o(aj-) 0 •1f 11   celli/In
                                                   celli/PEH
                                                   celli/H
                                                   cellelu/elsewhere

  PEH indicates patrilateral extended household, In intimacy, Hin the
home. The ordering of rules is as given. Both parenthetical expressions
must be expanded or not expanded together.
  Note that the highest frequency of alternation occurs among categories
of kin who are apt to be members of the same household. This is in line
with the general expectation that maximum differentiation occurs in areas
of high interest and interaction. Further, for the population being dis-
cussed, it is precisely between the reciprocals Fa/Ch and Mo/Ch that the
greatest role inconsistencies occur. (For further discussion of this point,
see Tyler 1964.)


        Morphological Variation

         Both in Koya and Telugu, the referential use of kin terms in-
volves not only the selection of the appropriate noun stem but also the
selection of appropriate possessive pronouns and derivative suffixes.
(Thus, in Koya and Telugu a kin term may consist of possessive pronoun
+ noun stem ± derivative suffixes.) It can be argued that this is in the
         264     Discovering Sti·ucture in Speech

domain of syntactic function, but it is easier in the present context to
treat the whole problem under morphology. Whether syntactic or mor-
phological, the main point is that the mere knowledge of the appropriate
noun stern and its denotata is not sufficient to generate acceptable state-
ments of kinship reference.
   The distribution and use of possessive pronouns and derivative suffixes
in first person reference have previously been discussed for Koya (Tyler
1967). The first and second person possessive pronouns in Koya and
Telugu do not differ. They are: maa- "our, my" formal; naa- "my" in-
formal. Second person possessive pronouns are nii- "your" informal,
mii- "your" formal. The derivative suffixes occurring with kin terms for
Telugu are: -ayya, "sir"; -gaaru, "sir, madam"; for Koya: -aal, "mature
rnale." 6 Table 8.3 indicates the distribution of first person possessives
and derivative suffixes for Telugu.


         Possessive Pronouns

         For Koya, the distribution of possessives is similar to that in
Table 8.3 with the exception that maa- and naa- alternate for elder female
relatives.
  The alternation of naa-/maa- for baava and vodina is paralleled in
Koya, and the reasons for the alternation seem to be identical. On the
one hand, these are 'elder relatives whom one should respect, but on the
other hand, they are people with whom a joking relation is permissible.
Since a female is given somewhat more latitude in a joking relation, sex of
speaker is a determinant. The next determinant is audience composition.
This involves two factors: (1) The presence or absence of the referent,
and (2) the presence or absence of the speaker's elder consanguineal
relatives and/or the presence or absence of non-kin. If the referent is
absent, maa- is used; if present, naa-. The latter is abandoned when the
speaker's elder consanguineal relatives or elder non-kin are present. The
major situational determinants are weddings and a festival, the Bhitna
paN Dum. One phase in a wedding ceremony involves a form of group
singing in which the bride's party and the groom's party sing competing
rounds. As the songs frequently refer to the sexual attributes of a baava
or vodina, these terms occur in the songs with the informal possessive
naa-. Since Christians no longer use the Koya ceremony, the significant
environments for this variation are K - T and, with the appropriate
semantic transform, K - K. During the Bhirna festival a mock marriage
  6
    There are others, for example, -Du, -Di, -a(a)/(11), and so forth; but for the most part
these are not optional in the same sense as -aa/, -gaam, -ayya. The English glosses are only
handy approximations.
                                                                                               ,--
                                                                                           /
                Context and Alt        . .
                                  ernatwn 1t1 Kaya Kinship Terminology             265
               table 8.3

                               First Person Possessive                     Derivative Suffix
(Tel11R11) Stem

 taata*
 avva
 naana
                         -     maa-

                                 +
                                 +
                                                  /l{l(l-



                                                    +
                                                    +
                                                                     -ayya

                                                                       +
                                                                                         -gaaru

                                                                                               +
                                                                                               +
 nayana                          +                                     +
                                 +                                                             +
 taNDRi                                                                                        +
 ayya                            +
                                 +                                                             +
 amma                                                                                          +
 tal/i                           +
                                 +                                                             +
 maama                                                                                         +
 atta                            +                                     +                       +
 llfl/l{I                        +                                                             +
 tammuDu                         +                                     +                       +
 baava                                              +
 vodina                          +                  +                  +                       +
 akka                            +                  +                                          +
 celle/u                         +                                     +                       +
 baamaaradi                                         +
 maradalu                                           +
 koDuku                                             +
 abbayi                                             +
 kummaruDu                       +                  +
 ammayi                                             +
 kuturu                          +                  +
 biDDa                                              +
 alluDu                                             +
 kooDalu                                            +
 manamaDu                                           +
 /ll(//l(/Jn(//'{/(1/                               +
                                                    +
               * Where maa-and naa-alternate derivative suffixes do not occur when naa-
               is used. This differs substantially f~om the system in T-T and t-t, and wherever
               T-to t-is speaker. In these cases maa-does not alternate with 1uw-.


is performed. At this time the distribution of maa-/naa- is the same as for
a real wedding.
   These distributions may be formulated as:

                         a+ aioa1 - ae, (i ~ j), PP 1 naa-/f
                                                            naa-/R
                                                            naa-/WS
                                                            ,naa-/elsewhere

f denotes female speaker, R referent present, WS wedding songs, and PP 1
first person possessive pronoun.
        266   Discovering Structure in Speech

   Alternation of maa-/naa- with terms in the +2 generation is largely a
function of the age of the speaker. Between grandparents and grand-
children there is usually a close, intimate relationship. The care of children
is frequently entrusted to elder grandparents who are no longer able to
work actively in the fields. Consequently, young children use naa- when
referring to these relatives. The social setting and audience composition
may also be important here. It js my general impression that mature
 speakers use naa- in reference to-these kinsmen in the home among other
 household members. My principal informant asserted that this was the
 case, but since my access to Kaya homes was limited, I have little to
 substantiate this. These rules may be summarized as:

                             PP 1   naa-/1
                                    naa-/H
                                    naa-/elsewhere

 I denotes an immature speaker, H inside the home.
    The alternation of maa-/ naa- for ammayi and abbayi is unexplained.
    The use of possessive pronouns in second person kinship reference, un-
 like that in first person reference, confers status or respect on the hearer,
 not on the referent of the term. The pronouns in question are: mii- "your"
 formal; nii- "your"' informal. The pronouns are the same for both Telugu
 and Koya. The following example should indicate the process involved
  here.
     K-T: mii tammuDu ee pani ceestunnaaDu, "what work is your younger
  brother doing (now)?" Since a younger brother is low status, one might
  expect agreement between the possessive pronoun and the noun stem,
  that is, nii tammuDu rather than mii tarnmuDu. Because nii tammuDu oc-
  curs in other situations, nii- and mii- are not inalienable in the sense that
  ,wa- and maa- are. The important variable here concerns the relative
  statuses of speaker and hearer. Briefly, the sources of status are educa-
  tion, wealth, occupation, categorical membership in kin groups, and per-
  sonal characteristics. Since all sources of status are not isomorphically
   distributed in specific population segments or kin categories, the use of
   possessive pronouns in second person reference cannot be predicted
   simply on the basis of categorical membership in K, k, T, t groups or from
   knowledge of the kin relation obtaining between speaker and hearer. The
   precise details of this system cannot be delineated in this brief discussion.
   Suffice it to say that when the speaker's status is lower than the hearer's,
   mii- occurs; when higher, nii- occurs. If the status of speaker and hearer
   are approximately equivalent, mii- and nii- are in free variation. Between
   old or ritual friends, nii- is used irrespective of status differences. This;'
   may be formulated as:                                                      ,
        Context and Alter/lat·1011..
                                   111
                                         Koya Kinship Terminology   267

                               PP 2/mii-/       L-H
                                   /11ii-/      H-L
                                   /nii-/       F-F
                                   /nii-, mii-/ E-E

L indicates low status H h · h
ppz second person     ' , ,·'g status, E equivalent status, F friends, and
                    possessive pronouns.


        Derivative Suffixes


          D_erivative suffixes in Koya and Telugu differ in the lack of a
Koya eqmvalen_t for -gaaru. Where -gaarn occurs for females in Telugu,
Koya h~s <P: W~th ~he ~xception of its occurrence with Esi, Telugu -ayya
is identical m d1stnbution to Koya -aal.
    Unfortunately, data are not at all certain here, but the most important
variable seems to be the definition of the situation. In part, this is deter-
 mined on the basis of audience composition. First, if the referent of a
given term is present, derivative suffixes are used; when the referent is
 absent, they are used less frequently. Second, if the audience consists of
 people whom the speaker wants to impress by his knowledge of respectful
 behavior, the derivative suffixes will be used. The strength of this situa-
 tion is such that one of the most disparaging comments one can make
 about another is that he is not respectful. Since one of the most critical
 audiences consists of one's elder affines, the presence or absence of elder
 affines is usually sufficient to predict the appropriate use of derivative
 suffixes. Further, among affines, those who are related to ego by only a
 single affinal link (in contradistinction to those with whom a series of such
 affinal links may be traced) are apt to be more critical. These distributions
  may be formulated as follows:

                                OS           OS/R
                                             OS/A 1
                                             </>, OS/A2
                                             cp/elsewhere

 DS denotes derivative suffixes, R referent present, A 1 single link affines,
 A2 multiple link affines, and <jJ no DS.
   In more general terms, certain social gatherings are considered t_o be
 more formal than others. Marriages, for example, are formal occas10ns.
 Formal behavior, however, is required only in specific phases of the
 wedding ceremony, or only from the central actors. The rules of formal
        268   Discovering Structure in Speech

behavior are not enjoined for peripheral actors-in fact, the reverse is usu-
ally the case. Analysis of these situations is too complex for brief sum-
mary, but enough has been said to indicate that a general rule may be
formulated:

                            DS     /DS/F
                                   cp/elsewhere

F denotes a formal situation.


        Conclusion

         This paper does not conclude that the rules presented are suf-
ficient to predict who will be called what in entirety. There are too many
gaps, both in data and in analysis. Yet, sketchy and incomplete as this
analysis is, it should at least indicate that the appropriate use of Koya kin
terms cannot be predicted solely on the basis of a formal analysis pre-.
dieted on the assumption of genealogical reckoning. There are many
contextual factors to be taken.into consideration. Among these are: social
setting, audience composition, sex and age of speaker/hearer, linguistic
repertoires of speaker/hearer, and-most difficult of all-something that
might be called the speaker's intention. Many of these and others have
been previously discussed (Ervin-Tripp 1964:86-94; Gumperz 1964b:
 143-147; Hymes 1964e:15-25) and need not receive further comment
 here. The important point is that this chapter demonstrates the possibility
of extending formal rules to these contextual factors. It is not an argument
 against the validity of formal analysis; rather, it is an argument for the
 extension of formal analysis to include extra-genealogical factors.
    Even though the Koya case may seem rather extreme, it should demon-
 strate that less complex types of variation can probably be easily handled
 by analysis of the sort used in this chapter. In addition, it should empha-
 size that problems of variation (or of general ethnography) call for some-
 what different field techniques than those that have traditionally been
 used. There must, for example, be a greater emphasis on the recording of
 kin terms as they are used in concrete and/or simulated ethnographic
 situations (cf. Conklin 1964; Hymes l 964e: 11). The anthropologist
 armed only with a genealogy and an informant or informants and using
 traditional methods of questioning cannot hope to cope with the problem
 of variation. This is not intended as a blanket condemnation of such
 methods. They are useful in collecting some kinds of data and can provide
 a base of information on which it is possible to build, but it should be
 abundantly clear from other publications (e.g., Frake 1962; Metzger and
                                                                               f-
                                                                           l
        Context and Alternation in Kaya Kins/zip Terminology   269

Williams 1963) that if our aim is ethnographic description, then field
methods must be adequate to the task. -
   Finally, these data show that much of what has usually been simply
regarded as unimportant variations on the basic structural pattern of a
terminological system consists of highly important differentiations, not
only in denotata but in role expectations as well. The structural pattern of
a system emerges as an ordered relation between these differentiations
and contextual features.
9

Social Context and Semantic Feature:
Cf he Russian Pronominal Usage
PAUL FRIEDRICH




Paul Friedrich is professor of anthropology at the Uni-
versity of Chicago. He received an M.A. degree in Rus-
sian at Harvard before taking his doctorate at Yale, and
has since taught structural linguistics and cultural anthro-
pology at Harvard, the University of Michigan, and the
University of Pennsylvania. In addition to two years of
fieldwork among the Tarascan Indians of Mexico, he has
done research on Russian semantics, on the Malayalam
language (along the Malabar coast in India), and in the
reconstruction of Proto-Indo-European semantic
systems.
    Friedrich himself sums up neatly the interest of pro-
nominal usage: "Just two short words, operating in all
speech events that involve two interlocutors, signaled the
relative position of each pole in hundreds of dyadic rela-
tionships." There is good precedent for use of a his-
torical-philological approach in anthropology, but its ap-
plication to a major literary tradition may seem unusual.
Literature, however, is well established as a source for
analysis of address (see Metcalf 1938; Brown and Ford
 1961 ), and Friedrich makes clear the value of nineteenth-
century novels in particular. Not only are they rich in in-
dications of common usage but they also bear witness to
dynamics of use and implicit meanings. Friedrich points
 to a conscious awareness in Russian society of ex-
 tralinguistic signaling as sharing the same dimensions as
 pronouns, for example, the seduced girl whose eyes say
 ty while her words are vy (in Tolstoy's Resurrection).
 Here, as so often where the two conflict, the nonlinguistic
 modality overrides the linguistic (see the concluding
                            270
                  Social Context and Semantic Feature    271

   remarks on "latent ty"). And, Friedrich suggests, use of
   such data, by grappling with inner as well as overt
   speech, may enable one better to understand personal
  strategies and to anticipate linguistic change (cf. Howell
   1968).
     The pronouns are linked with other sets of terms which
  would have to be taken into account in a complete study
  of address. Pronominal selection is therefore merely a
  special case of the type of sociolinguistic selection dis-
  cussed by Ervin-Tripp (Chapter 7), Blom and Gumperz
  (Chapter 14), and Passin (1966). As Friedrich points out,
  however, focus on pronouns is nevertheless specially ad-
  vantageous. They are as frequent, easily noted, obliga-
  tory categories linking grammar with social categories.
  Here in address, he suggests, may be a surer connection
  of grammar with culture than in attempts to link grammar
  with world view.
     Ten components serve to indicate the features neces-
  sary to account for the Russian usage: social context (set-
 ting, scenes); characteristics of participants, i.e., age,
 generation, sex, genealogical distance, relative authority,
 group membership; the tone (or key) underlying a rela-
 tionship or brought to expression in it (principally soli-
 darity but also, later, sarcasm and iron:y); topic of dis-
 course; and language variety itself, i.e., dialect. The same
 discriminations underlie the symbolism of kinship termi-
 nology and, one may suspect, the other forms of socio-
 linguistic choice and switching within the society. Fried-
 rich suggests that some six to a dozen such components
 may be found to underlie all such systems; he implies that
further research might establish such a limited set of
 dimensions or universals for sociolinguistic symbolism
(social meanings) generally (see Buchler and Freeze
 1966). The present dimensions meet the test of account-
ing for nearly all the Russian evidence and of predicting
the usage in new texts.
    Notice that the discriminations are made with regard to
the social situation and relationship with which the pro-
nouns are used. The two pronouns themselves are dia-
critic directly of social distance (its presence or absence,
or greater or lesser degree). Whether the absence of
social distance signaled by ty is affectionate or contemp-
tuous, whether the presence of social distance signaled
        272   Discovering Structure in Speech

        by vy is respectful or rejecting, emerges from the interac-
        tion between the meaning of the pronoun and the
        meanings of pronouns in the twin contexts of previous
        discourse and present event (including, as noted, facial
        and paralinguistic accompaniment).
           The Russian usage is presented first from the stand-
        point of patterns of exchange within dyadic relationships
        rather than, as with the Koya in the preceding chapter,
        from the standpoint of rules for a given speaker. (But no-
        tice that to specify interlocutors, or their relevant charac-
        teristics, in the context to which rules are sensitive, can
        accomplish the same thing). After symmetrical and asym-
        metrical patterns for both vy and ty are described, Fried-
        rich turns to the dynamics of what he felicitously calls a
        stable though not static system. Having observed earlier
        that context may determine usage, but that usage may
        also define context, he presents several instances of
        pronominal "switching" and "breakthrough," including
        temporary and persistent deviance, and covert attitudes.
         Paralinguistic signaling aside, the pronominal system it-
        self provides for an expressive counterpoint within rela-
        tionships.
           This and the preceding chapter complement each
        other, each broaching an essential aspect of research into
         rules of use. Both are concerned with the social context
         of linguistic forms, the one to bring it within the scope of
         formal rules, the other to interpret the texture of use as
         well. Additional related readings are provided by Conklin
         (1962), Friedrich (1964, 1966), Goodenough (1965b),
        Hymes (1964c), Hymes (typescript), Jain (1969), Martin
        (l 964), and Nuestupny (l 968).


         Introduction

           Studies in the relation between language and culture have some-
. times focused on how a way of life is categorized through words. The
  results are often of enormous value, as in the case of a dictionary of con-
  textual definitions. But lexicographical inventories typically lack theoreti-
  cal explication.
     A second kind of study may focus on the connections between obliga-
  tory grammatical categories in the linguistic system and axiomatic distinc-
  tions in the abstract thought of a people. Controlled demonstrations are
  sometimes possible, and the conclusions may be intellectually
  challenging, but one often finds on closer inspection that the causal rela-
             Context and Alternation in Kaya Kinship Terminology                  273

  tionships are little more than suggested or asseverated (Jakobson
  1959: 142-43).
     In short, language and culture studies tend to oscillate between compar-
  atively descriptive correlations of "words and things" and comparatively
  tenuous correlations between grammar and metaphysics. Just as fruitful
  as the lexicographic and philosophical extremes have been the attempts to
  relate either speech behavior or the inferred linguistic structure to either
  the societal regularities or the patterns of a culture. 1 In what follows I
  shall attempt to demonstrate how speech usage is determined by cultural
  principles. More concretely, I shall try to show how second person pro-
  nouns were selected and understood in nineteenth century Russia. To do
 this I will first evaluate the evidence for pronominal usage. Then I will
 show how pronominal usage covaried with genealogical distance, emo-
 tional solidarity, and eight other variables. The patterns governing the
 three types of symmetrical and asymmetrical usage of the pronoun will be
 considered in detail, leading directly to five cases of pronominal switching
 and what I call "breakthrough," notably in Crime and Punishment. A
 final section deals with the expressive and latent functions of the pronoun
 ty. The conclusions concern the relative advantages and disadvantages of
 this kind of semantic analysis.


           Background

         The evidence on the society and culture of the Russia of the last
century happens to be excellent, largely due to three brilliant magna
opera of one to two volumes each, composed by three very different men:
a German baron and economist (von Haxthausen), a French sociologist
and man of letters (Leroy-Beaulieu), and a peripatetic Scotch journalist
(Wallace). Their picture is rounded out by other sociological, eth-
nographic, and belletristic articles and books written over the past
hundred years.
   The information on pronouns is similarly full. But first a historical note.
Until about 1700 only ty had been employed, whereas " . . . the French
manner of address to one person in the plural number appeared in eigh-
teenth century and rapidly became current among educated circles"
(lsachenko 1960:414). 2 By the Napoleonic era French was already a
passport to high society. The use of Russian vy as a formal and respectful
singular had become firmly established and launched on its independent

  1 "Society" in this slightly technical sense refers to the regularities that may be observed,

measured, or otherwise determined as relating the individuals and groups of some bounded
population. "Culture," on the other hand, refers to the structured set of historically derived
explicit and implicit norms, values, attitudes, feelings, and ideas that are shared and trans-
mitted by the members of a society.
   2 References for Russian literature cited are appended at the end of this chapter.
         274     Discovering Structure in Speech

course, although subsequently reinforced and subtly influenced by the
pervasive French bilingualism of the upper classes and their constant ex-
posure to the tu/vous system of French novels and plays.
    The Russian realistic novel gives full and balanced evidence on pro-
nominal usage. For example, Tolstoy depicts the high aristocracy, Dos-
tojevsky, the patterns of the intermediate urban classes. Gorki unfolds a
panorama of proletarian and artisan customs, Leskov covers the clergy,
and Zlatovratsky and Sh.olokhov provide truly ethnographic detail on the
peasants and Cossaks, respectively. All authors-particularly Tolstoy
and Dostojevsky-include contacts between persons of diverse back-
ground; their status conflicts and rapidly fluctuating emotions are often
symbolized through pronominal usage, which, needless to say, is one of
the serious losses in any English translation. The Russian novel was real-
istic, not only in its concern with status differences, with burning moral
 issues, and with human nature but because it referred to the culture of the
 readers themselves, or to that of groups such as the peasantry which they
 had come to know through personal experience; ethnographic accuracy
 was an aesthetic imperative. 3 In the Russian novel and any similar text
 the pronouns are both frequent and very free in their distribution; in mY
 sample of over eight thou.sand pages the pronoun must at least be implied
 every time a verb refers to an addressee. Pronouns belong to what
 linguists of the Prague School call "background phenomena," and cannot
 be artificially employed any more than any other grammatical paradigm;
 no matter how original his wording or syntax, a creative writer must use
 the obligatory, covert categories of language and culture in conformity
  with the generally held norms. The figures in Gogol and Chekhov, for all
  their uniqueness, do not jar the reader in their use of pronouns qua pro-
  nouns. In fact, the originality of a protagonist cannot be evaluated without
  reference to the larger context of cultural norms and values.
     The second person pronouns functioned, not in isolation, but in-
  terrelated with other sets, notably kinship terms, proper names, official
  ranks, words reflecting occupation, relative age, and similar categories.
  Numerous kinship terms of address and many other quasi-kinship terms
  such as kum (ritual co-parent) were frequent in conversation, particularlY
  among the peasants. All classes of Russians interjected "brother," "little
   mother," and other terms when consciously or subconsciously trying to
  create an informal, congenial atmosphere with non-relatives. And there
   were numerous combinations of proper names, ranging from nicknames,
   to diminutives, to the first· name alone, to the first name plus a fixed

    3
      As Gerald Kelly has pointed out in a personal communication, this contrasts with the
 United States, where much of the literature functions to inform the reader, to create expec·
 tations of usage and behavior in subcultures not known through personal experience. The
 critical notion of "realism" is hardly adequate as a cover term for the Russian novel. In the
 present context, suffice it to say that the literature did provide a wealth of insight into societY
 and character.
                              Social Context and Semantic Feature            275

epithet ("Mikhail the Wolf'), to the.name plus an informal or formal pa-
tronymic (lvanych as against Ivanovich), and so on up the line. These
means of address had to be calibrated with each other. For example,
"A ren't ty joking, Foma?" "In the first place, I am not ty . 1• • but vy, and
don't forget it; and not Foma, but Foma Fomich" (Dostojevsky,
S~epanchikovo Village, 472). Finally, all the terms of address covaried
With the partly independent and equally copious terms of reference. The
total number of combinations was astronomical. Gogol was literally cor-
rect when he wrote facetiously in Dead Souls (35-36):
 It should be said that if we in Russia have not yet caught up with the foreigners in
8
 ?me things, we have long overtaken them in the means of address. It is impos-

r
sible to count all the shades and niceties of our means of address. The Frenchman
    the German will never grasp or understand all the particularities and dif-
 e'.e~ces; with almost the same voice and language he will start to speak with a
Intlltonaire, and with a petty tobacco vendor although, of course, in his soul he is
?Propriately base to the first. It is not like that with us. Among us there are wise
 ellows who will speak altogether differently with a landlord having two hundred
:~rfs th.an with one who has three hundred, and with one who has three hundred
h e~ Wtll not speak as they would with one having five hundred, and with one
 ;ving five hundred, again, not as with one having eight hundred; in a word,
a though you go to a million, they will always find shades (or difference) .

  . Second person pronouns have been analyzed from various points of
View. Social psychologists have shown' how pronominal usage is con-
ne~ted with attitudes and behavior (Brown and Gilman 1960). Philol-
ogists have produced accurate and carefully documented histories of the
t~age. in German, French, and other langu~ge_s (~.g., F~y 1918-20).
b ngu1sts such as Jesperson have inferred the _d1stmctive attnbutes.sh~red
/ Pronouns, such as their degree of abstract10n and freedom of d1stnbu-
 ion. In fact, the second person pronouns are of singular theoretical inter-
est because they link the abstract properties of a basic grammatical
b a ct·1gm to a second matrix of culturally specific components that are
Par
  0
    th very frequent and of major emotional and social significance. In
~ther Words, pronominal usage affords us an analytically accessible link
  ~t~een the obligatory categories of grammar and a second domain of
0
  . hgatory semantic categories related to the social culture: second person
~Ionouns occupy a boundary zone between "deep grammar" and the
  eep levels of attitude and norm by which a society is organized. For this
~e;son their study may emerge as a comparatively fruitful ground, a
be icitous case, for explorations of the hypotheses advanced by von Hum-
  oit, Boas, Wharf, Sapir, and others. 4
r01'. Norman McQuown has been emphasizing the sociolinguistic significance of substitutes
0th sev~ral years. I have profited from several discussions with him on this subject.
rela~~Wise, I retain h~pe but extreme skepticism about demonstrating any _pervasive ca~sal
Who fn between social structure and grammatical patterns (e.g., Russian aspect), a la
     r.
          276     Discovering Structure in Speech


         Discriminations Underlying
         Pronominal Usage

          Cultural systems are roughly of two kinds: those which are
explicit and understood by the native speaker, as against those primarily
inferred and understood by the analyst. It is true that most Russians oc-
casionally would have to hesitate or reflect over their usage and that
exceptionally sophisticated persons such as Leo Tolstoy were largely
aware of the basic determinants. But in general it seems that the discrimi-
nations underlying pronominal usage were subconscious and were not
conceptualized as a system by the Russian. This was even more true of
the evaluation which had to intervene between the discriminations and
one's pronominal response, and between one's hearing of a pronoun and
one's classification of the speaker's discriminations. Such evaluation was
largely subconscious. 5 In sum, what follows is a system that has been in-
ferred by one analyst.
   The ten components symbolized by Russian pronominal usage were:
the topic of discourse, the context of the speech event, then age, genera-
tion, sex, and kinship status, then dialect, group membership, and relative
jural and political authority, and, finally, emotional solidarity-the sympa-
thy and antipathy between the two speakers.
    First, two discriminations are implied by all acts of speech. The speaker
had mentally to associate the selection of pronouns with the topic of dis-
course; two officers might exchange vy while discussing military tactics,
but revert to ty when chatting about women back in their quarters. A large
number of such culturally defined topics-kinship, former school ex-
periences-tended to suggest informality, whereas business and profes-
 sional affairs and certain lofty (torzhestvennyje) themes would encourage
one to select vy. Of course, many subjects were relatively neutral and did
 not predispose the speaker in any particular direction. 6
    Pronominal usage was also determined by the context, especially the
 social context of the speech event; an august judge would use vy to a
 tramp during proceedings in court. The social context and the topic of dis-
course were logically related and are often hard to separate analytically.

  5 I am indebted to Larry Krucoff for this point.

  " In the transliteration of Russian words and passages the apostrophe stands for a "soft
sign" (softening or palatalization of the preceding consonant); kh stands for a letter in the
Russian alphabet that, in turn, stands for a sound that resembles the final ch of German ac/1;
zh is similarly related to a sound that resembles the middle consonant in English azure;j is so
related to the y-like front semi-vowel called "short i" and to the initial element of the so-
called "soft vowels"; e initially is so related to a hard front mid vowel, but elsewhere to a soft
front midvowel. The names of familiar authors and books have been transliterated less ex-
actly and more or less in accordance with the conventions in English language sources.
                          Social Context and Semantic Feature     277

 Nonetheless, instances of clearly independent variation are not too hard
 to find; a daughter might use vy to her mother during a masked ball, but
 revert to ty when whispering about the same boy later in her mother's
 bedroom.
    Next come four discriminations that are "biological" in a sense,
 although defined in terms of the culture. Relative age within the same gen-
 eration was not too important, but could tip the scales between distant
 blood relatives, or in cases where relative authority and affection led to
 ambiguity. Relative generation, on the other hand, was frequently deci-
 sive, as in the automatic asymmetry between any two gentryfolk relatives
 separated by one or more generations. Relative sex could also decide
 usage in the sense that two speakers of the same sex were normally more
 prone to use familiar terms, whereas speakers of the opposite sex would
 exercise greater restraint. Finally, genealogical distance, of which all
 Russians were keenly aware, provided highly specific rules and many gen-
 eral ones, such as that siblings of the same age at all social levels recipro-
 cated ty. Age, generation, sex and genealogical distance were also impor-
 tant components underlying the use of Russian kinship terms.
    The third set of discriminations includes various social and group phe-
 nomena. To begin with, relative authority depended on differences in the
 distribution of rights and obligations; for example, the father or house
chief held many economic and legal rights, whereas the position of the son
could be largely defined through his obligations in this patriarchal culture.
Such jural relationships, since they involved individual statuses, could
and often did vary independently of group membership. In other cases,
the relative authority had to be backed by the ability or readiness of the
individual to exercise the raw power available. Relative authority often
represented the resolution of conflict between several sets of dimensions-
above all, between the formal authority of the bureaucracy as against the
local leadership and political values of the peasants and Cossaks. Clearly,
relative authority and other discriminations had many more specific jural
and political implications.
   Group membership subsumed, above all, the notion of household; for
instance, cousins or affines of about the same age would exchange ty if
they were residing in the same household but would not necessarily do so
if they were living widely separated. The prestige of a family name also
influenced pronominal usage among the gentry. Village membership could
be decisive for the peasants, as in the regions where the elders addressed
each other informally but used vy to elders from other villages. Finally,
class or caste membership determined usage; workers, peasants, and
Cossaks of about the same age normally employed ty even at the outset of
a conversation, whereas two gentrymen would have to begin with vy.
   Di"alect refers to grammatical and semantic patterns marking a particu-
lar variety of Russian. Dialect lines were not clear among many merchant
           278    Discovering Structure in Speech

families and members of other transitional classes, but thick bundles of
isoglosses did distinguish the gentry from the workers, Cossaks and
peasants; all of the latter lived in what amounted to a quasi-familial ty
universe. The comparative homogeneity of the lower classes, while not
congruous with the many divergences in their way of life, did reflect their
 constant interaction and the recency of their diffel'entiation. The in-
 dependence of dialect as a variable was demonstrated neatly when, for
 example, a bilingual, blue-blooded aristocrat became so inured to vy that
 he used it even to peasant children, although receiving ty from their
 parents (Tolstoy 1960a Resurrection:218-20).
     Finally, there is the psychological dimension of "solidarity," of emo-
 tional affinity or antipathy. Emotional distance and certain negative feel-
 ings went together with the formal pronoun. Contrariwise, close friends,
 lovers, and persons joined in some common purpose would tend to use ty,
  and ty in some contexts could symbolize the dislike or deprecation bred of
  familiarity. In brief, the correlation between pronouns and solidarity was
  complicated, and difficult to predict in terms of a simple continuum
  between the ty of "like-mindedness" (Brown and Gilman 1960) and the vy
  of weak solidarity.
      The foregoing summary suggests the conclusion that pronominal usage
  implied complex concatenations of discriminations that reinforced each
   other often enough to make speech predictable. The rough breakdown of
   the society inferred from such usage is congruous with the sociological
   map arrived at by external criteria. In a larger, cross-cultural sense, the
   ten components inferred for Russian probably underlie most usage in
   other languages where second person pronouns are differentiated by
   authority and solidarity; they may be as universal for pronominal usage as
    Kroeber's nine components have turned out to be for kinship nomencla-
    tures (Kroeber 1909).
       Let us now turn to the types of dyadic relationship, beginning with the
    symmetrical use of vy.


             The Dyadic Pairs:
             The Symmetrical Vy

         Vy was mandatory in certain unambiguously formal occasions.
  Thus, elder peasants of probity and worth (blagomyslennyje) would
  exchange the formal pronoun when meeting on the street after Sunday
  mass, and peasant parents and matchmakers would tend to the same
  usage during the formalities of negotiation and the wedding. 7 But such

     7
         In both cases, there would be a greater use of the name plus patronymic (poimenovat' po
   otechestv11; Zlatovratsky 1947: 153).
                              Social Context and Semantic Feature
                                                                             279

o b]l·gatory reciprocation
                      . .         was largely confined to non -pe·tsa   , , n t s. F or ex-
.arn pie , all part1c1pants
                    .     . h .. used  the -formal
                                             h        pronoun  in   a large  ca. t egory of
 pu b   lic   occas10ns
                  .    .  m t  e cities,
                              . . . , .  sue    as  a  parliamentary   meet' mg, a com·t
      , ,
 sess 1 , · on university  exctmmations,    01, for  that matter , an open , pu bl'1c a Iter-
 cation between a factory 1?anag.er and leaders of the workers (Gorki
 1946 , Mother:134). A sp.ecial po1gnan.cy _could be created when, for ex-
 ample, former comrades-m-arms or dn.nkmg partners switched to formal
     rms during the challenge and execution of a duel (Lermonto 1948 A
 ~~ ero of Our Time: 192-210). While usage was. thus dictated b~ cont:xt,
 the process of_feedback c~mmon to all communication also meant that the
 usage itself might symbolize an augus~ and ceremonial atmosphere (torz-
 1tt,stvennost'). By the       same token, obligatory usage could create peculiar
    tresses or types of amb"igmty     . wh en t he speaker was conversing     '      with a
  s lose friend. In such cases, vy might signal the artificiality of the social
  ~istance being maintained.                    .
       In the second place, vy was reciprocated between any two persons
  desiring to show respect ~r d~ference, regardless of their relative status.
  While such personal motivation was secondary or redundant to many
   ,ocially determined usages, it also functioned independently in other
  s ases where asymmetrical or even informal usage might have been ex-
  ~ected, or at least permitted. Thus, at one point a student and a policeman
  offer to help a young woman, very drunk, who has apparently been
  violated or mistreated and is stumbling through the streets (Dostojevsky
   J 951, Crime and Punis/zment:57); th~ir sympathy and pity is partly con-
   veyed by vy. In ~nother case, a Russrn_n officer and a surgeon of German
   background decide to room together 1~ a resort town in the Caucasus.
   They become confidants and good fnends. Their elective affinity-to
   translate Goethe's precise phrase-is congruous with a continued recip-
   rocation of an affectionate but respectful vy.
        The role of pronominal signals for the individual's self-image is brought
   out in the following exchange between a proud young worker and an arro-
   gant officer who is leading a search party (Gorki 1946: 127). The officer
   begins with:

    "This is ty, Andrew Nakhodka."
    "I "answered Nicholas, moving forward. Andrew stretched out his hand, took
  Nicholas by the shoulder, and thrust him backwards.
    "He made a mistake! I am Andrew!"
    The officer, raising his hand and threatening Vesovshchik with his finger, said:
    "You look out with me!"
    He began to dig in his papers.
    "Nakhodka, were ty ever brought before an inquiry on political grounds'?" he
  asked.
    "I was summoned in Rostov, and in Saratov . . . only there the policeman said
  vy to me."
           280    Discovering Structure in Speech

  The officer winked his right eye, wiped it and, baring his small teeth, began to
say:
  "But isn't it known to vy, Nakhodka, precisely to vy, just who are the rascals
who are distributing criminal proclamations in the factory, aah?"

   Here we see a factory worker insisting-with admittedly ambiguous
success-that an inspecting officer show him the proper personal respect.
   This and other cases in my data point to important discriminations not
covered by my system: those of sarcasm and irony. Under certain circum-
stances the opposite of the expected usage could confuse, humiliate, or
affront an addressee. Such inverse usage was especially devastating
before a group of people who were more aware even than the victim of the
disparity between the verbal symbolism and the underlying social real-
ities. This is illustrated by a passage from the twentieth chapter of Tol-
stoy's Childhood.

  Grandmother had a singular gift of expressing her opinion about people under
certain circumstances by using the plural and singular pronouns of the second
person together with a certain tone of voice. She used vy and ty contrary to gen-
eral custom, and on her lips these shades of meaning acquired an entirely different
significance. When a young prince walked up to her she said a few words calling
him vy and looked at him with an expression of such contempt that if I had been in
his place I would have become utterly confused . . . .

(An ancient countess would normally use ty to a young prince.) In con-
trast to sarcasm, humor does not appear to have been significantly related
to pronominal usage.
   We have discussed formal occasions and the particular needs to show
or receive deference. Vy, in the third place, was determined by a large set
of contexts that can be defined exclusively through the relative status of
the participants within the larger context of the society. The higher the
individual in the social system, the more he tended to both receive and use
vy with persons of lower standing, including lackeys. Such usage to al-
most all except one's siblings and spouse was largely a carry-over from
the patterns of the French high aristocracy, probably the most formal in
Europe. Such bilingual blue-bloods lived in what approximated a vy-
universe.8
   Relative status within the larger society was also symbolized by auto-
matic formality on first encounter or casual acquaintance between all of-
ficials and gentryfolk who were not lovers, close friends, or certain types
of kinsmen. In one novel a petty official receiprocates vy with a long series

  8
      Roger Brown, writing in 1960, reported a French aristocrat who could remember using
111 only to an old woman who had been his nurse (Brown and Gilman 1960:270).
                          Social Context and Semantic Feature     281

 of rustic landlords with whom he is often cordial or even pseudo-intimate
 (Gogol 1947, Dead Souls:102-103). Russian officers and non-coms
 usually stayed on formal terms, just as did gentryfolk with the tutors and
 governesses of their children, and also prison officials with political pris-
 oners of the educated classes. Moving yet further down the ladder, a
 wealthy peasant would normally exchange vy with older peasants in the
 village he was visiting (Zlatovratsky 1947, The Foundations:459), and
 elders from neighboring villages might do the same under certain circum-
 stances. In all the instances just discussed, we find formality between
 persons who do not know each other well and whose social status was felt
 to be significantly coordinate.
   Among the gentry, at least, the formal pronoun was enjoined between
 certain categories of actual and potential relatives, such as a man and the
 consanguines of a girl he was wooing (Dostojevsky 1951 :218), and
 between cousins who were strangers, and between parents-in-law and
their children-in-law. Man and woman held to vy during a formal court-
ship until entering upon marriage, or sexual relations, or some com-
parably intense experience. Women tended to use vy more than men,
among the gentry because of their greater concern for propriety, among
all classes because of their partially subordinate status. In one intriguing
case that cuts across class lines, two women held to the formal term while
they passed through three relative statuses: landlord's niece as against the
same landlord's maid, a provincial actress as against the landlord's con-
cubine, and finally, a broken prostitute as against the village wanton. The
persisting use of vy despite considerable emotional affinity and, toward
the end, approximately equal power, lends unique flavor to this evolving
bond (Saltykov-Shchedrin 1958, The Golovlyov Family:265, 289)-
social status proving dominant over both personal feelings and the general
situation.


        The Asymmetrical Relationship

         In the patriarchal society of Russia deference and obedience
were widely accorded to age. Among the gentry, a child would recipro-
cate ty with the mother until about school age, but older children and ado-
lescents used the formal pronoun to their parents. These patterns did not
hold for some aristocratic families, and there may well have been marked
differences between parents, with less formality toward the mother, par-
ticularly between mother and daughter. Similarly asymmetrical were the
ties between married daughters and either parent, and between such dis-
tant consanguines as a man and his cousin's son's wife (Aksakov 1958, A
Family Chronicle:82, 157, 188). Step-relatives and affines separated by
one or more generations were also on vy/ty terms. Two concrete ex-
         282    Discovering Structure in Speech

amples must suffice for genealogical distance. In one case, an adult
prince received ty from an aunt thirty years his senior, although both were
exchanging the French vous. In another, singular instance, an elderlY
landlord and his niece retained the asymmetrical terms even after he had
become a psychotic and disreputable miser and she had returned home
from a career as an actress and prostitute, broken through drink and
tuberculosis (Saltykov-Shchedrin 1958: 181, 267). At one point the miser
even suggests that his niece become his mistress. Among the gentry and
wealthier merchant classes, then, usage was necessarily asymmetrical
between relatives of any sort, including those by adoption, who were sep-
arated by one or more generations.
   Among peasants and Cossaks asymmetrical usage was occasional or
regional, but was not generally obligatory between the household head
and his younger house-mates, with one major exception: in most of the
larger households of the urban lower classes and of the peasants of the
central "industrial" zones, the household head normally received vy and
addressed all as ty; these were precisely the two social groups and the
geographical area where Great Russian patriarchy reached its acme, and
where the influence of the vy-using gentry was most deeply felt. Asymme-
trical usage also set off a peasant from his parents-in-law, particularly a
girl from her father-in-law. In sum, asymmetrical usage tended to emerge
between two peasants when they were separated by two or more dimen-
sions, such as generation, community, extreme authority, or the solemnitY
of the situation.
    Superior and inferior authority within the established officialdom was
 pronominally symbolized in the relation between a teacher and pupils, laW
 officers and criminal prisoners, and officers or non-commissioned officers
 with their soldiers; the last of these three usages was congruous also with
 the gentry or middle class origin of almost all officers, as against the prole-
 tarian or peasant background of almost all soldiers. The Cossaks, despite
 their strong egalitarianism, reflected their common experience as
 members of a military caste by scrupulously using vy to non-coms, of·
 ficers, gentryfolk, and all government officials. 9                           d
    One well-known short-story of Pushkin's illustrates how pronouns coul
 symbolize authority. A young hussar feigns illness while en route in ordeJ
 to seduce the adolescent daughter of a fifty-year-old stationmaster an
 war veteran. The brokenhearted father makes his way into the large house
 in the capital where his daughter is being kept as a mistress, but, during a
 final, climactic scene, is literally thrown out by th~ irate young aristocrat,

   " One of the first acts of the Provisional Government in 1917 was. to force all com~~;
sioned officers to use vy to privates, but the Red Army reintroduced ty, eventually extend!
it to all subordinates.
                                Social Context and Semantic Feature       283

        Neither man ever deviates from asymmetrical usage. Thus, a low-ranking
        official could be subordinate to any member of the high aristocracy. The
       frequency with which social differences over-rode age demonstrates the
       strength of class cleavage in the first part of the century.
          Perhaps of greater psychological interest than the school, prison, army,
       td officialdom were the domains such as the gentry household and the
        anded estate where asymmetry was enjoined and often automatically
      as_cribed for the members of an entire group. Any patriarch or matriarch
      With the abilities and motivation to realize his or her power would eventu-
      ~lly use _ty to all, and receive vy from all except the spouse (Saltykov-
        hchednn 1958:6, 15, 71), and sometimes even from the spouse; such                   :
                                                                                          . '

      ~entry patterns emphasizing the formal or secular aspect of the father's or           I
                                                                                            I
     hUsband's authority, became models for the peasant and lower class
       ouseholds mentioned above. As a rule, landlords and their estate manag-
     er~ Were on vy/ty terms, although both kinds of symmetrical relationship
     Il1Ight occur for personal reasons. Country squires usually remained on a
     ~Ylty ?asis with their peasant concubines, although genuine affection and
     Isolation could lead to a mutual ty within the rustic privacy of the home.
        _Pronominal usage between peasants and other classes entailed sur-
    Prises. For example, a wealthy, respectable, and urbanized serf in Mos-
    cow Would still use vy and receive ty from the dissolute and disgraced
    :on of his distant proprietor, ascribed status taking precedent over both
   hge and actual power. In a second case, a fuIIy mature huntsman and
   1ouse serf would be pronominally subordinate to the little son of his
    anctlord. A third instance comes from the Childhood of Tolstoy, always
   so sensitive to status. As a boy he was cared for by a beloved elderly
   Peasant woman who, incidentally, was on vy/ty terms with his mother. At
   r~e Point this nurse scolded him, saying, "Don't ty soil the tablecloth."
  . Ittle Tolstoy gets furious and exclaims sputtering, "How ... Natal'ja
  Is say,·n
  da    '                                       '    ·
             g ty. to me. . . . " at which she ap0Io~1zes    · h , "Th a t' s enoug h ,
                                                          "'.''t
  smddy [ba~us!!lw], don't vy cry. . . . " at which ~e 1s ~omforted. Here a
       all boy 1s literally calling an elderly woman mto lme on her usage.
      Other, obvious differences in social rather than administrative status
 could determine usage. With the exceptions already noted, all persons
 Used ty to small children and would use ty and expect vy with pre-adoles-
 cent children. Any member of the gentry tended to use ty to a lower-class
 servant, typically the valet or lackey or the waiter in a tavern. The
 Stre                              ,    '     '                     .
       ngth of the combination of age and class differences 1s shown by a
~entlernan-landlord and his peasant boarder, who automatically entered
dPon an asymmetrical relationship and held to it even when the youth was
8 emanding the return of a large sum that the old codger had borrowed and
n{Uandered (Zlatovratsky J947:288, 350). Ty was used downwards to the
   embers of minority groups whose poverty and ethnic status were clear,
          284     Discovering Structure in Speech

as between a middle-aged landlord and a Jewish watchman (Dostojevsky
1951 :544-45). Any person with education and with civil or military rank
would immediately enter into vy/ty terms with some irregular semi-legal
person, such as a professional thief, a gypsy, a beggar, or a criminal. In
sum, asymmetrical relationships were automatic when social differences
were wide and mutually felt.


         The Symmetrical Ty
         Within and between all social classes children under about age
eleven or twelve exchanged ty. In one delightful scene, an aloof, isolated,
and already psychotic eight-year-old is approached by three adventurous,
arrow-shooting little "Mahicans" who are also on vacation, and immedi-
ately begin using ty (Sologub 1961, In Bondage:241-243). The apparent
assumption was that children were essentially equal and potentially
solidary. The status of child overwhelmed or obscured that of class.
Childhood informality also created the frequent comradeship between the
offspring of peasants and landlords, and contributed to the peculiar nos-
talgia for an irretrievable past that was felt by so many of the gentry in
their adult years. 10
   Second, the informal pronoun was exchanged with certain non-humans,
such as God, the Devil, demons, and other objects, animals, spirits, and
essences that might be addressed; the folklore and the texts containing
fantasy show that the usage was returned. The conversations between
Gorki's grandmother and God reveal the intimacy of such relations with
non-humans and the supernatural.
   In the third place, all members of the lower classes strongly tended to
reciprocate ty, even among total strangers. In one case, a proletarian
woman exchanges the informal pronoun with an elder peasant from
another community, whereas her son and the same man are on formal
terms. In a second instance, a wealthy kulak and his impoverished body
servant express through ty their sense of common peasant origin and their
personal affinity (Zlatovratsky 1947:520). In some northern, northeast-
ern, and Siberian regions, lacking landlords and far from the urban
centers, ty was probably the only functional pronoun.11
   Membership in the same community was often decisive. Thus rela-
tions-irrespective of age-were mutually informal between proletarian


   10
      It is psychologically intriguing that the ty was primarily associated with infant expeii-
ences and, for the aristocracy, was a symbol of intimate personal identity; in psychiatric
terms, it may correspond to the so-called "ego-id" (Silverberg 1940:511 ).
   11 I am indebted to Howard Aronson for this point.
                             Social Context and Semantic Feature           285

neighbors in the squalid factory. tow~s. The villages of Cossaks and Great
Russian peasants were pron~mmal m-groups of a sort, the members con-
ce1·vi'ng of each other as. relatives and addressing even th e v1.11 age e Id er m-
                                                                                 .
formally. In on: revealmg ca~~· _the peasants in a sm'all commune start on
formal terms _with a. you~g v1s1ting Muscovite, but after they have ascer-
tained his fnendsh1~ with. a local son their whole attitude and their
prOn ominal usage shift,
                      f . asdi 1s summed. up by. one
                                                 ,, matron , "S o IY, my d e,ar
(kinsman), ar~ on nen Y terms with him (Zlatovratsky 1947 : 153 ).
   Until the m1d?le of .the century, peas.ants usually said ty to the landlord,
but not to his wife; th1_s was part of their ~endency toward informality but,
in a perhaps more important sense,. It symbolized their conceptual
grouping of persons of supreme. authonty; the landlord's rights over his
serfs included purchase and manta! .arrangements. With the partial excep-
tion noted above, the household chief, the landlord, Tsar, and God were
all addressed with ty and the quasi-kinship term, batjushka ("little
father"). Thus a striking feature of authority in Russia as against the West
was that vy generally did symbolize greater power, but that when the
greatness passed a certain poin.t th~ speaker sv.:itched back to what might
be called the ty of total subordmat10n or of an mtimacy that could not be
jeopardized. 12 From another point of.vi~w, ty to God, Tsar, and squire
emphasized the father!~ aspect o~ th~1r JU:al authority.
   In addition to the social categonesJust discussed, pan-Russian patterns
enjoined a mutual ~y between brothers and sisters. This was related to the
norms of cooperat10n and loyalty between brothers and, in addition, was
extended to many kinds of comrades and associates. Peasants, Cossaks,
and artisans banded together into brotherhoods, and there was consider-
able overlap both in sentiment and usage between the words for commune
(mir) and cooperative (artel'). In addition, ritual brotherhood, sealed by
exchanging crosses worn around the neck, was important at all levels.
Students, officers, and other members of the educated classes had a ritual
of "drinking to ty," but this foreign brudershaft appears to have been rare
in the last century and is not evidenced in my texts. In any case, fraternal
solidarity of many kinds was a pervasive and integrating theme in Russian
 culture and was partly symbolized by the reciprocal ty.
   The informal pronoun was usual between spouses at all social levels, as
would be congruous with the balance of rights between man and woman
that underlay the symbols of male dominance. In many merchant families
and lower-middle class families, however, the wives addressed their hus-
 bands with vy plus the name and patronymic. Among the bilingual gentry
                                                 t,

  12 As Julian Pitt-Rivers points out, total subordination implies intimacy whereas formal
social usage implies social distance which obtains where respect might conceivably be
denied.'·
         286    Discovering Strncture in Speech

the mutual informality ran counter to pressures toward a reciprocal vy on
the model of French. 'a And conjugal usage could be poignantly ambigu-
ous, as when estranged or even hostile spouses persisted with ty. Even
among the high aristocracy, lovers held to informal terms long after the
liaison had cooled (Lermontov 1948: 141).
   Aside from siblings and spouses, ty was reciprocated between more dis-
tant kinsmen under certain conditions; for example, gentryfolk cousins
who knew each other reasonably well would be on informal terms. Sec-
ond degree relatives through marriage, such as the spouse's siblings or the
sibling's spouses, would usually reciprocate ty with a speaker of about the
same age, although this could produce conflicts if they were personally
antipathetic; in one case, a man and his sister's husband "tried to use ty"
after the sister's marriage, "but remained on vy terms" (Tolstoy
I 960a:332). In general, usage between affines varied considerably. As a
final point, the growth of the individual at all social levels was critically af-
fected by the grandmother, who was both a nurse, and a storyteller, and a
repository of norms and traditions; she varied from the peasant babushka
of Gorki's Childhood to the august and matriarchal babushka of Leo Tol-
stoy. Throughout life most Russians remained on informal terms with at
least one grandmother, although among the high aristocracy she might be
addressed with vy, while a peasant nurse filled many of the more intimate
and homely roles.
    The informal pronoun was also reciprocated between members of the
gentry who had been joined through shared experiences, such as regular
 participation in card games or a common revolutionary ideology. Class-
 mates from the same secondary school and alumni of the same privileged
 school, such as the Corps of Pages, were formally linked by ty. As a rule,
 men who had moved in the same circles as university students would con-
 tinue with ty throughout life, although reunion with an old chum might en-
 tail conflicts and pronominal gaucherie. In one case, a prince and an old
 army comrade use ty although the former is embarrassed by the implied
 closeness he no longer feels (Tolstoy I 960a:245-246). 14 The informal
 usage between friends and students generally expressed a certain affec-
 tion or esprit de co,ps, but at a more profound level it was the felt exten-
 sion of a kinship bond just as, conversely, the use of vy within the peasant
 village-which was an extended kinship group-was often associated
 with the introduction of external standards by government bureaucrats.


   "' Indeed, one of the most fascinating problems, barely hinted at in this chapter, was the
degree of congruity between French and Russian usage; both languages functioned as
largely independent systems for classifying the same set of actual and potential addressees.
   11
      This contrasts with many other languages, such as German, where the Du to a former
classmate is clearly not felt to necessarily imply anything more than the former group mem-
bership.
                         Social Context and Semantic Feature    287


         The Dynamics of Pronominal
         V sage: Eight Cases of "Switching"
         and "Breakthrough"

         Crucial to linguistics and social anthropology is the distinction
between studies of synchronic systems as they presumably operate in the
mind of speakers during at least one generation, as against the study of
historical sequences and cultural evolution. But despite the value of
keeping the two approaches apart to some extent, they can be rigidly sep-
arated only at great cost to our understanding. This is because the second
or "diachronic" framework always sheds light on the synchronic system;
by following replacement, loss, and rearrangement through time the
dynamic relations of units can be inferred. In addition to historical and
evolutionary change, any synchronic system shows alternation, variation,
and various kinds of rapid and often erratic option which can lead to infer-
ences about the functional and hierarchical relations between elements.
Let us review eight extended cases of pronominal "switching" and
"breakthrough" with the end of indicating and illustrating some of the
more obvious dynamic relationships.


  COMRADESHIP BETWEEN
  PECHORIN AND MAXIM MAXIMYCH
  IN LERMONTOV'S
  A HERO OF OUR TIME

   An arrogant, aristocratic lieutenant and a grizzled, older captain find
themselves thrust together as the only officers on an isolated outpost in
the Caucasus. Reciprocal formality at first seems appropriate to both. But
while the latter is sitting on the young lieutenant's bed and discussing a
confidential matter he switches to ty. When the lieutenant appears to
suggest insubordination, however, the captain reverts to vy as he issues a
peremptory demand; for the older man, the power of military rank is in
delicate balance with the emotions uniting the two lonely comrades in the
Caucasus.
   In the following scenes the lieutenant uses vy at all times, partly
because he is almost thirty years younger, partly because he comes from
the high aristocracy, partly because, as is borne out by several episodes,
he is emotionally incapable of warm, positive attachments to other peo-
ple; as is so often the case, the relative power of the three determinants
cannot be ascertained. On the other hand, I would deduce that in some
contexts the young lieutenant would have used ty or that at least after
their separation the older man thought of him as employing the more in-
        288   Discovering Structure in Speech

timate pronoun. During the final scene the two friends accidentally meet
again at an inn. The affectionate and simple-hearted captain rushes
forward impulsively, but is countered with, "How delighted I am, dear
Maxim Maximych! Well, how are vy?" (Lermontov 1948:88).
   "'But . . . ty . . . vy?' muttered the old man with tears in his eyes."
   The wrenching quality of the passage turns on the binary and here
ironic choice between two pronouns.


  CHICHIKOV AND KOROBOCHKA
  IN GOGOL'S DEAD SOULS

    Chichikov, a well-bred, petty official, gets lost at night in a snow storm,
and finally knocks on the door of the unknown proprietress of a small es-
tate. Both he and the maid at first use ty, reflecting their mutual surprise
and the spontaneity of the situation. But after hearing a few words, she
switches her pronouns, apparently in reaction to his urban accent: "But
who are vy?"
    Later that night Chichikov and the proprietress reciprocate vy as they
converse over tea, although repeatedly interjecting the kinship terms, ma-
tushka (derived from "mother"), and batjushka. The proprietress
switches to the informal ty when expressing sympathy over his carriage
accident, and when bidding him goodnight she calls him not only bat-
jushka but literally "my father" (moj otets), and tenderly offers to scratch
his heels, a soporific comfort her deceased husband had habitually
required (1947:34). By this time both Chichikov and his hostess feel
 themselves to be approximately on a par.
    The following day finds our guest, who is about forty, addressing his
 hostess in familiar terms; because of her seemingly small estate, "he
 didn't stand at all on ceremony." He soon inquires after her last name,
 and is told, "Korobochka (the wife of), a collegiate secretary," and that,
 on further inquiry, her name and patronymic is Nastas'ja Petrovna. The
 official title impresses Chichikov, and from then on he is careful to
 address her respectfully. He begins to importune her to sell him the title of
 such of her serfs as have passed away since the last census. As soon as
 this extraordinary intention becomes clear, Koroboc.hka switches from vy
 to ty. By this time (pp. 37-42) the asymmetrical relationship is coming to
 symbolize their mutuai and increasingly clear-cut awareness that she is an
 established owner of serfs and land, a true pomeshchitsa, whereas he is
  materializing into a rather suspicious sort of solicitor. The function of ty
 as an expression of Korobochka's growing wariness comes out in several
 strongly felt utterances: "What are they (the dead souls) to ty?" or "Are
  ty deceiving me, batijushka?" or "What terrible things ty say!" The
  unequal quality of the relationship is underscored by his combination of
  vy plus Nastas'ja Petrovna, whereas she mentions no proper name at all
                         Social Context and Semantic Feature      289

       I because he had dodged he        · ·         .
(part_ Y to interlard kinsh· t . r ongmal question about it). But both
  ont 1nue                   1p e1 ms.
c Chichikov fim!lly p~rsuades Korobochka to sell her dead souls by
irnplying that ~~ is takmg ; 0 vernment contracts and may be in a position
10 bUY some,? her ve?e~'l Jes. In the last scene, after a rich dinner for the
"contractor, s e s':"'itc es to vy when asking if he will buy some pork
Jard, _b~t then ~ot)s nght back to ty when discussing his carriage and road
conditions (p.      .
   In ten of the most masterful pages in Dead Souls the dyadic rela-
tionship evol~es _from vy/vy, to ty/vy to vy/vy to ty/vy to vy/vy and finally
to tyI vY· This illustrates the . frequ ency an d rap1d1ty
                                                       · ·    of 'pronomma
                                                                         · J
switching as total stran_gers adJust~d !o each other. More particularly, it
illustratt;; !he ~omplexi,~y of covariation ?etween pronouns and various
sorts of kmship terms. Thus, ty plus a kmship term of address occurred
quite normal_ly a~ong the gentry. But less redundant and more interesting
was the conJunct.10 n of the formal pronoun with a kinship term such as
  zatjushka, enablmg the speaker such as Chichikov to partially cross the
;ap between himself and his interlocutor.


  A PROLETARIAN MOTHER, HER SON,
  AND HER SON'S FRIENDS   .
  (GORKI'S MOTHER)

   After the death of her brutal husband, a mother somewhere in her
forties is left with an adolescent son who soon turns to private study and
underground revolutionary activities. More and more books appear on his
shelves and, to signal his growing cultivation, " . . . he said vy to her and
called her mamasha, but sometimes, suddenly, he would address her ten-
derly:                                                                     , ,,
   'TY, mother, please don't worry. I will be coming home late . . .
(Gorki 1946: 113). And later:
   "He said 'mother' and 'ty' to her, as was his wont only when he drew
closer to her. · · · "
   About the time of the conversations just described, the son brings home
a worker about twenty-eight years old to live with the family. At first the
mother calls him vy plus the respectful name plus patronymic (Andrej
Anisimovich), plus the respectful and affectionate kinship term that liter-
ally means "dear little father" (batjushka). But they grow more intimate
as the weeks pass, as is clear from the following scene.
   "Andrjusha, you ought to mend your shoes, or you will catch cold." To
which he responds, "You are almost like a true mother to me" (a, mozhet,
vy i est' rodnaja mat' moja). They remain on a formal basis, while
exchanging the "kinship terms," batjushka and 11e11ka. But after the young
        290   Discovering Structure in Speech

friend confesses to the murder of a political informer (pp. 166, 168), the
mother switches to ty although he continues with vy. At this point her son
actually comments on the pronominal usage:
   "'Ty know, ty did well, that ty began to say 'ty' to him after that.' She
looked at him with surprise and said. 'Yes, but I didn't even notice how it
happened! He has become so close to me-I can't say how!'"
   The mother's relations to her son's other revolutionary friends were
generally formal, even in the case of women, such as her son's sweetheart,
whom she got to know rather well. She remained on formal terms with an
educated school teacher though living in her house, and emotionally very
close (p. 247). The main exception to such reciprocal formality was the
relation between the mother and a young revolutionary in his thirties
before the hour of his death, when she becomes a loving nurse to him and
he is a hero to her (p. 20 l). But I hasten to add that even in such critical
relations between two proletarians fused by a common ideology, one
could not predict a switch to ty with absolute certainty.


  THE PRINCE AND THE PROSTITUTE
  IN RESURRECTION
   The heroine of Tolstoy's novel Resurrection (1960a) was born the
daughter of a wandering gypsy and the village wanton. She was then
adopted and reared in the cultivated home of an elderly, aristocratic lady.
When the eighteen-year-old nephew of her patroness comes home from
school on vacation, he unselfconsciously starts out using ty. She responds
with the respectful vy (p. 47), except when he steals a kiss from her during
a game, and even then her vat tebe raz is part of a fairly frozen, exclama-
tory expression. The contrast between their asymmetrical address comes
out neatly when he is leaving for the university and they bid farewell:
Proshchaj, Katjusha, as against, Proshchajte, Dmitryj lvanovich. During
their first, idyllic acquaintance their usage reflects caste status more or
less as one would predict.
   Three years later the prince returns as a pleasure-seeking officer. She
still uses vy (p. 54), whereas he vacillates before finally settling on the
same form. Both the· young people are soon in love, but continue on
formal terms; when they meet after the moving Easter service their usage
is apparently reinforced by the solemnity of the occasion (p. 60). But a
few hours later on the same Sunday he switches to ty while trying to
embrace her in a corridor, and this is conjoined with the diminutive of her
first name. She sticks to vy and the congruously respectful first name plus
patronymic, as above. During the physical seduction that evening he
 repeatedly says ty, whereas she says vy while her eyes say ty, "I am yours
(tvoja)"; the physical conquest of a woman appears to have been insepa-
                          Social Context and Semantic Feature     291

  rably connected with a switch to ty, at least by the i;nan; the woman might
 use vy, while her gestures, intonation and so forth indicated that she was
 thinking and feeling ty.
    Twelve years later the same prince finds himself in the juror's box and
 asked to pass judgment on an attractive, young prostitute who has been
 accused of poisoning and robbing a client. He recognizes her as the village
 girl he seduced long ago. Feeling remorse about his role in precipitating
 her downfall, he visits her later in jail. As he begins to speak (p. 1953) he
 uses ty, possibly in recognition of the enormous social distance between
 them, possibly to express his impulsive love toward her. But following an
 interruption in the conversation, he reverts to vy as part of the desire to
 increase the propriety of their relationship.
    Soon afterwards he returns to the jail and declares his resolve to marry
 her. At this her instant reaction is to recall the degrading scene the morn-
 ing after the seduction when he tried to thrust one hundred rubles into her
 hand. With a sort of ironic reference she therefore erupts with: "There is
 your (tvoja) price." The prince also switches pronouns with, "I won't
 leave tebja!" For a brief period thereafter she reiterates a ty of anger and
contempt: "Ty are a prince . . . (ty) go away!" (pp. 173-74). But after a
second, brief interruption by the warden she returns to vy although the
prince continues with ty, as in, "Ty don't believe me." As the interview
draws to a close both interlocutors grow colder, and he finally switches
back to vy himself, saying, "Vy think it over." Here we see the pronoun
functioning as a so1t of exclamatory particle, a two-phoneme signal of
rapid emotional shifts.                                   ,
    Shortly afterwards, Kat'ja is convicted. When the ill-matched couple
meet again they at first reciprocate vy, but when he proposes to her for the
second time, it is with, "I am asking tebja to marry me." She rejects him
using the formal pronoun, and he almost immediately switches back to vy
himself. Eight pages later, when he dreams of her, she says, "I am a
female convict, but vy are a prince."
    Later the prince returns from St. Petersburg after an unsuccessful at-
tempt to appeal her sentence. He is chagrined to learn that she has been
accused of gratifying one of the sergeants and, as a result, has been fired
from an advantageous job in the prison hospital. During the ensuing dia-
logue he feels ambivalent, and Kat'ja is mortified. Both use vy and they
never deviate from it for the rest of the story, during their long trek to
Siberia (pp. 357, 406), nor at their last meeting (p. 453), when her moral
redemption has been largely achieved.through the influence of the politi-
cal prisoners, to one of whom, a psychotic terrorist, she is already
promised in marriage.
   The particular value of the Resurrection lies in the interaction between
persons from opposite ends of the social continuum. In Prague School
           292    Discovering Structure in Speech

terms, at either end of the continuum one of the two pronouns was un-
marked, while the second was marked and conveyed more precise infor-
mation. Thus, for a prince vy was the more frequent and the less marked
pronoun, whereas for a prostitute ty was comparatively unmarked; in
either case a switch to or a maintenance of the marked pronoun implied
special hostility, affection, or ambivalence. 15

  RASKOLNIKOV AND SON'JA IN
  CRIME AND PUNISHMENT

    Raskolnikov, an undernourished and idealistic student in his early
twenties, is obsessed with the theoretical implications of willfully
breaking a fundamental moral law. He is living in a small garret that ad-
joins a room filled with two half-crazed parents and their hungry children.
One daughter, a shy, nervous girl of about eighteen, has turned as incon-
spicuously as possible to ·prostitution in order to help support her impov-
erished but originally upper-class family.
    These two young people reciprocate vy during their casual first con-
 tacts. But after his brutal ax-murder of the old usuress and her niece,
 Raskolnikov is torn by guilt and needs a confidant. He goes to visit the girl
 in her lodgings. As the conversation develops, they increasingly sense
 their need for each other. His voice becomes "quiet and tender." But
 Son'ja remains formal while talking about the suffering of her family, and
 even her first professional experiences; once she affixes the hyperre-
  spectful particle /-s/. As they continue to draw closer, Raskolnikov real-
 izes with more terrible clarity the conflict between her degrading profes-
  sion and her innocent, generous nature. He falls to his knees and kisses
 her feet (nogi). Son'ja cries out, "What are vy doing?" (precisely: chto vy,
  chto vy eto! Peredo mnoj!), and Raskolnikov immediately arises and
  answers, "I did not bow down to ty, I bowed down to all human suffering"
  (Dostojevsky 1951 :343). This scene, deservedly one of the most re-
  nowned in all Russian literature, owes its drama in no small measure to the
  profound, kaleidoscopic reorganization within Raskolnikov's mind;
  Son'ja is elevated to a vast ·symbol, an abstract, metaphysical idea, and
  her shift in status is signaled at the critical moment by a switch in pro-
  nouns.
     But let us continue. The asymmetrical relationship is held during a
  subsequent discussion and while Son'ja is reading the story of Lazarus:
  ". . . I am the resurrection and the life. . . ." and then ". . . the stub
  was already burning low in the candleholder, murkily lighting up in a
  beggarly room the murderer and the prostitute who had been strangely
   15
        lam grateful to Milka Ivie for this point.




                                                                                 _J
                           Social Context and Semantic Feature       293

   ·ted through a reading of the Holy Book" (p. 350). Raskolnikov,
  , lizing that S on ,.Ja 1s
uni                       . a Iso h a If.msane, asks her to go with him "along the
rea e road," and announces that he has chosen to tell her who murdered
sam
 h niece of th e usuress. S on ,.Ja, tern·fi1ed b y h.1s wild-eyed
                                                           ·       conduct, and
t ~ understanding his motives, persists with vy, and so they part.
00
    ShortlY afterwards, in a humiliating scene, Son'ja is accused of theft,
, d stoutly defended by Raskolnikov. He again visits her lodgings, and
a: y start out reciprocating vy. Their relationship soon grows very tense
t eRaskolnikov poses a terrible if hypothetical moral question, and Son'ja
~:eaks down, sobbing.~nd ap~ealing to P~ovidence_: ". . . did you indeed
    me only to torture? at which Raskolmkov, feeling a burst of remorse,
co itches his· pronouns, wh"lI e answenng,   .    "B ut o f course ty are right,
sW              i'
son'ja" (a vet Y prava . 1s v01ce weak ens " an d his
                   t       )  H"      .     "                   . entire manner
, lters as he confesses that he has come to ask her forgiveness. They sit
: gether on her bed and he gradually begins his confession, at first by
 ~ving her hints and asking her to guess. (At one point she fleetingly
gi minds him of the murdered niece.) Son'ja finally gets his message, that
~: himself was the ax-murderer, and recoils in horror, and then throws
herself to her knees before him and cries out, "Vy, what have vy done to
  ourself!" (chto vy, chto vy eto nad soboj scielali). Raskolnikov responds
~ith, "How strange you are!" (strannaja kakaja ty). It is at this critical
·uncture that Son'ja at last switches her pronouns, "No, there is no one in
{he entire world more unhappy than ty" (p. 439); (net, net tebja nes-
 ·hastnee nikogo v tselom tsvete), and she immediately repeats ty in sev-
~ral sentences while venting her own compassion, and pledging her
willingness to follow him anywhere. Son'ja's pronominal switch, just like
her kneeling, exactly parallels the earlier scene, and is reminiscent of the
eruption of tu at the most climactic moments in Phedre and other plays of
 Racine.
    After her rush of commiseration, however, Son'ja thinks of the murder,
 of the fact that Raskolnikov has bludgeoned her friend, the niece of the
 usuress. She pulls away, and also switches back to vy, "Yes, but what are
 vy (p. 440; Da kak vy, vy takoj). Raskolnikov then explains that he may
 have killed in order to steal, at which Son'ja's love comes flooding back,
 with a switch to ty, "Ty were hungry. Ty . . . in order to help your
 mother. . . . " But when he denies this, Son'ja, again horrified, reverts
 back to vy: " . . . how do vy give away your last money, but kill . . . ?"
 At this point Raskolnikov is torn between his growing affinity and sympa-
 thy for Son'ja and his desperate need to be frank about his own cynicism
 and immorality. He becomes agonized, wonders out loud why he has
 come to confess at all, and exclaims that they are two very different (roz-
 nyje) people. Here Son'ja, again seeming to sense his loneliness and des-
 pair, switches back to the pronoun of intimacy with "(Ty) speak, speak!"
        294    Discovering Structure in Speech

(p. 442). This exhortation precipitates Raskolnikov into his theory of the
Napoleonic hero: would Napoleon have murdered in defiance of the
moral law? Son'ja, confused and irritated, switches back again to the
formal pronoun, "Vy better speak to me plainly, without examples" (p.
443). At this Raskolnikov launches into a third line of explanation: he
might have murdered to help his mother and sister, but the genuine reason
was that he wanted to dare (osmelit'sja). Son'ja is yet more estranged and
cries out, "Vy have left God, and he has struck you down" (ot boga vy
otoshli, i Vlts bog porctzil) and "Vy be quiet! Don't vy dare, blasphemer"
(p. 446), and "Do vy have the right to kill?" Raskolnikov, persisting in the
exposition of his philosophy, states that he just wanted to try something
out (poprobovat'), but soon realizes the hollowness of his position. Heap-
peals to her for advice. True to her character, Son'ja responds to him, and
changes pronouns for the seventh and last time in only nine pages of dia-
logue, "(Ty) rise up . . . (ty) bow down at the crossroads . . . (ty)
confess to all the world" (p. 448). This unforgettable scene of the gradual
union of two human beings ends with Raskolnikov's agreement to go to
the police eventually, and of Son'ja's gift of a cross to be worn around the
neck (natel'nyj krest), which had been presented to her by the murdered
niece. As when urging him to confess at the crossroads, Son'ja's offer of
the cross, a symbol of ritual siblinghood, links this novel of intellectuals
and outcasts to some of the most enduring and profound dimensions of
Russian peasant culture. Just as in The Idiot and The Brothers Kara-
mazov, the theme of solidarity between brothers and ritual siblings un-
derlies much of Dostojevsky.
    Toward the end of the book (e.g., pp. 556-558), the two young people
use only ty to one another. Thus, an elective affinity gradually guides them
through many stages of pronominal usage with a frequency and rapidity of
change that is at times difficult to follow. Starting fairly close, as destitute
and demoralized individuals of good family, they have been drawn yet
closer, as a guilt-ridden murderer and an unwilling prostitute, and, at last,
as husband and wife about to share the rigors and deprivation of a pro-
tracted exile in Siberia. Their relation differs profoundly from that de-
 picted in Resurrection between a status-conscious blue-blood and a prac-
 ticed whore.


         A Special Kind of Switching:
         The Expressive and the Latent Ty

        The present study, while primarily concerned with the cognitive
aspects of culture, also touches at many points on sentiment and feeling,
both as they were regularly patterned, and in their idiosyncratic manifes-
                            Social Context and Se1namic Feature      295

   tations. Some mood, whim, or mental state could make the speaker play
   with or altogether ignore the usual rules, depending, of course on his
   emotional makeup and social sensitivity. In such instances the ;ronoun
   often had latent or purely expressive functions.
      To begin with, the second ~erson pr~n~uns-notably when in rapid-fire
   alternation-could express idiosyncratic impulses or the peculiarities of a
   situation. The shift to ty, both more frequent and more charged with emo-
   tion, was often an unconscious slip or outburst that, because of its transi-
   tory or covert character, did not necessarily evoke or reflect a mutual re-
   structuring of the relationship. For example, ty was simply part of many
   petrified phrases of surprise, fear, or ot~e.r _strong emotion; thus, a country
  squire on fairly formal terms with a v1s1tlng gentleman, might burst out
  momentarily with a grateful, "Ah, t~ are my benefactor" (Gogol
   1947:89). A maid normally on asymmetnc_al terms with her master might
  cry out, on bumping into him in a dark corridor, "Ty, my lord, watch out!"
  The informal pronoun was part of many frozen expressions such as "The
  devil take you (tebja)!" Such exclamations often did little mor~ than
  express the speaker's sentiments about a touchy or startling situation but,
  at another level of contrast, they at least implied a fleeting and superficial
  shift in his relation to his interlocutor.
     In the second place, personal derangement was also signaled by the ex-
  cessive use of ty. Many persons when drunk grew familiar to all and
  sundry. In one striking scene from Lermontov a drunken and berserk
  Cossak ty's an officer while cutting him down with a saber. More perma-
  nent disorganization was often associated with a readiness to use ty. An
'aristocratic woman, the daughter of a general, is gradually dying of
 tuberculosis in a squalid one-room apartment, surrounded by her starving
 children. Half-crazed and hysterical, she turns on the companion of her
 alcoholic husband with, "From the tavern! Ty were drinking with him!
 (Ty) get out!" (Dostojevsky 1951 :32). Later, at the husband's funeral,
 both go back to their usual vy. But a few pages later her maternal instincts
 are exacerbated by the guilt she feels over her daughter's condition
 (p. 421 ), and she lashes out with ty no less than six times on half a page, and
 many times more if one counts the verbal forms that imply the pronoun.
 When she is lacerating a vicious gentleman who has accused her daughter
 of theft, she goes, "Ty look then! (Ty) look, (ty) look, now (ty) look!"
These exclamatory pronouns symbolize her abject despair. The extreme
use of the ty of pronominal instability was part of hysteria, or, in Prague
School terms, the onset of insanity was signaled by a neutralization or
canceling out of the distinction that set off the two pronouns from each
other. I accept as apparently sound the theory of Jakobson ( 1942:83) that
in aphasia, extreme senility, and so forth, individuals generally revert to
the unmarked, generic form of their childhood years.
        296   Discovering Structure in Speech

    The informal pronoun could also serve as the unilateral, one-sided
expression ofan extreme ideology which, from one point of view, is a lack
of contact with "reality." One handsome and egregiously chaste young
woman "was on ty terms with everybody" (Tolstoy 1960a:416) as part of
her revolutionary posture. An old wanderer and anarchist, who had been
jailed once for "insanity," "believed only in himself' and used ty to all
(Tolstoy 1960a: 437-438). Speaking more generally, the exclusive use of
the informal pronoun often symbolized an outlook on man and society
characteristic of the insane, the senile, hermits, and extreme revolution-
aries, notably terrorists.
    The "second person singular" was also used by normal persons in
 normal states to express involuntary or transient feelings of contempt,
 hostility, and the like, often quite independent of the social class of the
 speakers. In one instance, a poor village priest consistently reciprocates
 vy with the niece of a powerful landlord until questioning her about life as
 an actress, when he says ''; .. sometimes with a spitty snout-one ought
 to be forbidden to even look at him-but ty have to proffer your lips." His
 switch of pronouns here was apparently unintentional, but the effect on
 his listener of the message and the pronoun itself was devastating. In
 another case, a doorman thinks to himself while turning away an un-
 desirable gentleman, "Just the same, if they chase ty away from the
 threshold, then ty must be some sort of rascal" (Gogol 1947:153).
 Similarly, a young lackey, when nagged at about fixing some blinds, thinks
 to himself with reference to the princess, "But the devil take ty if I know
 what ty need" (Tolstoy 1960a: 100). Finally, Gorki's grandmother does
 use vy to her husband, the patriarch, but during crises such as the great
 and ruinous fire she switches to ty. Later, when he is losing relatives and
 sinking into abject poverty, she uses nothing but the informal pronoun.
     Such shifts in pronouns could explicitly mark a shift toward contempt
 coupled with vilification. The big trading houses had special agents known
 as "nephews" to make false bids at auctions, among other things. When a
 nephew fell into disfavor an.d was about to be booted downstairs, "the
 director would begin to interlard his speech ever more with the pronoun
 ty, and with polite epithets in the nature of 'rascal,' 'good-for-
 nothing' . . . " (Zlatovratsky.1947:297). In another, better known case, a
 young woman, finding herself locked in a man's room, shifts to ty: "(Ty)
 open the door immediately, immediately, base man . . . so this (means)
 rape!" Later she draws a miniature revolver and accuses her tormentor of
 having poisoned his wife: "Ty! Ty hinted it to me yourself; ty spoke to me
  of the poison . . . I know, ty made a trip to get it . . . ty had it
  ready . . . it was ty . . . it was decidedly ty, lout!" (Dostojevsky
  1951 :528). Here the pronoun is repeated seven times in two and a half
  lines of Russian, illustrating how a woman might switch to ty as a partial
  expression of her terror, or contempt, or some other underlying antipathy,
                         Social Context and Semantic Feature    297
                                                           1
and more generally, how a pronoun could function as an exclamation and
a symbol of feelings about the addressee. In another case, a housemaid
has been forced into concubinage. She directs her frustrated emotions
into maternal love for an illegitimate child, until it is torn away and sent
off. From then on she thinks only ty to her master, although sticking to vy
in face-to-face conversations (Saltykov-Shchedrin 1958:232). Let us take
a last example. Toward the close of the famous cross-examination Ras-
kolnikov's interrogator, who had never deviated from the formal pronoun,
thinks ty toward the man whom he has broken with his questions. In sum,
a low opinion or even hatred could be mentally expressed through an
unarticulated and therefor,e unreciprocated ty.
   Affection and love could also be related to the covert or idiosyncratic
thinking of ty. For instance, one aristocrat, when passing through the ini-
tial stages of what might become a liaison with a seductive St. Petersburg
lady, finds himself conversing with ty "in the language of the eyes. The
eyes said, 'Can ty love me?' and the answer was 'Yes'" (Tolstoy
l 960a:265, 300, 314). A woman might be the first to make the shift with
her eyes, although a man would normally take the initiative with the artic-
ulate form. Such intuitions, shared by all normal Russians, were made
delightfully explicit by Pushkin in a verse entitled "Ty and Vy."

                       rrpe.n; neii aa.n;yM•rnbo CT010;
                       CbecTH o•rnii: c nee HeT cmu,1;
                       II robopm eii: RaR bLI MHJILI!
                       H MLICJIIO : 1m1, Te6n: mo6mo !

   This last quatrain may be translated as:

                     Pensive I stand before her now
                     And cannot tear my eyes away.
                     "How dear vy are," I say,
                     And think, "How I do love tebja."

Practically all Russians, particularly of the gentry class, were potentially
or mentally on ty terms with a larger number of persons than could be
deduced from their overt linguistic behavior.
   Such latent usage also mattered among the lower classes, except,
perhaps, for the peasants in their communes. In one instance, a proletar-
ian mother in her forties says, "Farewell," to a young female worker, but,
looking after her from the window, she thinks, "Comrade! . . . ah, you
dear, may God give tebe an honorable (clzestnogo) comrade for all your
life" (Gorki 1946: 153). The same proletarian mother-image regularly
thinks ty but says vy to her son's sweetheart, an educated girl of vaguely
middle-class background. She "felt a desire to say to her, '(Ty) my dear,
         298    Discovering Structure in Speech

  indeed, I know that you love him . . . . ' But she could not make up her
  mind to it" (ne reshalas'). And then later, "she pressed the extended hand
  and thought, '(Ty) my unhappy one.'" But soon thereafter she says aloud,
  "Vy speak truly" (Gorki 1946: 196).
    The foregoing data demonstrate some of the functions of the latent or
 mental ty, and this relates to a mote general point. One of the fallacies of
 behavioristic descriptive linguistics and of behavioristic social psychol-
 ogy is that, by a sort of convention, the evidence is artificially limited to
 the overt, actually articulated forms. Such an approach,. while usually
 valid for phonemics or many kinds of sociometrics, is apt to lead to distor-
 tion in semantics, because so much of meaning is private and never made
 explicit during the act of speech. On the one hand, such inner life is often
 maximally expressive, although barely reciprocated unless the addressee
 picks up the cue of gesture, intonation, and so forth. On the other hand,
 some of the most trenchant communication involves the combination of
one spoken pronoun with paralinguistic features of body movement and
intonation that would normally accompany the covert unspoken pronoun;
thus, an explicit vy combined with paralinguistic ty (warmness of tone,
and so forth), could often signal a felicitous union of personal respect and
an affection whose strength was not mitigated by overt restraint; spoken
vy when conjoined with the modulations and gestures usual for certain ty
bonds could often signal revilement and disgust in the most painful
manner. Unfortunately, the evidence being considered here does not
permit many inferences of this sort, but, by the same token, the singular
value of novels is that, unlike plays or psychological experiments, or most
field work, they do provide evidence of what speakers would think in a
variety of situations and status relationships.


        Conclusions

          Pronouns display unusual properties of emotional expres-
siveness, logical abstraction, and frequency in dialogue. Pronominal sets,
like those of kinship terminology, are Janus-faced because linked into
both the linguistic matrix of grammatical paradigms and the cultural ma-
trix of social statuses and group categories. Among the many symbols of
status in Russian, the second person singular pronouns were the most per-
vasive, frequent, and profound in their implications. Just two short words,
operating in all speech events that involved two interlocutors, signaled the
relative position of each pole in hundreds of dyadic relationships. Analy-
sis of a representative sample of pronominal usage leads to the inference
of a relational system of positional slots in the status system, and of other
culturally specific categories. For Russian the categories which have to be
postulated in order to predict pronominal usage more or less correlate
                                Social Context and Semantic Feature     299

        with those inferred on the basis of external sociocult~ral evidence. The
        same, ego-oriented analysis of pronominal usage leads to the inference of

I       discriminations or components that had to be controlled by the Russian in
        order to speak and understand. In the nineteenth century, at least, ten dis-
        criminations underlay the overwhelming mass of pronominal usage: topic
        of discourse, the context of the speech event, then age, generation, sex
I       and kinship status, then dialect, group membership, and relative jural and
        political authority, and finally, emotional solidarity. All these discrimi-
        nations, in modified form, also underlay the equally important symbolism
        of the kinship terminology. Such overlap of components in even these two
       semantic subsystems suggests that a continuing analysis of social struc-
       ture would lead to an ever diminishing margin of discoveries of discrimi-
       nations, which are probably quite limited in number. Also, about six to a
       dozen such discriminations probably underlie most systems with two pro-
       nouns. The ten discriminations with their patterns of combination consti-
       tute the stable-though not static-system that accounts for nearly all the
       evidence and predicts with accuracy the usage in new texts.
          The Russian usage was further characterized by a great deal of
       switching, by sudden changes of pronoun during a conversation or new
       encounter. Precisely because it depends on addition, loss, or realignment
      of discriminations, switching gives invaluable evidence on relative or hier-
      archical order. But while many important relationships between discrimi-
      nations can be inferred, the total network is less accessible. This is partly
      just because some evidence is lacking. Moreover, a decision as to the rela-
      tive status of any two discriminations can only be made within realistic
      contexts that involve several others; the total number of such possible
      combinations is very high. In addition, graphs of the relations between
      discriminations would only be valid if made for precisely defined dyadic
     pairs in precisely defined contexts; the axes would have to specify many
     subdivisions of the ten discriminations used above.
         Switching and what I have called "pronominal breakthrough" was
     interesting also because motivated by an interplay of the aforementioned
     cultural principles with what were essentially psychological forces of hos-
     tility, affection, ambivalence, mental derangement, and the like; the role
     of emotion was comparatively great in Russian life. Insight into the psy-
    chology of pronominal usage may be had, not only from switching, but
    from the expressive or latent use of ty, particularly when the speaker
    reverts to the informal pronoun. In many cases provided by the realistic
    novel and experienced by any normal Russian, the informal pronoun was
    encoded mentally, often embedded in phrases of love or hate, even while
    the formal pronoun was being articulated in a more or less different con-
    text. I take this to be but an accessible instance of the more general phe-
    nomenon whereby people think or feel one continuous message while
    enunciating a second string of overt forms. The content of the two mes-
        300     Discovering Structure in Speech

sages can range from virtual identity to total divergence. A linguistic
theory which boldly exploits all available evidence and intuitions about
such concomitant inner speech and other "psychological" phenomena
will not only have grappled with some of the most challenging experience
but be capable as well of predicting future events more fully and realis-
tically.16

         References to Russian Sources
Akskov, Sergej T., 1958, Semejnaja Khronika ("A Family Chronicle"). Mos-
         cow: Gos. lz. Khud Lit.
Dahl, V., 1880-1882, Tolkovyj So/var' Russkogo Jazyka. Petersburg, Moscow.
Dostojevsky, Fedor M., 1951, Prestuplenije i N akazanije ("Crime and· Punish-
         ment"). Sela Stepanchikogo i ego Obitateli ("Stepanchiko Village"),
         pt. I. Cambridge: University Press.
Gogol, Nikolaj V., 1947, Mertvyje Dushi ("Dead Souls"). Poema. Moscow: Ogiz
         Goslitizdat.
Gorki, Maksim, 1947, Detstvo ("Childhood"). Moscow, Leningrad: Gos. Iz. Det.
         Lit.
- - - , 1946, I zbrannyje S ochinenija ("Selected Works," including "Mother").
         Moscow: Ogiz. Gos. Iz. Khud. Lit.
Isachenko, A. V., 1960, Mo,fologiclzeskij Stroj R11sskogo Jazyka, vol. II. Bra-
         tislavo.
Lcrmontov, Mikhaj!Ju., 1948, Geroj Naslzego Vremeni ("A Hero of Our Time").
         Moscow, Leningrad: Gos. Iz. Det. Lit.
Pushkin, Aleksandr S., 1949, 'Stantsionnyj Smotritel' ("The Station Master"), pp.
       · 86-97 in Polnoe Sobranie Sochinenij v slzesti tomakh. Moscow: Gos. Iz.
         Khud. Lit.
Saltykov-Shchedrin, M. E., 1958, Gospoda Golovlevy ("The Golovlyov Fam-
         ily"). Moscow: Gos. Iz. Khud. Lit.
Sholokhov, Mikhajl, 1959, Tikhij Don ("The Quiet Don"). 2 vols. Moscow: Gos.
         Iz. Khud. Lit.
Sologub, Fjodor, 1961, V Plenu ("In Bondage"). In Russian Stories-Russkije
         Rasskazy, Gleb Struve (ed.). New York: Bantam Books.
Tolstoy, Lev, 1960a, Voskresenije ("Resurrection"). Moscow: Gos. Iz. Khud.
         Lit.
- - - , 1960b, Detstvo. Ostroc!zestvo. Junost' ("Childhood," "Boyhood,"
         "Youth"). Leningrad: Gos. lz. Det. Lit.
Zlatovratsky, N N., 1947, /zbra.nnyje Proizvedenija ("Selected Works"). Mos-
         cow: 0. Giz.

  "' I stand gratefully indebted to Roger Brown and Albert Gilman, whose brilliant article
(Brown and Gilman 1960) inspired the present effort, and to Joshua Fishman for valuable
points of method, to Marlys Wendell for stylistic criticisms, and to Gertrude Vakar for many
comments on both style and content. Above all, I wish to thank Julian Pitt-Rivers,and
Nicholas Vakar for their pervasive comments at all levels. Earlier versions of this chapter
were presented to the Chicago Society for Slavic and South Asian Linguistics and Poetics,
to Milton Singer's class on the Philosophy of Culture, and to the Los Angeles Conference on
Sociolinguistics; many persons in these audiences provided helpful points. Finally, the
present research was partly supported by a grant from the Department of Health, Education
and Welfare under the National Defense Education Act.
           10

           Remarks on Ethnomethod0Iogy                                      1


           HAROLD GARFINKEL




          Harold Garfinkel is a professor of sociology at the Uni-
          versity of California, Los Angeles. He res;eived his doc-
          torate from Harvard University. His research for many
          years has been concerned with "common sense" knowl-
          edge of social structure, and with practical reasoning, as
          found in a variety of experimental and institutional set-
          tings. The material discussed here is drawn from a paper,
          much of which is incorporated in the first chapter of his
          book Studies in Et/znometlwdology (1967). It outlines
          some of the basic assumptions about communication and .
          social science methodology which underlie the work of
          Sacks and Schegloff in the following two chapters.
             As the first part of the name suggests, eth-
          nomethodology has ties both with ethnology and
          linguistics and with philosophy. In some respects, it is the
          counterpart within sociology of ethnographic semantics
          and ethnoscience (see Frake, Chapter 3; Sturtevant
          1964; Colby 1966; Tyler 1969). The second part of its
          name indicates the point of difference. Ethnography and
          ethnomethodology share a methodological stance in that
          both give primacy to explicating the competence or
          knowledge of members of a culture, the unstated assump-
          tions which determine their interpretation of experience.

   1 The investigations were supported by Senior Research Fellowship SF-81 from the U.S.
Public Health Service, Grant Q-2 from the Research Section of the California State Depart-
ment of Mental Hygiene, and project AF-AFOSR-757-65 of the Behavioral Sciences
Division of the Air Force Office of Scientific Research. I am indebted to Michael Mend and
Patricia Allen, graduate students, for their aid with the clinic studies; to Eleanor B. Sheldon
for suggesting the format of and for her interest in the reliability study; and to Lindsey
Churchill and Harvey Sacks for conversations about these materials. Obviously, they are
not responsible for the chapter's deficiencies.

                                             30/
302   Discovering Structure in Speech

Like the descriptive linguists of the 1930s or 1940s, both
insist on the need for more intensive and systematic
empirical research into the nature of basic cognitive
processes, and by implication they are critical of social
science measurement which neglects to show how the
researcher's categories relate to the actor's perceptions
of what takes place. But whereas ethnographic seman-
ticists deal with members' knowledge primarily through
folk terminologies (as does Frake in Chapter 3), Gar-
finkel takes a much broader and, consequently, also less
formal approach to communicative acts. His main con-
cern is with the interpretative processes which underlie
these acts, be they verbal or nonverbal. Meaning for him
is "situated meaning," that is, meaning constructed in
specific contexts by actors who must actively interpret
what they hear for it to make sense. Garfinkel points out
that humans everywhere, whether in foreign cultures or
our own, whether laymen or social scientists, rely on the
fundamental 'procedures he illustrates. Methodology for
him, therefore, is more than the way the study is done; it
is part of what there is to study as well.
   The two case studies, each concerned with demon-
strating a kind of impossibility, make the distinctive char-
acter of ethnomethodology clear. In one sense, the first
 study, concerned with coding procedures in a psychiatric
clinic, is a straightforward study in ethnographic se-
 mantics. What are the categories by which those in the
 clinic, as well as those studying the clinic, segment the
 universe in question; what are the criteria by which in-
 stances are assigned to the categories? For Garfinkel, the
 essential point is that the categorization is not automatic
 but an open-ended process that entails operations not
 provided for in the classification or, indeed, in any stated
 set of procedures for using. the classification. These ap-
 parently "ad hoc" operations (called here "ad hoeing")
 are commonly invoked unconsciously. When they are
 brought to attention, the ordinary response is to consider
 them defects to be remedied or removed. (The clinic was ·
 distressed at the investigation's resulting specification of   r'
 procedures actually used in classifying patients, and          J
 would not allow it to be reproduced as part of the study,
 except with a clear warning on its cover that it was not
 the official specification, and not to be consulted in place
                       Remarh 011 Eth110111ethodology 1 303

of it). Garfinkel contends that the ad hoc operations
cannot be remedied or removed (although they can be ig-
nored). Similarly, those engaged in coding from the clinic
records (i.e., translating the language of these records
into social science categories suitable for formal statis-
tical analysis), found it impossible to follow their coding
instructions without resorting to ad hoeing.
   The second study set students the task of explaining a
brief conversation reported by one of them. The students
became convinced that each successive attempt at de-
scription was insufficient and, finally, that no total
description could be made. Again there is a tie with
ethnography, specifically the ethnography of speaking;
Garfinkel explains that the students found the task
impossible because, as would most social scientists, they
took the task to be one of remedying the sketchiness of
the conversation by elaborating its contents, by appealing
outside the speech event to what became, under prod-
ding, an infinite regress of context. Their error was to as-
sume a theory of signs in which the way something is said
is divorced from what is being said (form vs. content),
and in concentrating on the "what," neglecting the
"how." In fact, the conversation (like any conversation)
was an instance of one or more alternative ways of
speaking; it was intelligible to its participants not because
of some shared infinity of substantive knowledge as to
what was being talked about but in the first instance
because they agreed at the time on how the talking was
being done and how it was to be interpreted. The fact that
such momentary agreements can be reached, however,
does not mean that content can be reconstructed later
under different conditions.
   The insistence that speaking has a form beyond that of
grammar; that a simple semantic, or referential, perspec-
tive is inadequate to explaining intelligibility; that in-
telligibility depends upon the way in which something is
said, inseparable from what is being said; in short, that
members of a speech community share knowledge of
ways of speaking as well as of grammar, that com-
munication requires sociolinguistics as well as se-
mantics-all this is common ground. Garfinkel, however,
again goes beyond an ethnographic approach. While
recommending the study of ways of speaking (and listing
    304   Discovering Structure in Speech

    illustrations, such as narrating, lying, and gossiping), he
    does not stop to consider them in detail. For him the es-
    sential point is that rules of speaking also ultimately run
    afoul of "the essential incompleteness of any set of in-
    structions." Common understanding is never simply rec-
    ognition of shared contents or rules, but it is always
    open-ended, brought about in any given case because
    participants bring it about as their "artful (if unconscious)
    accomplishment." Ad hoeing remains the ultimate con-
    cern. People understand each other because "for the
    while" they assume the reasonableness of each other's
    statements and impute and construct reasonableness,
    where needed, out of often fragmentary data.
        Here is the fundamental contention of Garfinkel's
    work: that the orderliness, rationality, accountability of
    everyday life is, as he puts it, a "contingent, ongoing ac-
    complishment," a kind of "work," or "doing." Any oc-
    casion ·whatsoever provides material. "Methodology"
    thus refers to modes of practical reasoning used by
    researcher and subject alike. It is these modes of rea-
     soning that should be the first order of business in social
     research. The basis of culture, Garfinkel suggests, is not
     shared knowledge, but shared rules of interpretation; not
     common substantive information, already acquired, but
     "common sense" knowledge of what can count as rea-
.    sonable, factual, related, and the like. [Cf. Wallace's
     ( 1961) related view of culture as not "replication of
     uniformity" but "organization of diversity." See also
     Goodenough 1964]
        The emphasis on culture as interpretative rules shows
     a certain parallel. to transformational-generative
     grammar, a parallel which is made explicit by Cicourel
     (1970), who sees social structure as akin to deep struc-
     ture (see also Blom and Gumperz, Chapter 14). Just as
     speakers are held to be masters of a grammatical knowl-
     edge that they employ, fluently and largely unwittingly, a
     kind of "rule-governed creativity," largely free from
     stimulus control (Chomsky 1968), so here speakers are
     held to be masters of a speaking knowledge, employed
     fluently, unwittingly, and creatively. For Garfinkel, in-
     deed the common sense knowledge with which he is con-
     cerned is that of "members," member being used as a
     technical term to refer to mastery of a natural language,




                                                                    d
                             Remarks on Ethnomethodol,ogy       305

      where language includes not only grammar but also its
      use. And, just as for Chomsky, the resolution of other
      questions in linguistics is held to depend on character-
      izing the grammatical competence of speakers, if not, in
      fact, on discovering its basis in universal human nature.
      Garfinkel's project might be said to be the discovery of
      the human world view, at least its epistemological com-
      ponent.
        There are differences from generative grammar as well.
      Ethnomethodology might agree that the partial or
      "degenerate" nature of much of the speech encountered
     by the child argues against sheer learning as an explana-
     tion of the child's rapid acquisition of grammatical struc-
     ture; it would agree in rejecting the empiricist or descrip-
     tivist view that "text signals its own structure"; but it
     would not see the ancillary character of speech as merely
     an obstacle but rather as part of the knowledge the child
     must acquire. What, for grammarians, may be data not
     worth saving-clipped, elliptical, incomplete sentences-
     may be for the ethnomethodologist the precise way of ac-
     complishing some particular thing that is being said. One
     reason for this is the ethnomethodologists' contextual
     emphasis (i.e., the concern with the dependence of data
     on contexts created both by participants and by the in-
     vestigator, which is lacking in most linguistics). For an
     anthropological view of communication akin to that of
     Garfinkel, see Bateson's Cybernetic Explanation (1967).
        A further difference, between this approach and
     linguistic and ethnographic theory, may lie in the relation
     between particular studies and universal properties. At
     the particular level a parallel would hold, as we have
     seen, inasmuch as the data are understood as underlaid
     by mental capacities of the participants, and as being the
     product of these capacities. In linguistic theory, the ade-
     quacy of particular descriptions is tied to the adequacy of
     a general theory of the nature of language ["explanatory
     adequacy" (Chomsky 1965)]. Ethnomethodology also
     bases itself in a conception of the nature of language
     (recall the definition of the key term members), but it is
     not clear, at least at this time, that for it the study of uni-   I;
                                                                       I
     versal properties might undergird particular studies, con-
     straining the number of alternative analyses possible, and
     even deciding among them-in short, discovering behind
I




..
I
306   Discovering Structure in Speech

 the infinity of possible sentences and the diversity of lan-
 guages a finite mechanism. The universality envisaged in
 ethnomethodology would seem to underlie particular
 studies in two not clearly compatible ways.
    On the one hand, it is argued that investigators them-
 selves make unwitting use of processes that are intrinsic
 to that which they study. The recommendation here
 would seem to be that to avoid a vicious circularity, one
 must make ways of speaking and practical reasoning ob-
jects of explicit simultaneous study. Ethnographers, for
 example, obtain and interpret information by learning
 ways· of communicating appropriately in a community.
 Those ways of speaking are normally regarded as means
 to an end and forgotten, except in anecdotes, but should
 be described. Rather than take what is said only as a sign
of a content somewhere else (in some ethnological cate-
gory), ethnographers should learn the lesson of Gar-
finkel's students and study the ways of speaking on which
their verbal information depends. One might envisage
some general theory of ways of speaking to which eth-
nographers would contribute and on which they would
draw.
   However, the universality and ubiquity of methodolog-
ical phenomena leads to the view that it is not possible
to remedy or repair the presence of practical reasoning in
investigations. One gains the impression that all the in-
vestigator can do is to collect and exhibit instances. Quite
possibly, this posture of extreme empiricism-reminis-
cent of the descriptive linguists-is merely a passing
phase, which will disappear with the accumulation of
more properly documented case studies.
   While pointing out, on the one hand, that the task of
formulating ways of speaking is infinite, Garfinkel calls
attention, on the other hand, to some highly general and
most probably universal processes through which
meaning is conveyed in natural conversation. These are:
that ways of speaking are essentially indexical (like pro-
nouns), in the sense that part of their meaning and in-
telligibility always will lie in the situation in which they
occur and in the association this situation evokes in the
participants' minds; they are reflexive, in the sense that
the operations in question are part of all speaking and
making sense, so that an inquiry into them is itself always
                          Remarks on Ethnomethodolo,gy      307

     a new, as yet unanalyzed instance-the student of the
     "glossing practices" of others himself must employ
    some; and they are open-ended in that the sense that
    what is happening now can always be taken to depend
    upon, be revisable in the light of, what happens later. In-
    stances of this last property, indeed, are favorite "rep-
    resentative anecdotes" to use Kenneth Burke's
    (1945:59-61, 323-325) apt term; e.g., "Rose's gloss": In
    this practice Professor Rose, visiting a city for the very
    first time, while being driven from the airport by his host,
    "does" [looking ahead] and [watching something go by],
    and then remarks, "It certainly has changed." His host's
    reply tells Rose what he has been talking about. [The
   quotation marks and brackets adapt conventions es-
   tablished by Garfinkel and Sacks (1969)]. Analogous
   practices indeed are known in the interpretation of litera-
   ture, as in I. A. Richard's (1955:17-56) proposal that
   question marks be used to bracket some initial piece of
   talk or text (e.g., ?analogous practices?) as indication that
   how it is to be comprehended is to be left for decision or
   review later. A related practice is known in biblical
   studies as typology, referring to the procedures by which
   New Testament writers interpret the Old Testament past
  in the light of the present, "for now they see clearly the
  true significance of what had formerly been discerned
  only dimly," and by v.•hich Old Testament writers as well
  "had interpreted the meaning of God's action in the past
  in the light of their understanding of later events"
 (Richardson 1964: 178-179). For ethnomethodology,
 this family of practices is essential to the rationality of
 everyday life.
      The spirit of ethnomethodology is exactly that of the
                                                                    :i
 sociolinguistics with which we are concerned in many                !
 respects-the insistence that the number and kinds of
 ways of speaking are problematic and to be discovered;
 that analysis begin within the data of speech events them-
 selves; and that a person's speaking competence is not pas-
sive or mechanical, but part of strategies for the encom-
passing of situations (cf. Burke 1941 ).
     Garfinkel's ultimate concern with common sense
knowledge and practical reasoning is invaluable in
making one realize that the study of speaking entails
issues central to contemporary philosophical perspec-




                                                                   J,d
308   Discovering Stmcture in Speech

tives. It is work stimulated by phenomenology through
Alfred Schutz ( 1962, 1966, 1967), and has recognized af-
finity with the later Wittgenstein (l 953), as well as with
the late Scot philosopher Sinclair (l 951), who has also
influenced Kenneth Pike's ( 1967) approach to an in-
tegrated view of language as part of behavior. The con-
cern with what is known and the conditions of knowing it
in the human sciences is of a kind with methodological
questions raised from a variety of starting points-or-
dinary language philosophy [e.g., Hare 1963; Hampshire
 1967; cf. 114, 234; Marxist existentialism (or existen-
tialist.Marxism) in Sartre 1963 (and cf. LeFebvre 1966);
 Protestant and Catholic theology (Ebeling 1966; Kaspar
 1969; Mascall 1968)]. Each shares with eth-
nomethodology a concern to deal with human thought
and action as concrete, situated, yet going beyond the sit-
uation; each examines received categories and practices
found inadequate to human experience; but each, while
recognizing human experience as necessarily outrunning
determinate knowledge, is concerned with a structure of
 knowledge that can be established, as, in its own field, is
 sociolinguistic study of ways of speaking.
    Rose's gloss provides an illustration. Whether or not
 it is an adequate "representative anecdote," it is clear
 that it would not work in the same way in all situations.
 In some, as in the one described, it would pass unre-
 marked; in some, it would be remarked as unusual, odd,
 or specially expressive; in some it would not be regarded
 as interpretable at all-at least it would be taken as not
 related to the situation at all. In the first case, it would be
 odd to remark on what had been said; in the second, what
 has been said would be literally remarkable (i.e., worth
 retelling); in the third, response might range from open
 questioning to silent head shaking. A fourth possibility,
 of course, is absence of response because the remark,
 being uninterpretable, goes unnoticed. (These categories
 are adapted from work of William Labov.) Even if the
 remark could always be potentially "glossed" [given the
 (good) will], by finding some explanation for an unre-
 lated or uninterpretable remark to have been made, exis-
  tence of the possibility does not mean it will be acted
  upon.
    To pass over these four kinds of relation between
                                        Remarks on Ethnomethodology             309

            speaking and situation is to overshoot the heart of sociol-
            inguistic research into the structure of discourse. It is in
            terms of such research, indeed, that recourse to a particu-
            lar glossing practice, e.g., one of last resort ("Well, he
            must have some reason for saying that, though now's no
            time to ask what it is"), could be accounted for. Two
            things must be stressed: ( 1) Rules of interpretation (in-
           cluding glossing practices) can always be used to tran-
           scend determinate rules of speaking in the narrower
           sense, but need not be; and it is essential to discover
           where the boundary lies in a community, such that to find
           some particular thing interpretable in part puts one out-
           side the community's norms of interpretation, (2) Rules
           of interpretation apply through, or incorporate, determi-
           nate rules of speaking, and use of one is not intelligible
           without knowledge of the other. In short, eth-
           nomethodology goes beyond most sociolinguistic re-
           search, but presupposes and stimulates it, as Sacks and
           Schegloff(Chapters 11 and 12) will show. Though its no-
           tion of social categories is akin to semantic rules, it also
           offers a potentially highly useful methodological frame-
           work for integrating linguistic and social phenomena.
           Additional related readings are provided by Duncan
           (1968), Hill and Crittenden (1968), Postal (1968), Sapir
           (1949c), Kramer, Goldstein, Israel, and Johnson (1956),
           and Quentin Skinner ( 1970).




         I use the term ethnomethodology to refer to various policies,
methods, results, risks, and lunacies with which to locate and accomplish
the study of the rational properties of practical actions as contingent
ongoing accomplishments of organized artful practices of everyday life.
Given strongly enforced limitations of space and stronger ones on pa-
tience, I found the peaks of recommending these studies with detailed,
descriptive arguments beyond my skill. I therefore took as the limited
purpose of this chapter to characterize ethnomethodology. 2 I have done
this by presenting two studies and a concluding recitation of policies. It is


  2 For detailed studies, see Garfinkel ( 1967), and Garfinkel and Sacks (in press); a further
characterization of ethnomethodology, with introduction to detailed studies, is in Garfinkel
and Sacks ( 1969).
         310     Discovering Structure in Speech

possible to develop the central theme if the reader treats each section as a
guide to deepen and point up the others. The first study deals with follow-
ing coding instructions; the second with common understanding.


          Fallowing Coding Instructions

         Several years ago we undertook to analyze the experience of the
UCLA Outpatient Psychiatric Clinic in order to answer the question:
"By what criteria are its applicants selected for treatment?" To formulate
and answer this question, we used a variation of a method of cohort analy-
sis that Kramer and his associates (1956) had recommended to describe
load and flow characteristics of patients in mental hospitals. Successive
activities of "contact," "intake interview," "psychological testing," "in-
take conference," "in-treatment," and "termination" were conceived
with the use of the tree diagram of Fig. 10.1. Any path from first contact


                                                     IN-TREATMENT

                                          INTAKE
                                          CONFERENCE

                             PSYCHOLOGICAL                          TERMINATION
                             TESTING

                 INTAKE
                                                          TERMINATION
                 INTERVIEW


                                                TERMINATION
           FIRST
           CONTACT
                                  TERMINATION


                     TERMINATION
           figure JO.I
 Career paths of patients of a psychiatric clinic.



 to termination was called a "career." We wished to know what character-
 istics of patients, of clinic personnel, of their interactions, and of the tree
 were associated with which careers. Clinic records were our sources of
 information, the most important of which were intake application forms,
 and contents of case folders. In order to obtain a continuing record of pa-
 tient-clinic transactions from the time of a patient's initial contact until he
 terminated, a "Clinic Career Form" was designed and inserted into case
                                 Remarks on Etlznometlwdology      311

  folders. Because clinic folders contain records that clinic personnel
  provide of their own activities, almost all of these sources of data were the
  results of self-reporting procedures.
    Two graduate students in sociology at UCLA examined some 1500
 clinic folders for the information to complete the items of a coding sheet.
  A conventional reliability procedure was designed and run with the aim of
 determining the amount of agreement between coders and between suc-
 cessive trials of their coding. According to conventional reasoning, the
 amount of agreement furnishes one set of grounds for lending credence to
 coded events as actual events of clinic activities. A critical feature of con-
 ventional reliability assessments is that the agreement between coders
 consists of agreement on the end results.
    To no one's surprise, preliminary work showed that in order to ac-
 complish the coding, coders were assuming knowledge of the very
 organized ways of the clinic that their coding procedures were intended to
 produce descriptions of. More interestingly, such presupposed knowledge
 seemed necessary and was most deliberately consulted whenever, for
 whatever reasons, the coders needed to be satisfied that they had coded
 "what really happened" regardless of whether or not they had encoun-
 tered "ambiguous" folder contents. Such a procedure undermined any
 claim that actuarial methods for interrogating folder contents had been
used, no matter how apparently clear coding instructions were. Agree-
ment in coding results was being produced by some other contrasting
procedure with unknown characteristics.
    To find out more about it, the reliability procedure was treated as a
 problematic activity in its own right. The "reliability" of coded results
was addressed by asking how the coders had actually brought folder con-
tents under the jurisdiction of the coding sheet's item. Via what practices
had actual folder contents been assigned the status of answers to the
researcher's questions? What actual activities made up coders' practices
called "following coding instruction"?
    A procedure was designed that yielded conventional reliability informa-
tion so that the original interests of the study were preserved. At the same
time the procedure permitted the study of how any amount of agreement
or disagreement had been produced by the actual ways that the two
coders had gone about treating folder contents as answers to the ques-
tions formulated by the coding sheet. But, instead of assuming that
coders, proceeding in whatever ways they did, might have been in error,
in greater or lesser amount, the assumption was made that whatever they
did could be counted correct procedure in some coding game. The ques-
tion was, what were these "games"? How ever coders did it, it was suf-
ficient to produce whatever they got. How did they do it to get what they
got?
         312     Discovering Structure in Speech

    We soon found the essential relevance to the coders of such consider-
ations as: "et cetera," "unless," "let it pass," and "factum valet. " 3
    For convenience call these considerations "ad hoc," and call their use
in the coder's work of interrogating contents for answers to their ques-
tions "ad hoeing." Coders used these same ad hoc considerations in order
to recognize the relevance of the coding instructions to the organized
activities of the clinic. Only when this relevance was clear were the
coders satisfied that the coding instructions did analyze actually encoun-
 tered folder contents in such a way as to permit the coders to treat folder
 contents as reports of "real events." Finally, ad hoc considerations were
 an invariant ineradicable part of "following coding instructions." At-


                                                                                                        II
 tempts to suppress them while retaining an unequivocal sense to the in-
 structions produced coders' bewilderment.
     Various facets of the "new" reliability study were then developed, at
 first, in order to see if these results could be firmly established, and after it
 was clear, to my satisfaction, that they could, to exploit their con-
 sequences for the general sociological character of the coders' methods of
 interrogation (as well as contrasting methods) as well as for the work that
  is involved in recognizing or claiming that something had been done by
  rule-that an action had followed or had been "governed" by instructions.
     Ad hoc considerations are invariably relevant considerations in de-
  ciding the fit between what could be read from the clinic folders and what
  the coder inserted into the coding sheet. No matter how definitely and
                                                                                                        '
     3
        These considerations are quite generally found when professionals-sociologists,
 anthropologists, linguists, whosoever-make use of instructions, formulas, rules, and the
 like. There is always an implicit additional section to such statements, one that might be
 headed: "practical advice to whomsoever might seek to insure the usefulness of the instruc-
 tions (formulas, etc.) to analyze the situations." Professionals in effect claim the right to
                                                                                                        I
  make out a situation so as to see that a rule, or description, or the like is right. They claim
 such rights and assign them to each other by reason of common membership in a profession.
 This implicit practical advice consists of the things that need not be stated, yet are expected,
  and which to ask about may define one as not a member of the profession, the things that
  anyone (in the profession) knows.
                                                                                                        I
       "Et cetera" refers to the piece <1f implicit practical advice that runs: "Read it like this,
  ' .. .' and so forth", i.e., to see the rule, if you understand the rule, you presumably can
  recognize other circumstances and cases of its application without all of them being stated
  here. "Unless" refers to a second piece of advice: "Read the rule so as to include, as part of
   what it is talking about, any and all considerations of unless, considerations which any
   member knows need not and cannot be cited before they are needed, though no member is at
   a loss when the need is clear. That is, you presumably can recognize circumstances and
   cases to which no one in their right (professional) mind would take the rule as applying,
   though not stated." "Let it pass" refers to the advice that runs: "In the course of seeing that
    a rule applies, the use of and so forth and unless can introduce any matter whatsoever,
    thereby raising questions of where any of it ought appropriately to begin or end. Read the
    rule, therefore, with the proviso, 'Let it pass,' or 'Enough is enough, as anyone knows,' we
    have to get done." Finally ,fac/11111 valet is·, I understand, a medieval term that means that an
    action that is otherwise prohibited by a rule is to be treated as correct; it happens neverthe-
    less. (Based on Garfinkel 1966.)
                                   Remarks on Ethnomethodology           313

elaborately instructions had been written, and despite the fact that strict
actuarial coding rules 4 could be formulated for every item, and with which·
folder contents could be mapped into the coding sheet, insofar as the
cl· irn had to be advanced that coding sheet entries reported real events of
th'~ clinic's activities, then in every instance, and for every item, "et ce-
tera,, "unless," "let it pass," and "factum valet" accompanied the
cod~r's grasp of the coding instructions as ways of analyzing actual folder
contents. Their use made it possible as well for the coder to read a folder
 content as a report about the events that the coding sheet provided and
 fonnulated as events of the processing tree.
     ordinarily researchers treat such ad hoc procedures as flawed ways of
 writing, recognizing, or following coding instructions. The prevailing view
 holds that good work requires researchers, by extending the number and
 explicitness of their coding rules, to minimize or even eliminate the oc-
 casions in which "et cetera" and the others would be used.
     To treat instructions as though ad hoc features in their use was a
  nuisance, or to treat their presence as grounds for complaint about the in-
  cornpleteness of instructions, is very much like complaining that if the
  walls of a building were only gotten out of the way, one could see better
  what was keeping the roof up.
     our studies show that ad hoc considerations are essential features of
  coding procedures. Ad hoeing is required if the researcher is to grasp the
  relevance of the instructions to the particular and actual situation they are
  intended to analyze. For every particular and actual occasion of search,
  detection, and assignment of folder contents to a "proper" category-
  which is to say, over the course of actually coding-such ad hoc consider-
  ations have irremediable priority over the usually talked about "necessary
   and sufficient" criteria. Rather than it being the case that the "necessary
   and sufficient" criteria are procedurally defined by coding instructions,
   and rather than it being the case that ad hoc procedures are controlled in
   their presence, use, number, or occasion of use by making coding instruc-
   tions as definite as possible, ad hoc considerations are consulted by
   coders, and ad hoeing practices are used in order to recognize what the in-
   structions are definitely talking about. Ad hoc considerations are con-
   sulted by coders in order to recognize coding as "operational definitions"
   of coding categories. They operate as the ground for and as methods to
   advance and secure researchers' claims to have coded in accordance with
    "necessary and sufficient" criteria.
      We do not have strong evidence, though we do have some demonstra-
    ble grounds for pursuing the hunch, that the work of ad hoeing occurs
    without possibility of remedy whenever the coder assumes the position of

    • David Harrah's (1961) model of an information-matching game was taken to define the
   meaning of "strict actuarial method for interrogating."
        314    Discovering Structure in Speech

a socially competent member of the arrangement that he seeks to as-
semble an account of, and from this "position" treats actual folder con-
tents as standing in a relationship of trusted signification to the "system"
in the clinic activities. We think that it is because the coder assumes the
"position" of a competent member to the arrangements that he seeks to
give an account of, and that he can "see the system" in the actual content
in something like the way that we must know the orderly ways of English
usage in order to recognize an utterance as a work-in-English or know the
rules of a game to make out a move-in-a-game-given that alternative
ways of making out an utterance or a board play are always imaginable.
Thereby the coder recognizes the folder content for "what it actually is,"
or can. "see what a note in the folder is really talking about."
   Given this, then the coder, ifhe has to be satisfied that he has detected a
real clinic occurrence, must treat actual folder contents as standing proxy
for the social-order-in-and-of-clinic-activities. Actual folder contents
stand to the socially ordered ways of clinic activities as representations of
them; they do not describe the order, nor are they evidences of the order.
It is the coder's use of folder documents as sign functions to which I mean
to be pointing in saying that the coder knows the order of the clinic's
activities that he is looking at to be able to recognize the actual content as
an appearance-of-the-order. Once the coder can "see the system" in the
content, it is possible for the coder to extend and to otherwise interpret
the coding instructions-to ad hoc them-so as to maintain the relevance
of the coding instructions to the actual contents, and in this way to
formulate the sense of actual content so that its meaning, even though it is
transformed by the coding, is preserved in the coder's eyes as a real event
of the clinic's actual activities.
   There are several important consequences of this.
    1. Characteristically, coded results are treated as if they were disinter-
ested descriptions of clinic events, and coding rules are presumed to back
up the claim of disinterested description. But if the work of ad hoeing is
required to make such claims intelligible, it can always be argued-and so
far I do not see a defensible reply-that the coded results consist of a per-
suasive version of the socially organized character of the clinic's opera-
tions regardless of what the actual order is, perhaps independently of
what the actual order is, and even without our having detected the actual
order. This is to say that instead of our study of patients' clinic careers, as
well as the multitude of studies of various social arrangements that have
been carried out in similarly conventional ways, having described the
order of the clinic's operations, the account may be argued to consist of a
 socially invented, persuasive, and proper way of talking about the clinic
as an orderly enterprise since "after all" the account was produced by
"scientific procedures." The account would be itself part of the actual




                                                                                  _}
                                Rernarks on Ethnomethodology      315

 order of the clinic's operations in much the same way that one might treat
 a person's report on his own activities as a feature of his activities. The
 actual order would remain to be described.
   2. Another consequence arises when we ask what is to be made of the
 care that nevertheless is too assiduously exercised in the design and use
 of coding instructions for interrogating actual contents and transforming
 them into the language of the coding sheet? If the resulting account is a
feature of the clinic's activities, then one ought not perhaps to read the
coding instructions as a way of obtaining a scientific description of the
clinic's activities since this assumes that the coding language, in what it is
talking about, is independent of the interests of the members that are
being served in using it. Coding instructions ought to be read instead as
consisting of a grammar of rhetoric; offurnishing a "social science" way
of talking to persuade consensus and action within the practical circum-
stances of the clinic's organized daily activities, a grasp of which
members are expected to have as a matter of course. By referring to an ac-
count of the clinic that was obtained by following coding instructions, it is
possible for members with different interests to persuade each other and
to reconcile their talk about clinic affairs in an impersonal way, while the
matters that are really being talked about retain their sense for the "dis-
cussants" as a legitimate or illegitimate, a desirable or undesirable, an
advantaged or disadvantaged state of affairs for the discussants in their
occupational lives. It furnishes an impersonal way of characterizing their
affairs without the members relinquishing important organizationally
determined interests in what the account, in their eyes, is "after all" all
about. What it is all about is the clinic order whose real features, as any
member knows that "anyone knows," are always none of somebody-
else-in-that-organization 's business.


        Common Understanding and
        Ways of Talking
          Sociologists distinguish the "product" from the "process"
 meanings of a common understanding. As "product," a common under-
 standing consists of a shared agreement on substantive matters; as
 "process," it consists of various methods whereby something that a
person says or does is recognized to accord with a rule. With his concepts
of Begreifen and Verstehen, each with its distinct character as method
and knowledge, Weber provided sociologists an authority for this dis-
tinction.
   An analysis of students' experiences in reporting commonplace conver-
sation suggests that for either case, for product or process, a common un-
        3 I6   Discovering Structure in Speech

derstanding consists of an inner-temporal course of interpretive work.
Their experiences suggest some strange consequences of the facts that in
either case a common understanding has necessarily an operational struc-
ture. (See the last paragraph of this section.)
   Students were asked to report common conversations by writing on the
left side of a sheet what the parties actually said and on the right side what
they and their partners understood that they were talking about. A
student reported the following colloquy between himself and his wife:

HUSBAND:         Dana succeeded in putting       This afternoon as I was bring-
                 a penny in a parking meter      ing Dana, our four-year-old
                 today without being             son, home from the nursery
                 picked up.                      school, he succeeded in
                                                 reaching high enough to put a
                                                 penny in a parking meter when
                                                 we parked in a meter zone,
                                                 whereas before he had always
                                                 had to be picked up to reach
                                                 that high.
WIFE:            Did you take him to the         Since he put a penny in a
                 record store?                   meter that means that you
                                                 stopped while he was with
                                                 you. I know that you stopped
                                                 at the record store either on
                                                 the way to get him or on the
                                                 way back. Was it on the way
                                                 back, so that he was with you
                                                 or did you stop there on the
                                                 way to get him and somewhere
                                                 else on the way back?
HUSBAND:         No, to the shoe repair shop.    No, I stopped at the record
                                                 store on the way to get him
                                                 and stopped at the shoe repair
                                                 shop on the way home when
                                                 he was with me.
WIFE:            What for?                       I know of one reason why you
                                                 might have stopped at the
                                                 shoe repair shop. Why did you
                                                 in fact?
HUSBAND:         I got some new shoe laces       As you will remember I broke
                 for my shoes.                   a shoe lace on one of my
                                                 brown oxfords the other day
                                                 so I stopped to get some new
                                                 laces.
                                  Remarks on Ethnomethodology        317

 WIFE:             Your loafers need new          Something else you could
                   heels badly.                    have gotten that I was thinking
                                                  of. You could have taken in
                                                  your black loafers which need
                                                  heels badly. You'd better get
                                                  them taken care of pretty soon.

     Students filled out the left side of the sheet quickly and easily, but found
  the right side incomparably more difficult. When the assignment was
  made, many asked how much I wanted them to write. As I progressively
  imposed accuracy, clarity, and distinctness, the task became increasingly
  laborious. Finally, when I required that they assume I would know what
  they had actually talked about only from reading literally what they wrote
  literally, they gave up with the complaint that the task was impossible.
     Although their complaints were concerned with the laboriousness of
 having to write "more," the frustrating "more" was not made up of the
 large labor of having to reduce a mountain with buckets. It was not their
 complaint that what was talked about consisted of bounded contents
 made so vast by pedantry that they lacked sufficient time, stamina, paper,
 drive, or good reason to write "all ofit." Instead, the complaint and its cir-
 cumstances seemed to consist of this: If for whatever a student wrote I
 was able to persuade him that it was not yet accurate, distinct, or clear
 enough, and if he remained willing to repair the ambiguity, then he re-
 turned to the task with the complaint that the writing itself developed the
 conversation as a branching texture of relevant matters. The very way of
 accomplishing the task multiplied its features.
     What task had I set them, such that it required that they write "more";
 such that the progressive imposition of accuracy, clarity, and literalness
 made it increasingly difficult and finally impossible; and such that the way
 of accomplishing the task multiplied its features? If a common under-
 standing consisted of shared agreement on substantive matter, their task
 would have been identical with one that professional sociologists sup-
posedly address. The task would have been solved as professional
sociologists are apt to propose its solution, as follows:
    Students would first distinguish what was said from what was talked
about, and set the two contents into a correspondence of sign and refer-
ent. What the parties said would be treated as a sketchy, partial, in-
complete, masked, elliptical, concealed, ambiguous, or misleading version
of what the parties talked about. The task would consist of filling out the
sketchiness of what was said. What was talked about would consist of
elaborated and corresponding contents of what the parties said. Thus the
format of left- and right-hand columns would accord with the "fact" that
the contents of what was said were recordable by writing what a tape
        318   Discovering Structure in Speech

recorder would pick up. The right-hand column would require that some-
thing "more" be "added." Because the sketchiness of what was said was
its defect, it would be necessary for students to look elsewhere than to
what was said in order (a) to find the corresponding contents, and (b) to
find the grounds to argue for-because they would need to argue-the
correctness of the correspondence. Because they were reporting the
actual conversation of particular persons, they would look for these fur-
ther contents in what the conversationalists had "in mind," or what they
were "thinking," or what they "believed," or what they "intended."
   They would need further to be assured that they had detected what the
conversationalists actually and not supposedly, hypothetically, imagin-
ably, or possibly had in mind, which is to say that they would need to cite
observed actions-observed ways that the parties conducted themselves
-in order to furnish grounds for the claim of "actually." This assurance
would be obtained by seeking to establish the presence in the conversa-
tionalists' relationship of warranting virtues such as their having spoken
honestly, openly, candidly, sincerely and the like. All of which is to say
that students would invoke their knowledge of the community of under-
standings, their1knowledge of shared agreements, in order to recommend
the adequacy of their accounts of what the parties had been talking about,
i.e., what the parties understood in common. Then, for anything the
students wrote, they could assume that I, as a competent comember of the
same community (the conversations were after all commonplace) should
be able to see the correspondence and its grounds. If I did not see the cor-
respondence or if I made out the contents differently than they did, then
as long as they could continue to assume my competence-Le., as long as
my alternative interpretations did not undermine my right to claim that
such alternatives needed ·to be taken seriously by them and by me-I
could be made out by the students as insisting that they furnish me with
finer detailing than practical considerations required. In such a case, they
should have charged me with blind pedantry and should have complained
that because "anyone can see" when, for all practical purposes, enough is
enough, none are so blind as those who will not see.
   This version of their task accounts for their complaints of having to
write "more." It also accounts for the task's increasing laboriousness
when clarity and the like were progressively imposed. But it does not ac-
count very well for the final impossibility, for it explained one facet of the
task's "impossibility" as students' unwillingness to go any further, but it
does not explain an accompanying sense, namely, that students somehow
 saw that the task does not explain at all their complaint that the way ofac-
                                                                         1
complishing the task multiplied its features.                            ·
   An alternative conception of the task may do better. Although it may at
first appear strange to do so, suppose we drop the assumption that in
order to describe a usage as a feature of a community of understandings,
                                  Remarks on Ethnomethodology      319

   we must at the outset know of what the substantive common under-
   standing consists. With it, drop the assumption's accompanying theory of
   signs according to which a "sign" and "referent" are, respectively, prop-
   erties of something said and something talked about, and that in this fash-
   ion proposes sign and referent to be related as corresponding contents.
   By dropping such a theory of signs we drop thereby as well the possibility
   that an invoked shared agreement on substantive matters explains a
   usage.
      If these notions are dropped, then what the parties talked about could
  not be distinguished from how the parties were speaking. An explanation
  of what the parties were talking about would then consist not of an ac-
  count of what the parties had intended and not said entirely of describing
  how the parties had been speaking; of furnishing a method for saying
  whatever is to be said, like talking synonymously, talking ironically,
  talking metaphorically, talking cryptically, talking narratively, talking in a
  questioning or answering way, lying, glossing, double-talking, and the
  rest.
     In the place of, and in contrast to, a concern for a difference between
  what was said and what was talked about, the appropriate difference is
  between a speech-community member's recognition that a person is
  saying something, i.e., that he was speaking, on the other hand, and how
  he was speaking, on the other. Then the recognized sense of what a
 person said consists only and entirely in recognizing the method of his
 speaking, of seeing how he spoke.
     I suggest that one not read the right-hand column as corresponding con-
 tents of the left, and that the students' task of explaining what the conver-
 sationalists talked about did not involve them in elaborating the contents
 of what the conversationalists said. I suggest instead that their written
 explanations consisted of their attempts to instruct me in how to use what
 the parties said as a method for saying what the conversationalists said. I
 suggest that I had asked the students to furnish me with instructions for
 recognizing what the parties were actually and certainly saying. By per-
 suading them of alternative "interpretations," by persuading them that
ambiguity remained, I had persuaded them that they had demonstrated to
 me only what the parties were supposedly, or probably, or imaginably, or
hypothetically saying, wlziclz they took to 111ean that their instructions
were incomplete; that their denwnstrations failed by the extent to which
their instructions were incomplete; and that tlze difference between claims
of "actually" and "supposedly" depended 011 the co111plete11ess <~f the in-
structions.
    We now see what the task was that required them to write "more," that
they found increasingly difficult and finally impossible, and that became
elaborated in its features by the very procedures for doing it. I had set
them the task of formulating these instructions so as to make them
               Discovering Structure in Speech
        320

   .       , ingly" accurate, clear, distinct, and finally literal where the
"1ncreas  . gs of "increasing · 1Y" an d of c1 ·
                                              anty, accuracy, d' ·
                                                                1stmctness, and ·  ht-
mefntn s were supposedly explained in terms of the properties of the in-
era n;s ns themselves and the instructions alone. I had required them to
           10
struc the impossible task of "repairing" the essential incompleteness of
t'1ke
  '       ont of instructions no matter how carefully or elaborately wntten.      they
aT       ~~be. 1 had required them to formulate the method that the parties had
 m gd ·n speaking as rules of procedure to follow in order to say what the
 us\ \ said. The rules were thus rules that would withstand every ex-
         1
 ?ar \ of situation, imagination, and development. I had asked them to
 1dgen~ibe the parties' methods of speaking as if these methods were
  . esc orphic with                    · comp 1·mnce wit
                        acttons ·m stnct
                            ·                           · h a ru Ie of proce d ure that
  isom
  f       ulated the met h o d as an mstructa
                                        ·        bl e matter. T o recogmze· w I zat 1s
                                                                                     ·
    0
       ~d means to recognize how a person is speaking, e.g., to recognize that
       1
  :~ wife, in saying, "Your shoes need heels badly," was speaking narra-
     . e ly or metaphorically, or euphemistically, or .double-talking.
   t1ve ,
        They stumbled over the fact that the question of how a person is
   speaking, the task of describing a per~on's method of sp~aking, is not sat-
    . fled by and is not the same as showmg that what he said accords with a
    ~:le for demonstrating consistency, compatability, and coherence of
    meanings.
         For the conduct of their everyday affairs, persons take for granted that
     what is said will be made out according to methods that the parties use to
     make out what they are saying for its clear, consistent, coherent, under-
     standable, or planful character, i.e., as subject to some rule's jurisdiction
     -in a word, as rational. To see the "sense" of what is said is to accord to
     what was said its character "as a rule." "Shared agreement" refers to
     various social methods for accomplishing the member's recognition that
      something was said according to a rule and not the demonstrable
      matching of substantive matters. The appropriate image of a common un-
      derstanding is, therefore, an operation rather than a common intersection
      of overlapping sets.
          A person doing sociology-lay or professional-can treat a common
      understanding as a shared agreement on substantive matters by taking for
      granted that what is said will be made out in accordance with methods
       that need not be specified, which is to say that need only be specified on
       "special" occasions.
          Given the discovering character of what the husband and wife were
       talking about, its recognizable character for both entailed the use by each
       and the attribution by each to the other of work whereby what was said is
        or will have been understood to have accorded with their relationship of
        interaction as invokable rule of their agreement, as an intersubjectively
        used grammatical scheme of analyzing each other's talk whose use
                                      Remarks 011 Ethnomethodology
                                                                              32]
provided that they would understand each other in ways th t
be understood. It provides that neither one was entitled to a \~ey Would
other to specify how it was being done, i.e., without either;~ Upon the
to claim that the other needed.to "explain" himself.             emg entitled
   In short, a common understanding, entailing as it does an ...
poral course of interpretive work, has necessarily an oper /nner" tem-
ture. To disregard its operational structure is to use commona tonal struc-
edge of the society in exactly the way that members use it Whsense knowl-
decide what persons are really doing or really "talking about~~ _they must
                                                                    1
common sense knowledge of social structures as both a\ ·~·· to use
resource of inquiry. An alternative is to assign to the study of t~pic and a
of concerted actions and methods of common understandin e meth~ds
 priority. Not a method of understanding but immensely Vario g exclusive
 of understanding are the professional sociologist's proper and ~~t:ethods
                                                                    1
 studied and critical phenomena. Their multitude is indicated . ~rto un-
 less list of ways that persons speak. Some indication of thei~n ~ e end-
 and their differences occurs in the socially available glosses of a c ~r~cter
 of sign functions as when we take note of marking, labeling, sym~u t.it~de
                                                                        112mg
 emb1 ·     ·
       em1zmg,    cryp t ograms, ana1 ·
                                      og1es, anagrams, .mdicating o .       . •
      ·
 turizmg,   · ·   ·
            1m1tatmg,    moc k'mg-up, ·
                                      s1mu1a t'mg-m· Short, in reco• . .mmia-
 using, and_ producing the orderly ways of cultural settings from ..~~~:~:
 those settmgs. 5


           Ethnomethodology

           That practical actions are problematic in ways not so far s                       .
 fzow they are problematic; how to make them accessible to study· ;~~~
 we might learn about them-these are proposed tasks. I use the ter~ et~-
 nomethodology to refer to the study of practical actions according to
 policies such as the following, and to the phenomena, issues, findings, and
 methods that accompany their use.
    1. An indefinitely large domain of appropriate settings can be located
 if one uses a search policy that any occasion whatsoever be examined for
 the feature that "choice" among alternatives of sense, facticity, objec-
 tivity, cause, explanation, and communality of practical actions is a pro-
 ject of members' actions. With its use, inquiries of every imaginable kind
 from divination to theoretical physics thereby claim our interest as

    r. This note was touched off by Monroe Beardsley's remark ( 1962) to the effect that we do
  not decide that a word is used metaphorically because we know what a person is thinking;
  rather we know what he is thinking because we see that a word is used metaphorically.
  Taking poetry for his case, Beardsley points out that "the clues to this fact must somehow be
  in the poem itself, or we should seldom be able to read poetry."
        322    Discovering Structure in Speech

socially organized artful practices. That the social structures of everyday
activities furnish contexts, objects, resources, justifications, problematic
topics, etc., to practices and products of inquiries establishes the eligibil-
ity for our interest of every way of doing inquiries without exception.
    None can be excluded no matter where or when they occur, no matter
how vast or trivial their scope, organization, cost, duration, con-
sequences, whatever their successes, whatever their repute, their practi-
tioners, their claims, their philosophies or philosophers. Procedures and
results of water witching, divination, mathematics, sociology-whether
done by lay persons or professionals-are addressed according to the pol-
 icy that every feature of sense, of fact, of method for every particular case
of inquiry without exception is the managed accomplishment of organized
 settings of practical actions, and that particular determinations in
 members' practices of consistency, planfulness, relevance, or reproduci-
 bility of their practices and results-from witchcraft to topology-are
 acquired and assured only through particular, located organizations of
 artful practices.
    2. Members to an organized arrangement are continually engaged in
 having to decide, recognize, persuade, or make evident the rational, i.e.,
 the coherent, or consistent, or chosen, or planful, or effective, or methodi-
 cal, or knowledgeable character of such activities of their inquiries as
 counting, graphing, interrogation, sampling, recording, reporting, plan-
 ning, decision making, and the rest. In order to describe how actual inves-
 tigative procedures are accomplished as recognizedly rational actions in
 actual occasions, it is not satisfactory to say that members invoke some
 rule with which to define the coherent or consistent or planful, i.e.,
 rational, character of their actual activities. Nor is it satisfactory to
 propose that the rational properties of members' inquiries are produced
 by members' compliance to rules of inquiry. Instead, "adequate demon-
 stration," "adequate reporting," "sufficient evidence," "plain talk,"
 "making too much of the record," "necessary inference," "frame of
  restricted alternatives," in short, every topic of "logic" and "methodol-
  ogy," including these two titles as well, are glosses for organizational phe-
  nomena. These phenomena are contingent achievements of organizations
  of common practices, arid as contingent achievements, they are variously
  available to members as norms, tasks, and troubles, and only in these
  ways rather than as invariant categories or as general principles do they
  define "adequate inquiry and discourse."
     3. Thus, a leading policy is to refuse serious consideration to the
  prevailing proposal that efficiency, efficacy, effectiveness, intelligibility,
  consistency, planfulness, typicality, uniformity, reproducibility of ac-
  tivities-i.e., rational properties of practical activities-be assessed, rec-
  ognized, categorized, described by using a rule or a standard obtained
                                  Ifemarks 011 Etlznometlzodology   323

  from somewhere outside actual settings within which such properties are
  recognized, used, produced, and talked about by settings' members. All
  procedures whereby logical and methodological properties of the prac-
  tices and results of inquiries are assessed in their general characteristics
  by rule are of interest as phenomena for ethnomethodological study but
  not otherwise. Instead, structurally differing organized practical activities
  of everyday life are to be sought out and examined for the production, ori-
  gins, recognition, and representations of rational practices. All "logical"
  and "methodological" properties of action, every feature of activity's
  sense, of its facticity, of its objectivity, of its accountability, of its com-
  munality, without exception is to be treated as a contingent accomplish-
  ment of socially organized common practices. In short, they are not given,
  but accomplished.
    4. The policy is recommended that any setting be viewed as self-
 organizing with respect to the intelligible character of its own appearances
 as either representations of or as evidences-of-a-social-order. Any setting
 organizes its activities to make its properties as an organized environment
 of practical activities detectable, countable, recordable, reportable, tell-a-
 story-aboutable, analyzable-in short, accountable.
    Organized arrangements consist of various methods for accomplishing
 the accountability of a settings' organizational ways as a concerted under-
 taking. Every claim by practitioners of effectiveness, clarity, consistency,
 planfulness, or efficiency, and every consideration for adequate evidence,
 demonstration, description, or relevance, obtains its character as a plze-
 nornenon from the corporate pursuit of this undertaking and from the
 ways in which various organizational environments by reason of their
 characteristics as organizations of activities "sustain," "facilitate," "re-
 sist," etc., these methods for making their affairs accountable-matters-for-
 all-practical-purposes.
    In exactly the ways that a setting is organized, it consists of members'
 methods for making evident that settings' ways as clear, coherent, planful,
consistent, chosen, knowable, and uniform, with reproducible connec-
tions-i.e., rational connections. In exactly the way that persons are
members to organized affairs they are engaged in the serious and practical
work of detecting, demonstrating, persuading through displays in the ordi-
nary occasions of their interactions the appearances of consistent, coher-
ent, clear, chosen, planful arrangements. In exactly the ways in which a
setting is organized, it consists of methods whereby its members are
provided with accounts of the setting as countable, storyable, proverbial,
comparable, picturable, representable-i.e., accountable-events.
   5. Every kind of inquiry without exception consists of organized, artful
practices whereby the rational properties of proverbs, partially formu-
lated advice, partial description, elliptical expressions, passing remarks,
        324   Discovering Structure in Speech

fables, cautionary tales, and the like are made evident, are demonstrated.
   The demonstrable rationality of occasional expressions and occasional
actions is an ongoing achievement of the organized activities of everyday
life. Here is the heart of the matter. The managed production of this phe-
nomenon in every aspect, from every perspective, and in every stage re-
tains the character for members of serious, practical tasks, subject to
every exigency of organizationally situated conduct.
 11

On the Analyzability
of Stories by Children
HARVEY SACKS




  Harvey Sacks is an associate professor of sociology t
  the University of California, Irvine. He received his do a_
  to rate from the University of California, Berkeley, and h~s
  taught at the University of Cali~ornia, Los Angeles. His
  research has been concerned with natural conversation
 analyzed to discover how its structure and resource~
  reflect speakers' social knowledge. In the present
 chapter, which contains material to be incorporated in
 more detailed form in his recent book (Sacks 1971 ), he
 develops a conceptual apparatus for the empirical study
 of the specific ways in which what Garfinkel calls prac-
 tical reasoning is used in everyday discourse.
    The initial observation is quite like that of grammar:
 We understand sentences rapidly and unreflectingly in
 terms of relationships that are not overtly expressed.
There must, therefore, be implicit kinds of knowledge in
 terms of which this ability can be explained. Sacks deals
 with material on which linguists have also worked-the
coherence of texts [how it is that sentences are heard as a
connected text and not as an arbitrary list (Hassan 1968)]
and the delimitation of semantic fields. But unlike the
linguists, who in their concern with literary style tend to
be concerned with texts per se, Sacks focuses specifically
on verbal exchanges between speakers. He studies the
semantic and theoretical strategies by which speakers
identify themselves or react to others, his analysis concen-
trates on the use of particular nouns or verbs such as
'mother,' 'baby,' 'shortstop,' 'baseball team,' 'hairstylist,'
or activities such as 'crying,' 'doing fashions,' or 'having
sexual problems,' which serve as markers of social rela-
                            325
326   Discovering Structure in Speech

tionships. His aim is to show how listeners must utilize
their own knowledge of the social system to interpret the
juxtaposition of these terms in conversation. Members
are seen as using social knowledge in three ways: (a) to
 recognize particular strings of sentences as possible or
 potentially valid instances of descriptions, stories, con-
 versations, etc.; (b) to achieve certain social effects: to
 elicit a response, to get the floor, to induce somebody to
 gain a favor, etc.; (c) to communicate affect such as
 praise, criticism, humor, etc.
     Notice two points of perspective shared with
 linguistics and ethnoscience. There is, first, the view that
 analysis of human sciences need not wait for results from
 other sciences and that communicative sequences can be
 analyzed as entities in themselves without reference to
 actual events depicted therein. Sacks argues that
 members can identify "possible descriptions" solely on
 the basis of formal features such as those he describes.
 What is rejected here are views like that of Bloomfield
 (1933), who holds that semantic analysis had to wait for
 other sciences to analyze those phenomena to which
 words referred, as if description of meaning was the same
 as description of denotata. Only with recognition that one
 could, and must, deal with meaning independently, pro-
 ceeding in terms of just those attributes of phenomena
  relevant (criteria!) for members of the language commu-
  nity, could the recent development of semantic analysis
  take place (see Haugen 1957; Weinreich 1963, 1968).
  The issue is the same as with the beginnings of modern
  phonology. Phonology began with the realization that
  one could, and must, analyze speech sounds in terms of a
  level of features criteria! for members of the language
  community, beyond that of a purely physical (phonetic)
  description (see. Sapir 1949g). Second, there is the recog-
  nition of a qualitative structure in the stream of behavior,
  as implied by the distinction between "items" and "slot,"
  and the singling out, as a key feature, the possibility of
  validly specifying that something is absent, has not oc-
  curred. The importance of this is brought out in detail by
  Schegloff (Chapter 12).
     Sacks characterizes the differences between his own
   approach to social norms and those of most of his col-
   leagues as follows:
