           JAN-PETTER BLOM AND JOHN J. GUMPERZ




           Jan-Petter Blom is a lecturer in social anthropology and
           member of the Research Institute for Social Anthropol-
           ogy at the University of Bergen. He has done fieldwork
           in rural Norway and, most recently, in the Bahamas,
           on folklore, social structure, and ethnomusicology.
                John J. Gumperz is a professor of anthropology at
           the University of California, Berkeley. He received his
           doctorate in Germanic linguistics at the University of
           Michigan and has taught at Cornell University and
           Deccan College in Poona. He has done fieldwork in
           India, Norway, and among minority groups in the United
           States.
              This study of the meaning of linguistic choice in a
           Norwegian community exemplifies what is meant by an
           integrated sociolinguistic approach. Ethnography and
           linguistics both are drawn upon, technically and concep-
           tually; but more than that, the outcome is an under-
           standing of social constraints and linguistic rules as parts
           of a single communicative system. The conceptual frame-
           work for the social analysis here leans on the work of
           Leach (1954) and Barth (1966) and Goffman (1964).
              The stability of the valued local form of speech, as well
           as the potential for change in speech patterns within the

   1 Some of the data cited in this study were given in preliminary form in previous publica-

tions (Gumperz 1964b and Gumperz 1966). The authors are grateful to Einar Haugen,
Aaron Cicourel, and Richard Howell for their comments. Field work for the study was
sponsored by the Institute of Sociology, University of Oslo, Norway. We are grateful to
Professor Sverre Holm of that institution for support and encouragement. Mr. Gumperz'
stay in Norway was made possible through a senior postdoctoral fellowship from the Na-
tional Science Foundation.

                                            407
                                                                i
                                                                I
 408   Genesis, Maintenance, ancl Change of Linguistic Codes
                                                                '
                                                                I
community, is discussed. To show the relationships
between social and linguistic alternatives presupposes
the technical analysis of specific features of speech, as
well as also, of social relations (particularly of participa-
tion in closed and open networks) and of the diversity of
local value systems. It requires an experimental ap-
proach such as the one employed. It also requires a uni-
tary frame of reference; here the whole network is
viewed from the standpoint of actors in particular social
 situations as they adopt strategies constrained by the ex-
isting communicative repertoire.
    As in Part I of this volume, the present study concerns
values expressed in certain genres of speech, particularly
 self-identity and pride in informal conversations. As in
 Part 2, this study deals with rules; here, rules of alterna-
 tion that govern the linguistic repertoire of an entire com-
 munity. The components of the repertoire themselves are
 defined by co-occurrence rules. One can also describe
 the study as making problematic a series of things some-
 times taken for granted: (I) given that members of the
 community consider there to be two varieties of code, to
 what extent and in what way are the varieties actually
 linguistically distinct? Blom and Gumperz find a single
 linguistic system, differentiated by features similar to
 what Labov (Chapter I 9) calls variables. Notice that def-
 inition of the two varieties, Ranamal and Bokmal, cuts
 across several formal sectors of language (phonology,
 lexis, morphology). (2) Given that elicitation brings out
 these differences, what is the case in everyday interac-
 tion? Some features found in elicitation sessions are
 never found in spontaneous speech. (3) Given the
 linguistic reality of the two varieties, why are both main-
 tained? Unintelligibility can hardly be a factor since most
 speakers control the entire range of both. To speak of
 persistence of dialects in remote or less advanced areas is
  merely to name the phenomenon, not to explain it. Again,
  since the adult population has access to both varieties,
  the explanation must lie in the social meanings of the two.
'(4) If social symbolism is the basis, what is its nature?
  How is it actually expressed? Blom and Gumperz in-
  troduce the concepts of setting, situation, and event,
  taken as stages recognized in the enactment of personal
  strategies, to analyze the meaning of choice between the
  two varieties. An important distinction is made between
                         Social Meaning in Linguistic Structure   409
                                                        I


         situational switching, where alternation between
          varieties redefines a situation, being a change in gov-
          erning norms, and metaphorical switching, where alter-
         nation enriches a situation, allowing for allusion to more
         than one social relationship within the situation. In
         Hemnes situational switching involves change in partici-
         pants and/or strategies, metaphorical switching involves
         only a change in topical emphasis. (Cf. Albert's Burundi
         case of role switching initiated by an aristocrat talking to
         a peasant, described in terms of change of topic and pur-
         pose.)
            Notice the experimental presentation of the uncon-
         scious status of metaphorical switching among the
        members of the open network (i.e., a network of rela-
        tionships with reference points outside the local commu-
        nity); and criticism of it in terms of the folk concept of
        knot 'artifical speech.' Goffman ( 1961) provides an addi-
        tional related reading. A collection of Gumperz' papers
        dealing with similar issues has recently appeared (Gum-
        perz 1971).




          In recent discussions of the problem of language and society,
 Bernstein ( 1961, 1964a) explores the hypothesis that social relationships
act as intervening variables between linguistic structures and their realiza-
tion in speech. His formulation suggests that the anthropologists' analysis
of social constraints governing interpersonal relationships may be utilized
in the interpretation of verbal performances. This chapter attempts to
clarify the social and linguistic factors involved in the communication
process and to test Bernstein's hypothesis by showing that speaker's
selection among semantically, grammatically, and phonologically permis-
sible alternates occuring in conversation sequences recorded in natural
groups is both patterned and predictable on the basis of certain features of
the local social system. In other words, given a particular aggregate of
people engaged in regular face-to-face interaction, and given some knowl-
edge of the speakers' linguistic repertoire (Gumperz 1964b), we wish to
relate the structure of that repertoire to the verbal behavior of members of
the community in particular situations.
   Data on verbal interaction derives from approximately two months'
field work in Hemnesberget, a small commercial and industrial town of
about 1300 inhabitants in the center of the Rana Fjord, close to the Arctic
circle in northern Norway. The settlement owes its existence to the
        410   Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

growth of local trade and industry following the abolition of government-
sanctioned trade monopolies covering most of northern Norway in 1858.
Since the Middle Ages, these monopolies had kept the area's economy
dependent upon a small elite of merchant and landholding families with
connections to southern Norway, separated by great differences in
wealth, culture, and education from the tenant farmers, fishermen, estate
laborers, and servants who formed the bulk of the populace. Apart from a
few shop owners and government officials, present-day Hemnesberget
residents are mostly descendants of these latter groups. They have been
attracted to the town from the surroundings by new economic opportuni-
ties there, while a hundred years of relatively free economic development
have splintered the old ruling circles. Many of this former elite have
moved away, and the remainder no longer form a visible social group in
the region.
   Present inhabitants of Hemnesberget earn their livelihood mainly as
craftsmen in family workshops or in the somewhat larger boat-building
and lumber-processing plants, all of which are locally owned. The area
serves as a major source of wood products and fishing equipment for the
northernmost part of Norway. A significant group of merchant mid-
                                1
dlemen deal in locally produced boats and other products, which they ship
north for resale, and maintain sales agencies for motors and other appli-
ances and manufactured goods from the south.
   While at the beginning of the century Hemnesberget was the most im-
portant communications and commercial center in the area, it has been
eclipsed in recent years by government-sponsored economic develop-
ment which has turned the town of Mo i Rana, at the mouth of Rana Fjord,
into Norway's major iron- and steel-producing center. The region of Mo
has grown from about 1000 inhabitants in 1920 to almost 9000 in 1960,
largely through immigration from the region of Tryjndelag and southern
Norway. It now boasts several modern department stores, hotels, restau-
rants;and cinemas. The railroad from Trondheim in the south through Mo
and on north to Bodyj was completed shortly after World War II, and the
road system is steadily improving. All these new communication arteries,
however, now bypass Hemnesberget, which has all but lost its importance
as a communication link for both land and sea traffic.
   Although the immediate ecological environment has changed greatlY,
Hemnesberget remains an island of tradition in a sea of change. There is a
regular once-a-day boat service to Mo, buses leave for the railroad station
twice a day, and a few people commute to Mo by private automobile or
motorcycle. However, the bulk of the residents spend most of their wor~-
ing and leisure time in and around Hemnesberget. Those who can afford it
build vacation cabins in the unsettled areas across the fjord a few miles
away. Our interviews uniformly show that social events in Mo i Rana are
only of marginal interest to local inhabitants.
                                Social Meaning in Linguistic Structure   411


               The Community Linguistic Repertoire
                   Most residents of Hemnesberget are native speakers of Ranamal
         (R), one of a series of dialects which segment northern Norway into
         linguistic regions roughly corresponding to other cultural and ecological
         divisions (Christiansen 1962). As elsewhere in Norway, where local in-
         dependence and distinctness of folk culture are highly valued, the dialect
         enjoys great prestige. A person's native speech is regarded as an integral
         Part of his family background, a sign of his local identity. By identifying
         himself as a dialect speaker both at home and abroad, a member symbol-
        izes pride in his community and in the distinctness of its contribution to
        society at large.
           Formal education, however, is always carried on in the standard, the
        language of official transactions, religion, and the mass media. Norwegian
        law sanctions two standard languages: Bokmal (formally called Riksmal)
        and N ynorsk (formerly Landsmal), of which only Bokmal (B) is current in
       northern Norway.
           Education is universal and, allowing for certain individual differences in
       fluency, all speakers of Ranamal also control the standard. Both Bokmal
       and Ranamal, therefore, form part of what we may call the community
       linguistic repertoire (Gumperz 1964b), the totality of linguistic resources
       Which speakers may employ in significant social interaction. In their
       everyday interaction, they select among the two as the situation demands.
       Members view this alternation as a shift between two distinct entities,
       Which are never mixed. A person speaks either one or the other.
          The fact that the two varieties are perceived as distinct, however, does
      not necessarily mean that their separateness is marked by significant
      linguistic differences. Pairs such as Hindi and Urdu, Serbian and Croa-
      tian, Thai and Laotian, and many others which are regarded as separate
      languages by their speakers are known to be grammatically almost iden-
      tical. The native 's view of language distinctions must thus be validated by
     empirical linguistic investigation.                     \
         We began our analysis by employing standard linguistic elicitation
     Procedures. A series of informants selected for their fluency in the dialect
     Were interviewed in our office and were asked to produce single words,
     sentences, and short texts, first in the dialect and then in the standard, for
     t~ping or phonetic recording by the linguist. These elicitation sessions
     Yielded a series of dialect features which are essentially identical to those
     described by Norwegian dialectologists (Christiansen 1962).
    ) The vowel system distinguishes three tongue heights-high: front
    Unrounded i, front rounded y, central rounded u, back rounded o; mid:
    front unrounded e, front rounded 0 , back rounded a; low: front unrounded
    ie, front rounded jiS, back a.



l
            4I2        Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

   Consonants occur either singly or as geminates. Vowels are phonet-
ically short before geminates, consonant clusters, and palatalized conso-
nants. There are two series of consonants: unmarked and palatalized. Un-
marked consonants include stops p, b, t, d, k, g; spirants f, v, s, s, j, <;;
nasals m, n, l); trill r, lateral I, and retroflex flap I. The palatal series con-
tains tj, dj, nj, and Ij. On the phonetic level, a set of cacuminal or retroflex
allophones occur for the sequences rs [s], rd [d], rt [t], and rn [J}].
   The local pronunciation of the standard differs from the "pure" dialect
as follows: Bokmal does not have the phonemic distinction between the
palatalized and nonpalatalized series of consonants. Only nonpalatalized
consonants occur. In addition, it does not distinguish between mid front
rounded /of and low front rounded /,,-6/; only the former occurs. On the
purely phonetic level, dialect allophones of the phonemes /re/ and /a/ are
considerably lower and ·more retracted than their standard equivalents.
The dialect furthermore has a dark allophone [l] of /1/ where the standard
has clear [I]. The cacuminal or retroflex allophones of /s/, /d/, /ti, and /n/,
and the flap /I/, however, which are commonly regarded as dialect fea-
tures, are used in both varieties, although they tend to disappear in highly
formal Bokmal.                     I

   Morphological peculiarities of the dialect include the masculine plural
indefinite suffix -cl! and the definite suffix -an, e.g., (R) luestll! (horses),
lucstan (the horses), contrasting with (B) hester and hestene. In verb
 inflection the dialect lacks the infinitive suffix -e and the present suffix -er
 of regular verbs. Further differences in past tense and past participle
 markers and in the assignment of individual words to strong or weak
 inflectional classes serve to set off almost every dialect verb from its stan-
 dard Norwegian equivalent. Here are some examples of common regular
 and irregular verbs and their standard equivalents:

              /11fi11itive          Present               Past           Past Participle
            (R)          (B)     (R)        (B)    (R)           (B)      (R)        (B)
      fi1ii            fi1111e   Jinj    finner    fwii      fant      fpnje       fi1nnet   (find)
      vara
            or va       v<ere    e       lk..'I'   V(l       var       1'¢re       \'{l'r/   (be)
      ft)               fti      ftir    Jiir      Jekk      fikk.     Jiitt       Jiitt     (get)
      stwii             Sill     st1ir   st1ir     sto       sto       stie        sttitt    (stand)
      j1l!r             j¢re     j{l!r   jpr       jol       j¢re      jort        jort      (do)
       lws               Iese     lws    leser     ltr!st     leste    hr!st       lest      (read)
       ta                ta       tek     tar      tok        tokk      tatt       tat(      (take)
                                                                         or tire



 Other important dialect features appear in pronouns, common adverbs of
 time, place, and manner, conjunctions, and other grammatically signifi-
 cant function words. Here is a list of some of the most common distinctive
 forms of personal pronouns and possessive pronouns:
                          Social Meaning in Linguistic Structure                       413

                           (B)          (R)
                         j{l'jj        OR            (I)
                         111ll')i      Ille[.!    (me)
                         da,jj         deR        (you)
                         lw1111        hwti       (he)

                           (B)              (R)
                        hunn             ho                (she)
                        ha1111s          lwnjs             (his)
                        he1111es         hi11iers          (hers)
                        dere             d{ikk             (you)(plural)
                        di               dll'mm*           (theirs)
                * Sometimes also di and deres.

         Interrogatives, relatives, and indefinites:
                           (B)                   (R)
                        Slllll/ll        sa                     [ who, which (relative)]
                        va               ke                     [ what (interrogative)]
                        ve1111n          kem                    (who)
                        ,we              nakka                  (something)
                        l'{/lf(I/'/'     kefr/>r                (what for)
                        vilket           kefij>r nokka          [ which (thing)]
                        vi/ken           kefij>r 1101111        [ which (person)]
                        Vll'/'           kvar                   (every)
                        en               ein                    (one)


              Adverbs and conjunctions:

                           (B)              (R)
                        till            tell               (to, toward)
                        111enn          /ll{l'/lll         (but)
                        lul'r           her                (here)
                       fi'a             (fi'a              (from)
                       me/lam           ime(i{l'           (in between)
                        1•ordan         kelesn             (how)
                        1•iss            i•ess             (if)
                                                                  I
   These data constitute empirical evidence to support the view of the
dialect as a distinct linguistic entity. By comparing information collected
in this manner with local speech forms elsewhere in northern Norway,
dialectologists interested in historical reconstruction identify Ranamal as
one of a series of northern Norwegian dialects set off from others by the
fact that it shows influences of eastern Norwegian forms of speech (Chris-
tiansen 1962). In this discussion however, we are concerned with social
interaction and not with history, and this leads us to raise somewhat dif-
ferent problems.
   The elicitation sessions which provide the source data for dialect
grammars are conducted in the linguist's, and not in the informant's,
        414    Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

frame of reference. Although by asking speakers to speak in the dialect,
the linguist may be interested in purely descriptive or historical informa-
tion, the native speaker, mindful of the association between dialect, local
culture, and local identity, is, of course, anxious to present his locality in
the best possible light. Consistency of performance in linguistic interview
sessions might well be the result of the interviewer's presence; it need not
reflect everyday interaction. Furthermore, when comparisons with other
forms of speech are made, it is the linguist's analysis which serves as the
basis for these comparisons, not the speaker's performance.


        Ranamttl and Bokmal as Codes
        in a Repertoire

          In order to understand how natives may perceive the dialect stan-
dard language differences, some further discussion of the way in which
distinctions between what are ordinarily treated as separate linguistic
systems may be manifested in everyday speech is necessary. Thus if we
compare a bilingual's prdnunciation of the Norwegian sentence vill du ha
egg og heiken till frokast? with the same speaker's pronunciation of the
English equivalent "Will you have bacon and eggs for breakfast?" the two
utterances will show phonetic distinctions in every segment. The Nor-
wegian voiced spirant [v] has much less spirantal noise than its English
equivalent, the [i] is tense as compared to the lax English [i], the Nor-
wegian [l] may be clear or dark but it is phonetically different from English
[l]. The Norwegian central rounded [u] in du has no direct English equiva-
lent. In egg the Norwegian has a tense [e] and the [g] has an aspirate
release, whereas in English the vowel is lax and [g] has a voiced release.
Similarly, the Norwegian has a stressed vowel in heike11 [rei] whereas the
English has [ey]. Bilinguals whose entire articulation shifts in this way can
be said to have two distinct articulation ranges in addition to two sets of
grammatical rules.
    Analysis of recordings of Hemnesberget speakers' switching from the
dialect to the standard reveals a different situation. In a sentence pair like
hanj hor f){/ nilsen' s paysonat and its Bokmal equivalent hann hor pa
nilsen's paysonat "He lives in Nilsen's pensionat," only the realizations
of /a/, /ti, and /nj/ which appear in our list of dialect characteristics differ.
In other relevant respects the two utterances are identical. Furthermore,
even in the case of these dialect characteristics, speakers do not alternate
between two clearly distinguishable articulation points; rather, the shift
takes the form of a displacement along a scale in which palatalized conso-
nants show at least three degrees of palatalization, strong [nj], weak [ni],
and zero [n] and /a/ and /re/ each show three degrees of retraction and
lowering.
                         Social Meaning in Linguistic Structure   415

     While the switch from Norwegian to English implies a shift between
  two distinct structural wholes, the Bokmal-Ranamal alternation, in pho-
  nology at least, seems more similar to conditions described by Labov
  (1966b) for New York speech. A speaker's standard and dialect perfor-
  mance can be accounted for by a single phonetic system. The bulk of the
 constituent phones within this system are marked by relatively stable,
 easily identifiable points of articulation. The palatalized consonants and
 the vowels listed here differ in that they vary within a much greater articu-
 lation range. They are instances of what Labov has called variables
 (1964b). It is the position of such variables along the scale of possible
 articulations which, when evaluated along with morphological informa-
 tion, signals dialect vs. standard speech.
    Not all items identified in our elicitation sessions as Ranamal features
 function as variables, however. The contrast between /p/ and /6/ was
 never produced spontaneously. In normal discourse only [6] occurs. Fur-
 thermore, as stated previously, the flap allophone/!/ and the retroflex stop
 allophones which find a prominent place in dialect grammars are also used
 in local Bokmal as well as in eastern varieties of standard Norwegian;
 thus their status as dialect markers is doubtful.
    Our texts also reveal some individual differences in the pronunciation
 of the palatalized consonant and vowel variables. While the normal
 dialect speech of most residents shows strong palatalization of these con-
 sonants and extreme vowel retraction, some of the more highly educated
 younger residents normally have medium palatalization and medium
 vowel retraction. Regardless, however, the direction of variation is the
 same for all individuals.
    In the realm of morphology-syntax it is also possible to set up a single
 set of grammatical categories to account for what on the surface seem like
 striking differences between the two varieties. All nouns, e.g., appear in
an indefinite form consisting of the noun stem and in an indefinite form .
made up of stem plus suffixed article, both of which are inflected for singu-
lar and plural. There are three subcategories of noun gender: masculine,
feminine, and neuter, and the case categories are shared. Verbs appear in
imperative, infinitive, present, past, and past participle forms. Basic func-
tion word categories, including pronouns, conjunctions, and adverbs, are
shared, etc.
    Ranamal shows a few peculiarities in the order of pronouns and verbs
in sentences such as (R) ke du e (fr{I, (B) vor <l!r du fra "Where are you
from?" But even without detailed analysis, it is obvious that these dif-
ferences correspond to relatively low-order syntactic rules. The m,tjority
of the distinctions between the dialect and the standard thus do not affect
the basic grammar but only what we may call the morphophonemic real-
ization of shared grammatical categories.
   Even at the morphophonemic level, variation is not without pattern.
         416    Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

 Examination of such alternates as (B) till, (R) tell "to"; (B) jikk, (R) fekk
 "received"; (B) hest, (R) hwst "horse"; and (B) ,nenn, (R) mcenn "but"
 suggests a general process of lowering of front vowels in the dialect. This
 lowering process is also found elsewhere in Norway, although it may
 occur in different linguistic forms/ Similarly, other sets of alternates such
 as icce/ikke "not," dcemm/di "they," and ifra/ji·a "from" are common in
 other Norwegian regions.
     Leaving aside historical considerations, it is almost as if all dialect vari-
 ation within Norway were generated by selection of different forms from
 a common reservoir of alternates. Ranamal differs from other dialects not
 so much because it contains entirely different features but because of the
 way in which it combines features already found elsewhere. Furthermore,
 Hemnesberget pairs such as (B) lcerer, (R) lerar, and (B) !uer, (R) her,
 which conflict with the lowering process just mentioned, suggest that here ·
 as elsewhere selection may at times be motivated by social pressures
 favoring maintenance of distinctions (Ramanujan 1967). No matter what
 the actual historical facts are, however, the narrow range of variation we
 find lends support to our view of dialect features as variables within a
 single grammatical system.
    The effect of structural similarities on speakers' perception of speech
 differences is somewhat counterbalanced by the fact that choice among
 these variables is always restricted by sociolinguistic selection constraints
 such that if, for instance, a person selects a standard morphological
 variant in one part of an utterance, this first choice also implies selection
 of pronunciation variables tending toward the standard end of the scale. A
 speaker wishing to ask for another's place ofresidence may, e.g., start his
 sentence either with (R) ke "where" or (B) var. In the first case, the rest of
 the sentence will read hanj e ifrc1 "is he from?" In the second case, it will
 be cer hannfra; var and hanj do not co-occur. Similarly, selection of e "is"
 requires dialect pronunciation; the form cer "is" would sound odd if it
 appeared in the same sentence with hanj.
    It is the nature of these selection constraints and the manner in which
they cut across the usual boundaries of phonology and morphology to
generate co-occurrences among phonetic and allomorphic and lexical vari-
ables, which lends the Ranamal-Bokmal variation its peculiar stamp, and
sets it off, e.g., from the phonologically similar situation in New York.
Sociolinguistic selection rules also account to some extent for the speak-
er's view of the two varieties as separate entities.
   Since the dialect and the standard are almost isomorphic in syntax and
phonetics and vary chiefly in morphophonemics, and since most speakers//"
control the entire range of variables, it would be unreasonable to assume,
as is frequently done wherever two distinct dialects are spoken, that
selection patterns affecting the just-mentioned selection rules are mo-
tivated by considerations of intelligibility. The most reasonable assump-




                                                                               d
                                 Social Meaning in Linguistic Structure   417
                                                                      I

          tion is that the linguistic separateness between the dialect and the stan-
          dard, i.e., the maintenance of distinct alternates for common inflectional
          morphemes and function, is conditioned by social factors.
             Some idea of how this came about can be obtained by considering the
         conditions under which the two varieties are learned. The dialect is
         acquired in most homes and in the sphere of domestic and friendship rela-
         tions. As a result, it has acquired the flavor of these locally based rela-
         tionships. However, dialect speakers learn the standard in school and in
         church, at a time when they are also introduced to national Norwegian
         values. It has therefore become associated with such pan-Norwegian
         activity systems.
            Since the adult population has equal access to both sets of variants
         however, the developmental argument does not provide sufficient expla~
        nation for the maintenance of distinctness. Immigrants to urban centers
        around the world, e.g., frequently give up their languages after a generation
        if social conditions are favorable to language shift. The hypothesis suggests
        itself, therefore, that given the initial acquisition patterns, the dialect and
        the standard remain separate because of the cultural identities they com-
        municate and the social values implied ,therein. It is this aspect of the
        problem that we intend to explore in the .remaining sections of the
        chapter. Before we proceed, however, something more needs to be said
        about the process of social symbolization.
           Students of communication usually distinguish between semantics
       proper, or reference, and pragmatics (Ervin-Tripp 1964). Reference in-
       dicates verbal categorization of objects' actions and experience in terms
       of their objective properties; pragmatics deals with the effect of symbols
       of various kinds on speakers and listeners, i.e., with the significance of
       what is communicated for the actors involved. Most discussions of prag-
       matics ordinarily do not distinguish between individual intent and inter-
       personal significance of usage patterns, although it is evident that without
       such a distinction it would be impossible to explain the fact that the same
       message may indicate praise in some instances and disapproval in others.
      Effective communication requires that speakers and audiences agree both
      on the meaning of words and on the social import or values attached to
      choice of expression. Our discussions will be confined to the latter. We
      Will use the term social significance, or social 1nea11ing, to refer to the
      social value implied when an utterance is used in a certain context.
          In general, the assignment of value to particular objects or acts is as ar-
      bitrary as the referential naming of objects. Just as a particular term may
      refer to a round object in one group and a square object in another, so also
     the value of actions or utterance.s may vary. Thus the same term may in-
      dicate geographical distinctions in one community and symbolize social
     stratification elsewhere. Social meanings differ from referential meanings
     in the way in which they are coded. Whereas reference is coded largely

i


ob
          418   Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

  through words, social meaning can attach not only to acoustic signs but
  also to settings, to items of background knowledge, as well as to particular
  word sequences. In Hemnes, e.g., values attached to a person's family
  background or to his reputation as a fisherman are important in under-
  standing what he says and influence the selection of responses to his
  actions.
     It must also be pointed out th;tt referential meanings are at least to some
  extent recoverable through the study of individual words, they are, to use
  Pike's (1967) term, segmental, while social meanings are not. A sentence
  like ke due iji·d "Where are you from?" can be divided into units of refer-
  ence like ke "where," du "you," e "are," and ifr/1 "from." Social signifi-
  cance attaches to the utterance as a whole; it is not segmentable into
  smaller component stretches. Sociolinguistic co-occurrence patterns along
  with intonation contours enable the speaker to group language into larger
· pragmatic wholes and to interpret them in relation to signs transmitted by
  other communicative media.


         Local Organization and Values

          Social life in; Hemnesberget shows a fluidity of class structure
 quite similar to that described for southern Norway by Barnes (I 954). Ex-
 tremes of poverty and wealth are absent. Expressions of solidarity such as
 "'We all know each other here in Hemnes," and "We are all friends here"
 recur in our interviews. The majority of those who claim local descent
 show a strong sense of local identification. To be a hremnesvcering
 "Hemnes resident" in their view is like belonging to a team characterized
 by commonalty of descent. Members of this reference group act like kin,
 friends, and neighbors, cooperating in the pursuit of community ideals. In
 everyday behavior they symbolize this quality of their ties through greet-
 ings, exchanges of personal information, and general informality of pos-
'ture toward fellow members. The dialect is an important marker of their
 common culture. Residents of neighboring settlements, of Mo i Rana, as
 well as other Norwegians, stand apart from this local community. They
 are potential competitors who must at least initially be treated with
 reserve. Their dialects are said to be different. The linguist interested in
 structural significance may wish to· disregard such variation as minor.
 Nevertheless, they have important social meanings for intercommunity
 communication within the Rana region. They are constantly commented
 upon and joked about and seem to play an important role in the mainte-
 nance of local identity.
    Despite the intense sense of local identification, perceptions of close-
 ness within this local group are not everywhere the same among Hemnes
 residents. More detailed interviews and observations of visiting and rec-
                          Social Meaning in Linguistic Structure   419

    reational patterns and of the exchange of assistance suggest a clear dis-
    tinction between personal relations and the more general local relations.
    The actual range of effective personal relations for any single individual
   tends to be fairly small and stable over time. For most people it includes
   only certain near kin, in-laws, neighbors, or fellow workers. The commu-
   nity can thus be described as segmented into small nuclei of personal in-
   teraction. Since these groups are not marked linguistically, however, the
   behavioral signs of friendliness and equality constitute a communicative
   idiom which applies to both these nuclei and to other relations or shared
   local identification.
      The meaning attached to local descent and dialect use-to being part of
  the "local team"-is clearly seen when we consider those members of the
  community who dissociate themselves from this "team." Traditionally, in
  northern Norway the local community of equals was separated from the
  landowning commercial and administrative elite by a wide gulf of social
  and judicial inequality. Since the latter were the introducers and users of
  standard Norwegian, the standard form was-and to some extent still is-
  associated with this inequality of status. Many of the functions of the
  former elite have now been incorporated into the local social system.
  Individuals who fill these functions, however, continue to be largely of
  nonlocal descent. Although they may pay lip service to locally accepted
  rules of etiquette and use the dialect on occasion, their experience else-
  where in Norway, where differences in education, influence, and prestige
 are much more pronounced, leads them to associate the dialect with lack
 of education and sophistication. Therefore, they show a clear preference
 for the standard.
      Such attitudes are unacceptable to locals, who view lack of respect for
 and refusal to speak the dialect as an expression of social distance and
 contempt for the "local team" and its community spirit. It is not sur-
 prising, therefore, that their loyalty to the dialect is thereby reaffirmed.
 For a local resident to employ (B) forms with other local residents is in
 their view to snakk fint or to snakk jalat "to put on airs."
     Since the different social meanings which attach to the dialect are regu-
 lar and persistent, they must in some way be reinforced by the pattern of
social ties. This relationship can best be described if we consider the
socioecological system which sustains the community. There is a correla-
tion between a person's regional background, his reference group, and the
niche he occupies in this system (Barth 1964). This information enables
us to segment the local population into three distinct categories: (1) ar-
tisans, (2) wholesale-retail merchants and plant managers, and (3) service
personnel. Members of the first two categories are the basic producers of
wealth.
    The more than 50 percent of the population which falls into the first cat-
egory includes draftsmen who may or may not own their own shops, as
         420   Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

 well as workmen employed in the larger plants and their dependents.
 Most of them are locally born or have been drawn to Hemnes from the
 surrounding farms by the demand for their skills. Since they live and work
 among their relatives and among others of the same social background,
 they tend to choose their friends and spouses from within their own refer-
 ence group and thus become strong supporters of local values.
    Wholesale-retail merchants buy lumber products and finished boats
 from producers in the Rana are~l, f.:i'rnishing them with supplies and gear
 and appliances in exchange. They sell boats, lumber products, and fishing
 supplies to customers all the way up to the northernmost tip of Norway.
 Relationships between merchants and their customers most commonly
 take the form of long-term credit arrangements based on personal trust in
 which credit is given to artisans against their future production. Also part
 of the second category are the managers of large local enterprises who
 achieve their position partly because of their special commercial and man-
.agerial skills and partly through their ability to get along with and keep the
 confidence of owners, workers, and foremen.
    Like artisans, members of category 2 are largely of local descent.
 Although they tend to be in the higher income brackets, they maintain kin
 and conjugal relationships among craftsmen and fishermen-farmers. The
 fact that their livelihood depends to a great extent on their standing within
 the system of locally b,ased relations leads them to associate more closely
 with the local values. The circumstances of their commercial enterprises,
 however, also take them outside this local network. They must be able to
 act within the urban commercial ethic, and they must also maintain per-
 sonal ties with their customers in the north and elsewhere. The range of
 their social connections includes both local and supralocal ties, involving
 different and sometimes conflicting standards of behavior. The result is
 that while they maintain strong loyalty to general local values, they tend
 to avoid close personal ties with their kin in the first category and confine
 their friendships to others who are in similar circumstances.
    The third category is a composite one, consisting of individuals whose
 position depends on the productivity of others. It includes persons
 engaged in purely local services-private and administrative-of all kinds
 such as salesmen, clerks, repairmen, shopkeepers, professionals, and
 those who are employed in repair shops and in transportation. The
  sociocultural background of these people varies. Those who pe1form
  manual labor tend to be of local descent and are culturally indistin-
 guishable from members of the first category. The same is true for the
  lower echelons of employees in stores and in administrative offices.
  Among the owners of retail businesses, clothing, shoe, pastry, and sta-
  tionary shops, many belong to families who have moved to Hemnesberget
 from other urban or semiurban centers in northern Norway. Their kin and
 friendship relations tend to be dispersed among these communities, and
                          Social Meaning in Linguistic Structure   421

 this leads them to identify with the differentiated nonlocal middle-class
 value system. Shopowners of local background also aspire to these stan-
dards, at the same time trying to maintain their position in the "local
team" by showing loyalty to its values. Professionals are similarly drawn
to Hemnes from the outside because of their technical expertise. The
more stable core of this group, the schoolteachers, tend to be of north
Norwegian background. Doctors, veterinarians, dentists, and priests
frequently come from the south. Invariably their values are those of the
pan-Norwegian elite.
   Economic conditions in Hemnes leave little room for the academically
trained and those with technical skills outside local niches. Consequently,
young people from all categories who aspire to higher education must
spend most of their student years away from Hemnes and will eventually
have to seek employment somewhere else. While they remain students,
however, they are partly dependent on their families. They tend to return
home during the summer vacation and seek local employment.


         Contextual Constraints

           Previous sections have dealt with the linguistic repertoire, in-
  ternal cultural differences, and relevantfeatures of social organization.
 We have suggested that linguistic alternates within the repertoire serve to
 symbolize the differing social identities which members may assume. It is,
 however, evident from our discussion that there is by no means a simple
 one-to-one relationship between specific speech varieties and specific
 social identities. Apart from the fact that values attached to language
 usage vary with social background, the same individual need not be abso-
 lutely consistent in all his actions. He may wish to appear as a member of
 the local team on some occasions, while identifying with middle-class val-
ues on others. In order to determine the social significance of any one
utterance, we need additional information about the contextual clues by
which natives arrive at correct interpretations of social meaning.
    Recent linguistic writings have devoted considerable attention to
speech events as the starting point for the analysis of verbal com-
munication. It has been shown that aside from purely linguistic and
stylistic rules, the form of a verbal message in any speech event is directly
affected by (a) the participants (i.e., speakers, addressees, and audiences);
(b) the ecological surroundings; and (c) the topic or range of topics
(Hymes I 964e; Ervin-Tripp 1964).
    In visualizing the relationship between social and linguistic factors in
speech events, it seems reasonable to assume that the former restrict the
selection of linguistic variables in somewhat the same way that syntactic
environments serve to narrow the broader dictionary meanings of words.
        422    Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

 For the purpose of our analysis, we can thus visualize verbal com-
munication as a two-step process. In step I, speakers take in clues from
the outside and translate them into appropriate behavioral strategies. This
step parallels the perceptual process by which referential meanings are
converted into sentences. In step 2, these behavioral strategies are in turn
translated into appropriate verbal symbols. The determinants of this com-
municative process are the speaker's knowledge of the linguistic reper-
toire, culture, and social structure, and his ability to relate these kinds of
knowledge to contextual constraints. For Hemnesberget, it seems useful
to describe these constraints in terms of three concepts representing suc-
cessively more complex levels of information processing.
   We will use the term setting to indicate the way in which natives clas-
sify their ecological environment into distinct locales. This enables us to
relate the opportunities for action to constraints upon action provided by
the socially significant features of the environment. First, and most impor-
tant among local settings in Hemnesberget, is the home. Homes form the
center for all domestic activities and act as meeting places for children's
peer groups. Houses are well built and provide ample space for all. Also,
friends and kin prefer the privacy of meetings at home to restaurants or
other more public places.
   Workshops and plants where productive activity is carried on are sepa-
rated for the most part from residential areas, although some families con-
tinue to live next to their workshops along the shore of the fjord. The
work force normally consists of male members of the group of owners,
whether managed by a single nuclear family or by a group of families con-
nected by filial, sibling, or in-law ties. Employees in the larger plants
frequently also include groups of kin who work together as work teams.
In view of the homogeneity of workers, it is not surprising that the place
of work frequently forms the center for informal gathering among males.
In offices, shops, and merchant establishments, however, where the ex-
pertise requirements favor socially more differentiated personnel, work
relations tend to be less colored by preexistent social ties.
   A second group of settings lacks the specific restrictions on personnel
which mark those just mentioned. These include the public dock, where
visiting boats and the steamer are moored, as well as a few of the larger
stores, e.g., the co-operative society store located near the central square,
the square itself, and the community park. Here all local residents may
meet somewhat more freely without commitments, subject, of course, to
the constraints imposed by lack of privacy. The primary school, the junior
high school, the church, and community meeting hall all form somewhat
more restricted meeting grounds for more formal gatherings such as
classroom sessions, religious services, political meetings, meetings of
various voluntary associations, and occasional movies. The church is
used only for church services.
l
I                              Social Meaning in Linguistic Structure   423

          The socioecological restrictions on personnel and activities still allow
       for a wide range of socially distinct happenings. ,The school, e.g., is used
       for class sessions during the day and for meetings of voluntary associa-
       tions during the evening. Similarly, in the town square, men gather for dis-
      cussions of public affairs, women shoppers stop to chat with acquaint-
      ances, adolescent peer groups play their various games, etc. A closer
      specification of social constraints is possible if we concentrate on activi-
      ties carried on by particular constellations of personnel, gathered in par-
      ticular settings during a particular span of time. We will use the term
      social situation to refer to these. Social situations form the background
      for the enactment of a limited range of social relationships within the
      framework of specific status sets, i.e., systems of complementary distribu-
      tions of rights and duties (Barth 1966).
          Thus alternative social definitions of the situation may occur within the
      same setting, depending on the opportunities and constraints on interac-
      tion offered by a shift in personnel and/or object of the interaction. Such
      definitions always manifest themselves in what we would prefer to call a
      social event. Events center around one or at the most a limited range of
      topics and are distinguishable because of their sequential structure. They
      are marked by stereotyped and thus recognizable opening and closing
      routines. The distinction between situation and event can be clarified if
     we consider the behavior of Hemnes residents who are sometimes seen in
     the community office, first transacting their business in an officially cor-
     rect manner, and then turning to one of the clerks and asking him to step
     aside for a private chat. The norms which apply to the two kinds of in-
     teraction differ; the break between the two is clearly marked. Therefore,
     they constitute two distinct social events, although the personnel and the
     locale remain the same.
         The terms setting, social situation, and social event as used here can be
     considered three successively more complex stages in the speaker's
     processing of contextual information. Each stage subsumes the previous
     one in such a way that the preceding one is part of the input affecting the
     selection rules of the next stage. Thus, a speaker cannot identify the social
     situation without first having made some decision as to the nature of the
     setting. To demonstrate· how these factors influence language usage in
     Hemnesberget, we turn now to some examples drawn from participant
    observation.
         The fact that the dialect reflects local values suggests that it symbolizes
    relationships based on shared identities with local culture. Casual obser-
    vations and rec0rding of free speech among locals in homes, workshops,
    and the various public meeting places where such relationships are as-
    sumed do indeed show that only the dialect is used there. However, sta-
    tuses defined with respect to the superimposed national Norwegian
    system elicit the standard. Examples of these are church services, presen-
        424   Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

tation of text material in school, reports, and announcements-but not
necessarily informal public appeals or political speeches-at public meet-
ings. Similarly, meetings with tourists or other strangers elicit the stan-
dard at least until the participants' identity becomes more clearly known.


       Situational and Metaphorical Switching

          When within the same setting the participants' definition of the
social event changes, this change may be signaled among others by
linguistic clues. On one occasion, when we, as outsiders, stepped up to a
group of locals engaged in conversation, our arrival caused a significant
alteration in the casual posture of the group. Hands were removed from
pockets and looks changed. Predictably, our remarks elicited a code
switch marked simultaneously by a change in channel cues (i.e., sentence
speed, ryhthm, more hesitation pauses, etc.) and by a shift from (R) to (B)
grammar: Similarly, teachers report that while formal lectures-where
interruptions are not encouraged-are delivered in (B), the speakers will
shift to (R) when they want to encourage open and free discussion among
students. Each of these examples involves clear changes in the partici-
pants' definition of each other's rights and obligation. We will use the term
situational switching to refer to this kind of a language shift.
   The notion of situational switching assumes a direct relationship
between language and the social situation. The linguistic forms employed
are critical features of the event in the sense that any violation of selection
rules changes members' perception of the event. A person who uses the
standard where only the dialect is appropriate violates commonly ac-
cepted norms. His action may terminate the conversation or bring about
other social sanctions. To be sure language choice is never completely
determined; sociolinguistic variables must be investigated empirically.
Furthermore, situations differ in the amount of freedom of choice al-
lowed to speakers. Ritual events, like the well-known Vedic ceremonies
of South Asia, constitute extreme examples of determination, where
every care is taken to avoid even the slightest change in pronunciation or
rhythm lest the effectiveness of the ceremony be destroyed. The greet-
ings, petitions, and similar routines described by Albert (Chapter 2)
similarly seem strictly determined.
   In Hemnesberget, as our example will show later on, speakers are given
relatively wide choice in vocabulary and some choice in syntax. Selection
rules affect mainly the variables discussed previously. Values of these
variables are sociolinguistically determined in the sense that when, on the
one hand, we speak of someone giving a classroom lecture or performing
a Lutheran church service or talking to a tourist, we can safely assume
                           Social Meaning in Linguistic Structure   425

    that he is using (8) grammatical forms. On the other hand, two locals
    having a heart-to-heart talk will presumably speak in (R). If instead they
   are found speaking in (8), we conclude either that they do not identify
   with the values of the local team or that they are not having a heart-to-
   heart talk.
       In contrast with those instances where choice of variables is narrowly
   constrained by social norms, there are others in which participants are
   given considerably more latitude. Thus official community affairs are
   largely defined as nonlocal and hence the standard is appropriate. But
   since many individuals who carry out the relevant activities all know each
   other as fellow locals, they often interject casual statements in the dialect
   into their formal discussions. In the course of a morning spent at the com-
   munity administration office, we noticed that clerks used both standard
  and dialect phrases, depending on whether they were talking about official
  affairs or not. Likewise, when residents step up to a clerk's desk, greeting
  and inquiries about family affairs tend to be exchanged in the dialect,
  while the business part of the transaction is carried on in the standard.
      In neither of these cases is there any significant change in definition of
  participants' mutual rights and obligations. The posture of speakers and
  channel clues of their speech remain the same. The language switch here
  relates to particular kinds of topics or subject matters rather than to
  change in social situation. Characteristically, the situations in question
  allow for the enactment of two or more different relationships among the
  same set of individuals. The choice of either (R) or (8) alludes to these
  relationships and thus generates meanings which are quite similar to those
  conveyed by the alternation between ty or vy in the examples from Rus-
 sian literature cited by Friedrich (Chapter 9). We will use the term meta-
 phorical switching for this phenomenon.
     The semantic effect of metaphorical switching depends on the existence
 of regular relationships between variables and social situations of the type
just discussed. The context in which one of a set of alternates is regularly
 used becomes part of its meaning, so that when this form is then employed
 in a context where it is not normal, it brings in some of the flavor of this
 original setting. Thus a phrase like "April is the cruelest month" is
regarded as poetic because of its association with T. S. Eliot's poetry.
When used in natural conversation, it gives that conversation some of the
flavor of this poetry. Similarly, when (R) phrases are inserted metaphori-
cally into a (8) conversation, this may, depending on the circumstances,
add a special social meaning of confidentiality or privateness to the con-
versation.
    The case of the local who, after finishing his business in the community
office, turns to a clerk and asks him to step aside for a private chat further
illustrates the contrast between metaphorical and role switching. By their
constant alternation between the standard and the dialect during their
        426    Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

business transaction, they alluded to the dual relationship which exists
between them. The event was terminated when the local asked the clerk
in the dialect whether he had time to step aside to talk about private af-
fairs, suggesting in effect that they shift to a purely personal, local rela-
tionship. The clerk looked around and said, "Yes, we are not too busy."
The two then stepped aside, although remaining in the same room, and
their subsequent private discussion was appropriately carried on entirely
in the dialect.


        The Experiment

          Our discussion of verbal behavior so far has relied largely on
deductive reasoning supported by unstructured ethnographic observa-
tion. Additional tests of our hypothesis are based on controlled text elici-
tation. We have stated that gatherings among friends and kin implying
shared local identities must be carried on in the dialect. If we are correct
in our hypothesis, then individuals involved in such friendly gatherings
should not change speech variety regardless of whether they talk about
local, national, or official matters.
    In order to test this, we asked local acquaintances whom we knew to be
part of the network of local relationships to arrange a friendly gathering at
which refreshments were to be served and to allow us to record the pro-
ceedings as samples of dialect speech. Two such gatherings were re-
corded, one in the living room of our local hosts, and the other in the home
of an acquaintance. The fact that arrangements for the meeting were made
 by local people means that the groups were self-recruited. Participants in
the first group included two sisters and a brother and their respective
 spouses. One of the men was a shopkeeper, one of the few in this category
who claims local descent; his brothers-in-law were employed as
craftsmen. All three men are quite literate compared to workmen else-
where in the world and well read in public affairs. They are active in local
 politics and experienced in formal committee work. The second group
included three craftsmen, friends and neighbors who worked in the same
 plant, and their wives. One of these had served as a sailor on a Norwegian
 merchant vessel for several years and spoke English. Participants were all
 quite familiar with standard Norwegian, and our recorded conversations
 contain several passages where the standard was used in quoting nonlocal
 speech or in statements directed at us.                ·
    Methodologically, self-recruitment of groups is important for two
 reasons. It insures that groups are defined by locally recognized rela-
 tionships and enables the investigator to predict the norms relevant to
 their interaction. Furthermore, the fact that participants have preexisting
                          Social Meaning in Linguistic Structure          427

 obligations toward each other means that, given the situation, they are
 likely to respond to such obligations in spite of the presence of strangers.
 Our tape recording and our visual observations give clear evidence that
 this in fact was what occurred.
    Our strategy was to introduce discussion likely to mobilize obligations
 internal to the group, thus engaging members in discussion among them-
 selves. This proved to be relatively easy to do. When a point had been dis-
cussed for some time, we would attempt to change the subject by injecting
 new questions or comments. In doing this, we did not, of course, expect
that our own interjections would predictably affect the speakers' choice of
codes. Participants were always free to reinterpret our comments in any
way they wished. Nevertheless, the greater the range of topics covered,
the greater was the likelihood of language shift.
    As a rule, our comments were followed by a few introductory ex-
changes directed at us. These were marked by relatively slow sentence
speeds, many hesitation pauses, and visual clues indicating that people
were addressing us. Linguistically, we noted some switching to the stan-
dard in such exchanges. After a brief period of this, if the topic was inter-
esting, internal discussion began and arguments that referred to persons,
places, and events we could not possibly be expected to have any knowl-
edge about developed. The transition to internal discussion was marked
by an increase in sentence speed and lack of hesitation pauses and similar
clues. The tape recorder was run continously during the gatherings, and
after some time participants became quite oblivious to its presence.
   Only those passages which were clearly recognizable as internal discus-
sion were used in the analysis; all others were eliminated. The texts ob-
tained in this way consist of stretches of free discussion on diverse topics.
The following passages show that our hypothesis about the lack of con-
nection between code switching and change in topic was confirmed.

Group I: Topic: Chitchat about Local Events

GUNNAR:         ja de va ein sci laimm idag-ein sa kcimm me mcdka-s!t sci hanj
                de va SCI varmt in} pa mo i gar-Ja, sa eg, de 1'(1110 in·e vent an}tl!
                dtikk mli 110 ha 1neir enn di a11jra1111 bestanjdi.
                Yes, there was one who came today-one who came with milk-so
                he said it was so warm in Mo yesterday. Yes, I said, there is nothing
                else to be expected, you people must always have more than any-
                body else.

                Topic: Industrial Pla1111i11g
ALF:           her kunj ha vre eit par Sl/11/1 mel/0111store bedreftcl! pd eill frj>rti-
               fwmti ma,w so ha bescl!ftiga! denna fcl/ke detta sci ha gcidd ledi
               amm vinjtcl!m.
        428   Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

                There might have been here some medium-size plants employing
                forty to fifty men which then could offer work to those who have
                nothing to do in winter.

                Topic: Govenunental Affairs
OSCAR:          vi jekk inj f<IJr denn forste injsti/jinga! ifrt frikommitenn.
                'We supported the first proposal made by the Schei Committee.'


   Item 1 deals with a local topic in a somewhat humorous way; items 2
and 3 concern planning and formal governmental affairs. All these pas-
sages are clearly in the dialect. Of the phonological variables, [nj] and [lj]
show the highest degree of palatalization and [a] and [re] the highest
degree of retraction throughout. Morphophonemic dialect markers are
(R) ein "one," sl'i "who," ir,;<;e "not," dakk "you," 1neir "more," her
"here," jekk "went," ifdt "from." Even lexical borrowings from the stan-
dard such as injstiljing "proposal" and bedreftw "plants" are clearly in
dialect phonology and morphology. We find one single instance of what
seems to be a standard form: (B) mellom/ (R) imelja "middle." But this
only occurs as part of the borrowed compound mellomstore "medium-
size." In several hours of conversation with both groups, marked by many
changes in topic, we have found a number of lexical borrowings but not a
clear instance of phonological or grammatical switching, in spite of the
fact that all informants clearly know standard grammar.
  While our hypothesis suggests that switching is constrained in those sit-
uations which allow only local relationships to be enacted, it also leads us
to predict that whenever local and nonlocal relationships are relevant to
the same situation, topical variation may elicit code switching. To test
this, we selected members of a formerly quite active local peer group. For
the last few years these individuals had all been at universities in Oslo,
Bergen, and Trondheim. They returned home in the summer either for
vacation or to take up local employment. In conventional interview ses-
sions, all participant's claimed to be pure dialect speakers and professed
local attitudes about dialect use. They thus regarded themselves as
members of the local "team." As fellow students, however, they also
shared statuses that are identified with pan-Norwegian values and as-
sociated with the standard. Our assumption then is that if topical stimuli
are introduced which elicit these values, switching may result.
  Three gatherings were arranged in the home of one of our informants.
Refreshments were again served. Elicitation strategies were similar to
those employed with the first two groups, and similar ranges of topics
were covered. The examples cited here show that our hypothesis was
again confirmed.
                           Social Meaning in Linguistic Structure       429

 Group Ill: Topic: Chitchat about Drinking Habits

BERIT:       ja,ja, nuen vi bjynjt anjer veien du-vi bjynjt i barnelosen-sci vi har
             de II njajort.
             Yes, yes, we started the other way, we started in the children's an-
             tialcoholic league. So we have finished all that.

             Topic: Industrial Development
BERIT:       jo da viss di hare fikk de te /¢nn seg-sci e i vwrtfall prisniv(le luer i
             Rana skmdd h¢ger enn dee vanligvis anner stann i lanne.
             Yes, if they could only manage to make it profitable-so in any case
             the prices tend to be higher here in Rana than is common in other
             places in the country.

             Topic: Informal Statement about University Regulations
OLA:         nuenn no ha dcem111 lw111p{f! pa de.
             But now they have relaxed that.

             Topic: Authoritative Statement about University Regulations
OLA:         de voe/ du mellom en faemm saeks.
             You choose that from among five or six.

    Comparison of Berit's and Ola's first statement with their second state-
 ments shows considerable shifting in each case. Thus Berit's second
utterance has such unpalatalized forms as anner (vs. anjer), and raised and
less retracted [a] in da. She also uses standard variables (B)fikk/(R)fekk,
(B)viss/(R)vess, (B)V<1?rtfall/(R)kvartfal!, (B)lu1?r/(R)her, etc. Ola's second
 statement is characterized by (B)nzel/011/(R)imelja and (B)en/(R)ein. Simi-
larly, his [re] inf{l?,n and :u1?ks is raised and fronted. In neither case is the
 shift to the standard complete-after all the situation never lost its infor-
mality. Berit's statement still contains dialect words like (R)l¢n11/(B)/¢11ne
"to be profitable"; (R)stan/(B)steder "places"; and Ola has
(R)v{l?//(B)velger "to choose." What we see then is a breakdown of co-
occurrence rules, an erosion of the linguistic boundary between Ranamal
and Bokmal. The tendency is to switch toward standard phonology while
preserving some morphophonemic and lexical dialect features of (R). Fea-
tures retained in this manner are largely those which also occur in other
local dialects and to some extent also in N ynorsk. They have thus gained
some acceptance as proper dialect forms. Those characteristics which
locals refer to as broad speech, i.e., those that are known as local peculiar-
ities, tend to be eliminated.
    It must also be noted that Berit and Ola also differ in their pronuncia-
        430    Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

tion of the phonological variables. Ola's normal pronunciation shows the
strong palatalization of consonant and extreme vowel retraction charac-
teristic of most residents. Berit's normal pronunciation has medium
palatalization and medium retraction. Both, however, switch in the same
direction, in response to similar situational and topical clues, and this
agreement on the rules of stylistic manipulation is clearly more important
in this case than the mere articulatory difference in Berit's and Ola's
speech.
   The social character of the style switch was clearly revealed when the
tape-recorded conversations were played back to other Hemnes resi-
dents. One person who had been working with us as a linguistic informant
at first refused to believe that the conversations were recorded locally.
When he recognized the voices of the participants, he showed clear signs
of disapproval. Apparently, he viewed the violation of co-occurrence
rules as a sign of what is derogatorily called knot "artificial speech" in col-
loquial Norwegian. Some of the participants showed similar reactions
when they heard themselves on tape. They promised to refrain from
switching during future discussion sessions. Our analysis of these later
sessions, however, revealed that when an argument required that the
speaker validate his status as an intellectual, he would again tend to use
standard forms in the manner shown by Berit and Ola. Code selection
rules thus seem to be akin to grammatical rules. Both operate below the
level of consciousness and may be independent of the speaker's overt in-
tentions.
   Additional information about usage patterns in group III was provided
through a fortunate accident. One of our sessions with this group was
interrupted by a somewhat mentally retarded young person, who has the
habit of appearing in peoples' homes to solicit assistance for his various
schemes. Here are some examples of remarks addressed to him by Berit
and Solveig, of all the members of the group, the most prone to use stan-
dard forms. Her normal pronunciation shows the least amount of conso-
nant palatalization. She is socially more marginal to Hemnes than other
members of the group.
Group Ill: Topic: Talking to a Retarded Local Youth

BERIT:           e de du sa vikarier ff/)rr lwnj 110.
                 Are you a stand-in for him now?
SOLVEIG:        /zanj kanj jo jett gate, /zaj kanj 110 va me.
                He is good at word games, he should participate.

   Both Berit and Solveig's pronunication in these examples become iden-
tical with the ordinary speech of Ola and of the members of group I. The
extreme palatalization of [nj] and the lowering of [a] is not normal for
                          Social Meaning in Lingllistic Structllre   431

   them; they clearly are talking down in this case. Their stylistic range, as
   well as their facility in switching, seem to be' greater than those of the
   others.
      In comparing the behavior of the first two groups with that of group III,
   we find two different kinds of language-usage patterns. All three groups
   speak both the dialect and the standard. Groups I and II, however, show
   only situational switching. When members talk to each other, differences
   of formality or informality to topic are reflected only in the lexicon. Pro-
  nunciation and morphology do not change. Those groups shift to (B)
  phonology and grammar only when remarks are addressed directly to us
  who count as outsiders or in indirect quotes of such matters as govern-
  ment rules, on officials' statements, etc. In such instances of situation
  switching, therefore, Ranamal and Bokmal are kept separate throughout
  by strict co-occurrence restrictions. In group III, however, deviation from
  the dialect results both from metaphorical and situation switching. Meta-
  phorical switching, furthermore, involves a breakdown of the co-
  occurrence restrictions characteristic of situational shifts.
     The dialect usage of locals, on the one hand, corresponds to their view
  that the two varieties are distinct, and to their insistence on maintaining
  the strict separation of local and nonlocal values. For the students, on the
  other hand, the distinction between dialect and standard is not so sharp.
  Although they display the same general attitudes about the dialect as the
 team of locals, their behavior shows a range of variation rather than an al-
 ternation between distinct systems. It reflects a de facto recognition of
 their own nonlocal identification.
     A fourth conversational group further illustrates the internal speech
 diversity in the community. The principal speakers here are two men, A
 and B, and C, who is A's wife. All come from families who tend to dissoci-
 ate themselves from the egalitarian value system of the local team. Their
 normal style of speech was Bokmal for remarks directed, at us as well as for
 in-group speech. Only in a few instances when A began telling local
anecdotes did he lapse into Ranamal. (R) forms were introduced as meta-
phorical switches into what were basically (B) utterances to provide local
color, indicate humor, etc., in somewhat the same way that speakers in
group III had used (B) forms in (R) utterances.
     In the course of the evening A and C's teen-age daughter joined the
conversation. She expressed attitudes toward the dialect which are quite
similar to those of the students in group III and thus are somewhat dif-
ferent from those of her parents. The few samples we have of her speech
show (R) phonology similar to that of Berit and Solveig in group II I.
    Although the picture of language usage derived from the four groups
seems at first highly complex, it becomes less so when viewed in relation
to speakers' attitudes, interactional norms, and local values. All Hemnes
        432   Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

residents have the same repertoire. Their linguistic competence includes
control of both (R) and (B) rules. They vary in the way in which they use
these rules. Expressed attitudes toward (R) and (B) do not provide an
explanation for these differences in speech behavior. The most reasonable
explanation of the ways in which these groups differ seems to be that the
dual system of local values, differences in individual background, and the
various social situations in which members find themselves operate to
affect their interpretation of the social meaning of the variables they
employ.


        Conclusion

          Our analysis in this chapter is based on the assumption that
regularities in behavior can be analyzed as generated from a series of indi-
vidual choices made under specifiable constraints and incentives (Barth
1966). This position implies an important break with previous approaches
to social structure and to language and society. Behavioral regularities are
no longer regarded as reflections of independently measurable social
norms; on the contrary, these norms are themselves seen as com-
municative behavior. They are reflected in what Goffman (1959) calls the
rules of impression management or, in our terms, in the social meanings
which constrain the actor's adoption of behavioral strategies in particular
situations.
    In interactional sociolinguistics, therefore, we can no longer base our
analyses on the assumption that language and society constitute different
 kinds of reality, subject to correlational studies. Social and linguistic
information is comparable only when studied within the same general
analytical frame work. Moving from statements of social constraints to
grammatical rules thus represents a transformation from one level of
 abstraction to another within a single communicative system.
    As Bernstein (1961) has pointed out, verbal communication is a
process in which actors select from a limited range of alternates within a
 repertoire of speech forms determined by previous learning. Although ul-
timately this selection js a matter of individual choice, our chapter shows
 that the rules of codification by which the deep structure of interpersonal
 relations is transformed into speech performances are independent of
 expressed attitudes and similar in nature to the grammatical rules
 operating on the level of intelligibility. They form part of what Hymes
 (1972) has called the speaker's communicative competence. Socio-
 linguistic constraints on the selection of variables seem to be of central im-
portance in this codification process. We argued that they determine the
 speaker's perception of the utterances as a unit of social meaning. By ac-
                         Social Meaning in Linguistic Structure   433

 cepting the native's view of what is and what is not properly part of a
 dialect or language, linguists have tended to assume these co-occurrences
 rather than investigate them empirically. We have attempted to develop
 descriptive procedures suitable for the empirical investigation of these
 rules by combining various ethnographic field techniques with conven-
 tional linguistic elicitation methods.
    In Hemnes, where Ranamal and Bokmal communicate the same objec-
 tive information, we were led to ask how the apparent separateness of the
 dialect and the standard can exist and be maintained. Ethnographic inves-
 tigation suggests the hypothesis that Ranamal has social value as a signal
 of distinctness and of a speaker's identification with others of local
 descent. This social significance of the dialect can only be understood by
 contrast with the meanings which locals assign to the standard, the lan-
 guage of nonlocal activities. The standard is associated with education
 and power on the national scene and carries connotations of differences in
 rank which are unacceptable in the realm of informal local relations.
When used casually among Hemnes residents, therefore, it communicates
dissociation from the "local team."
    Since most Hemnes natives live, marry, and earn their livelihood
among others of their own kind, their values are rarely challenged. Their
personal relations have all.the characteristics of network closure (Barnes
 J 954). On the other hand, those with nonlocal background and who main-
tain significant ties in other communities tend to seek their friends among
those in similar circumstances, even though they may have resided in
Hemnes for more than a generation. Their contacts with members of the
"local team" remain largely nonpersonal, focusing around single tasks,
and are thus similar in kind to nonlocal contacts. This lack of personal ties
between individuals of dissimilar backgrounds and cultural identification
reinforces the general social meanings ascribed to the dialect by those
who share local background and identity, and thus contributes to main-
taining the separateness of dialect and standard.
    While this information provides the background for our study, it does
not explain the fact that all residents frequently switch between the
dialect and the standard. This can only be explained through the analysis
of particular speech events. The concepts of setting, social situation, and
social event represent an attempt to explain the natives' conception of
their behavioral environment in terms of an ordered set of constraints
which operate to transform alternative lines of behavior into particular
social meanings. Our distinction between metaphoric and role switching
shows how constraints at different levels of inclusiveness produce appro-
priate changes in the way speech pe1formances are interpreted.
    Although locals show an overt preference for the dialect, they tolerate
and use the standard in situations where it conveys meanings of of-
        434    Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

ficiality, expertise, and politeness toward strangers who are clearly seg-
regated from their personal life. In private gatherings where people meet
as natives and equals, a speaker's use of standard variables suggests
 social dissociation, an attitude which is felt to be out of place. Although
the students in our experimental sessions meet as locals and friends, they
 differ from other members of the local team because they share the addi-
tional status of intellectuals. This fact modifies the social meaning of stan-
dard forms when they are used among the students. To refrain from using
standard forms for these topics which elicit participants' shared experi-
ence as intellectuals would constitute an unnatural limitation on their
freedom of expression. Group IV demonstrates the effect of intracom-
munity differences in value systems on language-usage patterns. Because
of this identification with the urban middle classes, the adult members of
this group use (B) as their normal form of speech while employing (R)
only for special effect. Such usage distinctions, however, are not neces-
sarily very stable. The teen-age daughter of the adult members seems to
follow local usage, thus symbolizing her identification with her peer group
rather than with her family.
   Our experiments, and the analysis presented in this chapter, demon-
strate the importance of social or nonreferential meaning for the study of
language in society. Mere naturalistic observation of speech behavior is
not enough. In order to interpret what he hears, the investigator must
have some background knowledge of the local culture and of the pro-
cesses which generate social meaning. Without this it is impossible to gen-
eralize about the social implication of dialect differences. The processes
studied here are specific to particular small communities. Predictions of
language maintenance or language shift in larger societies will, of course,
have to depend on statistical generalizations. More studies along the lines
suggested here, however, should materially improve the validity of such
generalizations. For Hemnesberget, the fate of the dialect seems assured
as Jong as local identification maintains its importance, and the socioeco-
logical system continues to prevent any significant accumulation of indi-
viduals who, like the students, fail to maintain the situational barrier
between the dialects and'the standard.
 15

Domains and the Relationship
between Micro-- and
Macrosocio1inguistics
JOSHUA A. FISHMAN




 Joshua A. Fishman is a professor of sociology at Yeshiva
  University. He has been concerned with multilingualism
  and the social role of language for some years. Having
 completed studies of language loyalty in the United
 States, and Spanish-English bilingualism among Puerto
 Ricans in the New York area, he is now engaged in
 research on language policy and development. The theo-
 retical framework, as well as part of the data presented in
 this chapter, are contained in an earlier article (Fishman
 1965), of which the present essay is an extension and
 revision.
    Fishman is here concerned with situations of language
choice, as are Blom and Gumperz, but the focus and the
 methods employed are instructively different. Blom and
Gumperz treat norms and other factors all as dimensions
of one communicative system as input to a single set of
rules. The potential for change in the situation is de-
tected, but information as to the larger society and his-
tory is used as context to illuminate the set of rules itself.
The emphasis is on the individual choosing among alter-
native modes of behavior in accordance with linguistic
and social constraints. Fishman, however, is concerned
with behavioral norms seen as jural rules (see Introduc-
tion) and defined in sociological terms as regularities
which stand apart from individual behavior. He concen-
trates on stable systems of choice, or "proper" usage as
he calls it, specifically excluding situations of change
where these norms no longer hold. Fishman's key con-
cept, domain, is intended to relate specific language
choices, from which it is an abstraction, to general insti-
                            435
436   Genesis, Mai/ltenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

tutions and spheres of activity, both in one society and,
comparatively, between societies. Concern with chang-
ing situations is not dealt with in terms of formulated
rules and linguistic variation but at the level of changes in
spheres of activity and institutions. Whereas Blom and
Gumperz place participant observation and analysis of
spontaneous speech at the center of their approach,
Fishman employs techniques more characteristic of
large-scale social investigations, including self-report in-
struments, census, word association, test together with
factor analysis and analysis of variance. The approach
taken here is akin to the correlational view of language
described by William Bright ( 1966) and discussed in the
 Introduction.
    Further difference lies in the materials studied and in
 the approach taken. Both chapters are concerned with
successful prediction, but the Norwegian case of vari-
ables within one linguistic matrix clearly requires close
phonetic and other linguistic specification, whereas the·
 Puerto Rican case can be approached in terms of two
grossly distinguishable wholes.
    Notice in Fishman's discussion of topic that this sa-
 lient dimension of rule-governed choices is shown to
 depend on more than one underlying process. The
 implicit danger to which Fishman calls attention is that
 success in stating rules and predicting use may remain at
 a "surface structure" level and may not reach the level at
 which the predictable regularities are generated. In both
 this and the preceding chapter there is the concern of
 relating individual choices to relatively stable patterns,
 but whereas Blom and Gumperz align themselves with
 the view that the latter are generated from the former,
 Fishman treats the individual choices as being derived
 from stable patterns. (It is worthwhile to compare the
 Blom-Gumperz schema of setting-situation-event with
 the scheme of relationships in Fig. 15. I of the present
 chapter.)
    Domain analysis is linked to the analysis of cultural
 scenes discussed by Frake (Chapter 3), although the defi-
 nition of domain here differs from the ethnoscientific defi-
 nition of the term. Fishman points out that a fixed set of
 domains cannot be prescribed in advance for all cases.
 He envisages different categories of participant (e.g.,
            Domains between Micro- and Macrosociolinguistics     437

         children), different types of social context1 (e.g., im-
         migrant-host contexts), and different levels of focus (e.g.,
         social-psychological vs. societal-institutional). While
         concerned with the establishment of the validity of the
         constructs for the particular Puerto Rican study,
         Fishman locates the findings of appropriate domains first
         of all in the integrative intuition of the investigator. He
         implies that the heuristic value of the concept of domain
         does not depend on any one method of data collection
         and analysis. Additional related readings are provided
         by: Ferguson ( 1966), Gumperz (1961 ), Rona (1966),
         Rubin (1968), and Fishman (1970).



         The Analysis of Multilingual Settings

          Multilingual speech communities differ from each other in so
 many ways that every student of societal multilingualism must grapp.Je
 with the problem of how best to systematize or organize the manifold dif-
ferences that are readily recognizable between them. This chapter is
 directed to a formal consideration of several descriptive and analytic vari-
ables which may contribute to an understanding of who speaks what lan-
guage to whom and when in those speech communities that are character-
 ized by widespread and relatively stable multilingualism. It deals
primarily with "within-group (or intragroup) multilingualism" rather than
with "between-group (or intergroup) multilingualism," i.e., it focuses upon
those multilingual settings in which a single population makes use of two
(or more) "languages" or varieties of the "same language" for internal
communicative purposes (Fishman 1967). As a result of this limitation,
mastery or control of mother tongue and other tongue [or, more generally,
of the various languages or varieties constituting the speech community's
linguistic repertoire (Gumperz 1962)] may be ruled out as a crucial vari-
able since the members of many speech networks could communicate
with each other quite easily in any of their available codes or subcodes. It
seems dear, however, that habitual language choice in multilingual
speech communities or speech networks is far from being a random
matter of momentary inclination, even under those circumstances when it
could very well function as such from a purely probabilistic point of view
(Lieberson 1964). "Proper" usage dictates that only one of the theoreti-
cally coavailable languages or varieties will be chosen by particular
classes of interlocutors on particular kinds of occasions to discuss partic-
ular kinds of topics.
         438    Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

   What are the most appropriate parameters in terms of which these
choice patterns can be described in order to attain both factual accuracy
and theoretical parsimony, and in order to facilitate the integration of
small-group and large-group research rather than its further needless
polarization? If we can solve the problem of how to describe language
choice in stable, within-group bilingual settings (where the limits of lan-
guage mastery do not intrude), we can then more profitably turn (or return)
to the problem of choice determinants in less stable settings such as those
characterizing immigrant-host relationships and between-group mul-
tilingual settings more generally (Fishman I 964).

  A HYPOTHETICAL EXAMPLE

   American students are so accustomed to bilingualism as a "vanishing
phenomenon," as a temporary dislocation from a presumably more
normal state of affairs characterized by "one man, one language," that an
example of stable intragroup bilingualism may help to start off our discus-
sion in a more naturalistic and less bookish vein.
   A government functionary in Brussels arrives home after stopping off at
his club for a drink. He generally speaks standard French in his office,
standard Dutch at his club, and a distinctly local variant of Flemish at
home. 1 In each instance he identifies himself with a different speech
network to which he belongs, wants to belong, and from which he seeks
acceptance. All of these networks-and more-are included in his
overarching speech community, even though each is more commonly as-
sociated with one speech variety than with another. Nevertheless, it is not
impossible to find occasions at the office in which he speaks or is spoken
to in one or another variety of Flemish. There are also occasions at the
club when he speaks or is addressed in French; finally, there are oc-
casions at home when he communicates in standard Dutch or even
French.
   Our hypothetical government functionary is most likely to give and get
Flemish at the office when he bumps into another functionary who hails
from the very same Flemish-speaking town. The two of them grew up
together and went to school together. Their respective sets of parents
strike them as being similarly "kind- but- old- fashioned." In short, they
 share many common experiences and points of view (or think they do, or
 pretend they do), and, therefore, they tend to speak to each other in the

  1
    This example may be replaced by any one of a number of others: standard German,
Schwytzertiitsch, and Romansch (in parts of Switzerland); Hebrew, English, and Yiddish in.
Israel; Riksmaal, Landsmaal, and more local dialectal variants of the latter in Norway; stan-
dard German, Plattdeutsch, and Danish in Schleswig; French, standard German, and
German dialect in Luxembourg, etc.
               Domains between Micro- and Macrosocio/inguistics                  439

language which represents for them the intimacy that they share. The two
do not cease being government functionaries when they speak Flemish to
each other; they simply prefer to treat each other as intimates rather than
as functionaries. However, the careful observer will also note that the two
do not speak Flemish to each other invariably. When they speak about
world affairs, or the worlds of art and literature, not to mention the world
of government, they tend to switch into French (or to reveal far more
French lexical, phonological, or even grammatical influence in their Flem-
ish), even though (for the sake of our didactic argument) the mood of in-
timacy and familiarity remains clearly evident throughout.
   Thus our overall problem is twofold: (a) to recognize and describe
whatever higher order regularities there may be in choosing among the
several varieties that constitute the repertoire of a multilingual speech
community (so that we need not always remain at an anecdotal and
clinical level of analysis) and (b) nevertheless, to provide for and recog-
nize the interpersonal fluctuation (= lower order societal patterning) that
remains even when higher order societal patterning is established.

   TOPIC
   The fact that two individuals who usually speak to each other primarily
in X nevertheless switch to Y (or vacillate more noticeably between X
and Y) when discussing certain topics leads us to consider topic per se as
a regulator of language use in multilingual settings.
   The implication of topical regulation of language choice is that certain
topics are somehow handled "better" or more appropriately in one lan-
guage than in another in particular multilingual contexts. However, this
greater appropriateness may reflect or may be brought about by several
different but mutually reinforcing factors. Thus, some multilingual speak-
ers may "acquire the habit" of speaking about topic x in language X par-
tially because that is the language in which they are trained to deal with
this topic (e.g., they received their university training in economics in
French), partially because they (and their interlocutors) may lack the spe-
cialized terms for a satisfying discussion of x in language Y, 2 partially
because language Y itself may currently lack as exact or as 1nany terms
for handling topic x as those currently possessed by language X, and par-

   2 This effect has been noted even in normally monolingual settings, such as those ob-

taining among American intellectuals, many of whom feel obliged to use French or German
words in conjunction with particular professional topics. English lexical influence on the lan-
guage of immigrants in the United States has also often been explained on topical grounds.
The importance of topical determinants is discussed by Haugen (I 953, 1956) and Weinreich
(1953) and, more recently, by Gumperz (1962) and Susan Ervin-Tripp (1964). It is implied
as a "pressure" exerted upon "contacts" in Mackey's descriptions of bilingualism (I 962,
1965, 1966).
          440     Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

tially because it is considered strange or inappropriate to discuss x in lan-
guage Y. The very multiplicity of sources of topical regulation suggests
that topic may not in itself be a convenient analytic variable when lan-
guage choice is considered from the point of view of the larger societal
patterns and sociolinguistic norms of a multilingual setting, no matter how
fruitful it may be at the level of face-to-face interaction per se. What would
be helpful for larger societal investigations and for intersocietal compari-
sons is an understanding of how topics reflect or imply regularities which
pertain to the major spheres of activity in any society under consider-
ation. We may be able to discover the latter ifwe inquire why a significant
number of people in a particular multilingual setting at a particular time
have received certain kinds of training in one language rather than in
another; or what lt reveals about a particular multilingual setting if lan-
guage X is currently actually less capable of coping with topic x than is
language Y. Does it not reveal more than merely a topic-language rela-
tionship at the level of particular face~to-face encounters? Does it not
reveal that certain socioculturally recognized spheres of activity are, at
least temporarily, under the sway of one language or variety (and,
therefore, Ptrrhaps, under the control of certain sp~ech networks) rather
than others? Thus, while topic is doubtlessly a crucial consideration in un-
derstanding language choice variance in our two hypothetical government
functionaries, we must seek a means of examining and relating their indi-
vidual, momentary choices to relatively stable patterns of choice that
exist in their multilingual speech community as a whole.



          Domains of Language Behavior

         l. The concept of domains of language behavior seems to have
received its first partial elaboration from students of language mainte-
nance and language shift among Auslandsdeutsche in pre-World-War-II
multilingual settings. 3 German settlers were in contact with many dif-
ferent non-German-speaking populations in various types of contact set-
tings and were exposed to various kinds of sociocultural change pro-
cesses. In attempting to chart and compare the fortunes of the German
language under such varying circumstances Schmidt-Rohr (1963) seems
to have been the first to suggest that dominance configurations needed to


  3 The study of language maintenance and language shift is concerned with the relationship

between change or stability in habitual language use, on the one hand, and ongoing psycholo-
gical, social, or cultural processes of change and stability, on the other hand (Fishman i 964,
1966; Nahirny and Fishman 1965).
                    Domains between Micro- and Macrosocio/inguistics                  441

       be established to reveal the overall status of language choice in various
       domains of behavior. The domains recommended by Schmidt-Rohr were
      the following nine: the family, the playground and street, the school, the
      church, literature, the press, the military, the courts, and the govern-
      mental administration. Subsequently, other investigators either added ad-
      ditional domains [e.g., Mak (1935), who nevertheless followed Schmidt-
      Rohr in overlooking the work sphere as a domain], or found that fewer
     domains were sufficient in particular multilingual settings [e.g., Frey
     0 945), who required only home, school, and church in his analysis of
     Amish "triple talk"]. However, what is more interesting is that Schmidt-
     Rohr's domains bear a stdking similarity to those "generally termed"
     spheres of activity which have more recently been independently ad-
    ~anced by others interested in the study of acculturation, intergroup rela-
    hons, and bilingualism [e.g., Dohrenwend and Smith (1962)) .
      . Domains are defined, regardless of their number,4 in terms of institu-
    tional contexts and their congruent behavioral co-occurrences. They at-
    tempt to summate the major clusters of interaction that occur in clusters
   of multilingual settings and involving clusters of interlocutors. Domains
   enable us to understand that language choice and topic, appropriate
   though they may be for analyses of individual behavior at the level of
  fac~-to-face verbal encounters, are, as I suggested, related to widespread
  sociocultural norms and expectations. By recognizing the existence of
  domains it becomes possible to contrast the language of topics for individ-
  U~ls or particular subpopulations with the predominant language of
;domains for larger networks, if not the whole, of a speech community.
      2. The appropriate designation and definition of domains of language
  behavior obviously calls for considerable insight into the sociocultural
 dy~amics of particular multilingual speech communities at particular
 ~~nods in their history. Schmidt-Rohr's domains reflect not only mul-
 tilingual settings in which a large number of spheres of activity, even
~hose that pertain to governmental functions, are theoretically open to
   0
     t_h or all of the languages present but also those multilingual settings in
Which such permissiveness is at least sought by a sizable number of inter-
ested parties. Quite different domains might be appropriate if one were to
study habitual language use among children in these very same settings.
Ce~tainly, immigrant-host contexts, in which only the language of the host
society is· recognized for governmental functions, would require other and
Perhaps fewer domains, particularly if younger generations constantly

  4
th _We can safely reject the implication encountered in certain discussions of domains that
b ~Ie ~nust be an invariant set of domains applicable to all multilingual settings. If language
k~d~vior is r:~ective of sociocultural patterning, as is now wi,dely acc:pted.' t~en d!fferent
d    _of muit1hngual speech communities should benefit from ,malyses m te1 ms of different
  omain O f
       s    language use, however defined and validated.
          442     Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

 leave the immigrant society and enter the host society. Finally, the
domains of language behavior may differ from setting to setting not only in
terms of number and designation but also in terms of level. Thus in study-
ing acculturating populations in Arizona, G. C. Barker [who studied bilin-
gual Spanish Americans.(19,47)] and Barber [who studied trilingual Yaqui
 Indians (1952)] formulated domains at the ln•el of sociopsychological
analysis: intimate, informal, formal, and intergroup. Interestingly enough,
the domains defined in this fashion were then identified with domains at
 the societal-institutional level mentioned previously. The "formal" do-
 main, e.g., was found to coincide with religious-ceremonial activities; the
intergroup" domain consisted of economic and recreational activities as
well as of interactions with governmental-legal authority, etc. The in-
terrelationship between domains of language behavior defined at a so-
cietal-institutional level and domains defined at a sociopsychological level
(the latter being somewhat closer to the topical-situational analyses dis-
cussed earlier) may enable us to study language choice in multilingual set-
tings in newer and more fruitful ways.
   3. The "governmental administration" domain is a social nexus which
normally brings certain kinds of people together primarily for a certain
cluster of pw-ri,ses. Furthermore, it brings them together primarily for a
certain set of role relations (discussed later) and in a delimited environ-
ment. Thus, domain is a sociocultural construct abstracted from topics of
communication, relationships between communicators, and locales of
communication, in accord with the institutions of a society and the
spheres of activity of a speech community, in such a way that individual
behavior and social patterns can be distinguishedji-cJrn each other and yet
related to each other. 5 The domain is a higher order summarization which
is arrived at from a detailed study of the face-to-face interactions in which
language choice is imbedded. Of the many factors contributing to and sub-
sumed under the domain concept, some are more important and more ac-
cessible to careful measurement than others. One of these, topic, has
already been discussed. Two others, role relation and locale, remain to be
discussed. Role relations may be of value to us in accounting for the fact
that our two hypothetical governmental functionaries, who usually speak
an informal variant of Flemish to each other at the office, except when
they talk about technical, professional, or sophisticated "cultural''
matters, are themselves not entirely alike in this respect. One of the two
tends to slip into French more frequently than the other. It would not be
surprising to discover that he is the supervisor of the other.

   5
     For a discussion of the differences and similarities between "functions of language
behavior" and "domains oflanguage behavior" see Fishman ( 1964). "Functions" stand closer
t? so.ciopsychological analysis, for they abstract their constituents in terms of individual mo·
t1vat1on rather than in societal institutions.




                                                                                                   ,,,,,
                    Domains between Micro- and Macrosociolinguistics                    443

       DOMAINS AND ROLE RELATIONS

          In many studies of multilingual behavior the family domain has proved
       to be a very crucial one. Multilingualism often begins in the family and
       depends upon it for encouragement if not for protection. In other cases,
       multilingualism withdraws into the family domain after it has been dis-
      placed from other domains in which it was previously encountered. Little
      wonder then that many investigators, beginning with Braunshausen sev-
      eral years ago (1928), have differentiated within the family domain in
      terms of "speakers." However, two different approaches have been
     followed in connection with such differentiation. Braunshausen [and,
     much more recently, Mackey (1962, 1965, 1966)] have merely specified
     family "members": father, mother, child, domestic, governess and tutor,
     etc. Gross (1951 ), however, has specified dyads within the family: grand-
     father to grandmother, grandmother to grandfather, grandfather to father,
     grandmother to father, grandfather to mother, grandmother to mother,
    grandfather to child, grandmother to child, father to mother, mother to
    father, etc. The difference between these two approaches is quite consid-
    erable. Not only does the second approach recognize that interacting
    members of a family (as well as the participants in most other domains of
    language behavior) are hearers as well as speakers (i.e., that there may be
   a distinction between multilingual production) but it also recognizes that
   their language behavior may be more than merely a matter of individual
   Preference or facility but also a matter of role relations. In· certain
   societies particular behaviors (including language behaviors) are expected
   (if not required) of particular individuals vis-a-vis each other
  (Goodenough 1965a).
  . The family domain is hardly unique with respect to its differentiability
  Into role relations. Each domain can be differentiated into role relations
  that are specifically crucial or typical of it in particular societies at partic-
 u!ar times. The religious domain (in those societies where religion can be
 ~1fferentiated from folkways more generally) may reveal such role rela-
 ~1ons as cleric-cleric, cleric-parishioner, parishioner-cleric, and parish-
 ioner-parishioner. Similarly, pupil-teacher, buyer-seller, employer-
emp]oyee, judge-petitioner, all refer to specific role relations in other
domains. It would certainly seem desirable to describe and analyze lan-
guage use or language choice in a particular multilingual setting in terms
of the crucial role relations within the specific domains considered to be
rnost revealing for that setting.o The distinction between own-group-in-
   0 These remarks are not intended to imply that all role-relation differences are necessarily
~elated to language-choice differences. This almost certainly is not the case. Just which role-
~elation differences are related .to language-choice differences. \and unde: what circum-
s~ances) is a matter for empirical determination within each mult!lmg~al seth~g i's well as _at
different points in time within the same setting. In general the venficat1on of s1gn!ficantly dif-
ferent clusters of a/lo-roles (as well as significantly different clusters of allo-top1cs and allo-
caJes) (see later discussion) is a prerequisite for the empirical formulation of domains.
        444   Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

terlocutor and other-group-interlocutor may also be provided for in this
way_ when intergroup bilingualism becomes the focus of inquiry.

  DOMAINS AND LOCALES
   Bock (1964), Ervin-Tripp (1964), and Gumperz (1964b) have pre-
sented many examples of the importance of locale as a determining com-
ponent of situational analysis. If one meets one's clergyman at the race-
track, the impact of the locale on the topics and role relationships that
normally obtain is likely to be quite noticeable. However, we must also
note that domains too are locale related in the sense that most major
social institutions are associated with a very few primary locales. Just as
topical appropriateness in face-to-face language choice is indicative of
larger scale societal patterns, and just as role appropriateness in face-to-
face language choice is similarly indicative, so the locale constraints and
local appropriatenesses that obtain in face-to-face language choice have
their large-scale implications and extrapolations.

  THE CONSTRUCT VALIDITY OF DOMAINS
    A research project dealing with Puerto Rican bilingualism in the
Greater New York City area has yielded data which may help clarify the
construct validity of domains as well as the procedure for their recogni-
 tion. Since domains are a higher order generalization than congruent situ-
 ations (i.e., from situations in which individuals interacting in appropriate
 role relationships with each other, in the appropriate locales for these role
 relationships, and discussing topics appropriate to their role rela-
 tionships), it was first necessary to try out and revise intuitive and rather
 clinical estimates of the widespread congruences that were felt to obtain.
,After more than a year of participant observation and other data-
,gathering experiences, it seemed to Greenfield ( 1968) that five domains
 could be generalized from the innumerable situations that he had encoun-
 tered in the Puerto Rican speech community. He tentatively labeled these
  "family," "friendship," "religion," "education," and "employment" and
  proceeded to determine whether a typical situation could be presented for
 each domain as a means of collecting valid self-report data on language
  choice. As indicated on p. 445 each domain was represented by a con-
  gruent person (interlocutor), place, and topic in the self-report instrument
  that Greenfield constructed for use with high school students.
    Greenfield's hypothesis was that within the Puerto Rican speech com-
 munity, among individuals who knew Spanish and English equally well,
 Spanish was primarily associated with family and secondarily with friend-
 ship (the two, family and friendship, constituting the intimacy value clus-
                Domains between Micro- and Macrosociolinguistics                  445 1

        Domain         /11terloc11tor     Place                       Topic
      Family           Parent           Home          How to be a good son or daughter
      Friendship       Friend           Beach         How to play a certain game
      Religion         Priest           Church        How to be a good Christian
      Education        Teacher          School        How to solve an algebra problem
      Employment       Employer         Workplace     How to do your job more efficiently



  ter), while English was primadly associated with religion, work, and edu-
  cation (the three constituting the status-stressing value cluster).7 In order
  to test this hypothesis, he initially presented two seemingly congruent sit-
  uational components and requested his subjects (a) to select a third com-
 ponent in order to complete the situation as well as (b) to indicate their
 likelihood of using Spanish or English if they were involved in such a situ-
 ation (and if they and their Puerto Rican interlocutors knew Spanish and
 English equally well). Section I of Table 15.1 shows that Greenfield's
 predictions were uniformly confirmed among those subjects who selected
 congruent third components. The domains for, which Spanish was re-
 ported were, from most often to least, family, friendship, religion, employ-
 ment, and education, regardless of whether the third ~omponent selected
was a person, place, or topic.
    However, as Blom and Gumperz (Chapter 14), Fishman (1968b), and
others have indicated, seemingly incongruent situations frequently occur
and are rendered understandable and acceptable Gust as are the seemingly
ungrammatical sentences that we hear in most spontaneous speech). In-
terlocutors reinterpret incongruencies in order to salvage some semblance
of. the congruency in terms of which they understand and function within
 their social order (c.f. Garfinkel, Chapter 10). Were this not the case,
then no seemingly congruent domains could arise and be maintained out
of the incongruencies of daily life. In order to test this assumption, Green-
field subsequently proceeded to present his subjects with two incongruent
components (e.g., with a person from one hypothetical domain and with a
place from another hypothetical domain) and asked them (a) to select a
third component in order to complete the situation, as well as (b) to in-
dicate their likelihood of using Spanish or English in a situation so consti-
tuted. Greenfield found that the third component was overwhelmingly
selected from one or the other of the two domains from which he had
selected the first two components, not from some third domain. Further-
more, in their attempts to render a seemingly incongruous situation some-
what more congruent, his subjects' language preferences left tlze normal
relationship between domains and language choice substantially wza/-

  1 For a discussion of the significance or' value clusters in the study of diglossic societies
and the relationship between domain analysis and value analysis see Fishman (1968b).
        446   Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

tered (directionally), regardless of whether person, places, or topics were
involved. Nevertheless, all domains became somewhat less different from
each other than they had been in the fully congruent situations. Ap-
parently, both individual indecisiven.~ss and sociolinguistic norms gov-
erning domain regularity must be combined and compromised when
incongruencies appear. Language choice is much more clear-cut and
polarized in "usual" situations governed entirely by sociolinguistic
norms of communicative appropriateness than they are in "unusual"
situations which must be resolved by individual interpretation.
   Greenfield's findings imply that the assumed relationship between face-
to-face situations and larger scale societal domains obtains for self-report
data. However, it remained necessary for other investigators to determine
whether the domains adumbrated in this fashion have more general valid-
ity in the speech community under study.
   On a reinterviewed sample of 124 cases the distributions obtained were
practically identical to those shown here, indicating that the marginals
reported here are quite stable.
   The language replies to the census have been subjected to a factor anal-
ysis (verimax orthogonal rotation). The following five-factor solution ap-
peared to be most revealing:
   A language census conducted among all 431 souls in a two-block
Puerto Rican neighborhood in Jersey City yielded the data shown in
Table 15.2. Above and beyond examining the replies obtained to the indi-
vidual census items, the reader should direct his attention to the results of
the factor analysis. If domains are more than the investigator's etic reclas-
sification of situations, then they should also become apparent from factor
analysis, which in essence asks: Which items tend to be answered in a con-
sistent fashion? Of the five domains extracted from this analysis, all four
domains considered appropriate for census questioning (language in the
context of family, education, work, and religion) appeared as separate
factors, namely, I. Spanish: literacy (= education), II. Spanish: oral (=
family), IV. Spanish: at work, and V. Spanish: in religion. In addition, an
English factor also emerged, indicating that although English is not as-
sociated with specific domains for the population as a whole (it is so as-
sociated for children, as we will see), its relation to Spanish is not one of
displacement or transition. An orthogonal English factor indicates that (as
in other speech communities marked by relatively stable and widespread
bilingualism) there is no need for one language to be learned or used at the
expense of the other in the population under study. Other accounts of lan-
guage censuses and the research problems which they pose are provided
by Kloss ( 1929) and Lieberson ( 1966a).
   A third (and, for this presentation, final) indication of the construct
validity of domains as analytic parameters for the study of large-scale
sociolinguistic patterns is yielded by Edelman's data (1968). Here we
note that when the word-naming responses of bilingual Puerto Rican
I
I
                        table 15.1
{
         Spanish- and English-Usage Self-Ratings in Various Situations for Components
         Selected by Bilingual Ss*

         I. Congruent Situations: Two "congruent" components presented; S selects third congruent
            component and language appropriate to situation ( I = All in Spanish; 5 = all in English)

                                                           Congruent Persons Selected
                                Parent        Friend       Total      Priest    Teacher      Employer         Total
(
                  Mean            2.75           3.38       3.08        4.67       4.92         4.77           4.77
                  s.d.            1.67           1.22       1.15        0.68       0.30         0.44           0.37
                  n              12             13         13          12         12           13             13

                                                           Congruent Places Selected

                               Home        Beach         Total      Church      School      Work Place        Total
                  Mean           2.33         3.50        2.60        3.80        4.79         4.27            4.34
                  s.d.           1.11         1.37        1.14        1.57        0.58         1.39            0.99
                  n             15            6          15          15          14           15              15

                                                                            '
                                                          Congruent Topics Selected
                       Family         Friendship         Total      Religion    Education      Employment             Total
         Mean            1.69             3.33            2.64        3.80          4.78              4.44             4.38
         s.d.            0.95             1.24            0.98        1.52          0.55              1.15             0.75
         11             16               18              18          15            18                18               18

     II. Incongruent Situations: Two "incongruent" components presented; S selects any third
         component and language appropriate to situation ( I = All in Spanish; 5 = all in English)

                                                                All Persons Selected
                              Parent       Friend         Total      Priest    Teacher      Employer         Total
              Mean               2.89          3.48        3.50       4.65       4.73         4.38            4.66
              s.d.               1.41          1.21        0.73       0.63       0.42         0.74            0.57
              n                 13            13          13         13         13            8              13

                                                                All Places SelC'l'ted
                           Home          Beach          Total      Church      School      Work Place        Total
              Mean             2.63       3.86           2.77        3.71       4.39          4.42            4.10
              s.d.             0.80       1.05           0.73        1.36       1.03          0.98            0.85
              n               15          5             15          15         15            15              15

                                                                All Topics Selected

                      Family       Friendship           Total      Religion    Education      Employment             Total

    Mean               2.88              3.81            3.26        3.07          3.65           3.81                3.49
    s.d.               1.07              1.16            1.05        1.03          1.59           1.06                0.79
    11                18                16              18          18            17             18                  18
                      * From Greenfield 1968.

                                                                   447
         448    Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

         table 15.2

Language Census
                       Item                              Yest     Little   t    110*   np*

I. Can understand Spanish conversation?                  779       135         019     067
2. Can speak Spanish (conversation)'?                    833       077         016     074
3. Can read newspapers/books in Spanish?                 397       049         318     237
4. Can write letters in Spanish?                         390       030         339     241
5. Can understand English conversation?                  571       176         183     070
6. Can speak English (conversation)?                     536       181         216     067
7. Can read newspapers/books in English?                 455       130         206     209
8. Can write letters in English?                         387       063         327     223


                                                        Spant      Engt        Botht   NPt
 9. First language understood (conversation)?            886        002         039    072
10. First language spoken (conversation)?                884                    0.23   093
11. First language read (newspapers/books)?              401                    297    302
12. First language written (letters)?                    383        002         276    339
13. Most frequently spoken at home?                      657        088         183    072
14. Most frequently read at home?                        267        051         357    325
15. Most frequently written at home?                     339        014         255    392
16. Most frequently spoken with fellow workers?          137        049         137    677
17. Most frequently spoken with supervisor?              046        009         264    680
18. Most frequently spoken with clients/customers        032        014         035    919
19. Language of instruction in school?                   339        237         167    257
20. Language liked most (conversation)?                  362        285         186    167
21. Language of priest's/minister's sermon?              452        137         193    206
22. Language of silent prayer?                           469        123         151    257
23. Language of church service?                          427        160         193    220


   On a reinterviewed sample of 124 cases the distributions obtained were practically iden-
tical to those shown here, indicating that·the marginals reported here are quite stable.
   The language replies to the census have been subjected to a factor analysis (verimax
orthogonal rotation). The following five~factor solution appeared to be most revealing:


        No.     Suggested Factor Name                 Items (Loadings)

               Spanish: literacy            4(93), 3(92), 15(89), 12(88), 11 (87),
                                               19(71), 14(70), 20(54)
        II     English (oral and written)   7(89), 6(88), 5(84), 8(82)
        Ill    Spanish: oral                9(78), 1(71), 2(66), 10(63), 13(38)
        IV     Spanish: at work             18(79), 16(73), 17(55)
        V      Spanish: in religion         21 (93), 23(89), 22(40)
        * Fishman 1968a.
        t Percents carried to three places; decimals omitted.
               Domains between Micro- and Macrosociolinguistics;                449

             table 15.3a

 Mean Number of Words Named by Young Schoolchildren*
                                     (N=34)

                                                   Domain
      Age       Language   Family       Education       Religion   Friendship    Total
      6-8        English     6.2           8.2              6.6       8.3         7.3
                 Spanish     7.6           6.2              5.8       6.4         6.5
                 Total       6.9           7.2              6.2       7.4         6.9

      9-11       English    11.7          12.8              8.7      I0.9        11.0
                 Spanish    10.5            9.4             7.2       9.7         9.2
                 Total      I I. I        I I. I            7.9      10.3        10.1

     Total      English     9.0           10.5              7.7       9.6         9.2
                Spanish     9.0            7.8              6.5       8.0         7.8
                Total       9.0            9.1              7.1       9.0         8.5

         *Edelman 1968.



children in Jersey City were analyzed in accord with the domains derived
 from Greenfield's and Fishman's data reported here (Tables 15.1 and
15.2) significant and instructive findings were obtained. The most Spanish
 domain for all children was "family" (Table 15.3a). The most English
domain for all children was "education." The analysis of variance (Table
 15.3b) indicates that not only did the children's responses differ signifi-
cantly by age (older children giving more responses in both languages
than did younger children), by language (English yielding more responses
than did Spanish), and by domain (church yielding fewer responses than
did any other domain), but that these three variables interact significantly
as well. This means that one language is much more associated with cer-
tain domains than is the other and that this is differentially so by age. This
is exactly the kind of finding for which domain analysis is particularly
suited. Its utility for inter-society comparisons and for gauging language
shift would seem to be quite promising.

  THE INTEGRATION OF MACRO-
  AND MICROPARAMETERS

  The situational analysis of language and behavior represents the bound-
ary area between micro- and macrosociolinguistics. The very fact that a
baseball conversation "belongs" to one speech variety and an electrical
          450      Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

          table 15.Jb

Analysis of Variance of Young Schoolchildren's Word-Naming Scores
                             Mean
     Source           dj'   Square      F9s      F95    Foo

Between subjects      33
 C (age)               I    689.30    19.67*     4.17   7.56
  D (sex)                    15.54     0.44      4.17   7.56
  CD                    I    87.87     2.51      4.17   7.56
  Error (b)           30     35.05

Within subjects      235
 A (domain)             I   123.13     11.11 *   4.17   7.56
 B (language)           3    64.18      9.30*    2.71   4.00
  AB                    3    21.71      6.66*    2.71   4.00
  AC                    3    20.51      2.97*    4.17   7.56
  AD                    3     0.96      0.14     4.17   7.56
  BC                         16.50      1.49     2.71   4.00
  BO                         42.08      3.80     2.71   4.00
  ABC                   3     8.00      2.45     2.71   4.00
  ABO                   3     2.23      0.68     2.71   4.00
  ACD                   3     4.51      0.65     4.17   7.56
  BCD                        14.62      1.32     2.71   4.00
  ABCD                 3      2.66      0.82     2.71   4.00
  Error (w)          207
  Error 1 (w)         89      6.90
  Error2 (w)          29     11.08
  Error3 (w)          89      3.26

Total                268

          * Significant at or above the 0.01 level.
          t Significant at or above the 0.05 level.


engineering lecture "belongs" to another speech variety is a major key to
an even more generalized description of sociolinguistic variation. The
very fact that humor during a formal lecture is realized through a meta-
phorical switch to another variety (Blom and Gumperz, Chapter 14) must
be indicative of an underlying sociolinguistic regularity, which obtained
before the switch occurred, perhaps of the view that lecture-like or formal
situations are generally associated with one language or variety whereas
levity or intimacy is tied to another. Without such a view, without a more
general norm assigning a particular topic or situation, as one of a class of
such topics or situations, to one language rather than to another, meta-
phorical purposes could neither be served nor recognized.
   As with all constructs (including situations, role relationships, and
                                                                 I
                   Domains between Micro- and Macrosociolinguistics       45 J

          speech events), domains originate in the integrative intuition of the inves-
          tigator. If the investigator notes that student-teacher interactions in
          classrooms, school corridors, school auditoriums, and school laboratories
          of elementary schools, high schools, colleges, and universities are all
         realized via the high variety (H), as long as these interactions are focused
         upon educational technicality and specialization, he may begin to suspect
         that these congruent situations all belong to a single (educational) domain.
         If he further finds that incongruent situations involving an educational and
         a noneducational ingredient are, by and large, predictably resolved in
         terms of H rather than the low variety (L) if the third ingredient is an edu-
        cational time, place, or role relationship, he may feel further justified in
        positing an educational domain. If informants tell him that the predicted
        language or variety would be appropriate in most of the examples he can
        think of that derive from his notion of the educational domain, whereas
        they proclaim that it would not be appropriate for examples that he draws
        from a contrasted domain, and, finally, if the construct helps clarify and
        organize his data, and, particularly, ifit arises as a compositing feature of
        his data-then the construct is as usefu,lly validated as is that of situation
       or event-with one major difference.
           Whereas particular speech acts can be apportioned to the speech events
       and social situations in which they transpire (Hymes, Chapter 1) the same
       cannot be done with respect to such acts in relation to societal domains.
       Domains are extrapolated from the data of "talk" rather than being an
       actual component of the process of talk. However, domains are as real as
       the very social institutions of a speech community and, indeed, they show
       a marked paralleling with such major social institutions (G. C. Barker
       I 947) and the somewhat varied situations that are congruent with them.
      There is an undeniable difference between the social institution, "the fam-
      ily," and any particular family, but there is no doubt that the societal
      regularities concerning the former must be derived from data on many in-
      stances of the latter. Once such societal regularities are formulated, they
      can be utilized to test predictions concerning the distributions of socie-
      tally patterned variation in "talk."
          Thus domains and social situations reveal the links that exist between
     micro- and macrosociolinguistics. The members of diglossic speech com-
     munities can come to have certain views concerning their varieties or lan-
     guages because these varieties are associated (in behavior and in attitude)
     With particular domains. The H variety (or language) is considered to
     reflect certain values and relationships within the speech community,
     Whereas the L variety is considered to reflect others. Certain individuals
     and groups may come to advocate the expansion of the functions of L into
     additional domains. Others may advocate the displacement of L entirely
     and the use of H solely. Neither of these revisionist views could be held




ht
        452     Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

or advocated without recognition ()f the reality of domains of language-
and-behavior- (in terms of existing norms of communicative appropri-
ations) on the part of members of speech communities. The high culture
values with which certain varieties are associated and the intimacy and
folksiness with which others are congruent are both derivable from
domain-appropriate norms governing characteristic verbal interaction.
   There are several levels and approaches to sociolinguistic description
and a host of linguistic, sociolinguistic, and societal constructs within
each (Fig. 15. I). The choice among them depends on the particular



                  VALUE CLUSTER
          Set of community values character-
          istically enacted in a corresponding
          set of culturally defined behavioral
          domains                 ;



                        DOMAIN                                        NETWORK TYPE
                                                                        (open und closed)
           Cluster of social situations typically
           constrained by a common set of be-                    Cluster of role relationships
           havioral rules                                        defined by extent to which
                                                                 they are governed by a sin-
                                                                 gle (or multiple) set of com-
                                                                 munity values

                  SOCIAL SITUATION
           Encounter defined by intersection of
           setting, time, and role relationship



           TIME          SETTING
                                                 ROLE
                                              RELATIONSIIIP
                                            Set of culturally de·
                                            fined mutual rights and
                                            obligations




                                                    INTERACTION TYPE
                                                    (personal and trnnsactional)
                                            Function of interaction defined by
                                            degree to which participants in social                   I
                                            situation stress the mutual rights and
                                            obligations of their role relationship               /

                                SPEECH (EVENTS AND ACTS)

        figure 15.1
Relationships among some constructs employed in sociolinguistic
analysis (Cooper 1968).
            Domains between Micro- and Macrosocioling11istics    453

 problem at hand. This is necessarily so. Sociolinguistics is of interest to
 students of small societies as well as to students of national and interna-
 tional integration. It must help clarify the change from one face-to-face
 situation to another. It must also help clarify the different language-
 related beliefs and behaviors of entire social sectors and classes. It must
 be as useful and as informative to sociologists pursuing intersocietal and
 intrasocietal topics as it is to linguists pursuing more contextualized
synchronic description.
    It would be foolhardy to claim that one and the same method of data
 collection and data analysis be utilized for such a variety of problems and
purposes. It is one of the hallmarks of scientific social inquiry that
methods are selected as a result of problem specifications rather than
independently of them. Sociolinguistics is neither methodologically nor
theoretically uniform. Nevertheless, it is gratifying to note that for those
who seek such ties the links between micro- and macroconstructs and
methods exist (as do a number of constructs and methods that have wide
applicability through the entire range of sociolinguistics). Just as there is
no societally unencumbered verbal interaction so are there no large-scale
relationships between language and society that do not depend on individ-
ual interaction for their realization. Although there is no mechanical part-
whole relationship between them, micro- and macrosociolinguistics are
both conceptually and methodologically complementary.
16
Ethnic Processes
on the Pathan--Baluch Boundary
FREDRIK BARTH




Fredrik Barth is· a professor of social anthropology and
director of the Research Institute for Social Anthropol-
ogy at the University of Bergen, Norway. He has done
fieldwork in Iran, Pakistan, Sudan, and most recently in
New Guinea. One of his principal interests is a transac-
tional model of social organization (Barth 1966). The
present chapter was originally published as part of the
Georg Morgenstierne Felicitation volume (Redard
1964).
   The stability of language boundaries in multitribal
areas is in large part determined by the structure of tribal
systems. Taking a sociological insight of the linguist
Georg Morgenstierne as his starting point, Barth explains
the northward expansion of the Baluchi language in
Pakistan in terms of capacity to assimilate and organize
potential personnel, given a situation of fragmentation
and social mobility. The considerations usually invoked
by linguists would have predicted expansion not of the
Baluch but of the Pathans. The Pathans are more nu-
merous, of greater population density, more prosperous,
probably have a higher rate of fertility, and are acknowl-
edged to be more agressive militarily. Yet in spite of
numerical superiority and greater prestige, Pashto, the
 Pathan langauge, is retreating before Baluchi.
   In explaining this seemingly anomalous situation
 Barth, by implication, at least, suggests that the analysis


From !ndo-lranica. Melanges presentes b Georg Morgenstieme ll /'oc-
Cllsio11 de son soixllnte-dixieme anniversaire. Edited by Georges Re-
dard. 1964. Otto Harrassowitz, Wiesbaden.

                                454
      Ethnic Processes on the Patlzan-Baluch Boundary    455

  of language maintenance and language shift (see Fishman
   1965 for a discussion of this problem) requires consider-
  ably more information about intrasocietal social pro-
  cesses internal to the societies concerned than is usually
  adduced. Units such as "a tribe," "a culture," "a caste,"
  or "a nation" cannot be taken for granted and member
  populations treated as culturally uniform (cf. Moerman
  1965 and 1968a for a different approach to similar
  problems). Nor does the common assumption that so-
  cietal or geographical isolation is crucial to maintenance
  of cultural diversity accord with the ethnographic facts.
  Barth's position is explained in detail in his introduction
  to a recent collection of ethnographic investigations of
 ethnic boundaries (Barth 1969). Here he demonstrates
 that ethnic boundaries frequently persist in spite of the
 regular movement of personnel across them and in spite
 of regular and institutionalized intergroup com-
 munication [just as language boundaries are often main-
 tained in regions of almost total bilingualism (Gumperz
 1969)]. There must therefore be, he argues, social pro-
 cesses of exclusion and incorporation which lead to the
 maintenance of such boundaries. Taking an interactional
 point of view of social structure similar to that developed
 by Goffman (I 959), he views ethnic categories as cat-
 egories of ascription by which actors identify themselves
 by expressing particular cultural values and speaking par-
 ticular languages. The social necessity (or advantage) of
 maintaining such identifications is conditioned by a com-
 bination of underlying factors (cultural interactional
 norms, intrasocietal power relationships, ecology, or by
factors of demography, etc.) which must be studied em-
 pirically for each case.
    In the present situation, Barth begins by questioning
the identification of Pathans and Baluch as two com-
pletely distinct social entities. He deals with them as
component groups operating within the same ecological
system-i.e., as members of a single linguistically di-
verse speech region. He then proceeds to examine in de-
tail the social conditions which could lead an individual
to identify himself as a member of one or the other
subgroup. His analysis of the two groups as part ofa single
social whole is justified on grounds of both intergroup
mobility and communication and common culture.
Pathan and Baluch share the fundamental cultural princi-
456   Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

pies of patrilineality, honor, and obligation. They differ in
political organization. Pathan communities are based on
councils of equals where a person's ability to survive eco-
nomically is in part based on his ability to muster commu-
nity support. Individuals who for reasons of war or per-
sonal misfortune, etc., no longer possess the resources
for participation in the.competition among equals must
turn to others for protection. If they fail to find support
among their former equals, their alternative is to attach
themselves to a Baluch chief and enter into a hierarchi-
cally organized patron-client relationship with him.
   Notice that the different systems of social organization
also involve differences in norms of verbal interaction
and lead to differential distribution of speech skills and
verbal genres. Among the Pathan, on the one hand the
right to speak in one's local councils requires skilled use
of Pashto rhetoric in formal debate. Furthermore, the
egalitarian ethic emphasizing communality of back-
ground apparently also operates to exclude bilingualism.
Among the Baluch, on the other hand, political com-
munication is between different levels of authority and
may be carried by bilingual intermediarjes. The use of
Baluchi is required only in a type of formalized ritual
exchange. Former Pathan groups may therefore retain in-
formal colloquial Pashto for intragroup communication
while using Baluchi on specialized occasions. (Cf. Bern-
stein, Chapter 17, on the relationship between social rela-
tions and speech skills.)
   Although Barth deals with relatively remote tribal
groups, his approach to social organization has important
implications for the understanding of sociolinguistic phe-
nomena in complex Western societies. In these so-
cieties, even more than in the case discussed by Barth,
ethnically distinguishable groups are tightly enmeshed in
a single social system. Yet, most of our models for the
description of such groups, or subgroups, are models
designed to describe primarily the aspects of mechanical,
rather than organic, solidarity. Note that Barth has a way
of isolating both similarities and differences in culture
and that he is careful to point out the behavioral con-
sequences of an individual's choice among alternate
value systems. He also separates culture from ecology
and shows the effect of common ecologicM systems on
different value systems, and on speech behavior. A simi-
                Ethnic Processes 011 the Pathan-Ba/uclz Bo;mdary   457

           Jar approach applied to Western society might provide
           some revealing insight into subtle behavioral variations in
           such societies. Additional related readings are provided
           by Gumperz (1962), Trevor Hill (1958), Hymes (1968b),
           Pride (in press), Salisbury (1962), and Brudner (1969).



            Linguistic studies on the Indo-Iranian borderland throw light on
   the historical processes of ebb and flow of language areas and on the role
   of contagion, borrowing, and linguistic substrata, as well as genetic
   processes, in language development. In his many contributions to the sub-
  ject, Georg Morgenstierne has referred to the importance of social struc-
   ture in these processes. Thus in an early statement he comments on how
  "the tribal system of the Baloches and Brahuis, which in contrast to that
  of the Pathans favours the assimilation of racially foreign elements into
  the tribe, has no doubt led to frequent changes of language within many
  Baloch and Brahui clans" (1932:8-9). As a tribute to his insight, I should
  like to demonstrate the validity of this contrast, and show its relevance to
  trends along the Pathan-Baluch language boundary. Briefly, I wish to
  demonstrate that the recent northward spread of Baluchi at the expense of
  Pash to in the hill country west of the Suleiman range (Fig. I 6.1) depends
  precisely on the structural differences in the tribal systems of these two
  peoples, to which Morgenstierne refers. The discussion is based mainly
  on material collected during social anthropological fieldwork among
  Pathans in 1954 (see Barth I 959a,b) and in 1960, and among the Marri
 by the late Robert N. Pehrson in I 9 5 5 (see Pehrson I 966).
    The relationship between tribal and ethnic identity and language needs
 to be established. The often-cited Pashto proverb that "he is Pathan who
 does Pashto, not who speaks Pashto" can illustrate the absence of any
 necessary correlation. Yet, in the tribal areas, it is true to say that tribal
 membership presupposes linguistic fluency. In contrast to some other of
 the tribal systems of the Middle East [e.g., South Persia (cf. Barth
 I 961: 130ff)], tribal political structures constitute linguistic communities
and depend on constant internal cross-communication. In the case of
Pathan tribes, these structures are essentially acephalous and are consti-
tuted by lineage councils Uirgas) arranged in a hierarchy of inclusiveness.
Within councils of every level the interests-and in the longer run, sur-
vival-of individuals and segments can only be secured through debate,
requiring the skilled use of the idiom.
    Baluch tribes, however, are socially stratified and have a centralized
form, and the structure is composed of channels of communication
through echelons of leaders. In such a system foreign language bodies
might be encapsulated and communicate upwards through a bilingual
                                                                    69'E
  Jo·1v




                                                 SJ>b.
                                                   'Y    l'.
                                                          '14>1.v          ---··..••••
                                                                              Mekhtar \
                                                                                           -Is.
                                                                                           vi
                                                                                           Co


                                                                                          C'l
                                                                                          ~
                                                                                          :::
                                                                                           ~

                                                                                          '";·'
                                                                                           ~
                                                                                          g·
                                                                                          ~
                                                                                          :::
                                                                                          ::;:;
                                                                                          ~
                                                                                          ;::,
                                                                                          :::
                                                                                          ;::,_
                                                                                          ("')
                                                                                          :::-
                                                                                          ::
                                                                                          ~
                                                                                          ~


                                                                                          ~
                                                                                          t:
                                                                                          :::
 29,.'v
                                                                                          ~
                                                                                          ~·
                                                                                          t=;·
          0        IO                                                                     ("')
                                                                                          0
                 Miles                                                                    ;::,_
                                                                                          ~

                                                                                          '"'
          68'E

          figure I 6.1
Ethnic processes on the Pathan-Baluch boundary
                          Ethnic Processes on the Pathan-Baluch Boundary      459

             leader, as do linguistic minorities in South-Persian tribes. However, in
             their precarious niche as nomadic mixed herders in a harsh environment,
             the widely dispersed Baluch camps and segments depend for survival also
             on another network of communication, mediating information on the
             availability of grazing, water, and the movements of other persons and
             camps rather than political decisions. This network is formalized in tlie
             Baluch institution of hat-exchanges of information given in a peculiar
             intonation and stereotyped phrases as formal greetings whenever
             tribesmen meet. In both cases, in other words, membership in a tribe
             implies membership in a linguistic community.
                In seeking the causes for the growth and expansion of Baluch-speaking
             tribes at the expense of Pathans, it is convenient first to discuss some of
             the more self-evident possibilities. Indeed a number of factors of undeni-
             able relevance in a situation of competition between tribes seem rather to
             favor the Pathans. With respect to aggregate numbers, Pathans greatly
             outnumber Baluchis; likewise in their over-all density in their respective
             territories. In the zone of contact that concerns us here (Marri/Bugti vs.
             Panni/Tarin/Kakar/Luni/Zarkun/Powindah), the same holds true, and
             Pathan villages and camps are consistently larger than those of the
             Baluchis. Relative prosperity is also on the side of the Pathans-there is
             a general ecological gradient of improvement from south to north, and this
             is mirrored in greater capital accumulation (in dwellings, irrigation devel-
             opments, flocks, movable property, and weapons) among the Pathans.
             Relative rates of natural population growth are difficult to assess in the ab-
             sence of detailed demographic information. Doubtless both populations
             produce a surplus, as evidenced by th.eir history of invasion~ of the plains,
             and the wide dispersal of both groups through contemporary labor migra-
             tion. But the small door-to-door censuses I have suggest a higher rate of
             fertility among Pathan than Baluch, as one would expect in their better
             environment. Finally, in military aggressiveness the reputation of Pathan
             tribes exceeds that of Baluchis, both in their mutual estimation and in the
             judgement of third parties, though perhaps more because of the Pathans'
             better weapons than any difference in the value placed in the two cultures
             on bravery and fighting.
                A number of considerations would thus lead one to expect the pressure
             along the boundary to be primarily from Pathan to Baluch country. In the
             hill regions, until recently, for all practical purposes, uncontrolled by any
             external government, one would expect these pressures to express them-
             selves in fighting, conquest, and over-all expansion. There can be no
             doubt about the anarchy that prevailed in the area (cf. Bruce 1900), which
             resulted in a complex history of conquest and local succession (Dames
              1904). Yet this very anarchy created the situation where structural fea-
             tures of the tribal organizations of the competing peoples become over-



     I
         I
./
        460    Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

whelmingly important. Frequently, wars and plundering forays inevitably
tear numbers of people loose from their territorial and social contexts:
splinter groups, fleeing survivors, and families and communities divested
of their property, as well as nuclei of predators, are generated. From such
processes of fragmentation and mobility, a vast pool of personnel results
-persons and groups seeking social identity and membership in viable
communities. The growth rates of such communities will then depend not
so much on their natural fertility rates as on the capacity of their formal
organization to assimilate and organize such potential personnel.
   In this respect, there are striking contrasts between Pathan and Baluch
tribal organization, though the difference in the cultural bases on which
each is built is slight. Fundamentally, both tribal forms derive from the
shared principles of patrilineality, honor, and obligation. Let me try to
sketch these common bases, and then show how the two systems derive
from them.
   I. The patrilinet1l principles are followed in both tribes: Political rights
in the tribe and rights in the tribal estate are vested in men and transmitted
in male line only. Though persons may lose status and rights because of
their mother's lower status, they can never gain rights through their
mother, only through their father. A man's political position inside his
lineage and tribe is thus fixed through agnatic descent.
   2. A position in the tribe implies a patrimony of /zonor which must be
defended against slights from persons with whom one claims to be equal.
An unrequited grievance is' a blemish on one's honor which only talion or
blood revenge can eliminate. A failure to take revenge is an acceptance of
inequality and brings about a loss of honor and position. From the time
they are very small, Pathan boys learn to fight with their peers to defend
their honor (izzlit),just as the Baluch boy who fails to hit back when other
boys beat him is scolded for being beghairat-'without honor.'
   3. Finally, the honor of a tribesman involves an obligation toward
those who depend on his position: his guests, his family who are his legal
wards, and those who have sought his protection as clients (/zamsayalz).
Thus hospitality, patronage, and physical dependence form a complex
with clear political implications.
 ; Pathan tribal organization is based on these principles, as realized for
political and judicial purposes through the mechanism of the council
(jirga). One might say that the model for the whole system is the group of
brothers, independent men with separate interests who, by virtue of their
common blood, keep peace and can unite as a corporate body through
joint decision making on the basis of equality. Extending the notion of
common blood (among patrilineal relatives only), ever-widening circles of
"brotherhood" are defined by ever-deepening genealogies, producing a
hierarchy of merging segments and lineages based on common descent.
 Each such segment becomes corporate in the form of a council of its living
              Ethnic Processes 011 the Patlw11-Ba/11ch Boundary   461

male members, who sit together as agnates with equal rights. It also
follows that the right to speak in one small, local council implies the right
to speak in every council of higher order within the merging series.
   Another important feature of the Pathan tribal system is its t~rritorial
aspect. Groups and their segments hold rights to different types of joint
estate. Persons thus obtain access to agricultural land and to grazing areas
by virtue of agnatic status; as a result, units are also territorial units, and
localities and districts tend to be named after the tribal segment inhabiting
them-names which again usually derive from the common ancestor of
that descent segment.
   The aspect of equality between council members indicates the rele-
vance of honor, point 2, to council procedure. This has tactical implica-
tions since acts which compromise the honor of fellow council members
will lead to retaliation or blood revenge, even against superior force. For
the person who is insulted cannot permit the blemish to remain-he can
sit on the council and act as a tribesman only if he can defend his honor
and assert his equality. It is therefore difficult for such councils to reach
final decisions, and dangerous for the interested parties to use pressure on
members to achieve compliance. Pathan tribes are well able to act
strongly in defense of shared, short-term interests or basic values or in the
pursuit of gain, but generally fail to pursue more long-term strategies, or
to reach agreement on compromises requiring joint action.
   Where a Pathan's honor is lost through a dishonorable act of failure to
extract revenge, he loses his capacity to defend his life and interests in the
council. He must then either flee the country or seek the protection of
another man as noted under point 3. Seeking the protection of one man
is, however, lowering yourself before all the tribesmen, and in most situa-
tions the unfortunate chooses emigration-so Pathans often say that "he
who leaves his tribal land has either committed incest with his mother or
failed to revenge his father." It also follows from the preceding that to ac-
cept hmnsayalzs is in most Pathan areas a commitment that men would
prefer to avoid. In the egalitarian setting of the council, the value of
clients as a fighting force is more than offset by the disputes they may
cause-liabilities which fall squarely on the shoulders of their patron.
Only in rich environments, where the control over a large labor force
gives great economic returns, are such clients an advantage (as, e.g., in
Bannu in preadministration times, and in Malakand Agency today).
   It should be emphasized that this description holds even where, as in
many of the southern Pathan tribes, sardars and maliks are found. An in-
vestigation of actual decision making shows that these leaders have little
authority, and political processes take place within the framework of
egalitarian lineage councils. The tribal growth pattern that follows from
these features is characteristic: It might be called vegetative, based on
natural increase (with a certain loss through individual emigration) and
         462   Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

 tending toward a ramifying, branching form where local growth 1s as-
 sociated with rapid segmentation.
    Baluch tribal organization, though derived from the same concepts, is
 not based on the particular mechanism of the egalitarian council. Though
 defense of honor among equals is important, it thus does not become built
 into the political system as a m,\jor tactical consideration. A model for the
 Baluch political system is the relationship between a father and his sons-
 one of authority stemming from status, and common submission to this
 authority as the basis for joint action. Instead of working in terms of rhet-
 oric and rallying of equals, with the ultimate sanction of talion, the Baluch
 political and judicial mechanism is based on vertical communication
 between ordinary men and big leaders, with communal action as the ul-
 timate sanction. Political activity thus mainly takes place between
 unequals, and the important principle that is brought into play is not honor
 but obligation, as sketched under point 3. Tribal status in such a system
does not require an assertion of equality but is based on a chain of client-
age and patronage between minor and major leaders in a hierarchy. A
Baluch tribe as a whole becomes divided into segments in a formal pattern
very much like a Pathan tribe, and membership and position in the system
are ascribed on the basis of patrilineal descent; but the politically crucial
aspect of the organization is the recognition of a political clientship tie to
the leader of each group by its members. These leaders again work in the
same "vertical" pattern-political maneuver does not involve appeal to
equals in a council, but communication with and mobilization of more
influential, higher echelon leaders.
   At the top of this hierarchy sits the sardar, who has no equal, only even
more influential connections: with the Khan of Kalat and the government
of the plains. Sardars maintained their influence in the tribe by playing
their inferiors (waderas and mukadams) off against each other, and by
substantial bribes and personal favors-the patron's reciprocal to the
client's request for protection.
   The territorial estate of a Baluch tribe is also allocated differently from
that of Pathans. Among the Marri, grazing rights to the whole tribal area
are held by the sardar and accessible to any Marri by payment of a tax
(gahl), which has now been dispensed with. Agricultural land is held indi-
vidually (until recently by leaders only) or jointly by very large tribal sec-
tions in a system of periodic reallotment. Such systems have also been
common among Pathans; but among them the allocation of fields to sub-
segments and families follows the schema of their genealogical relations,
while among the Marri equal shares are given to all men within the sec-
tion, regardless of genealogical pattern. There is thus no identity between
tribal subunits and territorial units; as might be expected, place names in
Marri area have no reference to social groups, though they sometimes
derive from the personal names of prominent men, past or present.
              Ethnic Processes on the Pathan-Baluclz Boundary    463

    When a man in this system is dishonored, the consequences are of a dif-
 ferent order from what they are for Pathans. Conflicts of honor and
 revenge between equals lead to fission of their immediate group, but need
 not in fact be resolved between the parties since territorial separation can
 take place without consequences for the persons' positions in the political
 structure. A relationship of clientship to the same leader can thus be
 maintained by enemies, though the conflict may also be such as to involve
 the leader and thus force one faction to secede. But where a man or group
 does secede, this implies no important loss of rank, and a new clientship
 relation may be established to another leader. Again in contrast to the
 Pathans, such seceders are welcomed in their new status: The importance
 and influence of a Baluch leader is roughly commensurate with the
 number of his effective followers, and the decision to grant new followers
 protection and rights lies with him and need not be debated and accepted
 by a council of his equals.
   The normal growth pattern that will result in such a system is in part
 different from that of the Pathan system. Further segmentation does not
follow automatically with growth in every generation: Natural growth can
 take place within fixed political units, merely increasing their size. And
where persons secede or are expelled from one segment, they can be
accommodated in an equivalent position in another segment, without loss
of tribal status.
   The structural differences sketched here imply clear differences in
assimilative capacities of the two forms of tribal organization. Disorgan-
ized personnel such as is generated at a high rate during relatively
anarchic periods is readily incorporated in a Baluch tribe: Persons may
seek the protection of, and swear fealty to, a recognized leader within that
tribe. In the case of the Marri, their tribal organization was also clearly
thought of as predatory organization, and for purposes of offense and
increased loot, as well as defense, it was in everybody's interest to
increase the personnel. Thus one Marri leader, himself of Pathan descent,
explained to me: "In those days there was war Uang]-nobody asked
who is your father, brother-you joined the force [las/zkar], moved and
conquered and moved again."
   Though the same military consideration also held for Pathan tribes
along the boundary, incorporation of personnel into their tribal system
would either require that newcomers accept servile status or that a ple-
nary meeting of the whole tribe agreed to accept them as equals, allotted
them a compact block of land, and determined their position in the tribal
schema of segmentation. Though both of these forms of incorporation
have occurred, they are rare, and one would expect the growth rate by
incorporation into Baluch tribes far to exceed that of Pathan tribes.
   There can be little doubt that such is the case. None of the Pathan
tribes along the boundary have sections or, to my knowledge, persons
        464   Genesis, Maintenance, and Change of Linguistic Codes

claiming Baluch descent, and the vast majority of tribesmen have recog-
nized agnatic status, though some incorporation of other Pathan groups
has taken place, e.g., among the Kakar and Luni (Baluchistan District
Gazetteer II :76, 85). The tiny Zarkun tribe, partly encapsulated in Marri
territory, is the only one that admits to a (rather fanciful) compound ori-
gin, explaining the name as meaning zar lwum-"thousand nations"-
and their origin as being a defensive confederation against the Marri to
which each Pathan tribe contributed one family. The presence ofso many
small, genealogically distant tribes along the boundary (Panni stem:
Isot/Barozai; Miani stem: Luni/Jafar/Lats; Zarkun; var. Tarins, etc.) is
evidence of this general failure of assimilative growth.
   In the Marri tribe, however, all sections have traditions of incorpo-
ration, and many sections and subsections trace Pathan descent, often to
existing Pathan tribes. Of the three main branches of the Marri, the
Ghazani contains subsections of various origins, the Loharanis are half-
constituted by the Shiranis, tracing descent from the Pathan tribe of that
name, and the Bijaranis are regarded as predominantly of Pathan origin.
Among the Bijaranis the Powadhi section has had the most prolific recent
growth. Mentioned in most texts (based on early and poor material) as a
not particularly significant subsection, their leader is today virtually au-
tonomous in his relation to the Bijarani leader; and the growth of the sec-
tion has taken place so predominantly through incorporation of Pathans
that it is referred to as "Pathan" by other Manis, though it is uniformly
Baluchi speaking.
   This rapid population growth of the Marri tribe, based in large part on
assimilation, has expressed itself also in territorial expansion. Growth
without political subdivision has progressively tipped the military scales
in favor of the Marris; over the last hundred years parts of Panni, Luni,
Zarkun, and Tarin land have been conquered, and the linguistic boundary
moved accordingly. The broken fragments of Pathan tribes along the
boundary, and the Wanechi language remnant among them, suggest that
the northward trend has both considerable consistency and antiquity.
Under present more peaceful conditions, increasing numbers of Marris
also penetrate with their flocks into Pathan country as far north as Loralai
and Mekhtar-an encroachment which the administrative authorities
battle against but are unable to stop.
   The northward expansion of the Baluchi language area in the hill
country west of the Suleiman range is thus an aspect of rather complex
processes of incorporation and exclusion along the ethnic boundary by
which Pathans become assimilated into Baluch tribal organization rather
than a simple case of Baluch population growth and expansion. An analy-
sis of tribal organization illuminates some of the critical factors underlying
the linguistic spread.




                                                                                 rrrd
    17
    A Sociolinguistic Approach
   to Socialization; with Some Reference
