

=== PDF p1 S (book-seq 1) ===
FREDRIK BARTH

ethnic groups
and boundaries



=== PDF p2 L (book-seq 2) ===


=== PDF p2 R (book-seq 3) ===
Ethnic Groups

and Boundarnies

The Social

Organization of Culture Difference

Edited by
FREDRIK BARTH

LITTLE, BROWN AND COMPANY
BOSTON


=== PDF p3 L (book-seq 4) ===
© Universitetsforlaget 1969

Published in Norway
for Scandinavian University Books
by Universitetsforlaget, Bergen, Oslo, Tromsé

Published in The United States of America
by Little, Brown and Company
Boston, Massachusetts

Published in The United Kingdom
by George Allen & Unwin, London

Printed in Norway
by Johansen & Nielsen Boktrykkeri, Oslo


=== PDF p3 R (book-seq 5) ===
Contents

Preface

FREDRIK BARTH:
Introduction

HARALD EIDHEIM:
‘When Ethnic Identity is a Social Stigma

GUNNAR HAALAND:

Economic Determinants in Ethnic Processes

JAN-PETTER BLOM:
Ethnic and Cultural Differentiation

KARL ERIC KNUTSSON:
Dichotomization and Integration

HENNING SIVERTS:
Ethnic Stability and Boundary Dynamics in Southern
Mexico

FREDRIK BARTH:
Pathan Identity and its Maintenance

KARL G. 1ZIKOWITZ:
Neighbours in Laos

Bibliography

74

86

101

117

135
149


=== PDF p4 L (book-seq 6) ===


=== PDF p4 R (book-seq 7) ===
Preface

This collection of essays presents the results of a symposium in which
a small group of Scandinavian social anthropologists cooperated in a
joint effort to further the analysis of ethnic groups. The symposium
meetings, supported by a grant-in-aid from the Wenner-Gren Foun-
dation for Anthropological Research, were held at the University of
Bergen, 23rd to 26th February 1967. The participants were Klaus
Ferdinand, Aarhus; Karl Gustav Izikowitz and Karl Eric Knutsson,
Gothenburg; Peter Kandre, Stockholm; Axel Sommerfelt, Harald Eid-
heim and Helge Kleivan, Oslo; and Henning Siverts, Jan-Petter Blom,
Gunnar Haaland, and Fredrik Barth, Bergen. A brief statement of
problems and a sketch of analytical concepts by Barth was circulated
with the original invitation. Participants then prepared their essays in
advance of the meeting, and these were circulated. After the meetings
it was decided to publish the results in one book, and each participant
was invited to revise and rewrite his essays as he saw fit. Seven com-
plied with this wish, and Barth wrote the general introduction, basing
it on his original points and on the results of the discussion, drawing
freely on the essays in their original or revised forms. The result is thus
in a real sense a joint product from all the participants which, we
feel, illustrates the application of some common analytical viewpoints
to different sides of the problems of poly-ethnic organization in differ-
ent ethnographic areas. As host to the symposium I wish to thank all
the participants for their contribution to its success, and to express
our joint appreciation to the Wenner-Gren Foundation for making
our work possible.

Bergen, January 1969 Fredrik Barth


=== PDF p5 L (book-seq 8) ===


=== PDF p5 R (book-seq 9) ===
Introduction
by Fredrik Barth

This collection of essays addresses itself to the problems of ethnic
groups and their persistence. This is a theme of great, but neglected,

importance to social anthropology. _Eﬁhﬁl_ly_a_ll_anﬂmpnlogmal
reasoning rests on the premise that cultural variation is discontinuous:
that there are aggregates of people who essentially share a common .
culture, and interconnected differences that distinguish each such
discrete culture from all others. Since culture is nothing but a way to
describe human behaviour, it would follow that there are discrete
groups of people, i.e. ethnic units, to correspond to each culture. The
differences between cultures, and their historic boundaries and con-
nections, have been given much attention; the constitution of ethnic
groups, and the nature of the boundaries between them, have not been
correspondingly investigated. Social anthropologists have largely
avoided these problems by using a highly abstracted concept of
‘society’ to represent the encompassing social system within which
smaller, concrete groups and units may be analysed. But this leaves
untouched the empirical characteristics and boundaries of ethnic
groups, and the important theoretical issues which an investigation
of them raises.

Though the naive assumption that each tribe and people has main-
tained its culture through a bellicose ignorance of its neighbours is no
longer entertained, the simplistic view that geographical and social
isolation have been the critical factors in sustaining cultural diversity
persists. An empirical investigation of the character of ethnic boun-
daries, as documented in the following essays, produces two discoveries
which are hardly unexpected, but which demonstrate the inadequacy
of this view. First, it is clear that boundaries persist despite a flow
of personnel across them. In other words, categorical ethnic distinc-
tlons do not depend on an absence of mobility, contact and mformatlon,



=== PDF p6 L (book-seq 10) ===
10 FREDRIK BARTH

but do entail social processes of exclusion and incorporation whereby
discrete categories are maintained despite changing participation and
membership in the course of individual life histories. Secondly, one
finds that stable, persisting, and often vitally important social relations
are maintained across such boundaries, and are frequently based pre-
cisely on the dichotomized ethnic statuses. In other words, ethnic
distinctions do not depend on an absence of social interaction and
acceptance, but are quite to the contrary often the very foundations
on which embracing social systems are built. Interaction in such a
social system does not lead to its liquidation through change and
acculturation; cultural differences can persist despite inter-ethnic
contact and interdependence.

General approach

There is clearly an important field here in need of rethinking. What
is required is a combined theoretical and empirical attack: we need
to investigate closely the empirical facts of a variety of cases, and fit
our concepts to these empirical facts so that they elucidate them as
simply and adequately as possible, and allow us to explore their
implications. In the following essays, each author takes up a case
with which he is intimately familiar from his own fieldwork, and tries
to apply a common set of concepts to its analysis. The main theoretical
departure consists of several interconnected parts. First, we give
primary emphasis to the fact that ethnic groups are categories of
ascription and identification by the actors themselves, and thus have
the characteristic of organizing interaction between people. We at-
tempt to relate other characteristics of ethnic groups to this primary
feature. Second, the essays all apply a generative viewpoint to the
analysis: rather than working through a typology of forms of ethnic
groups and relations, we attempt to explore the different processes
that seem to be involved in generating and maintaining ethnic groups.
Third, to observe these processes we shift the focus of investigation
from internal constitution and history of separate groups to ethnic
boundaries and boundary maintenance. Each of these points needs
some elaboration.

Ethnic group defined

The term ethnic group is generally understood in anthropological
literature (cf. e.g. Narroll 1964) to designate a population which:

1. is largely biologically self-perpetuating


=== PDF p6 R (book-seq 11) ===
INTRODUCTION 11

2. shares fundamental cultural values, realized in overt unity in
cultural forms

3. makes up a field of communication and interaction

4. has a membership which identifies itself, and is identified by others,
as constituting a category distinguishable from other categories of
the same order.

This ideal type definition is not so far removed in content from the
traditional proposition that a race = a culture = a language and that
a society = a unit which rejects or discriminates against others. Yet,
in its modified form it is close enough to many empirical ethnographic
situations, at least as they appear and have been reported, so that this
meaning continues to serve the purposes of most anthropologists. My
quarrel is not so much with the substance of these characteristics,
though as I shall show we can profit from a certain change of emphasis;
my main objection is that such a formulation prevents us from under-
standing the phenomenon of ethnic groups and their place in human
society and culture. This is because it begs all the critical questions:
while purporting to give an ideal type model of a recurring empirical
form, it implies a preconceived view of what are the significant factors
in the genesis, structure, and function of such groups.

Most critically, it allows us to assume that boundary maintenance
is unproblematical and follows from the isolation which the itemized
characteristics imply: racial difference, cultural difference, social sepa-
ration and language barriers, spontaneous and organized enmity. This
also limits the range of factors that we use to explain cultural diversity:
we are led to imagine each group developing its cultural and social
form in relative isolation, mainly in response to local ecologic factors,
through a history of adaptation by invention and selective borrowing.
This history has produced a world of separate peoples, each with their
culture and each organized in a society which can legitimately be
isolated for description as an island to itself.

Ethnic groups as culture-bearing units

Rather than discussing the adequacy of this version of culture history
for other than pelagic islands, let us look at some of the logical flaws
in the viewpoint. Among the characteristics listed above, the sharing
of a common culture is generally given central importance. In my
view, much can be gained by regarding this very important feature
as an implication or result, rather than a primary and definitional
characteristic of ethnic group organization. If one chooses to regard



=== PDF p7 L (book-seq 12) ===
‘ l
12 FREDRIK BARTH

the culture-bearing aspect of ethnic groups as their primary charac-
teristic, this has far-reaching implications. One is led to identify and
distinguish ethnic groups by the morphological characteristics of the
cultures of which they are the bearers. This entails a prejudged view-
point both on (1) the nature of continuity in time of such units, and (2)
the locus of the factors which determine the form of the units.

1. Given the emphasis on the culture-bearing aspect, the classifica-
tion of persons and local groups as members of an ethnic group must
depend on their exhibiting the particular traits of the culture. This is
something that can be judged objectively by the ethnographic observer,
in the culture-area tradition, regardless of the categories and prejudices
of the actors, Differences between groups become differences in trait
inventories; the attention is drawn to the analysis of cultures, not of
ethnic organization. The dynamic relationship between groups will
then be depicted in acculturation studies of the kind that have been
attracting decreasing interest in anthropology, though their theoretical
madequacies have never been seriously discussed. Since the historical
provenance of any assemblage of culture traits is diverse, the viewpoint
also gives scope for an ‘ethnohistory’ which chronicles cultural accre-
tion and change, and seeks to explain why certain items were bor-
rowed. However, what is the unit whose continuity in time is deplcted (I
in such studlm""ﬁPEra&)xxca]]y, lt must include cu]tures in the past
which would clearly be excluded in the present because of dlfferencesJ
in form — differences of precisely the kind that are diagnostic in syn-
chronic differentiation of ethnic units. The interconnection between(
‘cthnic group’ and ‘culture’ is certainly not clarified through thlsi
confusion.

2. The overt cultural forms which can be itemized as traits exhibit
the effects of ecology. By this I do not mean to refer to the fact that
they reflect a history of adaptation to environment; in a more immedi-
ate way they also reflect the external circumstances to which actors
must accommodate themselves. The same group of people, with un-
changed values and ideas, would surely pursue different patterns of
life and institutionalize different forms of behaviour when faced with
the different opportunities offered in different environments? Like-
wise, we must expect to find that one ethnic group, spread over a
territory with varying ecologic circumstances, will exhibit regional
diversities of overt institutionalized behaviour which do not reflect
differences in cultural orientation. How should they then be classified
if overt institutional forms are diagnostic? A case in point is the


=== PDF p7 R (book-seq 13) ===
INTRODUCTION 13

distributions and diversity of Pathan local social systems, discussed
below (pp. 117 f£.). By basic Pathan values, a Southern Pathan from the
homogeneous, lineage-organized mountain areas, can only find the
behaviour of Pathans in Swat so different from, and reprehensible in
terms of, their own values that they declare their northern brothers
‘no longer Pathan’. Indeed, by ‘objective’ criteria, their overt pat-
tern of organization seems much closer to that of Panjabis. But I found
it possible, by explaining the circumstances in the north, to make
Southern Pathans agree that these were indeed Pathans too, and
grudgingly to admit that under those circumstances they might indeed
themselves act in the same way. It is thus inadequate to regard overt
institutional forms as constituting the cultural features which at any
time distinguish an ethnic group — these overt forms are determined
by ecology as well as by transmitted culture. Nor can it be claimed
that every such diversification within a group represents a first step
in the direction of subdivision and multiplication of units. We have
well-known documented cases of one ethnic group, also at a relatively
simple level of economic organization, occupying several different
ecologic niches and yet retaining basic cultural and ethnic unity over
long periods (cf., e.g., inland and coastal Chuckchee (Bogoras 1904-9)
or reindeer, river, and coast Lapps (Gjessing, 1954).

In one of the following essays, Blom (pp. 74 ff.) argues cogently on
this point with reference to central Norwegian mountain farmers. He
shows how their participation and self-evaluation in terms of general
Norwegian values secures them continued membership in the larger
ethnic group, despite the highly characteristic and deviant patterns of
activity which the local ecology imposes on them. To analyse such
cases, we need a viewpoint that does not confuse the effects of ecologic
circumstances on behaviour with those of cultural tradition, but which
makes it possible to separate these factors and investigate the non-
ecological cultural and social components creating diversity.

Ethnic groups as an erganizational type

By concentrating on what is socially effective, ethnic groups are seen
as a form of social organization. The critical feature then becomes
item (4) in the list on p. 11 the characteristic of self-ascription and
ascription by others. A categorical ascription is an ethnic ascription
when it classifies a person in terms of his basic, most general identity,
presumptively determined by his origin and background. To the extent
that actors use ethnic identities to categorize themselves and others for


=== PDF p8 L (book-seq 14) ===
14 FREDRIK BARTH

purposes of interaction, they form ethnic groups in this organizational
sense.

It is important to recognize that although ethnic categories take cul-
tural differences into account, we can assume no simple one-to-one
relationship between ethnic units and cultural similarities and differ-
ences. The features that are taken into account are not the sum of
‘objective’ differences, but only those which the actors themselves
regard as significant. Not only do ecologic variations mark and exag-
gerate differences; some cultural features are used by the actors as
signals and emblems of differences, others are ignored, and in some
relationships radical differences are played down and denied. The cul-
tural contents of ethnic dichotomies would seem analytically to be of
two orders: (i) overt signals or signs — the diacritical features that
people look for and exhibit to show identity, often such features as
dress, language, house-form, or general style of life, and (ii) basic value
orientations: the standards of morality and excellence by which per-
formance is judged. Since belonging to an ethnic category implies being
a certain kind of person, having that basic identity, it also implies a
claim to be judged, and to judge oneself, by those standards that are
relevant to that identity. Neither of these kinds of cultural ‘contents’
follows from a descriptive list of cultural features or cultural differ-
ences; one cannot predict from first principles which features will be
emphasized and made organizationally relevant by the actors. In other
words, ethnic categories provide an organizational vessel that may be
given varying amounts and forms of content in different socio-cultural
systems. They may be of great relevance to behaviour, but they need
not be; they may pervade all social life, or they may be relevant only
in limited sectors of activity. There is thus an obvious scope for
ethnographic and comparative descriptions of different forms of ethnic
organization.

The emphasis on ascription as the critical feature of ethnic groups
also solves the two conceptual difficulties that were discussed above.

1. When defined as an ascriptive and exclusive group, the nature
of continuity of ethnic units is clear: it depends on the maintenance
of a boundary. The cultural features that signal the boundary may
change, and the cultural characteristics of the members may likewise
be transformed, indeed, even the organizational form of the group may
change — yet the fact of continuing dichotomization between members
and outsiders allows us to specify the nature of continuity, and investi-
gate the changing cultural form and content.


=== PDF p8 R (book-seq 15) ===
INTRODUCTION 15

2. Socially relevant factors alone become diagnostic for member-
ship, not the overt, ‘objective’ differences which are generated by
other factors. It makes no difference how dissimilar members may be
in their overt behaviour — if they say they are A, in contrast to an-
other cognate category B, they are willing to be treated and let their
own behaviour be interpreted and judged as A’s and not as B’s; in
other words, they declare their allegiance to the shared culture of A’s.
The effects of this, as compared to other factors influencing actual
behaviour, can then be made the object of investigation.

The boundaries of ethnic groups

The critical focus of investigation from this point of view becomes the
ethnic boundary that defines the group, not the cultural stuff that it
encloses. The boundaries to which we must give our attention are of
course social boundaries, though they may have territorial counter-
parts. If a group maintains its identity when members interact with
others, this entails criteria for determining membership and ways of
signalling membership and exclusion. Ethnic groups are not merely or
necessarily based on the occupation of exclusive territories; and the
different ways in which they are maintained, not only by a once-and-
for-all recruitment but by continual expression and validation, need
to be analysed.

‘What is more, the ethnic boundary canalizes social life — it entails
a frequently quite complex organization of behaviour and social rela-
tions. The identification of another person as a fellow member of an
ethnic group implics a sharing of criteria for evaluation and judge-
ment. It thus entails the assumption that the two are fundamentally
‘playing the same game’, and this means that there is between them
a potential for diversification and expansion of their social relation-
ship to cover eventually all different sectors and domains of activity.
On the other hand, a dichotomization of others as strangers, as
members of another ethnic group, implies a recognition of limitations
on shared understandings, differences in criteria for judgement of
value and performance, and a restriction of interaction to sectors of
assumed common understanding and mutual interest.

This makes it possible to understand one final form of boundary
maintenance whereby cultural units and boundaries persist. Entailed
in ethnic boundary maintenance are also situations of social contact
between persons of different cultures: ethnic groups only persist as
significant units if they imply marked difference in behaviour, i.e.


=== PDF p9 L (book-seq 16) ===
16 FREDRIK BARTH

persisting cultural differences. Yet where persons of different cul-
. ture interact, one would expect these differences to be reduced,

since interaction both requires and generates a congruence of codes
[ and values — in other words, a similarity or community of culture
I (cf. Barth 1966, for my argumentation on this point). Thus the persis-
¢ tence of ethnic groups in contact implies not only criteria and signals
! for identification, but also a structuring of interaction which allows
1 the persistence of cultural differences. The organizational feature
‘ which, I would argue, must be general for all inter-ethnic relations
s is a systematic set of rules governing inter-ethnic social encounters.
In all organized social life, what can be made relevant to interaction
[ in any particular social situation is prescribed (Goffman 1959). If
{ people agree about these prescriptions, their agreement on codes and
values need not extend beyond that which is relevant to the social
situations in which they interact. Stable inter-ethnic relations pre-
« suppose such a structuring of interaction: a set of prescriptions govern-
I ing situations of contact, and allowing for articulation in some sectors
E or domains of activity, and a set of proscriptions on social situations
( preventing inter-ethnic interaction in other sectors, and thus insulating
i parts of the cultures from confrontation and modification.

Poly-ethnic social systems
. This of course is what Furnivall (1944) so clearly depicted in his
analysis of plural society: a poly-ethnic society integrated in the
market place, under the control of a state system dominated by one
[ of the groups, but leaving large areas of cultural diversity in the
1 religious and domestic sectors of activity.
What has not been adequately appreciated by later anthropologists
‘ is the possible variety of sectors of articulation and separation, and
[ the variety of poly-ethnic systems which this entails. ‘We know of
some of the Melanesian trade systems in objects belonging to the high-
prestige sphere of the economy, and even some of the etiquette and
prescriptions governing the exchange situation and insulating it from
( other activities. We have information on various traditional poly-
centric systems from S.E. Asia (discussed below, Izikowitz pp. 135 ff.)
integrated both in the prestige trade sphere and in quasi-feudal political
structures. Some regions of S.W. Asia show forms based on a more
fully monetized market economy, while political integration is poly-
centric in character. There is also the ritual and productive coopera-
tion and political integration of the Indian caste system to be con-


=== PDF p9 R (book-seq 17) ===
INTRODUCTION 17

sidered, where perhaps only kinship and domestic life remain as a
proscribed sector and a wellspring for cultural diversity. Nothing
can be gained by lumping these various systems under the increasingly
vague label of ‘plural’ society, whereas an investigation of the
varieties of structure can shed a great deal of light on social and
cultural forms.

What can be referred to as articulation and separation on the
macro-level corresponds to systematic sets of role constraints on the
micro-level. Common to all these systems is the principle that ethnic
identity implies a series of constraints on the kinds of roles an indi-
vidual is allowed to play, and the partners he may choose for different
kinds of transactions.! In other words, regarded as a status, ethnic
identity is superordinate to most other statuses, and defines the per-
missible constellations of statuses, or social personalities, which an
individual with that identity may assume. In this respect ethnic identity
is similar to sex and rank, in that it constrains the incumbent in all his
activities, not only in some defined social situations.? One might thus
also say that it is imperative, in that it cannot be disregarded and
temporarily set aside by other definitions of the situation. The con-
straints on a person’s behaviour which spring from his ethnic identity
thus tend to be absolute and, in complex poly-cthnic societies, quite
comprehensive; and the component moral and social conventions are
made further resistant to change by being joined in stereotyped
clusters as characteristics of one single identity.

The associations of identities and value standards

The analysis of interactional and organizational features of inter-

ethnic relations has suffered from a lack of attention to problems of

boundary maintenance. This is perhaps because anthropologists have '
reasoned from a misleading idea of the prototype inter-ethnic situation. ‘
One has tended to think in terms of different peoples, with different

histories and cultures, coming together and accommodating themselves ]
to each other, generally in a colonial setting. To visualize the basic
requirements for the coexistence of ethnic diversity, I would suggest

that we rather ask ourselves what is needed to make ethnic distinc-

tions emerge in an area. The organizational requirements are clearly,

first, a categorization of population sectors in exclusive and imperative

status categories, and second, an acceptance of the principle that

standards applied to one such category can be different from that

applied to another. Though this alone does not explain why cultural

2, Barth


=== PDF p10 L (book-seq 18) ===
18 FREDRIK BARTH

differences emerge, it does allow us to see how they persist. Each
category can then be associated with a separate range of value stan-
dards. The greater the differences between these value orientations
are, the more constraints on inter-ethnic interaction do they entail:
the statuses and situations in the total social system involving
behaviour which is discrepant with a person’s value orientations must
be avoided, since such behaviour on his part will be negatively
sanctioned. Moreover, because identities are signalled as well as
embraced, new forms of behaviour will tend to be dichotomized: one
would expect the role constraints to operate in such a way that persons
would be reluctant to act in new ways from a fear that such behaviour
might be inappropriate for a person of their identity, and swift to
classify forms of activity as associated with one or another cluster of
ethnic characteristics. Just as dichotomizations of male versus female
work seem to proliferate in some societies, so also the existence of
basic ethnic categories would seem to be a factor encouraging the
proliferation of cultural differentiae.

In such systems, the sanctions producing adherence to group-specific
values are not only exercised by those who share the identity. Again,
other imperative statuses afford a parallel: just as both sexes ridicule
the male who is feminine, and all classes punish the proletarian who
puts on airs, 5o also can members of all ethnic groups in a poly-ethnic
society act to maintain dichotomies and differences. Where social
identities are organized and allocated by such principles, there will
thus be a tendency towards canalization and standardization of inter-
action and the emergence of boundaries which maintain and generate
cthnic diversity within larger, encompassing social systems.

Interdependence of ethnic groups
The positive bond that connects several ethnic groups in an encom- [
passing social system depends on the complementarity of the groups
with respect to some of their characteristic cultural features. Such
complementarity can give rise to interdependence or symbiosis, and
constitutes the areas of articulation referred to above; while in the
fields where there is no complementarity there can be no basis for
organization on ethnic lines — there will either be no interaction, or
interaction without reference to ethnic identity.

Social systems differ greatly in the extent to which ethnic identity,
as an imperative status, constrains the person in the variety of statuses
and roles he may assume. Where the distinguishing values connected


=== PDF p10 R (book-seq 19) ===
INTRODUCTION 19

with ethnic identity are relevant only to a few kinds of activities, the
social organization based on it will be similarly limited. Complex poly-
ethnic systems, on the other hand, clearly entail the existence of
extensively relevant value differences and multiple constraints on
status combinations and social participation. In such systems, the
boundary maintaining mechanisms must be highly effective, for the
following reasons: (i) the complexity is based on the existence of
important, complementary cultural differences; (ii) these differences
must be generally standardized within the ethnic group — i.e. the
status cluster, or social person, of every member of a group must be
highly stereotyped — so that inter-ethnic interaction can be based on
ethnic identities; and (iii) the cultural characteristics of each ethnic
group must be stable, so that the complementary differences on which
the systems rest can persist in the face of close inter-ethnic contact.
‘Where these conditions obtain, ethnic groups can make stable and
symbiotic adaptations to each other: other ethnic groups in the region
become a part of the natural environment; the sectors of articulation
provide areas that can be exploited, while the other sectors of activity
of other groups are largely irrelevant from the point of view of
members of any one group.

Ecologic perspective

Such interdependences can partly be analysed from the point of view of
cultural ecology, and the sectors of activity where other populations
with other cultures articulate may be thought of as niches to which
the group is adapted. This ecologic interdependence may take several
different forms, for which one may construct a rough typology. Where
two or more ethnic groups are in contact, their adaptations may entail
the following forms:

(1) They may occupy clearly distinct niches in the natural environ-
ment and be in minimal competition for resources. In this case their
interdependence will be limited despite co-residence in the area, and
the articulation will tend to be mainly through trade, and perhaps in
a ceremonial-ritual sector.

(2) They may monopolize separate territories, in which case they
are in competition for resources and their articulation will involve
politics along the border, and possibly other sectors.

(3) They may provide important goods and services for each other,
i.e. occupy reciprocal and therefore different niches but in close inter-
dependence. If they do not articulate very closely in the political


=== PDF p11 L (book-seq 20) ===
20 FREDRIK BARTH

sector, this entails a classical symbiotic situation and a variety of
possible fields of articulation. 1f they also compete and accommodate
through differential monopolization of the means of production, this
entails a close political and economic articulation, with open possibi-
Lities for other forms of interdependence as well.

These alternatives refer to stable situations. But very commonly,
one will also find a fourth main form: where two or more interspersed
groups are in fact in at least partial competition within the same niche.
With time one would expect one such group to displace the other, or
an accommodation involving an increasing complementarity and inter-
dependence to develop.

From the anthropological literature one can doubtless think of type
cases for most of these situations. However, if one looks carefully at
most empirical cases, one will find fairly mixed situations obtaining,
and only quite gross simplifications can reduce them to simple types.
I have tried elsewhere (Barth 1964b) to illustrate this for an area of
Baluchistan, and expect that it is generally true that an ethnic group,
on the different boundaries of its distribution and in its different
accommodations, exhibits several of these forms in its relations to

other groups.

Demographic perspective

These variables, however, only go part of the way in describing the
adaptation of a group. While showing the qualitative, (and ideally
quantitative) structure of the niches occupied by a group, one cannot
ignore the problems of number and balance in its adaptation. When-
ever a population is dependent on its exploitation of a niche in nature,
this implies an upper limit on the size it may attain corresponding to
the carrying capacity of that niche; and any stable adaptation entails
a control on population size. If, on the other hand, two populations
are ecologically interdependent, as two ethnic groups in a symbiotic
relationship, this means that any variation in the size of one must have
important effects on the other. In the analysis of any poly-ethnic
system for which we assert any degree of time depth, we must there-
fore be able to explain the processes whereby the sizes of the interde-
pendent ethnic groups are balanced. The demographic balances in-
volved are thus quite complex, since a group’s adaptation to a niche in
nature is affected by its absolute size, while a group’s adaptation to a
niche constituted by another ethnic group is affected by its relative

size.


=== PDF p11 R (book-seq 21) ===
INTRODUCTION 21

The demographic problems in an analysis of ethnic inter-relations
in a region thus centre on the forms of recruitment to ethnic groups and
the question of how, if at all, their rates are sensitive to pressures on
the different niches which each group exploits. These factors are highly
critical for the stability of any poly-ethnic system, and it might look
as if any population change would prove destructive. This does not
necessarily seem to follow, as documented e.g. in the essay by Siverts
(pp- 101 ff.), but in most situations the poly-ethnic systems we observe
do entail quite complex processes of population movement and adjust-
ment. It becomes clear that a number of factors other than human
fertility and mortality affect the balance of numbers. From the point
of view of any one territory, there are the factors of individual and
group movements: emigration that relieves pressure, immigration that
maintains one or several co-resident groups as outpost settlements of
larger population reservoirs elsewhere. Migration and conquest play
an intermittent role in redistributing populations and changing their
relations. But the most interesting and often critical role is played by
another set of processes that effect changes of the identity of indi-
viduals and groups. After all, the human material that is organized
in an ethnic group is not immutable, and though the social mechanisms
discussed so far tend to maintain dichotomies and boundaries, they
do not imply ‘stasis’ for the human material they organize: boundaries
may persist despite what may figuratively be called the ‘osmosis” of
personnel through them.

This perspective leads to an important clarification of the conditions
for complex poly-ethnic systems. Though the emergence and persis-
tence of such systems would seem to depend on a relatively high
stability in the cultural features associated with ethnic groups — i.e.
a high degree or rigidity in the interactional boundaries — they do
not imply a similar rigidity in the patterns of recruitment or ascription
to ethnic groups: on the contrary, the ethnic inter-relations that we
observe frequently entail a variety of processes which effect changes
in individual and group identity and modify the other demographic
factors that obtain in the situation. Examples of stable and persisting
ethnic boundaries that are crossed by a flow of personnel are clearly
far more common than the ethnographic literature would lead us to
believe. Different processes of such crossing are exemplified in these
essays, and the conditions which cause them are shown to be various.
‘We may look briefly at some of them.


=== PDF p12 L (book-seq 22) ===
22 FREDRIK BARTH

Factors in identity change

The Yao described by Kandre (1967b) are one of the many hill
peoples on the southern fringe of the Chinese area. The Yao are
organized for productive purposes in extended family households,
aligned in clans and in villages. Household leadership is very clear,
while community and region are autochthonously acephalous, and
variously tied to poly-ethnic political domains. Identity and distinc-
tions are expressed in complex ritual idioms, prominently involving
ancestor worship. Yet this group shows the drastic incorporation rate
of 10 non-Yao becoming Yao in each generation (Kandre 1967a:
594). Change of membership takes place individually, mostly with
children, where it involves purchase of the person by a Yao house-
leader, adoption to kinship status, and full ritual assimilation. Occa-
sionally, change of ethnic membership is also achieved by men through
uxorilocal marriage; Chinese men are the acceptable parties to such
arrangements.

The conditions for this form of assimilation are clearly twofold:
first, the presence of cultural mechanisms to implement the incorpora-
tion, including ideas of obligations to ancestors, compensation by pay-
ment, etc., and secondly, the incentive of obvious advantages to the
assimilating household and leader. These have to do with the role of
households as productive units and agro-managerial techniques that
imply an optimal size of 6-8 working persons, and the pattern of
intra-community competition between household leaders in the field
of wealth and influence.

Movements across the southern and northern boundaries of the
Pathan area (cf. pp. 123 ff.) illustrate quite other forms and conditions.
Southern Pathans become Baluch and not vice versa; this transforma-
tion can take place with individuals but more readily with whole
households or small groups of households; it involves loss of position
in the rigid genealogical and territorial segmentary system of Pathans
and incorporation through clientage contract into the hierarchical,
centralized system of the Baluch. Acceptance in the receiving group
is conditional on the ambition and opportunism of Baluch political
leaders. On the other hand, Pathans in the north have, after an
analogous loss of position in their native system, settled in and often
conquered new territories in Kohistan. The effect in due course has
been a reclassification of the settling communities among the congeries
of locally diverse Kohistani tribes and groups.


=== PDF p12 R (book-seq 23) ===
INTRODUCTION 23

Perhaps the most striking case is that from Darfur provided by
Haaland (pp. 58 ff.), which shows members of the hoe-agricultural Fur
of the Sudan changing their identity to that of nomadic cattle Arabs.
This process is conditional on a very specific economic circumstance:
the absence of investment opportunities for capital in the village
economy of the Fur in contrast to the possibilities among the nomads.
Accumulated capital, and the opportunities for its management and
increase, provide the incentive for Fur households to abandon their
fields and villages and change to the life of the neighbouring Baggara,
incidentally also joining one of the loose but nominally centralized
Baggara political units if the change has been economically completely
successful.

These processes that induce a flow of personnel across ethnic
boundaries will of necessity affect the demographic balance between
different ethnic groups. Whether they are such that they contribute to
stability in this balance is an entirely different question. To do so,
they would have to be sensitive to changes in the pressure on ecologic
niches in a feed-back pattern. This does not regularly seem to be the
case. The assimilation of non-Yao seems further to increase the rate
of Yao growth and expansion at the expense of other groups, and can
be recognized as one, albeit minor, factor furthering the progressive
Sinization process whereby cultural and ethnic diversity has steadily
been reduced over vast areas. The rate of assimilation of Pathans by
Baluch tribes is no doubt sensitive to population pressure in Pathan
areas, but simultaneously sustains an imbalance whereby Baluch tribes
spread northward despite higher population pressures in the northern
areas. Kohistani assimilation relieves population pressure in Pathan
area while maintaining a geographically stable boundary. Nomadiza-
tion of the Fur replenishes the Baggara, who are elsewhere becoming
sedentarized. The rate, however, does not correlate with pressure on
Fur lands — since nomadization is conditional on accumulated wealth,
its rate probably decreases as Fur population pressure increases. The
Fur case also demonstrates the inherent instability of some of these
processes, and how limited changes can have drastic results: with the
agricultural innovation of orchards over the last ten years, new invest-
ment opportunities are provided which will probably greatly reduce,
or perhaps for a while even reverse, the nomadization process.

Thus, though the processes that induce change of identity are impor-
tant to the understanding of most cases of ethnic interdependence,
they need not be conducive to population stability. In general, however,


=== PDF p13 L (book-seq 24) ===
24 FREDRIK BARTH

one can argue that whenever ethnic relations are stable over long
periods, and particularly where the interdependence is close, one can
expect to find an approximate demographic balance. The analysis of
the different factors involved in this balance is an important part of
the analysis of the ethnic inter-relations in the area.

The persistence of cultural boundaries
In the preceding discussion of ethnic boundary maintenance and inter-
change of personnel there is one very important problem that I have
left aside. We have seen various examples of how individuals and
small groups, because of specific economic and political circumstances
in their former position and among the assimilating group, may change
their locality, their subsistence pattern, their political allegiance and
form, or their household membership. This still does not fully explain
why such changes lead to categorical changes of ethnic identity, leaving
the dichotomized ethnic groups unaffected (other than in numbers) by
the interchange of personnel. In the case of adoption and incorporation
of mostly immature and in any case isolated single individuals into
pre-established households, as among the Yao, such complete cultural
assimilation is understandable: here every new person becomes totally
immersed in a Yao pattern of relationships and expectations. In the
other examples, it is less clear why this total change of identity takes
place. One cannot argue that it follows from a universally imputable
rule of cultural integration, so that the practice of the politics of one
group or the assumption of its pattern of ecologic adaptation in subsis-
tence and economy, entails the adoption also of its other parts and
forms. Indeed, the Pathan case (Ferdinand 1967) directly falsifies this
argument, in that the boundaries of the Pathan ethnic group cross-
cuts ecologic and political units. Using self-identification as the critical
criterion of ethnic identity, it should thus be perfectly possible for a
small group of Pathans to assume the political obligations of member-
ship in a Baluch tribe, or the agricultural and husbandry practices of
Kohistanis, and yet continue to call themselves Pathans. By the same
token one might expect nomadization among the Fur to lead to the
emergence of a nomadic section of the Fur, similar in subsistence to the
Baggara but different from them in other cultural features, and in
ethnic label.

Quite clearly, this is precisely what has happened in many historical
situations. In cases where it does not happen we see the organizing
and canalizing effects of ethnic distinctions. To explore the factors


=== PDF p13 R (book-seq 25) ===
INTRODUCTION 25

responsible for the difference, let us first look at the specific explana-
tions for the changes of identity that have been advanced in the
examples discussed above.

In the case of Pathan borderlands, influence and security in the
segmentary and anarchic societies of this region derive from a man’s
previous actions, or rather from the respect that he obtains from these
acts as judged by accepted standards of evaluation. The main fora for
exhibiting Pathan virtues are the tribal council, and stages for the
display of hospitality. But the villager in Kohistan has a standard of
living where the hospitality he can provide can hardly compete with
that of the conquered serfs of neighbouring Pathans, while the client
of a Baluch leader cannot speak in any tribal council. To maintain
Pathan identity in these situations, to declare oneself in the running
as a competitor by Pathan value standards, is to condemn oneself in
advance to utter failure in performance. By assuming Kohistani or
Baluch identity, however, a man may, by the same performance, score
quite high on the scales that then become relevant. The incentives to a
change in identity are thus inherent in the change in circumstances.

Different circumstances obviously favour different performances.
Since ethnic identity is associated with a culturally specific set of value
standards, it follows that there are circumstances where such an
identity can be moderately successfully realized, and limits beyond
which such success is precluded. I will argue that ethnic identities will
not be retained beyond these limits, because allegiance to basic value
standards will not be sustained where one’s own comparative perfor-
mance is utterly inadequate.® The two components in this relative mea-
sure of success are, first, the performance of others and, secondly, the
alternatives open to oneself. I am not making an appeal to ecologic
adaptation. Ecologic feasibility, and fitness in relation to the natural
environment, matter only in so far as they set a limit in terms of sheer
physical survival, which is very rarely approached by ethnic groups.
‘What matters is how well the others, with whom one interacts and to
whom one is compared, manage to perform, and what alternative
identities and sets of standards are available to the individual.

Ethnic identity and tangible assets

The boundary-maintaining factors in the Fur are not immediately
illuminated by this argument. Haaland (pp. 65 f.) discusses the evalua-
tion of the nomad’s life by Fur standards and finds the balance between
advantages and disadvantages inconclusive. To ascertain the compara-


=== PDF p14 L (book-seq 26) ===
26 FREDRIK BARTH

Jook more generally at all the factors
The materials derive from grossly
number of factors are varied

bility of this case, we need to
that affect the behaviour in question.
different ethnographic contexts and so a

simultaneously.
The individual’s relation to productive resources stands out as the

significant contrast between the two regions. In the Middle East, the
means of production are conventionally held as private or corporate,
defined and transferable property. A man can obtain them through a
specific and restricted transaction, such as purchase or lease; even in
conquest the rights that are obtained are standard, delimited rights. In
Darfur, on the other hand, as in much of the Sudanic belt, the prevail-
ing conventions are different. Land for cultivation is allocated, as
needed, to members of a local community. The distinction between
owner and cultivator, so important in the social structure of most
Middle Eastern communities, cannot be made because ownership does
not involve separable, absolute, and transferable rights. Access to the
means of production in a Fur village is therefore conditional only on
inclusion in the village community — i.e. on Fur ethnic identity.
Similarly, grazing rights are not allocated and monopolized, even as
between Baggara tribes. Though groups and tribes tend to use the
same routes and areas every year, and may at times try in an ad hoc
way to keep out others from an area they wish to use, they normally
intermix and have no defined and absolute prerogatives. Access to
grazing is thus an automatic aspect of practising husbandry, and
entails being a Baggara.

The gross mechanisms of boundary maintenance in Darfur are thus

quite simple: 2 man has access to the critical means of production by
virtue of practising a certain subsistence; this entails a whole style of
life, and all these characteristics are subsumed under the ethnic labels
Fur and Baggara. In the Middle East, on the other hand, men can
obtain control over means of production through a transaction that
does not involve their other activities; ethnic identity is then not
necessarily affected and this opens the way for diversification. Thus
nomad, peasant, and city dweller can belong to the same ethnic group
in the Middle East; where ethnic boundaries persist they depend on
more subtle and specific mechanisms, mainly connected with the
unfeasibility of certain status and role combinations.


=== PDF p14 R (book-seq 27) ===
INTRODUCTION 27 -

Ethnic groups and stratification

Where one ethnic group has control of the means of production uti-
lized by another group, a relationship of inequality and stratification
obtains. Thus Fur and Baggara do not make up a stratified system,
since they utilize different niches and have access to them indepen-
dently of each other, whereas in some parts of the Pathan area one finds
stratification based on the control of land, Pathans being landowners,
and other groups cultivating as serfs. In more general terms, one may
say that stratified poly-ethnic systems exist where groups are charac-
terized by differential control of assets that are valued by all groups
in the system. The cultures of the component ethnic groups in such
systems are thus integrated in a special way: they share certain general
value orientations and scales, on the basis of which they can arrive
at judgements of hierarchy.

Obversely, a system of stratification does not entail the existence
of ethnic groups. Leach (1967) argues convincingly that social classes
are distinguished by different sub-cultures, indeed, that this is a more
basic characteristic than their hierarchical ordering. However, in many
systems of stratification we are not dealing with bounded strata at all: ‘
the stratification is based simply on the notion of scales and the
recognition of an ego-centered level of ‘people who are just like us’
versus those more select and those more vulgar. In such systems,
cultural differences, whatever they are, grade into each other, and
nothing like a social organization of ethnic groups emerges. Secondly,
most systems of stratification allow, or indecd entail, mobility based l
on evaluation by the scales that define the hierarchy. Thus a moderate
failure in the ‘B’ sector of the hierarchy makes you a ‘C’, etc. Ethnic
groups are not open to this kind of penetration: the ascription of ethnic
identity is based on other and more restrictive criteria. This is most
clearly illustrated by Knutsson’s analysis of the Galla in the context of
Ethiopian society (pp. 86 ff.) — a social system where whole ethnic
groups are stratified with respect to their positions of privilege and
disability within the state. Yet the attainment of a governorship does
not make an Amhara of a Galla, nor does estrangement as an outlaw
entail loss of Galla identity.

From this perspective, the Indian caste system would appear to be
a special case of a stratified poly-ethnic system. The boundaries of
castes are defined by ethnic criteria: thus individual failures in perfor-
mance lead to out-casting and not to down-casting. The process

NN e


=== PDF p15 L (book-seq 28) ===
28 FREDRIK BARTH

whereby the hierarchical system incorporates new ethnic groups is
demonstrated in the sanscritization of tribals: their acceptance of the
critical value scales defining their position in the hierarchy of ritual
purity and pollution is the only change of values that is necessary for
a people to become an Indian caste. An analysis of the different
processes of boundary maintenance involved in different inter-caste
relations and in different regional variants of the caste system would,
1 believe, illuminate many features of this system.

The preceding discussion has brought out a somewhat anomalous
general feature of ethnic identity as a status: ascription* is not condi-
tional on the control of any specific assets, but rests on criteria of
origin and commitment; whereas performance in the status, the ade-
quate acting out of the roles required to realize the identity, in many
systems does require such assets. By contrast, in a bureaucratic office
the incumbent is provided with those assets that are required for the
performance of the role; while kinship positions, which are ascribed
without reference to a person’s assets, likewise are not conditional on
performance — you remain a father even if you fail to feed your child.

Thus where ethnic groups are interrelated in a stratified system,
this requires the presence of special processes that maintain diff erential
control of assets. To schematize: a basic premise of ethnic group
organization is that every A can act roles, 1, 2 and 3. If actors agree
on this, the premise is self-fulfilling, unless acting in these roles re-
quires assets that are distributed in a discrepant pattern. If these assets
are obtained or lost in ways independent of being an A, and sought and
avoided without reference to one’s identity as an A, the premise will
be falsified: some A’s become unable to act in the expected roles. Most
systems of stratification are maintained by the solution that in such
cases, the person is no longer an A. In the case of ethnic identity, the
solution on the contrary is the recognition that every A no longer can
or will act in roles 1 and 2. The persistence of stratified poly-ethnic
systems thus entails the presence of factors that generate and maintain
a categorically different distribution of assets: state controls, as in
some modern plural and racist systems; marked differences in evalua-
tion that canalize the efforts of actors in different directions, as in
systems with polluting occupations; or differences in culture that
generate marked differences in political organization, economic orga-
nization, or individual skills.


=== PDF p15 R (book-seq 29) ===
INTRODUCTION ol

The problem of variation

Despite such processes, however, the ethnic label subsumes a number
of simultaneous characteristics which no doubt cluster statistically,
but which are not absolutely interdependent and connected. Thus there
will be variations between members, some showing many and some
showing few characteristics. Particularly where people change their
identity, this creates ambiguity since ethnic membership is at once a
question of source of origin as well as of current identity. Indeed,
Haaland was taken out to see ‘Fur who live in nomad camps’, and I
have heard members of Baluch tribal sections explain that they are
‘really Pathan’. What is then left of the boundary maintenance and
the categorical dichotomy, when the actual distinctions are blurred in
this way? Rather than despair at the failure of typological schematism,
one can legitimately note that people do employ ethnic labels and that
there are in many parts of the world most spectacular differences
whereby forms of behaviour cluster so that whole actors tend to fall
into such categories in terms of their objective behaviour. What is
surprising is not the existence of some actors that fall between these
categories, and of some regions in the world where whole persons do
not tend to sort themselves out in this way, but the fact that variations
tend to cluster at all. We can then be concerned not to perfect a
typology, but to discover the processes that bring about such cluster-
ing.

An alternative mode of approach in anthropology has been to
dichotomize the ethnographic material in terms of ideal versus actual
or conceptual versus empirical, and then concentrate on the consis-
tencies (the ‘structure’) of the ideal, conceptual part of the data,
employing some vague notion of norms and individual deviance to
account for the actual, statistical patterns. It is of course perfectly
feasible to distinguish between a people’s model of their social system
and their aggregate pattern of pragmatic behaviour, and indeed quite
necessary not to confuse the two. But the fertile problems in social
anthropology are concerned with how the two are interconnected, and
it does not follow that this is best elucidated by dichotomizing and
confronting them as total systems. In these essays we have tried to
build the analysis on a lower level of interconnection between status
and behaviour. I would argue that people’s categories are for acting,
and are significantly affected by interaction rather than contemplation.
In showing the connection between ethnic labels and the maintenance


=== PDF p16 L (book-seq 30) ===
40 FREDRIK BARTH

of cultural diversity, I am therefore concerned primarily to show how,
under varying circumstances, certain constellations of categorization
and value orientation have a self-fulfilling character, how others will
tend to be falsified by experience, while others again are incapable
of consummation in interaction. Ethnic boundaries can emerge and
persist only in the former situation, whereas they should dissolve or be
absent in the latter situations. With such a feedback from people’s
experiences to the categories they employ, simple ethnic dichotomies
can be retained, and their stereotyped behavioural differential rein-
forced, despite a considerable objective variation. This is so because
actors struggle to maintain conventional definitions of the situation
in social encounters through selective perception, tact, and sanctions,
and because of difficulties in finding other, more adequate codifica-
tions of experience. Revision only takes place where the categorization
is grossly inadequate — not merely because it is untrue in any objec-
tive sense, but because it is consistently unrewarding to act upon,
within the domain where the actor makes it relevant. So the dichotomy
of Fur villagers and Baggara nomads is maintained despite the patent
presence of a nomadic camp of Fur in the neighbourhood: the fact
that those nomads speak Fur and have kinship connections with
villagers somewhere does not change the social situation in which the
villager interacts with them — it simply makes the standard transac-
tions of buying milk, allocating camp sites, or obtaining manure, which
one would have with other Baggara, flow a bit more smoothly. But a
dichotomy between Pathan landowners and non-Pathan labourers
can no longer be maintained where non-Pathans obtain land and
embarrass Pathans by refusing to respond with the respect which their
imputed position as menials would have sanctioned.

Minorities, pariahs, and organizational characteristics of the periphery
In some social systems, ethnic groups co-reside though no major aspect
of structure is based on ethnic inter-relations. These are generally
referred to as societies with minorities, and the analysis of the minority
situation involves a special variant of inter-ethnic relations. I think
in most cases, such situations have come about as a result of external
historical events; the cultural differentiae have not sprung from the
local organizational context — rather, a pre-established cultural con-
trast is brought into conjunction with a pre-established social system,
and is made relevant to life there in a diversity of ways.

An extreme form of minority position, illustrating some but not all


=== PDF p16 R (book-seq 31) ===
INTRODUCTION L}

features of minorities, is that of pariah groups. These are groups
actively rejected by the host population because of behaviour or
characteristics positively condemned, though often useful in some
specific, practical way. European pariah groups of recent centuries
(executioners, dealers in horseflesh and -leather, collectors of night-
soil, gypsies, etc.) exemplify most features: as breakers of basic taboos
they were rejected by the larger society. Their identity imposed a
definition on social situations which gave very little scope for interac-
tion with persons in the majority population, and simultaneously as an
imperative status represented an inescapable disability that prevented
them from assuming the normal statuses involved in other definitions
of the situation of interaction. Despite these formidable barriers, such
groups do not seem to have developed the internal complexity that
would lead us to regard them as full-fledged ethnic groups; only the
culturally foreign gypsies® clearly constitute such a group.

The boundaries of pariah groups are most strongly maintained by
the excluding host population, and they are often forced to make use
of easily noticeable diacritica to advertise their identity (though since
this identity is often the basis for a highly insecure livelihood, such
over-communication may sometimes also serve the pariah individual’s
competitive interests). Where pariahs attempt to pass into the larger
society, the culture of the host population is generally well known;
thus the problem is reduced to a question of escaping the stigmata of
disability by dissociating with the pariah community and faking
another origin.

Many minority situations have a trace of this active rejection by the
host population. But the general feature of all minority situations lies
in the organization of activities and interaction: In the total social
system, all sectors of activity are organized by statuses open to members
of the majority group, while the status system of the minority has
only relevance to relations within the minority and only to some
sectors of activity, and does not provide a basis for action in other
sectors, equally valued in the minority culture. There is thus a disparity
between values and organizational facilities: prized goals are outside
the field organized by the minority’s culture and categories. Though “

P

such systems contain several ethnic groups, interaction between
members of the different groups of this kind does not spring from the
complementarity of ethnic identities; it takes place entirely within
the framework of the dominant, majority group’s statuses and institu-
tions, where identity as a minority member gives no basis for action,

.


=== PDF p17 L (book-seq 32) ===
LY FREDRIK BARTH

Wiyl it may in varying degrees represent a disability in assuming
the uperalive statuses. Eidheim’s paper gives a very clear analysis of
(il sltuntion, as it obtains among Coast Lapps.

Wal I o different way, one may say that in such a poly-ethnic
swalei. e contrastive cultural characteristics of the component groups
wre locnted in the non-articulating sectors of life. For the minority,
{hese sectors constitute a ‘backstage’ where the characteristics that
are sligmatic in terms of the dominant majority culture can covertly
e made the objects of transaction.

The present-day minority situation of Lapps has been brought about
I recent external circumstances. Formerly, the important context of
inleraction was the local situation, where two ethnic groups with
wfficient knowledge of each other’s culture maintained a relatively
limited, partly symbiotic relationship based in their respective identi-
tics. With the fuller integration of Norwegian society, bringing the
northern periphery into the nation-wide system, the rate of cultural |
change increased drastically. The population of Northern Norway ]
became increasingly dependent on the institutional system of the
larger society, and social life among Norwegians in Northern Norway
was increasingly organized to pursue activities and obtain benefits
within the wider system. This system has not, until very recently, taken
ethnic identity into account in its structure, and until 2 decade ago
there was practically no place in it where one could participate as @
Lapp. Lapps as Norwegian citizens, on the other hand, are perfectly
free to participate, though under the dual disability of peripheral loca-
tion and inadequate command of Norwegian language and culture.
“This situation has elsewhere, in the inland regions of Finnmark, given

scope for Lappish innovators with a political program based on the
ideal of ethnic pluralism (cf. Eidheim 1967), but they have gained no
following in the Coast Lapp area here discussed by Eidheim. For these
Lapps, rather, the relevance of Lappish statuses and conventions
decreases in sector after sector (cf. Eidheim 1966), while the relative
inadequacy of performance in the widest system brings about frustra-

tions and a crisis of identity.

Culture contact and change

This is a very widespread process under present conditions as de
dence on the products and institutions of industrial societies spreads
in all parts of the world. The important thing to recognize is that a
drastic reduction of cultural differences between ethnic groups does

pen-


=== PDF p17 R (book-seq 33) ===
INTRODUCTION 33

not correlate in any simple way with a reduction in the organizational
relevance of ethnic identities, or a breakdown in boundary-maintain-
ing processes. This is demonstrated in much of the case material.

We can best analyse the interconnection by looking at the agents
of change: what strategies are open and attractive to them, and what
are the organizational implications of different choices on their part?
The agents in this case are the persons normally referred to somewhat
ethno-centrically as the new elites: the persons in the less industrialized
groups with greater contact and more dependence on the goods and
organizations of industrialized societies. In their pursuit of participa-
tion in wider social systems to obtain new forms of value they can
choose between the following basic strategies: (i) they may attempt
to pass and become incorporated in the pre-established industrial
society and cultural group; (ii) they may accept a ‘minority’ status,
accommodate to and seek to reduce their minority disabilities by
encapsulating all cultural differentiae in sectors of non-articulation,
while participating in the larger system of the industrialized group
in the other sectors of activity; (iii) they may choose to emphasize
ethnic identity, using it to develop new positions and patterns to
organize activities in those sectors formerly not found in their society,
or inadequately developed for the new purposes. If the cultural inno-
vators are successful in the first strategy, their ethnic group will be
denuded of its source of internal diversification and will probably
remain as a culturally conservative, low-articulating ethnic group with
low rank in the larger social sytem. A general acceptance of the second
strategy will prevent the emergence of a clearly dichotomizing poly-
ethnic organization, and — in view of the diversity of industrial society
and consequent variation and multiplicity of fields of articulation —
probably lead to an eventual assimilation of the minority. The third
strategy generates many of the interesting movements that can be
observed today, from nativism to new states.

1 am unable to review the variables that affect which basic strategy
will be adopted, which concrete form it may take, and what its degree
of success and cumulative implications may be. Such factors range
from the number of ethnic groups in the system to features of the
ecologic regime and details of the constituent cultures, and are illus-
trated in most of the concrete analyses of the following essays. It may
be of interest to note some of the forms in which ethnic identity is made
organizationally relevant to new sectors in the current situation.

Firstly, the innovators may choose to emphasize one level of identity

3. Bark



=== PDF p18 L (book-seq 34) ===
L —

34 FREDRIK BARTH

among the several provided by the traditional social organization.
Tribe, caste, language group, region or state all have features that
make them a potentially adequate primary ethnic identity for group
reference, and the outcome will depend on the readiness with which
others can be led to embrace these identities, and the cold tactical
facts. Thus, though tribalism may rally the broadest support in many
African areas, the resultant groups seem unable to stand up against
the sanctioning apparatus even of a relatively rudimentary state
organization.

Secondly, the mode of organization of the ethnic group varies, as
does the inter-ethnic articulation that is sought. The fact that con-
temporary forms are prominently political does not make them any
less ethnic in character. Such political movements constitute new ways
of making cultural differences organizationally relevant (Kleivan
1967), and new ways of articulating the dichotomized ethnic groups.
The proliferation of ethnically based pressure groups, political parties,
and visions of independent statehood, as well as the multitude of sub-
political advancement associations (Sommerfelt 1967) show the
importance of these new forms. In other areas, cult-movements or
mission-introduced sects are used to dichotomize and articulate groups
in new ways. It is striking that these new patterns are so rarely
concerned with the economic sector of activities, which is so major
a factor in the culture contact situation, apart from the forms
of state socialism adopted by some of the new nations. By contrast, the
traditional complex poly-ethnic systems have been prominently based
on articulation in this sector, through occupational differentiation and
articulation at the market place in many regions of Asia and Middle
Anmerica, or most elaborately, through agrarian production in South
Asia. Today, contending ethnic groups not infrequently become differ-
entiated with respect to educational level and attempt to control or
monopolize educational facilities for this purpose (Sommerfelt 1967),
but this is not so much with a view to occupational differentiation
as because of the obvious connection between bureaucratic competence
and opportunities for political advancement. One may speculate that
an articulation entailing complex differentiation of skills, and sanc-
tioned by the constant dependence on livelihood, will have far greater
strength and stability than one based on revocable political affiliation
and sanctioned by the exercise of force and political fiat, and that
these new forms of poly-ethnic systems are probably inherently more
turbulent and unstable than the older forms.


=== PDF p18 R (book-seq 35) ===
INTRODUCTION 29

When political groups articulate their opposition in terms of ethnic
criteria, the direction of cultural change is also affected. A political
confrontation can only be implemented by making the groups similar
and thereby comparable, and this will have effect on every new sector
of activity which is made politically relevant. Opposed parties thus
tend to become structurally similar, and differentiated only by a few
clear diacritica. Where ethnic groups are organized in political con-
frontation in this way, the process of opposition will therefore lead
to a reduction of the cultural differences between them.

For this reason, much of the activity of political innovators is
concerned with the codification of idioms: the selection of signals for
identity and the assertion of value for these cultural diacritica, and
the suppression or denial of relevance for other differentiae. The issue
as to which new cultural forms are compatible with the native ethnic
identity is often hotly contended, but is generally settled in favour of
syncretism for the reasons noted above. But a great amount of atten-
tion may be paid to the revival of select traditional culture traits, and
to the establishment of historical traditions to justify and glorify the
idioms and the identity.

The interconnection between the diacritica that are chosen for
emphasis, the boundaries that are defined, and the differentiating
values that are espoused, constitute a fascinating field for study.’
Clearly, a number of factors are relevant. Idioms vary in their
appropriateness for different kinds of units. They are unequally
adequate for the innovator’s purposes, both as means to mobilize sup-
port and as supports in the strategy of confrontation with other groups.
Their stratificational implications both within and between groups are
important: they entail different sources and distributions of influence
within the group, and different claims to recognition from other groups
through suppression or glorification of different forms of social

stigmata. Clearly, there is no simple connection between the ideological
basis of a movement and the idioms chosen; yet both have implica-

tions for subsequent boundary maintenance, and the course of further
change.

Variations in the setting for ethnic relations

These modern variants for poly-ethnic organization emerge in a world
of bureaucratic administration, developed communications, and pro-
gressive urbanization. Clearly, under radically different circumstances,
the critical factors in the definition and maintenance of ethnic boun- -



=== PDF p19 L (book-seq 36) ===
36 FREDRIK BARTH

daries would be different. In basing ourselves on limited and con-
temporary data, we are faced with difficulties in generalizing about
ethnic processes, since major variables may be ignored because they
are not exhibited in the cases at our disposal. There can be little doubt
that social anthropologists have tended to regard the rather special
situation of colonial peace and external administration, which has
formed the backdrop of most of the influential monographs, as if this
were representative of conditions at most times and places. This may
have biased the interpretation both of pre-colonial systems and of
contemporary, emergent forms. The attempt in these essays to cover
regionally very diverse cases is not alone an adequate defence against
such bias, and the issue needs to be faced directly.

Colonial regimes are quite extreme in the extent to which the
administration and its rules are divorced from locally based social life.
Under such a regime, individuals hold certain rights to protection
uniformly through large population aggregates and regions, far beyond
the reach of their own social relationships and institutions. This allows
physical proximity and opportunities for contact between persons of
different ethnic groups regardless of the absence of shared under-
standings between them, and thus clearly removes one of the con-
straints that normally operate on inter-ethnic relations. In such situa-
tions, interaction can develop and proliferate — indeed, only those
forms of interaction that are directly inhibited by other factors will
be absent and remain as sectors of non-articulation. Thus ethnic
boundaries in such situations represent a positive organization of
social relations around differentiated and complementary values, and
cultural differences will tend to be reduced with time and approach
the required minimum.

In most political regimes, however, where there is less security and
people live under a greater threat of arbitrariness and violence out-
side their primary community, the insecurity itself acts as a constraint
on inter-ethnic contacts. In this situation, many forms of interaction
between members of different ethnic groups may fail to develop, even
though a potential complementarity of interests obtains. Forms of
interaction may be blocked because of a lack of trust or a lack of
opportunities to consummate transactions. What is more, there are
also internal sanctions in such communities which tend to enhance
overt conformity within and cultural differences between communities.
If a person is dependent for his security on the voluntary and spon-
taneous support of his own community, self-identification as a member


=== PDF p19 R (book-seq 37) ===
INTRODUCTION 7

of this community needs to be explicitly expressed and confirmed; and
any behaviour which is deviant from the standard may be interpreted
as a weakening of the identity, and thereby of the bases of security.
In such situations, fortuitous historical differences in culture between
different communities will tend to perpetuate themselves without any
positive organizational basis; many of the observable cultural differ-
entiae may thus be of very limited relevance to the ethnic organiza-
tion.

The processes whereby ethnic units maintain themselves are thus
clearly affected, but not fundamentally changed, by the variable of
regional security. This can also be shown by an inspection of the cases
analysed in these essays, which represent a fair range from the colonial
to the poly-centric, up to relatively anarchic situations. It is important,
however, to recognize that this background variable may change very
rapidly with time, and in the projection of long-range processes this
is a serious difficulty. Thus in the Fur case, we observe a situation of
externally maintained peace and very small-scale local political
activity, and can form a picture of inter-ethnic processes and even
rates in this setting. But we know that over the last few generations,
the situation has varied from one of Baggara-Fur confrontation under
an expansive Fur sultanate to a nearly total anarchy in Turkish and
Mahdi times; and it is very difficult to estimate the effects of these
variations on the processes of nomadization and assimilation, and
arrive at any long-range projection of rates and trends.

Ethnic groups and cultural evolution

The perspective and analysis presented here have relevance to the
theme of cultural evolution. No doubt human history is a story of the
development of emergent forms, both of cultures and societies. The
issue in anthropology has been how this history can best be depicted,
and what kinds of analyses are adequate to discover general principles
in the courses of change. Evolutionary analysis in the rigorous sense
of the biological fields has based its method on the construction of
phyletic lines. This method presumes the existence of units where the
boundaries and the boundary-maintaining processes can be described,
and thus where the continuity can be specified. Concretely, phyletic
lines are meaningful because specific boundaries prevent the inter-
change of genetic material; and so one can insist that the reproductive
isolate is the unit, and that it has maintained an identity undisturbed
by the changes in the morphological characteristics of the species.


=== PDF p20 L (book-seq 38) ===
Y=

38 FREDRIK BARTH

I have argued that boundaries are also maintained between ethnic
units, and that consequently it is possible to specify the nature of
continuity and persistence of such units. These essays try to show that
ethnic boundaries are maintained in each case by a limited set of
cultural features. The persistence of the unit then depends on the
persistence of these cultural differentiae, while continuity can also be
specified through the changes of the unit brought about by changes in
the boundary-defining cultural differentiae.

However, most of the cultural matter that at any time is associated
with a human population is not constrained by this boundary; it can
vary, be learnt, and change without any critical relation to the
boundary maintenance of the ethnic group. So when one traces the
history of a ethnic group through time, one is not simultaneously, in
the same sense, tracing the history of ‘a culture’: the elements of the
present culture of that ethnic group have not sprung from the partic-
ular set that constituted the group’s culture at a previous time, whereas
the group has a continual organizational existence with boundaries
(criteria of membership) that despite modifications have marked off a
continuing unit.

Without being able to specify the boundaries of cultures, it is not
possible to construct phyletic lines in the more rigorous evolutionary
sense. But from the analysis that has been argued here, it should be
possible to do so for ethnic groups, and thus in a sense for those aspects
of culture which have this organizational anchoring.

1 The emphatic ideological denial of the primacy of ethnic identity (and rank)
which characterises the universal religions that have arisen in the Middle East is
understandable in this perspective, since practically any moyement for social or
ethical reform in the poly-ethnic societies of that region would clash with conven-
tions and standards of ethnic character.

* The difference between ethnic groups and social strata, which seems problematical
at this stage of the argument, will be taken up below.

3 T am here concerned only with individual failure to maintain identity, where most
members do so successfully, and not with the broader questions of cultural vitality
and anomie.

¢ As opposed to presumptive classification in passing social encounters — I am
thinking of the person in his normal social context where others have a considerable
amount of previous information about him, not of the possibilities afforded occasion-
ally for mispresenting one’s identity towards strangers.

s The condemned behaviour which gives pariah position to the gypsies is com-
pound, but rests prominently on their wandering life, originally in contrast to the
serf bondage of Europe, later in their flagrant violation of puritan cthics of respon-
sibility, toil and morality.

* To my knowledge, Mitchell's essay on the Kalela dance (Mitchell 1956) is the
first and still the most penetrating study on this topic.


=== PDF p20 R (book-seq 39) ===
When Ethnic Identity
is a Social Stigma

by Harald Eidheim

The problem of delimiting ethnic groups as contrasting cultural units,
and of defining ethnic borders, has occupied many anthropologists, in
particular many of the cultural anthropological school. The distribution
of cultural and other ‘objective’ traits has usually been the empirical
evidence on which their approaches have been built. Analyses of such
data may provide us with a statistical and distributive picture (if it is
possible to agree on a definition of a trait) and may show how the
concentration of traits correlates with named groups. However, if ethnic
groups should not happen to coincide with contrasting economic
systems or with firm and enduring political groups, there will always
be the problem of ‘transitional zomes’, i.e. where such criteria give
ill-defined ethnic borders. Yet in many such areas, people themselves
apparently have no difficulties in ascribing ethnic membership, i.e. we
might find a high degree of ‘homogeneity’ (rather insignificant distri-
bution of objective traits) but still indications of ethnic diversity,
expressed in native theory and also articulated in the routine of
interpersonal behaviour (cf. Nadel 1947, Garvin 1958, Moerman
1965.

This poses the general problem of how ethnic diversity is socially
articulated and maintained.

To analyse the social organization of ethnic borders we need a
relational frame of reference, in which we can single out those objec-
tive phenomena that we somewhat dubiously called ‘traits’, by con-
cepts logically consistent with a relational language. The basic axiom
for such analyses is that ethnic groups are social categories which
provide a basis for status ascription, and consequently that inter-
cthnic relations are organized with reference to such statuses. My
material shows a situation where an ethnic status (or identity) is, in a
sense, illegitimate, and therefore not acted out in institutional


=== PDF p21 L (book-seq 40) ===
e ——

40 HArALD EIDHEM

inter-ethnic behaviour. Nevertheless, this very illegitimacy has definite
implications in the process of role-taking in elementary ‘nteraction
and thus adds form to inter-ethnic relations.

My case refers to an area of mixed Norwegian — Coast Lappish
population inhabiting the fjords and inlets of West-Finnmark, Nor-
thern Norway.! Throughout West-Finnmark there is a conspicuous
lack of ‘contrasting cultural traits’ between Lapps and Norwegians, but
these ethnic labels are attached to communities as well as to families
and individual persons, and are in daily use. The consistent, though not
public use of such labels indicates that an ethnic identity is a topic of
importance in the relationships between persons carrying contrasting
as well as similar identities. The language of symbols which bear on
an identity cleavage is rich and finely shaded. I have been able to
understand and analyze only the gross forms of these symbols and
their differentiating significance. It is fairly evident, however, that
very few of them may be classified as contrasting traits with reference
to ethnic provenance, the mother tongue dichotomy (Lapp-Norwegian)
being perhaps the only obvious contrast. The language of symbols thus
must be understood in a local social context; we are faced with the
difficult task of understanding the local mode of valuation and inter-
pretation of general behaviour expressed in such terms as, for instance,
self-sufficiency, covertness, politeness, or cleanliness.

Under the disability of a stigmatized ethnic identity, members of
the Coast Lappish population in question seek to qualify themselves
as full participants in the Norwegian society. In order to obtain this
membership they have to develop techniques to avoid or tolerate sanc-
tions from the local Norwegian population. In the following I hope
to be able to show that the behavioural forms which under such con-
straints are displayed on the stages of everyday life, are organized
in distinct spheres of interaction which articulate and maintain an
identity dichotomy. Spheres of interaction as well as identities emerge
through everyday interaction because impression management about
identities is of constant concern to the actors.

Let me now turn more concretely to the ethnic situation in Finn-
mark, the northernmost county in Norway.

In the townships (Norw. kommuner) of the inland region, which
are the strongholds of Lappish culture in Norway, the Lappish speak-
ing population constitutes an 80-90 per cent majority. The Norwegian
part of the population is engaged in various administrative and social
services and in commerce. Some of these Norwegians are bilingual, as


=== PDF p21 R (book-seq 41) ===
WHEN ETHNIC IDENTITY IS A SOCIAL STIGMA -

is the Lappish population in general. Of a population of more than
8,000, fifteen per cent are Reindeer Lapps. These live in their perma-
nent houses while their herds are on their winter pastures in the
vicinity, but most of them leave the region in summer when they stay
with their herds on headlands and islands along the Arctic coast. The
reindeer population in the region is slightly above 100,000 head (Aar-
seth 1967). The great bulk of the Lappish population pursue dairy
farming and have inland fishing and cloudberry picking as subsidiary
occupations. Quite a few are also engaged in social and administrative
services and in transportation.

As one moves from the interior towards the townships of the fjord
and coast area, the ethnic proportions of the population are reversed.
The proportion of Lappish speakers in some townships is inconsider-
able, while in others it might amount to 20-25 per cent. (The only
exception is one fjordal township in East Finnmark with a 50/50-
constellation.) Lapps as well as Norwegians combine farming and
fishing with no difference in ecologic adaptation along ethnic lines.
Spatially, however, there is a tendency to ethnic clustering. The towns
and fishing villages on the coast are entirely dominated by Norwegians
(cf. Vorren (ed.) 1963, Kirke- og undervisningsdepartementet 1959).
In the fjord area and especially in the western part which concerns us
here, visible signs of Lappishness, which prevail e.g. in the inland
region, are either absent in the indigenous population, (as are reindeer
herding and nomad life, Lappish costume and the public use of Lap-
pish language) or they are rather unreliable criteria for classification
of individual persons (as is physical type).2 People make a living from
fishing and small farming in the same way as in peripheral settlements
all along the North Norwegian coast. Clothing, food habits, housing,
the major forms of social institutions, ideals and values are also so
evenly distributed that there are seemingly only trivial differences
from one locality to another. In short, an outsider, paying a casual and
short visit in the area, will most likely notice no signs of ethnic
diversity, not to speak of an ethnic border.

Such were also my own first impressions as a field worker. I knew,
of course, that I was on the edges of the Lappish area, but my eyes
and ears told me that I was inside a Norwegian fjord community. It
was not until I was able to observe and learn from the daily events of
my own socialization into the community that I became sensitized to
the relational aspect of the local ethnic dichotomy. I will therefore
take the liberty of reviewing some of the initial, and, I think, important


=== PDF p22 L (book-seq 42) ===
—'

42 HARALD EIDHEIM

phases of this process, leaving aside the obvious traumatic aspects
caused by my own blunders.

At first I was merely looked upon as some kind of travelling Nor-

wegian, maybe a somewhat unusual one, because a visit from a com-
plete stranger who has no definite and conventional task is an extreme-
ly rare occasion. In any case, 1 was a person towards whom people
in the community considered it appropriate to show off their Norwe-
gianness. They made efforts to underline this quality of theirs by com-
municating their competence in modern fishing and agriculture, and
by telling about local public events which they thought meritorious
with reference to this quality. Many people liked to stress that they
were well travelled and pretended to have a good knowledge of other
parts of Norway, and they did not forget to mention that people from
this fjord were settled as far away as Oslo, Germany, Alaska, and
Australia. In addition, they liked to dwell on their good standard of
housing, and the quality of their stables compared to what they had
seen during their evacuation period 1944/45 farther south. (All the
buildings in this area were burnt down by the Germans in 1944 and
the population evacuated, but the communities were rebuilt and
resettled through a governmental aid program after the war.) House-
wives constantly took pride in showing their well-furnished kitchens.
They also had what to me seemed to be a craze for cleanliness, and
entertained me for hours about their precautions and good habits in
their daily housekeeping. (In local Norwegian native theory, unclean-
liness is one of the vices of the Lapps.)

All this was communicated in the local Norwegian dialect which
all spoke quite well, but which very few, if any, had a perfect com-
mand of, since the structure of Lappish to some extent, is likely to
invade their speech and produce a slightly broken Norwegian. This
is even true in those homes in the community which have abandoned
the Lappish language (see below).

I have mentioned a few themes which local people were eager to
pursue in our conversations. As mere themes they are conventional in
normal Norwegian discourse, and might be thought sociologically
unimportant. But it was the recurrent management of these themes,
combined with the fact that themes which pointed to ethnic differentia-
tion in the population were obviously avoided, which eventually led
me to look upon them as a vital part of a process of presentation of
identity (cf. Goffman 1959). This became more evident to me as my
socialization proceeded into the next stage.


=== PDF p22 R (book-seq 43) ===
WHEN ETHNIC IDENTITY 1S A SOCIAL STIGMA 43

Gradually I accentuated my interests in the Lappish population and
cautiously presented myself more concretely by telling about my
studies and reproducing what is recorded in books about the area,
and I apparently added depth and concreteness to their image of me
as a most unusual Norwegian. Needless to say, however, my interests
and questions annoyed most people in the community. Some young
people avoided me for weeks when rumours about my interests spread
through kitchen conversations; they took me for some sort of unpleasant
detective. Others, notably some of the middle-aged, took me into their
confidence. I was concerned with Lapps in a way which they could
perceive as being far from negative, and I appeared to be a useful
source of information about the wider society. (Other anthropologists
have, of course, experienced similar field situations.) Regarding me
little by little as an acceptable stranger, uncommitted on controversies
about ethnicity, people became more relaxed in their relations with
me. They became more careless with the ‘secret’ that they habitually
used Lappish in their daily life, and when they also discovered that I
could join in a simple conversation in Lappish, we had established
such relations that 1 was able to broach the question of ethnicity more
openly and directly than before. The themes of discussion which were
current in my initial socialization faded more and more into the back-
ground. However, except within separate households and small groups
of three—four persons, I was never able to engage people in discussion
about these matters. In public encounters, such as parties which 10-15
people attended, in the small crowds of customers gathered at the
merchant’s shop or in the crowd waiting on the quay for the local
steamer, I had little success.

In short, this first groping phase of my field work, which also
brought me to neighbouring communities, including the adminis-
trative centre of the township, led me eventually to some basic social
facts which were at odds with the facade that people presented as
long as they regarded me as an ordinary Norwegian.

These facts were:

1. People in the area have a good personal knowledge of each other,
and can classify each other very precisely as either Lapp or Norwegian
(or finn versus ddZa which are the labels in Norwegian and Lappish
respectively).

This is true only within local districts: I define the district, with
reference to interaction and communication, as the area within which
people have mutual personal knowledge of place of residence, heritage,


=== PDF p23 L (book-seq 44) ===
O —— e —

44 HARALD EIDHEM

doings and personal inclinations. Thus, we have to visualize the
district from the point of view of a central fixed point, which in this
case is the fjord community where 1 concentrated my field-work.
Obviously, the district so defined has no definite borders; it represents
a concentration in a field of personal information; but for the present
purpose we may say that within a diffuse range of 30-50 kilometers
it encompasses scattered, small communities of from one or two house-
holds up to a hundred or more which people think of as inhabited by
Lapps and Norwegians in various proportions. The fjord community
in which I worked was one of the most Lappish with only six persons
out of ca. 150 classified as Norwegians, and the administrative centre
of the township being the most Norwegian with about 20 out of 300
classified as Lapps.

2. In this fjord community, Lappish was the domestic language in
about 40 of the 50 odd households. In each of the ten which used
Norwegian, at least one person knew Lappish and used it in other
social contexts. Outside the households Lappish was a medium of
communication within the wider district, but language behaviour is
such that Lappish must be regarded as a secret language or code.
regularly used only in situations where trusted Lappish identities are
involved.

Having grasped these facts, which clearly indicated that the question
of Lappish identity was a topic of general concern, and having
realized that the dimension of social space must be a promising frame
of observations, I could engage in more selective data collecting.

Not surprisingly, my best friends among the Lapps in the fjord at
this point started admitting me to their personal dilemmas of identity.
This would often take the form of confessions: They were after all 2
kind of Lapp. Their parents and grandparents lived in turf huts, some
of them as late as the 1930s. Some people even wore Lappish costumes
at that time, and Lappish foot-wear was in common use until World
War II. They were bothered by not being fully proficient in Nor-
wegian and by the spite and ridicule to which they were often exposed
for this and other reasons in interactions with self-confident and ar-
rogant Norwegians. They even had the suspecion that their low stan-
dard of living and the lack of industrial enterprises in the fjord might
derive from their being of an inferior race.® “The Lapps must be stupid’,
they said. Certainly they believed the average Norwegian to be of that
opinion. In all details their miserable self-image was a reflection of
the Lappish stigma as local Norwegians define it.


=== PDF p23 R (book-seq 45) ===
WHEN ETHNIC IDENTITY IS A SOCIAL STIGMA 45 &

This dilemma appeared to be most developed in persons from
16-17 up to 50, the age classes where aspirations are strongest; a
psychiatrist would probably say that this part of the population was
subject to an identity-neurosis.

In my article on guest relationships (Eidheim 1966) I have described
how people in this fjord behave towards Nomad Lapps. Displaying
their preference for contract relations, their new and comfortable
houses, their cleanliness and their command of Norwegian, the fjord
dwellers very ostentatiously act out a ‘Norwegian’ identity. How-
ever, as is understood, the relationships with people whom they them-
selves classify as ddzat (Norwegians) show quite another aspect of
their situation.

In very general terms one may say that the basis for their dilemma
is that in order to achieve the material and social goods they appreciate,
and to share the opportunities available in the society, people have to
get rid of, or cover up, those social characteristics which Norwegians
take as signs of Lappishness.

This must be understood on the background of certain traits of local .
ecology and society.* Local resources, the amount of arable soil and
the local fishing grounds give little or no opportunities for increased
or diversified production. Capital management beyond the level of
single households is non-existent (the only exception is the local
private shopkeeper), nor have any other forms of associations or
corporations, which could have promoted social differentiation in the
neighbourhood society, gained foothold.? Only very few households
can, or are willing to, live exclusively within the confines of neigh-
bourhood and kin relations or exclusively from local fishing and the
yields of their small farms (a cow or two and four-six sheep). A wide
range of attainments therefore can only be secured through careers
or at least temporary wage work, outside the fjord community, in
situations where Norwegians are their social partners and where these
also possess or assume the positions of formal and informal author-

Apart from guest-relations with members of a nomadic unit (Eid-
heim 1966), these fjord dwellers have no relations with Lapps in the
inland regions. They never go there, they are indifferent to the debate
about the Lappish minority situation in mass media and they are out-
side the influence of the Lappish movement which works for consolida-
tion and promotion of an ethnic esprit de corps. Their orientation and
their social aspirations are confined to a social landscape where the



=== PDF p24 L (book-seq 46) ===
e —————

46 HARALD EIDHEIM

actors are either people of Norwegian identity or people in the same
opportunity situation as themselves.

The preceding description indicates that interaction is organized
here in three distinct spheres, namely (1) a public sphere, (2) a Lappish
closed sphere, and (3) a Norwegian closed sphere. Each of these is
associated with characteristic codes, themes, and valuations, and furth-
er distinguished by the ethnic composition of the acting personnel. The
spheres in their generalized forms emerge as an organizational result
of ethnic heritage in this particular dual context. Situationally, how-
ever, behaviour belonging in one or another of these spheres is depen-
dent on definable circumstances or opportunity situations.

There is first the public sphere of interaction. Inside the fjord
community, the most common encounters belonging in this sphere are
occasions where one or more of the local Norwegians participate.
Infrequently, these are big celebrations like weddings, funerals, and
baptisms; more commonly they are encounters in the routine of daily
life in the community. All formally organized activity at the local
public school also belongs in this sphere. Not surprisingly, therefore,
a wide sector of daily encounters outside the school where children
and teenagers are involved also has these public overtones: the Nor-
wegian code is used and themes and valuations are those of the public
sphere.®

People in the fjord community think it is ‘necessary’ and therefore
‘right’ to speak Norwegian to children. ‘They shall not have the
same handicap as we have had,’ they say. Interaction among the small
crowd of customers at the merchant’s shop also belongs to the public
sphere. Even when no Norwegians are present (the merchant is a
local Lapp) people regard it as appropriate to define the situation
as public. The merchant himself is the apparent initiator and he
bluntly answers in Norwegian if it happens that someone asks a
question in Lappish.

As already suggested the verbal code in this sphere of interaction
is local Norwegian. The themes around which the interactions are
concentrated are domestic work and the conventional problems
of daily life inside the fjord community as well as outside, and the
valuations are those which fit in with North Norwegian coast culture.

‘When people are temporarily outside the fjord they likewise define
interactions with Norwegians as events in the public sphere. Locals,
both Norwegians and Lapps, present themselves behaviouristically
in the idioms of this sphere, and, as I have described above, they tried


=== PDF p24 R (book-seq 47) ===
WHEN ETHNIC IDENTITY IS A SOCIAL STIGMA 47 &

to constrain me by these conventions as long as they regarded me as
a stranger.

Of course, the public sphere must also be defined with reference
to the social properties or behaviour which are excluded from it. This
behaviour is first and foremost the use of Lappish language, secondly
themes, stories, and other possible pointers to the ethnic dichotomy and
other actions which are regarded as the presentation of a Lappish
identity. For a Norwegian explicitly to present himself as a Norwegian
and to draw attention to the ethnic dichotomy is less uncommon and
somewhat more legitimate than the corresponding behaviour by a
Lapp, since it is implicit in the process of role-taking in public situa-
tions and congruent with a Norwegianizing intent (cf. fn. 6). Let me
turn to some examples for purposes of illustration.

Per, a Lapp from the fjord community, is a member of the town-
ship’s school board, which has its regular meetings in the administrative
centre of the township. But he never argues in these meetings for a
Lappish oriented public school in his community, nor does he suggest
to fellow passengers on board the local steamer that the state has for-
gotten the Coast Lapps in its program for economic development of
the outlying districts.

Why then, is Per recognized as a Lapp? To answer this question
we must go to the syndrome of signs which the Norwegians look for.
This syndrome or image is much of the same order as the term stigma
used by Goffman (cf. Goffman 1963). There are a very great number
of such signs and they are unevenly distributed among individuals.
In the case of Per we might list some of the most releyant ones: (1)
He comes from a certain community, which Norwegians call by a
name which is a slight twist of its proper name, and which gives it
an oblique derogatory edge. We might say that by this nickname
persons are associated with a spatial criterion of Lappishness. (2) He
has what is considered to be Lappish physiognomy. (3) He speaks a
slightly broken Norwegian. (4) He seldom plays an active role in the
discussions at the school board meetings. (5) He misses the meetings
more often than the average member and does not instruct a deputy
to go in his place. (6) ‘He sticks to his own.” This is demonstrated even
at the administrative centre where he frequently visits a household
which is regarded as Lappish.”

Per and a couple of other persons from the area experience the
school board meetings as a confrontation with people of Norwegian
identity. A common Norwegian fisherman and the inspector of the



=== PDF p25 L (book-seq 48) ===
S —— e —

48 Hararp EmpHEIM

school, though dissimilar in many respects, are in another and more
vital sense the same sort of person. Per thinks that they know the
nuances of suitable behaviour and effective action better than he him-
self, and objectively they have a fuller command of the code. They
have the right identity, which makes them authorized initiators in the
situation, while he is only some kind of satellite.

What has been said so far about the public sphere of interaction
enables us to sum up some of its characteristics. Most conspicuous
among these is the fact that interaction in this sphere takes place
within the statuses and institutions of the dominant Norwegian popula-
tion. However, it is an overruling axiom that the local population is
made up of two ethnic categories, Lapps and Norwegians. Since public
presentation of a Lappish identity is not an alternative, it follows that
in this sphere there is no institutionalized interaction in which a status
‘Lapp’ has accepted roles, i.e. Lapp and Norwegian are not comple-
mentary statuses. What perpetuates the axiom of an identity cleavage,
then, is the fact that people are able to identify each other as belonging
to separate categories on the basis of their performance of any role in
the public sphere. This reinforces the syndrome of signs attached to
ethnic categories as well as the notion that separate identities are
mirrored in the social landscape. Against this background we can
understand that to be a Lapp is a primary restriction on impression
management to the extent that all Coast Lapps avoid as much as
possible behaviour which in the local language of symbols and signs
points to their identity.

Such public encounters between Coast Lapps and Norwegians are
part of the daily routine in the area, in all places where people meet
and interact. It might be said that a pseudo-agreement on a shared
identity is established when the mutually recognized pragmatic con-
tent of the relations in the public sphere is not severely violated. (The
degree of severity must of course be subject to a situational definition.)
The seemingly unproblematic flow of interaction in the public sphere,
or the fact that the flow goes on, indicates that the gross qualities of
public encounters reflect mutual agreement, and to strangers the two
parties seem to communicate adequately.® However, each party turns to
ethnically closed stages to interpret and discuss the idiomatic content
of public encounters with reference to identity. The Lappish closed
stages, which I made most effort to observe, constitute 2 sphere of
interaction that can only be understood in relation to the public sphere.
It is in the articulation between these two, i.e. in the routine of


=== PDF p25 R (book-seq 49) ===
WHEN ETENIC IDENTITY IS A SOCIAL STIGMA 49

establishment of public stages versus ethnically closed stages that the
organizational significance of identity emerges most clearly.

I think it might be a defensible simplification to leave out a full
treatment of the Norwegians’ closed stages, i.e. to take them more or
less for granted, and concentrate upon the Lappish ones. As
indicated above, in my review of the fieldworker’s socialization I was
successively admitted to this sphere of interaction, if not as a full parti-
cipant, then at least as a harmless bystander.

The Lappish closed sphere coincides with kin and neighbourhood
relations between Lapps but it also includes relations between non-
kin and non-neighbours within the wider district who are known to
be Lappish. Lappish language is the code of interaction. Failure to
use Lappish in such interaction is sanctioned negatively, except in the
case of the youngsters who have little or no command of the language.
In view of the Lapps’ participation also in the public sphere, and the
preference for use of a stigmatizing code between neighbours/kinsfolk/
friends, it is obvious that the daily round of encounters calls for a quick
social apprehension and the command of shared and smooth techniques
to define and redefine situations.

A most common occurrence in daily life inside the community was
the entry of one of the local Norwegians into a pre-established closed
stage. People then immediately switched from Lappish to Norwegian,
and themes of conversation were adjusted. The Norwegians not only
regard Lappish as an inferior language in a general sense, but also
judge it highly improper and challenging if it is used in their presence.
(All Norwegians are monolingual.) Now, of course, it happens fre-
quently that local Norwegians are within earshot of the performance
in such closed stages and they are thus regularly reminded of what
kind of people they live among. Norwegians also let me into
their closed stages in order to ‘deepen’ my understanding of the
Lappish syndrome as it prevailed in their own minds and to contrast
it to what they considered to be Norwegian character.?

At home in the fjord, the technique of changing code and theme is
not felt to be very inconvenient; interaction in the closed sphere can
always be resumed later. Other circumstances, however, require other
solutions. The steamer on the [jordal route was a forum of consider-
able social importance. Here people exchanged news and gossip and
here they met acquaintances as well as strangers; Norwegians and
Lapps mingled. One might expect people in this setting to interact
in any or all of three capacities: (a) as passengers, defining stages

4. Barth


=== PDF p26 L (book-seq 50) ===
EEEEE—

50 HARALD EIDHEIM

according to the conventions of the public sphere. (b) as Norwegians,
defining closed stages of passengers, and (c) as Lapps, likewise defin-
ing closed stages of passengers. What can be observed empirically,
however, is almost imperceptible transitions from (a) to (b) and vice
versa (exchange of eloquent glances, pregnant silence or verbal twists
which are a kind of meta-communication in plain speech). On the
other hand there is a fairly high frequency of unmistakable transitions
from (a) to (c) and vice versa, although the crowding on board a little
boat offers few opportunities for spatial arrangements in order to
avoid leakages. When a Lapp has played the role of passenger for a
while with both Lapps and Norwegians as role partners, he is inclined
to switch to the role of kinsman/friend in order to interact with a fel-
low-passenger, a Lappish person he perhaps has not met for six months
or more. They both wish to exchange greetings and information in
Lappish and they provisionally separate themselves spatially from the
public stage. Thus, groups of two or three may for a few minutes carry
on a low-voiced conversation in Lappish in a corridor, on a staircase
landing or close together along the rail if the weather is not too bad.
The next moment, if a person with Norwegian or uncertain identity
approaches, the situation is smoothly redefined to a public one before
the intruder is within earshot.

The dynamics of interaction on board the coastal steamer may
serve as an illustration of some crucial points. The average public
situation offers a near optimum for Norwegians to realize their
spectrum of intentions, and the maintenance of a Norwegian identity
is not a question of serious concern. The Lapp, on the other hand, may
find himself in a serious dilemma. If he ignores Lapps, in the sense
that he continues to act as passenger in the idioms of the public sphere,
his kin/neighbour/friend relations with such persons will suffer; and
if he avoids encounters in the public sphere in favour of such kin/
neighbour/friend relations, he will be considered a covert Lapp, even
if he should be successful in controlling the audio-space.

Some crucial negative statements can be deduced logically from
this contrast, and may also be observed empirically: the totality of
passengers never divide into two permanent or semi-permanent groups
with reference to identity; nor will the simultaneous performance of
roles belonging to the public sphere and the Lappish sphere ever be
observed.

Given a situation of some duration where people of Lappish and
Norwegian identity come together for some purpose, alternation or


=== PDF p26 R (book-seq 51) ===
WHEN ETHNIC IDENTITY 1S A SOCIAL STIGMA 81

switching between situations of a public Norwegian type and a closed
Lappish type will invariably take place if the audio-space can be
controlled. A work situation that I witnessed a few times was when
a carrier came to the fjord to load dried fish. Five or six local men
were engaged in the work together with the Norwegian crew of three,
whose main job was the trimming of the vessel. The spatial setting
was a boat alongside the quay with a relatively big storehouse on
the shoreside where the fish was kept. On the quay among themselves
and in direct interaction with the crew on the quay edge, the local men
used Norwegian, inside the storchouse they used Lappish; they
switched every time they passed the door.

‘We have seen how the stigma of Lappishness is related to perfor-
mance on public stages as well as to unintentional leakages from their
ethnically homogeneous closed stages. There is also a third but uncom-
mon variant: situations where one of the parties is so much offended
that, in anger, he gives up all pretences, and an overt inter-ethnic
quarrel results. Inevitably, the Norwegians have as a rule the last
word in such quarrels and the Lapps are the losers. Let me review a
couple of incidents which exemplify this. A man from the fjord, one
of eight siblings, was educated as a school teacher. For some years
he held a position in a community in East Finnmark, known to people
in West Finnmark to be a Lappish dominated community; and when
a vacancy occurred at his home fjord he applied for appointment
there. This represented a challenge to the Norwegian dominated school
board who appeared to be against having a Lappish teacher in a Lap-
pish community, In their opinion the former Norwegian teacher had
carried on successful work of Norwegianization in the fjord, and they
were afraid that the new man might reverse this. A member of the
school board is reported to have said, in a public situation: ‘Let him
just stay on there in East Finnmark together with the Lapps, he really
fits in with conditions there . . .” He did not get the job.

The Norwegians’ authority to define behavioural standards, even,
for instance, in such a dignified institution as the school-board or in a
public place like the coastal steamer, is never questioned publicly by the
Lapps. But all Norwegians are not granted equal authority to define
situations and set standards. One man, who came to the fjord through
an uxorilocal marriage, exemplifies this situation. He accentuated his
Norwegianness very arrogantly and busied himself with leakage-
rumour about neighbouring Lapps. Most people in the fjord were
provoked by him, and occasionally when he was alone among a


=== PDF p27 L (book-seq 52) ===
L ——

52 HARALD EIDHEIM

plurality of local Lapps, his definition of the situation and role play
would be destroyed by some of the participants. Thus one day he set
out together with a few of the local Lapps to build a small bridge
across a brook. As usual he pretended to be the only expert in the
gang, but the others challenged his expertise and an argument
developed. Once the breach was obvious, the Lapps switched to Lappish
and continued the work according to their own design. The Norwegian,
now almost out of his mind with rage, waved his arms and shouted
insults and curses against the others; but their front was unbreakable.
In a few hours he had had enough and left the place in great indigna-
tion, having confirmed the truth in the familiar North-Norwegian
laconism: ‘There is a (real) difference between people and Lapps.’
(Det er forskjell pa folk og finn). This incident exemplifies the rare
situations where Lappish ‘cthnic solidarity’ is stressed in public.

Although rare, such incidents have definite and often long lasting
effects. They are remembered, recapitulated and interpreted in ethni-
cally homogeneous closed stages, and they reinforce the Norwegians'
jealous search for any signs of Lappish uppishness, while to the Lapps
each incident represents a reminder to be more cautious in their role-
play in the public sphere. A general feature of Lappish behaviour
in the public sphere is therefore an effort to avoid provocation. The
Lapp is often either a rather passive partner or he grants Norwegians
extravagant role support by being servile and manageable. If he
anticipates confrontations which may focus upon his identity he is apt
to withdraw, avoid persons, or even to change place of work.!®

The fact that the flow of interaction in the public sphere goes on
does not indicate that the relations are based on mutual and real
agreement about a shared identity. One may easily be misled to believe
this, but we must realize that an inherent quality of the public sphere
is that it gives no scope for Lapps to show behaviour which springs
from their Lappish identity without great social costs. Such behaviour
is reserved for closed stages, where the social dangers and defeats
that people have been subject to in public encounters are redundantly
reviewed and to some extent mended, or at least made temporarily
less severe, through the sharing of adversities with other Lapps. Hour-
long conversations will take place, as for instance when an adult man
came home from 2-3 months’ work outside the community, dropped
down into a chair in the kitchen, and blurted out: ‘It is fine to be able to
speak Lappish again and not to be constantly cautious about how to
express myself in Norwegian.” Or a Lapp might rail against the boss


=== PDF p27 R (book-seq 53) ===
WHEN ETHNIC IDENTITY IS A SOCIAL STIGMA 53

(something he could never do face to face) who gave him the worst
jobs and made hints about his being a Lapp when he thought the
job was not properly done. Others respond with old stories, and thus
the conversation goes on and on.

We have now seen how persons indirectly identify each other in
institutional behaviour in the public sphere and how Lapps also from
time to time expose their identity in non-institutional encounters. We
have also seen how indirect the sanctions are, i.e. it is clearly the
anticipation of future role dilemmas and not direct sanctions which
delimits and thereby adds form to the conventional roles played by
Lapps in public situations. This contrasts with the clear public con-
frontation between the two ethnic categories that is seen in the inland
regions of Finnmark (cf. the mobilization of clients in the entrepreneur
case (Eidheim 1963) and the programmatic idealization of pluralism
which is the basis of the nativistic Lappish movement (Eidheim 1968)).
In this area a Lappish identity is not only relevant in inter-ethnic
relations in the daily routine of public interpersonal behaviour, it is
also claimed and made relevant in the more formalized sectors of
social life, i.e. on boards and committees on township and higher levels
of administration. Furthermore, it is expressed in mass media and in
voluntary associations, and it is displayed in a growing cult of Lappish
nativistic idioms like language, dress, folk songs, and cultural history.

Compared with this general picture of the inland regions, a Lappish
identity in the Coast-Lappish area described here has very limited
organizational potential. It is only relevant on closed stages which
are established under the protective constraints of limited time and
space. Lappish co-activity in the inland regions is a public affair which
also allows the maximization and defence of Lappish values; in the
coastal area, however, the manipulation of time and space in order to
establish closed stages, and what goes on on these stages, may rather be
understood as techniques to hide, but thereby also to sustain, a disa-
bility (or stigma) which people cannot escape.

I have used the term sphere of interaction to conceptualize ‘public
life’ and ‘Lappish secret life’ respectively. One might alternately use
the term network and define network as a field of relations in which
exchangeable values flow, thus taking exchange in a wide and
behavouristic sense. Networks emerge then as a consequence of the
local distribution of exchange resources in the population.

Exchange resources in this sense are part of the social landscape
(provenance, kinship relations, physiognomy, etc) and they are


=== PDF p28 L (book-seq 54) ===
54 HarALD EIDHEIM

recognizable in people’s actions (command of language, role-taking
etc.). The Lapps’ exchange resources may also be effected by leakages
from closed stages and occasional inter-ethnic quarrels. The existence
of a Lappish network indicates that there are exchange resources
which can only be marketed to certain persons, i.e. to persons of one’s
own identity, while the public network shows the field of relations
where the exchange is such that ethnic identity is overlooked, through
tact on the part of the Norwegians and covering on the part of the
Lapps.

Both parties try to behave as if ethnicity ‘does not count’; however,
we have the paradoxical situation that it is ethnic status which under-
lies and delimits relations in the public network. In this network per-
sons of different identities interact in conventional and narrowly
defined role-dyads or role-clusters, and there are ‘agreements’ on
exchange if pragmatic and proximate ends are fulfilled. It is for
instance very unlikely that a Norwegian merchant will obstruct
customer/merchant relations because he knows where a customer
comes from, or because the customer makes grammatical errors when
asking for a commodity. Quite another thing is the type of relations
where ‘whole persons’ are involved. By and large such intimate rela-
tions are only consummated between persons of the same identity.
Within the local area, a Lapp might establish such a relation with a
Norwegian. Those who have a perfect command of Norwegian, and a
Norwegian physiognomy, have the best chances of doing this, especial-
ly if they are willing to cut themselves off from intimate interaction
with other Lapps. This indicates that in such relations cthnic idioms
rank highly among the exchange resources. To pursue the above illus-
tration: the merchant’s daughter would not think of marrying a man
from a stigmatized Lappish community, who in addition has a Lappish
physiognomy and makes grammatical errors.'*

It is implicit in such terms as ‘district’ and ‘social landscape’ that
exchange resources are in part conditioned by local knowledge and
valuations and to this extent only locally valid. Thus chances to pass
can be improved by moving out.!* If a person has other exchange
resources and is willing to settle in a Norwegian community or a town
outside his district there are certainly better possibilities to establish
and consummate intimate or comprehensive relations with Norwegians.
I have mentioned above that there is historical evidence to show that
the synchronic situation depicted here represents a phase in a long
range and directional process of assimilation (N orwegianization). This


=== PDF p28 R (book-seq 55) ===
WHEN ETHNIC IDENTITY IS A SOCIAL STIGMA =
long range process of de-stigmatization of total Lappish communities
is of course a more complex and intriguing problem than the ex area
Norwegianization of individual persons. I have not myself done field
work in communities which earlier — say hundred years ago — were
regarded as Lappish but are now Norwegian; such communities are on
record. What I can conclude about such processes is therefore only
a deduction from the present analysis.

It would seem as if Lappish closed stages represent a necessary
solution to a series of dilemmas as long as people’s behaviour rein-
forces a cognitive dualistic system in the local Norwegian population.
This system also constitutes a charter of identification and a mode of
sanctioning. People in the Lappish fjord community, with their aspira-
tions directed towards participation in the public network as it is
defined by Norwegians, do what they can to present themselves as
full-fledged participants. Many families have even made the drastic
decision to prevent their children from learning Lappish. Presumably,
as their performance in Norwegian language improves, there will be
a concomitant decrease in the reinforcing effect of their behaviour
upon the charter of identification which in turn brings about a reduc-
tion in sanctions. Likewise one would expect a decrease in the necessity
to maintain a Lappish network as the principal field for intimate
relations and as stages where social costs may be shared.

However, it is not only actual behaviour in this district and com-
munity which has repercussions on the local charter of identification.
This is also affected by the great variety of public display of Lappish-
ness in the wider Lappish population, for instance in the inland area
of the county. As the notion of physical descent is linked to Lappish
behaviour, one would suppose that a Lappish stigma on this particular
community will prevail in some rudimentary form even generations
after the complete abandonment of the Lappish language, granted that
a flourishing Lappish culture is maintained in the inland.

What is said here about the long range process is tentative and has
obvious limitations. But we need to consider the question of long range
persistence of ethnic cleavages, something which usually is not exposed
in the day-to-day processes we observe in the field situation. Based
on precisely that kind of material it has been my main intention to
analyze the dynamics of inter-ethnic relations in a population where
institutionalized inter-ethnic relations are not organized with reference
to the respective ethnic status directly, but which nevertheless are
shaped by them. It is in some sense an analogue to a shadow play. The


=== PDF p29 L (book-seq 56) ===
e ——

56 HARALD EIDHEIM

behavioural forms which have classificatory significance for the actors
can only be understood by uncovering and systematizing local values
and sanctions. The behavioural forms may be ‘objective’, as for in-
stance language, or they may be implications of the general character
of inter-ethnic behaviour as role-taking. The organizational potential
of separate identities is clearly indicated in the stages of everyday life.

‘We must bear in mind that it is the general character of local ecology
and society which provide the meaningful context in which a Lappish/
Norwegian ethnic dichotomy is articulated. The organizational poten-
tial of ethnic identities is conditioned by local circumstances. Thus
the local context of Reindeer Lapps/marginal Norwegian farmers,
which for instance prevails in the southern Lapp districts of Norway,
will generate quite other patterns of inter-ethnic relations (cf. Falken-
berg 1964).

1 The author did field work here for five months in 1960 and has earlier published
an article on social relations between coast Lapps and Nomad Lapps in the district
(Eidheim 1966).

2 In some localities, however, like the fjord community where I lived during most
of my field work, there is a certain concentration of what is currently understood
to be the Lappish physical type.

3 And they also had other ‘secrets’ which they now unveiled to me; preferences
for dishes which were regarded as Lappish, some old people preferred to eat with
their fingers, and three or four of these also used Lappish fur moccasins (but only
in their houses). Most people had put coins and other amulets into the foundations
of their new houses and they also used certain spells when slaughtering, the first
time they set their nets after New Year, etc.

4 See also Eidheim (1966).

5 Attempts to establish and run local branches of various national associations have
been made at intervals since the beginning of this century, usually promoted by
teachers or other ddZat. However, all attempts have been short-lived. This is in
contrast to the material presented by Robert Paine from another Lappish Coast
fjord (cf. Paine 1965).

® The school aims exclusively at communicating those values which are current
in an idealized Norwegian society, and for generations it has had the implicit goal
(at times also explicit) to Norwegianize the Lappish communities (Dahl 1957).
Norwegian teachers and the few Norwegians who have married into the community
have always assumed the role of agents in the process of Norwegianization, i.c.
they have defined the behaviour standards in the public sphere.

7 Only very few adult Lappish persons in the district do not show traces of one or
more of the stigmata listed under 1, 2, 3 and 6; as a rule they exhibit all these. In
addition local Norwegians enrich the syndrome e. g. by referring to concrete role-
behaviour which in their opinion demonstrates that Lapps are secretive, superstitious,
stupid, etc.

8 In fact, if we add a time perspective we will easily see how the public sphere
progressively has taken on new dimensions in the last generations. This, of course,
is an indication of the directional and long range process we call assimilation.

 An example: One of them said, speaking about housing: ‘I made up my mind not


=== PDF p29 R (book-seq 57) ===
— e —

WHEN ETHNIC IDENTITY 1S A SOCIAL STIGMA 57

to accept these drawings of standard houses. It did cost me a lot of extra money, but
I wanted to show them what a real house looks like and how it is to be furnished.’
He was the only one in the community who had built a house with a concrete base-
ment under the whole house. The house was built on an elevated site, and he had
painted the lower part of it in a bold pink colour. ‘Of course,’ he said, ‘people here
have good houses now (you would not believe how they lived before the War) but
remember that the administration forced these standard houses on them: if you
come back here in a few years time you may learn something about the way they
have kept them!”

'* However, Norwegians bchave with considerable “tact’ in public relations. They
point out in private to me or to each other that ‘yes, he is a Lap, but he is all
right” A teacher said: ‘I know that many of my pupils are Lapps, of course, I have
the tact not to take notice of the fact.”

It is symptomatic that five out of six persons with a Norwegian identity who have
married into the fjord, come from communities outside the district.

* Such emigration, especially by young unmarried people, takes place, but not to
the extent that the population is drained off from the community.



=== PDF p30 L (book-seq 58) ===
Economic Determinants

in Ethnic Processes
by Gunnar Haaland

This essay describes and analyses processes of boundary maintenance
between two of the major ethnic groups in Western Sudan: the Fur
and the Baggara. I shall discuss the nature of ethnic identities and the
determinants in change of identity. In the discussion I shall draw on
data collected during one year’s field work in the Lower Wadi Zone
of the District of Western Darfur.

The Fur are probably autochthonous to the district, with the Jebel
Marra Mountain as their core area (cf. map on p. 60). Their language
is only remotely related to other languages in the Sudan savannah belt
(Greenberg 1966). They are sedentary hoe cultivators relying mainly
on subsistence cultivation of millet in the rainy season. Residentially
they are divided into villages of varying size, from about fifty to a
few thousand inhabitants. In total population they probably number
about half a million.

Their territory borders in the east and west on the territories of
other sedentary ethnic groups (Masalit, Tama, Berti, Birgid and Daju
are the most important). To the north is the area of nomadic and semi-
nomadic tribes (Beni Hussein Baggara, Zaghawa cattle and camel
nomads and various Arabic camel driving tribes) and to the south there
are several Baggara tribes (Taisha, Beni Helba, and Rizeigat).

Before colonial administration (established in Darfur 1916) a Fur
sultan ruled the Fur and at times also neighbouring groups. Today the
Sudan government maintains peace in the area. A shallow hierarchy
of Fur chiefs is incorporated in the Sudan administrative system. They
are delegated administrative functions (collection of taxes and jurisdic-
tion) and their decisions are sanctioned by the central government
(Barth 1964c).

The historical origin of the Baggara is connected with the Arabic
invasion of Sudan from the fourteenth century onwards. The Baggara


=== PDF p30 R (book-seq 59) ===
EconoMic DETERMINANTS IN ETHNIC PROCESSES <]

claim descent from the Arabic invaders and consider themselves
Arabs. While they have remained culturally distinct from earlier
inhabitants of negro stock, they can today hardly be distinguished
from this population on the basis of physical features.

The Baggara are cattle nomads, but most of them also practise some
millet cultivation in the rainy season. They are divided into several
tribal groups, each with a recognized homeland (dar) and with a
hierarchy of chiefs. Their area extends in a belt from the Nile to
Lake Chad. The Baggara local communities are migratory camps of
two to twenty tents. In the rainy season they stay in their dar where
conditions are favourable for the cattle. As the dry season approaches,
lack of water and grass forces them to migrate to other areas (Cun-
nison 1966).

About 30,000 Baggara nomads (mainly members of the Beni Hussein
and Beni Helba tribes) spend the dry season among the Fur in the
lower parts of the Western Darfur. Competition for resources is slight
since the two groups exploit different ecological niches. In the rainy
season, when the Fur do most of their cultivation, the presence of flies
and leeches makes the areca unfavourable for cattle and thus also for
the Baggara. Conflict does arise when cows invade dry season irrigated
gardens, but this is not very important since irrigated agriculture is
still only pursued on a small scale.

Ethnic categories and inter-ethnic relations

The Fur and Baggara have remained culturally distinct although they
have been in contact for centuries. They differ with regard to general
style of life, subsistence pattern, overt cultural features like language,
house type and weapons, and standards for evaluation of performance.

Fur-Baggara contact is regulated by shared codification of the
reciprocal statuses that are appropriate for members of the two groups
respectively. Both the Fur and the Baggara are Muslims and may thus
interact on ritual occasions. A Baggara may camp in the Fur area in
the dry season, but is then subject to the jurisdiction of the local Fur
chief (sheikh or omda). In the market place they provide complemen-
tary goods: the Baggara supply milk and livestock, and the Fur supply
agricultural products of which millet is of major importance to the
Baggara. The herding contract is another basis for Fur-Baggara
transactions. Persons in Fur villages may own cattle, but ecological
conditions make it risky to keep them in the villages in the Fur area
in the rainy season. Cattle-owning Fur farmers may avoid this problem


=== PDF p31 L (book-seq 60) ===
60 GUNNAR HAALAND

Arab camel nomads carnel nomads

® E| Fasner

Rizeigat (B)

LEGEND
Ethnic groups I tribes

KILOMETRE'S

9 2 40 S5 80 W0

District of Western Darfur : Distribution of major ethnic groups.

by handing their cows over to Baggara nomads. The Baggara keeps
the cows in his own herd and drives them to his dar in the rainy
season. He gets the milk from the cows while the owner gets the calves.
The Baggara is not responsible if predatory animals or disease kill
the cows.

The articulation of Fur and Baggara is thus mainly based on the
complementarity of goods and services connected with their different
subsistence patterns. They agree on the codes and values that apply
to the situations in which they articulate, whereas comprehensive
differences are maintained in other sectors of activity. These dif-
ferences do not just relate to features that are of differential functional
value in the pursuit of agriculture and animal husbandry respectively,


=== PDF p31 R (book-seq 61) ===
EcoNoMic DETERMINANTS IN ETHNIC PROCESSES &1

but are of a more arbitrary character like language, standards relating
to kinship and marriage, and the importance of hospitality.

I shall argue here that these differences are maintained because
Fur and Baggara are categories in terms of which actors identify them-
selves and their partners. Interaction is structured by a categorical
dichotomization of people who are like oneself, with whom one may
have relations covering all sectors of activity, and people who are
different from oneself, having different evaluations, with whom one
only interacts in a limited number of capacities. These identities are
signalized by several easily identifiable features: villages of huts made
of mud and straw versus camps of mat tents arranged in a circle, Fur
language versus Arabic, the throwing-spear versus the Baggara lance.
I shall argue that this dichotomization of ethnic identities implies
restrictions on interaction and that these restrictions are crucial in
maintaining the cultural distinctiveness of the Fur and the Baggara,
because it allows inter-ethnic relations to cover only a small sector of
activity. Differences in codes and values applying to other sectors of
activity are not made relevant to inter-ethnic encounters, and conse-
quently they are not adjusted. It is generally accepted by both the
Fur and the Baggara that a person’s behaviour should be judged
according to the standards of evaluation that apply to Ais ethnic group.

Processes of identity change

The two groups are recruited not only by biological reproduction, but
also by the incorporation of people from other groups. In the following
I shall analyse the determinants by which individuals are sloughed off
from the Fur local community and incorporated into a Baggara com-
munity. I shall try to show how these processes can be explained as a
result of the specific character of the Fur economic system and the
ecological restrictions on cattle husbandry in Darfur.

The economic system will be described here as a set of alternative
strategies for the allocation of value. Such an approach focuses on the
cconomic units, the forms of value they allocate, and the institutional
mechanisms by which values in various forms may be transformed to
other forms.

Among the Fur every adult individual, male or female, is an
cconomic unit.! The marriage contract does not establish a family
household; husband and wife thus constitute two management units.
They have usufruct rights to separate fields, they plan their produc-
tion separately, they keep the product in separate stores and they


=== PDF p32 L (book-seq 62) ===
62 GUNNAR HAALAND

allocate the product independently. The only reciprocal economic
commitments that the marriage contract establishes are the wife’s duty
to make porridge and beer for the husband (of millet taken from his
store) and the husband’s duty to buy clothes for his wife and children
once a year. The wife is responsible for growing millet to feed the
children.

Every person who is recognized as a member of a Fur local com-
munity has access to land. Land is administrated by the local chief
and is allocated to members of the community according to need.
Usufruct rights can be exercised only as long as one cultivates the
land. When land is laid fallow after a few years’ cultivation, the
farmer has no rights to it any longer; rights to reallocation revert to
the chief. The farmer has no right to alienate his land.

Each adult individual among the Fur has the necessary resources
for a farming enterprise: access to land and his own working capacity.
The management of these resources is relatively simple. The larger
part of agricultural production is oriented towards the cultivation of
crops for private consumption. Millet is the staple crop and is consumed
in the form of beer and porridge which are the main items in the Fur
diet. Several institutional rules constitute limitations and possibilities
for transformations of value through the process of exchange. The sale
of porridge and beer for cash is restricted by ideas of shame associated
with such transactions. The institution of the beer-party does, how-
ever, allow for an exchange of beer for labour. By providing beer, one
can invite neighbours to drink and help weed the millet fields. The
institution of the market place allows for cash exchanges of agri-
cultural products (onion, tomatoes, okra, chili, millet, mango, citrus),
animal products (livestock, meat, milk), the blacksmith’s products, and
imported goods (sugar, tea, salt, cloth). The character of land-rights
makes it impossible to exchange money for land. Exchange of money
for labour is also restricted, since it is considered shameful to work
for money. The bride price institution allows for conversion of value
from the cash sector to a wife. Money is furthermore convertible into
social esteem if it is spent on pilgrimage (haj) or feast (karama).

It is within these institutional rules that a Fur has to manage his
resources in order to satisfy his consumption needs.

The alternative strategies of value-transformations that are possible
within this framework are depicted in the diagram.

This is a multicentric system where there are restrictions on trans-
formation of value from some forms to other forms. Some forms of


=== PDF p32 R (book-seq 63) ===
EcoNomIic DETERMINANTS IN ETHNIC PROCESSES 62

CONSUMPTION

Hay

Diagrams showing the principal allocative choices open to the Fur farmers in the Lower Wadi.
Thick arrows indicate the main direction of flow ; dotted lines separate spheres of the economy.

value are thus not reciprocally convertible. One implication of this is
that they are not made comparable to each other, i.e. one has no con-
ception of their relative value. In this system there are only two invest-
ment possibilities. One may grow millet, brew beer and invite to a
beer-party and thereby mobilize labour. Decreasing efficiency of labour
in bigger beer-parties limits the profitability of investment in this
sector. The other investment possibility is cattle. Cattle constitute the
only way of accumulating capital and are an investment that gives
profit in the form of calves. The profitability of this mode of invest-
ment is, among other things, dependent upon how the cows thrive in
the area where they are kept in the rainy season. Most Fur farmers
therefore prefer to leave their cows with a Baggara. This, however,
is also a hazardous arrangement, because it is difficult for the Fur
farmer to know whether losses stem from causes for which the Baggara
herdsman is not responsible, or whether the herdsman has slaughtered
and sold the owner’s stock. The more capital a Fur has invested in
cattle, the more concerned will he be about the risk he takes when


=== PDF p33 L (book-seq 64) ===
64 GUNNAR HAALAND

handing over his cows to the Baggara. Five cows represent a value of
about £40-50, a considerable amount of money. The Fur farmer’s
dilemma is that, on the one hand, the cows do not thrive in the farm-
land area, but that, on the other hand, the herding contract is a risky
venture.

The solution which cattle-owning farmers frequently choose when
they have from five to ten cows is to establish themselves as nomads
(Haaland 1968). This seems to be a paradoxical choice: the most
wealthy farmers become the most marginal nomads. As nomads they
will not be able to maintain the level of consumption (in terms of their
evaluation of consumption goods) that they could as farmers. I will
argue that the rationality of the choice can be understood when it is
related to the multicentric character of the economic system.

By being a member of a local community, a villager automatically
has the right to usufruct of land. A Fur has, therefore, no conception
of the value of land relative to other forms of value. The choice
between being a farmer and becoming a nomad is thus not a choice
of whether to accumulate capital in the form of land or in the form
of cattle. The choice is whether to secure the cattle capital by becom-
ing 2 nomad one-self and living with the reduced level of consump-
tion that this implies, or to continue as a farmer with a satisfying level
of consumption and take the risk of losing the capital one has accumu-
lated. When the cattle capital reaches £40-50 the Fur finds the
first alternative preferable.

In choosing seasonal migrations the nomadic novice has to consider
what conditions will be like for the cattle in various arcas as well as
for millet cultivation. The smaller the herd, the more heavily cultiva-
tion opportunities are weighed. The income from a herd of five to ten
cows is still so small that the nomad will, to a large extent, be depen-
dent on millet cultivation. This implies that he cannot migrate to the
Baggara land in the rainy season, because conditions for millet culti-
vation are not good enough there. The Fur nomads migrate to higher,
sandy parts of the Fur area where the risk of losing the cattle is smaller
than on the low-lying farmlands, and where the conditions for millet
cultivation are better than in the Baggara area. If the herd increases the
nomad can take the welfare of his cattle more into account when he
makes his choice of migrations. When he has about twenty-five cows
he does not have to rely on millet cultivation, and he therefore chooses
to migrate to the Baggara area in the rainy season. A successful
economic career among the Fur thus starts in the village and leads to


=== PDF p33 R (book-seq 65) ===
EcoNoMic DETERMINANTS IN ETHNIC PROCESSES 65

nomadic migrations within the Fur area, and finally ends up with the
long rainy season migrations to the Baggara area.

In the first phase of nomadization, the Fur nomad camps together
with other marginal nomads from his own area. Due to the differential
growth of the various herds of the camp, disagreements about migra-
tions may easily arise. A critical situation emerges when a herdowner
has enough cattle to migrate out of the Fur area in the rainy season.
If he starts the long migrations, he will have to leave the camp of
Fur-speaking nomads and try to attach himself to a camp of Arabic
speaking Baggara nomads. His children will then grow up learning
Arabic, not Fur, and they will eventually get spouses from the Baggara
communities. Each year about one per cent of the population of the
lower-lying areas of Western Darfur leave the villages and establish
themselves as nomads. Although those who do not succeed will return
to a sedentary life in the villages where they are accepted as members,
some will manage to build up herds of considerable size, and their
descendants will not learn the Fur culture. They will constitute disap-
pearing lines in local Fur genealogies.

Through the nomadization process individuals are thus sloughed
off from Fur local communities and eventually incorporated into
Baggara communities. But at what point does the change of identity
actually take place. When does a Fur become a Baggara? Is it when
he establishes himself as a nomad? Is it when he has enough cattle to
attach himself to Baggara camp? Or is the ethnic transformation
process completed only with his children, who have not learned Fur
culture and who are not recognized as members of any Fur com-
munity? To solve this problem I find it necessary to specify the nature
of ethnic identity change and the criteria applied in ethnic clas-
sification. Are we to study this as a long-lasting process of personality
change and concentrate on the socializing mechanisms? Should we
look at the cultural inventory of the nomads and compare it to that
of the sedentary Fur and that of the Baggara, or should we try to
discover how people categorize the nomadized Fur and what the
crucial criteria for categorization are? I shall discuss these problems
by a further analysis of some consequences of this nomadization.

I have claimed that the identities of Fur and Baggara are associated
with different value standards. Some of these differences relate to the
evaluation of goods and activities associated with a sedentary versus
a nomadic style of life, where Fur preferences are for village-life and
Baggara preferences are for nomadism, respectively. If a Fur, how-

5. Barth


=== PDF p34 L (book-seq 66) ===
66 GUNNAR HAALAND

ever, succeeds in accumulating cattle, he will sooner or later realize
that the optimal way of maintaining this form of value is to establish
himself as a nomad. This choice implies that he puts himself into a
position where he will not have access to other values current among
the Fur. According to Fur standards of evaluation, the consumption
pattern of the nomad is a poor substitute for the consumption pattern
of the villager: ‘Milk yesterday, milk today, milk tomorrow, that is
not good’, complained one newly established nomad. The implication
was that beer was preferable, but as a nomad he could not afford it.
Unfavourable comments on the small tent that is used by the nomads,
as compared to the larger and more comfortable hut of the sedentary
Fur, are also frequently heard from nomadized Fur. The nomad will
furthermore not have the opportunity to participate in communal
activities like village dances, beer-parties and other feasts. These are
the hardships faced by a Fur when he chooses nomadization. If he
specializes in maximizing one form of value, cattle, his satisfaction in
other goods is reduced. Judged according to Fur standards a nomad
is more successful than villagers with regard to accumulation of
wealth, but the activities he has to perform as a nomad clearly imply
disadvantages compared with village life. An evaluation of the
advantages and disadvantages of nomadic life according to Fur stan-
dards can thus not give a conclusive answer to the problem of whether
a nomad will maintain his allegiance to these standards or whether
he will prefer to assume Baggara identity and be judged according to
the standards of that culture.

The total life situation in the nomad camp is, however, radically
different from that of the village. As a nomad a person’s interest is
focused on cattle, the resource on which his livelihood depends, and
this form of capital requires a kind of foresight in management that
is not present among the sedentary Fur farmers. A subsistence based
on animal husbandry thus generates a different attitude towards
saving and investment. The more corporate character of the nomad
family also gives a basis for long-term planning that is not present in
the atomistically organized village community where the individuals’
need for achieving recognition of social identity leads them to orientate
a great deal of their activity towards participation in informal com-
munity life. These are circumstances that generate differences of
evaluation between nomads and settled people. Do we conclude then
that the value changes that are generated by the practice of nomadic
subsistence will sooner or later make it impossible for a nomad to


=== PDF p34 R (book-seq 67) ===
EcoNoMic DETERMINANTS IN ETHNIC PROCESSES =

maintain his allegiance to Fur standards of evaluation? Comparative
material from other ethnographic contexts suggests that the answer
is no. Such circumstances do not invariably lead to a change of identity.
There are cthnic groups that maintain their unity despite the fact
that their populations are distributed over niches that imply just as
radical differences in life situation as that between sedentary and
nomadic Fur. Arabic nomads, farmers and townsmen is one such case.
However, a Fur who has established himself as a nomad exhibits
several socio-cultural traits that make him distinct from sedentary
Fur. As farmers, husband and wife constitute separate households, as
nomads they pool their resources and establish a family household
similar to the household form of the Baggara. With respect to the
relationship between marriage partners, there seems to be greater
similarity between the nomadized Fur and the Baggara than between
nomadized and sedentary Fur. But are we permitted to present social
forms of that order as criteria for classification of persons as Fur or
Baggara? If so, the family form of the nomadized Fur would indicate
that they must be classified as Baggara when they establish themselves
as nomads. Such a point of view would have to be based on a hypoth-
esis that the similarities in social forms are a consequence of the Fur
adopting Baggara ideas about the marriage relationship. I would
argue, however, that this change in family form can be more ade-
quately explained by an alternative hypothesis that does not take
cultural borrowing into account (Barth 1968, Haaland 1968). Cattle
nomadism implies organizational problems that make the Fur pattern
of individual houscholds inadequate. Cattle have to be herded and
milked, milk has to be churned and marketed, new pastures and camp
sites have to be located, and millet has to be cultivated in the rainy
season. Several of these activities have to be performed simultaneously.
The economic units practising cattle husbandry can therefore not be
built on single individuals; they have to be built on units that include
at least two persons. While the Fur value husband-wife autonomy in
economic life, there is no prohibition on cooperation. As long as the
family subsists by millet cultivation there is no great economic advan-
tage gained by pooling resources; it makes no difference for the result
of production if husband and wife work together or separately.

When a Fur establishes himself as a nomad, he bases his subsistence
on a more complex process of production. Great economic advantages
are obtained if the spouses agree on a division of labour within a
joint economic enterprise. The emergence of family households among


=== PDF p35 L (book-seq 68) ===
68 GUNNAR HAALAND

the nomadized Fur can be explained, then, by the mutual advantages
secured by the pooling of resources; i.e. family households would have
emerged whether there were Baggara nomads present or not. Overt
similarities in social forms can thus not be used as criteria for ethnic
classification if these similarities are generated by the restricting
effects of ecologic conditions.

Observing a camp of nomadized Fur we notice few visible criteria
by which it can be distinguished from a Baggara camp. The tents are
made of the same kind of straw mats, and are arranged in the same
circular pattern as in Baggara camps. The personnel of the camp use
the same kind of material equipment as do the Baggara. There are
thus no diacritica that signal an identity different from the Baggara
(but they are easily distinguished from recently immigrated Fulani
nomads). It is only when one recognizes that the language used in daily
conversation is Fur and not Arabic that one can identify their Fur
origin. When asked what tribe (Arabic: gabila) they belong to, the
nomads will identify themselves as Fur. In fact, I first became aware
of the existence of nomadized Fur when one of my informants in a
village inquired whether I wanted to visit Fur people who live as
nomads.

By their inventory of objective cultural traits, these nomadized Fur
therefore can neither be classified unambiguously as Fur nor as
Baggara. They seem to be persons in an intermediate position exhibit-
ing traits associated with both of these ethnic groups, and if these
traits are the basis for classification one is led to see them as constitut-
ing a transitional category. Are they then identified by themselves and
by others as belonging to such a category? 1 have said that they identify
themselves as Fur when asked about their tribe. But this does not
imply that ‘Fur’ is their actual label, the category that defines their
position in situations of contact with Fur or Baggara. If one asks a
Baggara what his tribe is, he will not say he is a Baggara, but will
identify himself as a member of one of the many Baggara tribes such

as Rizeigat, and Beni Helba. In this context the term ‘Fur’ is of the
same order as ‘Rizeigat’ or ‘Beni Helba’. It is a name referring to
the ancestry of the person. A Fur nomad could not have identified
himself as Rizeigat because too many people would have known that
his father was a Fur. The fact that the term Fur is applied to 2 nomad
in this context does not necessarily imply that social situations in which
he participates are structured by the codes and values applying to a
person of Fur identity. This is the crucial criterion of ethnic classifica-


=== PDF p35 R (book-seq 69) ===
EcoNoMic DETERMINANTS IN ETHNIC PROCESSES 69

tion if we approach ethnicity as a principle of social organization, as a
categorization defining what can be made relevant in interaction
between persons of the same and persons of different ethnic identity.
From this point of view the nomadized Fur will be classified as Fur,
Baggara or a separate category depending on how their participation
in social situations is defined, what status sets are mobilized, and what
standards are applied in judging their role performance.

As a nomad, a Fur offers the same prestations as a Baggara in
transactions with members of the sedentary population. Market-like
situations are defined by the same status sets whether a nomadized
Fur or a Baggara interacts with the settled Fur. He will, furthermore,
have the same kinds of conflicts with the sedentary Fur as the Baggara
have, because of the problems involved in keeping the cows away
from the irrigated gardens. But these are again similarities that arise
from the practice of animal husbandry and not from sharing the same
ethnic identity.

As distinct ethnic groups the Fur and the Baggara have different
preferences and they accept the fact that their behaviour is not judged
by the same standards. The way actors (Fur and Baggara) categorize
a nomadized Fur will then be manifest in the standards they apply
when they judge his behaviour.

If the nomadized Fur were judged by the standards of Fur culture,
one would expect role differences to emerge between them and the
Baggara. One would furthermore expect that their Fur identity would
be signalized by easily visible cultural features. This, however, is, as
I have said, not the case: the origin of the Fur nomads can be
discovered only from the persistence of such habits as are difficult
to change overnight, like language. Sociologically significant dif-
ferences in role play can hardly be distinguished. This indicates that
nomadized Fur are subject to the same role restraints as the Baggara,
ie. they are categorized as if they were Baggara and their
performance is judged by the standards of Baggara culture. This
was once clearly brought out by comments exchanged between my
assistant (a Fur) and one of my informants from a Fur village com-
munity when we had visited a camp of newly established Fur nomads.
When visiting a Baggara camp one expects to be received with a
show of hospitality; tea is brought forth and served generously. The
situation is not tense, for the Baggara act with confidence towards
strangers and conversation is easy. In a Fur community there are
similar idioms of hospitality, but strangers are not received in the


=== PDF p36 L (book-seq 70) ===
70 GUNNAR HaaranD

same confident way. The Fur are suspicious towards people they do
not know, and it usually takes them some time to overcome their
reluctance to engage in conversation. There is thus qualitative dif-
ference between the Fur and the Baggara in situations where a show
of hospitality is expected. When we came to the camp of the Fur
nomads we were received in a manner resembling more the expected
reception in a Fur village than in a Baggara camp. Tea was not brought
forth, conversation was difficult, and a bowl of milk was served only
after some time. On our way back to the village my two companions
complained about the behaviour of the nomads: ‘This was not the way
one should be received by a nomad.’ In other words, they evaluated
the performance of the nomadized Fur with reference to the Baggara’s
standards of hospitality and not with reference to their own Fur
standards.

This exemplifies, I shall argue, the crucial point in the categorical
dichotomization of Fur and Baggara: a person who pursues a
nomadic subsistence is categorized as a Baggara, i.e. he is expected
to behave like a Baggara and he is judged as if he were a Baggara.
That he speaks Fur only implies that his interaction with the farmers
can be easier. Nomadized Fur still have relatives in the village com-
munity, but the kinship relations are not mobilized as often as they
were formerly, and kinship status is only made relevant in a limited
sector of interaction with the related villagers. The fact that nomadiza-
tion is not an irreversible choice (the nomadized Fur will still be
accepted as member of a local community, if he wants to turn farmer
again) does not contradict this statement. The nomadized Fur has a
resource that the Baggara does not have, but this it not a resource
that he can exploit as a nomad, nor does it have to be maintained by
any kind of prestation to the local community. It derives simply from
his knowledge of Fur culture and does not affect any of his activities
as a nomad. That some of the nomads have a background which makes
it easier for them to return to the local community if they
fail as nomads does not alter the fact that they are considered Baggara
as long as they practise nomadism.

If one approaches the problem of how to classify the nomadized
Fur from the social point of view, through the categories held by the
actors, the difficulties of classification are solved. According to this
perspective, a Fur becomes a Baggara as soon as he establishes himself
as a nomad. People categorize him as Baggara, and his participation
in social situations is therefore prescribed by the same rules as those


=== PDF p36 R (book-seq 71) ===
EcoNoMic DETERMINANTS IN ETHNIC PROCESSES et

which apply to members of Baggara tribes. By this approach one
avoids the psychological problems involved in considering change of
ethnic identity as a question of personality adjustments. Of course
these problems are important and interesting, but I argue that one
can most adequately study the organizational consequences of ethnic
categorization when the psychological constitution of the actors is
excluded from the analysis. The fact that a Fur does not change his
personality immediately when he establishes himself as nomad and
that he, in some situations, is not able to act like a Baggara does not
alter the fact that the adequacy of his role performance is judged by
Baggara standards. The social constraints imposed on him are of the
same kind as those imposed on a Baggara, but he may be less able to
make a successful performance within these constraints,

Nomadized Fur may therefore be regarded by other Baggara as
inferior, but this means that they are inferior as Baggara, not that
they are an inferior ethnic group. The inclusion of successful Fur
nomads in Baggara camps and their marriages with members of
Baggara tribes are facts that validate this assertion.

Thus the maintenance of the boundary between the Fur and the
Baggara is probably related to the distribution of rights in productive
resources. Right to utilize land accrues to everybody who is accepted
as a member of a Fur village. Agricultural land is held only as long
as it is actually cultivated. Access to grazing is free for those who have
cattle to herd. Consequently, a person can control the factors of pro-
duction only by practising the activities involved in the processes of
production. The activities of farming and of cattle husbandry imply
two different styles of life, and these styles are categorized as Fur and
Baggara. Land and grazing rights can thus not be accumulated by any
specific transaction. Only by practising activities that identify him as
Fur or Baggara can a person acquire access to these resources.

Conclusion

I have tried to show the determinants underlying the nomadization of
sedentary Fur hoe cultivators, and I have argued that this nomadiza-
tion implies a change of ethnic identity. This analysis has been focused
on conditions as they can be observed today, and I have said nothing
about the time perspective of this process. I have argued that given
the specific economic structure of the Fur, and given the ecological
setting of the lowlands of Western Darfur, a nomadization of some
Fur will follow. Both of these factors may be assumed to have been


=== PDF p37 L (book-seq 72) ===
72 GUNNAR HAALAND

fairly constant for centuries, thus suggesting that this process has had
some permanence over time.

One circumstance that I have taken as given in the analysis is the
political situation. In situations characterized by inter-ethnic tension
and warfare, the restrictions on change of identity would be radically
different from what they are in the present situation where peace is
maintained by the central administration, as the case has been since
1916. It is therefore not possible to project the rates of nomadization
to periods when political conditions may have been different. I have,
however, information about cases of nomadization that date back to
the time before colonial rule, a fact that shows that nomadization also
occurred in politically more unstable periods in the history of Darfur.

Hence, 1 will hypothesize that there has been some nomadization
of the sedentary hoe cultivators ever since the arrival of the Arabs in
Darfur, although at varying rates. Before that time cattle may have
been kept in favourably located villages, but nomadism was probably
not practiced as a technique of husbandry.

Certain linguistic data point to the same conclusion: Fur words for
those aspects of cattle husbandry that are connected with nomadism
are clearly derived from Arabic, whereas the vocabulary for describing
the animal itself is Fur.

In the future, this trend towards nomadization will probably stop.
1 have related nomadization to the lack of investment objects in
traditional Fur economy. Today, changes are taking place which alter
these circumstances (Barth 1967b, Haaland 1968). Both land and
labour are being monetized, a process that opens new investment
alternatives for the actors. In the two villages in my field sample
which have progressed furthest in the direction of a comprehensive
market economy, no cases of nomadization have occurred over the
last 25 years.

The nomadization trend has important consequences for the demo-
graphic balance between Fur and Baggara. The Baggara is a group
that probably cannot maintain its present numerical size by biological
reproduction. Two processes tend to reduce their population: seden-
tarization and low fertility rate. I am not able to specify any rate of
sedentarization, but there is evidence of Baggara nomads settling,
mainly in towns and rural areas elsewhere. The Baggara who settle
are mainly those who have not succeeded in maintaining the minimum
number of cattle needed in order to pursue a nomadic subsistence.

My data do not allow any assessment of the fertility rate of the


=== PDF p37 R (book-seq 73) ===
EcoNoumic DETERMINANTS IN ETHNIC PROCESSES 73

Baggara. The composition of families in the camps I visited, however,
gives an impression of low fertility. That this generally may be
the case among the Baggara is supported by information indicating
prevalence of venereal disease (El Hadi El Nagar & T. Baashar 1962).
In this essay I have described a process of recruitment to the
Baggara population through the penetration of an ethnic boundary
by individuals and elementary families. This process, involving the
nomadization of sedentary hoe cultivators, is in fact not unique for
the Fur; it also takes place among the other sedentary ethnic groups
of Darfur (Haaland 1968) and it probably has an even wider occur-
rence in the Sudan savannah belt. The organizing effect of ethnic
dichotomizations is clearly demonstrated by the fact that this noma-
dization process does not lead to the emergence of nomadic sections
of the groups in question, but to the replenishment of the Baggara.

* For a more detailed documentation and analysis of the Fur economic system, see
Barth (1967 a).


=== PDF p38 L (book-seq 74) ===
Ethnic and Cultural Differentiation

by Jan-Petter Blom

The purpose of this paper is to discuss the cultural and organizational
requirements for the establishment of ethnic boundaries. I shall present
a case in which the cultural diversification of a peasant popula-
tion within a national state is shown to reflect continuous pro-
cesses of adaptation to shifting circumstances in the natural and social
environment. Socially, the situation is one in which the resultant dif-
ferentiation presupposes symbiotic interdependencies of people in dis-
similar adaptational positions and is thus reminiscent of the so-called
plural society (Furnivall 1948).

However, although stereotypes and prejudices referring to cate-
gorizations of observed cultural differences are frequently held, they
are never made directly relevant to the relationships between people
with dissimilar backgrounds and ways of life.

Consequently, ethnic homogeneity is maintained throughout the area
in spite of the apparent diversity in behavioural styles and forms of
social organization. My case is thus a negative one, and through the
analysis I shall try to show that the organization of ethnic identities
does not depend on cultural diversity per se, as generally assumed in
anthropology, but rather on the assignment of particular social mean-
ings to a limited set of acts.

There is within the South Norwegian peasantry a population
characterized by direct dependence upon the utilization of the high
mountain environment for hunting, fishing and the grazing of live-
stock. This population, collectively referred to as mountain peasants
(fjellbonder), lives in local communities which are situated in deep,
narrow river valleys and lake basins close to the central high mountain
plateaus.! These run from northeast to southwest and adjoin four major
regions (see map on page 75): the eastern region (@stlandet) with farm-


=== PDF p38 R (book-seq 75) ===
ETHNIC AND CULTURAL DIFFERENTIATION 75

KILOMETERS
S0 1o ase

South Norway. Narrow hatching : the location of the true mountain communities. Spaced
hatching : the adjacent area of central valley and inner Siordal communities with somewhat
similar adaptational features.

ing or combined farming/timbering; the southern region (Serlandet)
with smaller farming/timbering areas inland and farmer/fishermen on
the coast; the western region (Vestlandet) with farming populations
in the interior fiord areas and farmer/fishermen on the coast; and
finally the northern region (Trondelag) with rich agricultural areas
which are similar to the eastern region. Normally Norwegian farming
is mixed. combining the raising of livestock and the cultivation of grain
and root crops. The relative importance of these sectors depends on
ecologic conditions and therefore varies regionally.

As the map shows, the main concentration of the high mountain


=== PDF p39 L (book-seq 76) ===
76 JAN-PETTER BLoM

communities is found in the eastern area at altitudes between 500-
1000 m. The winters are severe and the summers short (about three
months) and cool, with middle temperatures for July varying locally
from 8-12° C. The landscape takes its character from the close juxta-
position of valley and mountain. An ecologic cline extends visibly with
increasing altitude from open coniferous forest through mountain
birch forest to high mountain vegetation such as heather and lichen.
Due to the prevalence of metamorphic rock over the area, the wood-
land floor, as well as the mountain slopes and plains, are rich in grass,
which provides excellent summer pastures. Topographically the condi-
tions vary: some valleys are quite narrow with steep sides, others are
relatively open with more broken terrain. The local communities or
districts are split up into clusters of adjoining farms (grender), which
crowd together whenever the valley bottom or lower slopes provide
small strips of arable land. Such settlements are found mostly on
moraine soils away from the valley bottoms, preferably on the north
or east sides where the danger of frost is least.

In regard to opportunities for farming, there is naturally a marked
ecological barrier between this mountain area and the surrounding
low valleys, plains and fiordal districts. In contrast to lowland farming
areas, the mountain communities are located above or near the
boundary for the guaranteed ripening of grain and root crops. Further-
more, even where the arable land allows for the cultivation of such
crops, it is nowhere sufficient to support the population. The ‘moun-
taineers’ may therefore be characterized as a population of marginal
farmers who are almost completely dependent on livestock for a living
and whose in-fields are, for a large part, cultivated meadows produc-
ing only hay.

Archaeological and historical sources indicate that this area was
not settled by agriculturalists until the lowland was filled. After the
Black Death (1349) most of the high valleys were completely or
partially depopulated, either as a direct result of the Black Death or
because the people moved down to the lowlands to take possession of
farms or tenant contracts which were vacant after the ravages of the
plague. It was not until the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries that
the high valleys again reached their former population level. Later
they became greatly over-populated in the course of the eighteenth
2nd nineteenth centuries, until the pressure was relieved by emigration
to America and by later industrial development.

It is therefore reasonable to assume that the whole southern Nor-


=== PDF p39 R (book-seq 77) ===
ETHNIC AND CULTURAL DIFFERENTIATION v
wegian farming population, mountaineers and lowlanders alike, has
a common cultural source. On the other hand, this population has
developed divergent cultural traits, or styles of life, in response to
adaptive requirements and opportunities provided by variations in
ecological conditions. While the lowland peasant is tied to the farm
and lives a stable and regular life, the mountain peasant’s adaptation
is based on the exploitation of large areas. He is constantly on the
move, trekking across the mountains; he is a hunter and a stock buyer.
As a result the mountaineer is often attributed a certain type of
character: he is a gambler, an artist and a ruffian in contrast to the
sturdy, mild lowlander.

However, if we want to demonstrate the validity of the ecological
approach to the problem of cultural diversification, we must be able
to make a model which shows the synchronic processes that generate
these empirical forms from a common cultural basis,

Since the high valleys are mainly dependent on livestock, the size
of the capital (cattle, sheep, goats) of a management unit is dependent
on the amount of fodder which can be acquired in the course of the
short harvest season. In the traditional system of production, where
the high quality of summer grazing is utilized by spring calving, haying
comes in the peak season of the dairy work. This situation prevents the
full utilization of the household’s labour in haying. Such labour
becomes men’s work, since the women are able to participate only
when they are free from the demands of caring for the livestock and
dairying.

Moreover, as the arable patches in the high valleys are steep and
stony, cultivation is labour consuming, much more so than in the low-
land where it is possible to apply more efficient techniques.

Because of the density of population relative to the amount of
arable land, farms are on the average too small to utilize fully the
available labour potential for cultivation and likewise too small to
provide a surplus of dairy products. Many peasants are therefore
forced to collect fodder from the forest and natural meadows, a
technique which requires a considerably larger investment of labour
than does the harvesting of arable ficlds.

Since these resources are available in practically unlimited quan-
tities, one can safely say that the work input in collecting fodder
represents the minimal factor in this production.

While a three generation family with small children, or a two
generation family with grown and half grown children, has a surplus


=== PDF p40 L (book-seq 78) ===
78 JAN-PETTER BLoM

of labour for the year as a whole, it has too little labour potential at
harvest time to enable it to collect fodder for flocks that would be
large enough to exploit completely the rich summer pastures. Nor
would it be realistic to base production on the import of seasonal
labour, since there is no easily tapped supply of labour at this season;
moreover, such labour is too expensive in relation to expected profit.
A significant augmentation of the household through the incorporation
of additional adult members is therefore neither a feasible nor an
attractive alternative.

Considering the labour potential available throughout the year, and
the large resources of pasturage which the mountain peasants control
de jure or de facto, it becomes clear that available productive capital
is the limiting factor in increasing the rate of utilization. The most
adequate adaptation would be one that made possible the acquisition
of seasonal capital, in the form of livestock, during the period when
pastures are available.

This situation has long been, and continues to be, a major deter-
minant for productive activity in the high valleys. The mountain
peasants have solved the problem by importing livestock from the
lowlands. This is done by several institutionalized arrangements:

1. Mountaineers establish agreements with lowlanders for the seasonal
rental of livestock, primarily cows and goats, thereby increasing
milk production in the summer.

2. Mountaineers buy up lowland calves in the spring for fattening;
these are sold in the autumn.

3. Mountaineers rent out mountain areas for the pasturing of sheep
or horses.

These solutions may be combined in various ways depending on the
resources of the individual farm unit, i.e. pasturage and labour.

Lowlanders also find such arrangements attractive, for a number
of reasons:

1. It saves labour.

2. It supplements inadequate lowland pastures.

3. It improves the quality of the stock, since mountain pasturage is,
especially for sheep, of considerably higher quality than lowland
pasturage.

4. This demand for capital makes it possible to utilize otherwise


=== PDF p40 R (book-seq 79) ===
ETHNIC AND CULTURAL DIFFERENTIATION 79

unexploited resources, such as winter pasturage on islands and
peninsulas along the west coast. By renting out or selling livestock,
peasants in such areas can keep herds larger than the household

alone could manage to make productive, even through intensive
utilization.

In this way, the mountain peasants’ demand for capital has caused
many lowlanders to grasp this opportunity for basing their system of
production upon a symbiotic relationship. The specific details of
contracts differ regionally and historically, reflecting the varying
tactical advantages of the partners, but they are all founded on the
unalterable ecologic contrast between the high valleys and the lowland
farming areas adjoining them.

The contracts are, as far as the mountain peasant is concerned,
based on three conditions: availability of abundant pastures in the
summer season, an external market for seasonal rental or buying of
livestock, and an external market for sale of surplus animal products.
The resultant pattern of utilization of resources contributes to make
the mountain farmers culturally distinctive in regard both to the type
of work they do and to the specific organizational solutions which are
embraced by individual households and local communities. Moreover,
these circumstances not only imply specialized techniques and skills,
but also contribute to the development of a characteristic mountaineer
style of life, with correlates on the level of attitude and world view.

A successful adaptation presupposes the solution of a number of
special technical and organizational problems. The stock must be
moved to the pastures early in the summer and back to the owner or to
the markets in the fall. Before the road system was sufficiently well
developed for truck transport, the animals were driven long distances
up the valleys or over the mountains and ferried by boat in the fiordal
areas. Driving livestock was very risky, especially the crossing of high
mountains in the autumn and early spring, because of unseasonal
cold and snow storms. However, different types of cooperation between
households made transport more efficient and reduced the risk. Cooper-
ative agreements were also made concerning the marketing of cheese
and meat. These are the basis for more recent joint efforts such as
the building of proper roads to summer dairy (seter) areas, joint
motorized transport of milk to main roads leading to dairies in the
towns or cities, and the founding of smaller, local cheese dairies.

Even so, this kind of farming carries a great deal of economic risk


=== PDF p41 L (book-seq 80) ===
80 JAN-PETTER BrLoM

for the individual unit. On the other hand, it also involves the pos-
sibility of growth through net investments in the enterprise. This is
achieved through purchase of more or better pasturage or through
seasonal buying and selling of yearlings. A successful enterprise entails I
geographical mobility and the ability, as well as the possibility to
exploit the changing opportunities in the market. This picture of the
mountaineer as a gambler is corroborated by his activities as reindeer
hunter and travelling middleman (skreppekar). The mountain com-
munities also tend to be the main areas for the recruitment of artist
craftsmen and musicians, who sell their output or expertise over wide
areas.

The foregoing analysis has attempted to show the ecological and
social bases for a cultural situation which in many important respects
is reminiscent of poly-ethnic societies, ie. culturally differentiated
regional populations in symbiotic interdependence based on the
exploitation of different ecologic niches. However, in a poly-ethnic
context, the interaction of the representatives of the discrete units
observes and maintains boundaries since all, by their actions, will
emphasize their respective ethnic identities — and thereby their mutual
cultural differences — in such a way that their relationship is
restricted to impersonal or role-specific forms. However, there is
no empirical evidence to support an assertion that interaction between
these mountain farmers and lowlanders is based on dichotomization
of such generalized, ethnic character. On the contrary, one finds that
the cultural difference is undercommunicated (Goffman 1959) by the
parties to the transaction: they display the same values and utilize
common idioms which stress similarity and mutual trust. Their inter-
action is therefore in principle identical with that which obtains
between individuals within a local community or district when they
are engaged in similar transactions.

These findings take us to our starting point, ie. the question of
social meanings implied by cultural diversification. The question sug-
gests an analytical dichotomy between culture, in the sense of stan-
dards of evaluation and their codification in social categories and
statuses, and culture in the sense of the manifest forms generated by
such values under specific ecologic and social conditions (Barth 1966,
1968).

Consequently, if we wish to explain, on this basis, the growth and
maintenance of the specialized forms of activity in the high valleys
and the traditions that are established as a result, we must be able to


=== PDF p41 R (book-seq 81) ===
ETHNIC AND CULTURAL DIFFERENTIATION o3

point to an intention on the part of this population to realize ideals
concerning their way of life which are common to Norwegians, or at
least to the whole agricultural population.

This can be demonstrated through an examination of the way in
which the mountain peasant allocates his annual production. Taking
into consideration the market price for his produce, and the amount
of money he needs to invest in the farm, he reserves some of his prod-
ucts for private consumption while income from the sale of the
remainder is used to buy imports, such as flour or grain, coffee, sugar,
household equipment, and some farm implements. Depending in this
way on the success of his various enterprises, it is possible for a moun-
tain peasant to achieve a consumption profile which corresponds
to that of the lowlander. This is shown to some extent in the every-
day diet but more importantly through the stress which is placed
on conspicuous consumption, as in housing and hospitality. Optimally
a part of the profit is saved either as movable property or money.
This capital is transferred to the children as inheritance or dowry
and serves as compensation to those who do not inherit land. In this
way the child who inherits the farm, normally the eldest son, may be
given the complete holding without prejudicing the position of his
siblings.

It is therefore safe to say that the mountain peasants not only
recognize the general criteria of rank which apply to the wider society,
but that by striving to live up to the standards of the richest and most
powerful people in the larger society — particularly those of the
peasants who constitute their natural reference group — they also
struggle to achieve the highest possible rank both within the local
community and beyond it. A farmer’s claim to rank is perhaps most
clearly shown in situations of hospitality, since this situation gives
the most dependable result in the form of social recognition. Large
amounts of food are stored for this purpose, often at the expense of
daily consumption. In the case of the mountain peasant, this often
means that he and his family may have to restrict themselves quite
drastically to achieve adequate visible advancement in the social
sphere.

My analysis thus indicates that the more a mountaineer involves
himself in social competition with peasants of the lowlands, and
through them with most Norwegians, the more his overt style of living
must diverge from that of people in other tactical positions. Through
this specialization, distinctive regional cultures emerge; but the pro-

6. Barth


=== PDF p42 L (book-seq 82) ===
82 JAN-PETTER BLoM

cess of diversification depends on the operation of factors that militate
against the systematization of cultural differences in the form of ethnic
boundaries. Confronted by specific ecologic and social limitations, the
mountain peasant tries to maximize ideals which, if he is successful
in his enterprise, will substantially raise his rank despite his natural
handicap; thus a situation arises which sometimes generates great
differences in rank within the local community in the high valleys.
A more concrete result of wealth and higher rank is often that one or
more of a mountain peasant’s children marry heirs to better farms,
either locally or in lower areas, or are launched into other types of
careers in the society at large. In rare cases a mountain peasant may
even himself manage to transform his resources and his wealth into a
reasonably good farm outside the high valley area.

Most of the mountain communities, especially in the years after
the last World War, have changed considerably. The extension of the
national road net crossing the area, construction of dams in connection
with hydro-electric enterprises, the growth of tourism and the pos-
sibility of local industrial development have given the mountain
peasant alternative productive uses for his time and local resources.
The same factors which previously favoured a growing cultural
diversification between regions now make a reintegration possible
through urbanization.

Aspects of the analysis above are reminiscent of studies such as that
of Sahlins (1958), who shows that the variation in the forms of social
stratification in Polynesia can be understood as adaptive variability
from a single cultural source. Historically, the argument implies the
geographic expansion of a population with an identical cultural
background and further implies processes of adaptation to particular
local environments that offer unique possibilities for the development
of patterns of leadership and inequality.

In a similar analytical tradition Arensberg (1963) shows that the
peoples of the Old World are set off from all others by a unique
cultural complex characterized by a food base of bread, milk, and meat
associated with a particular ecological pattern of mixed agriculture on
clean-cropped fields. This adaptation is based on a cycle of land use
rotating from hard field grains for bread to grassland fodder for
hoofed animals, which, in turn, provide manure for the fields and
consumption goods such as meat and milk, hide and wool. However,
variable natural circamstances throughout the area modify this com-


=== PDF p42 R (book-seq 83) ===
ETHNIC AND CULTURAL DIFFERENTIATION a3

plex, causing significant variations on the level of economic organiza-
tion from patterns of simple subsistence to forms of specialization and
market exchange.

Being more or less in the culture area tradition, as developed by
Kroeber (1939), this ‘phylogenetic’ perspective on culture diversifica-
tion and change might demonstrate a perfect merger of cultural and
ethnic boundaries for some areas (as is the case for Polynesia) and
considerable overlap for others. Thus the cultural-natural regions of
Europe as generated through Arensberg’s approach to the problems
of diversification seem to be ethnically irrelevant for most areas. How-
ever, apart from the total empirical picture, it is always possible to
point at some kind of co-variation between the distribution of ethnic
groups and cultural features. My quarrel is consequently not with the
empirical pictures established through this procedure, but with their
assumed explanatory value for the existence of ethnic groups and
boundaries. As long as a study only shows co-variations of ethnic and
cultural boundaries, one can only make tautologies about the interde-
pendencies between variables.

My case has demonstrated that the existence, between regional popu-
lations, of considerable cultural differences which provide a basis for
symbiotic complementarity and ample material for regional stereotypes
and distinctions, yet do not in themselves entail a social organization
of activity based on ethnic units. As already mentioned, we have to
add a further dimension, that of the social codification of some of
these cultural differences into contrastive total identities, in order to
produce cthnic groups; and this does not spring from the cultural con-
trast per se.

Against this some might argue that whenever, for example, a co-
variation of language and ethnic boundaries is emphasized, this implies
the hypothesis that language barriers are instrumental in generating
the ethnic picture. Recent socio-linguistic findings, however
(Gumperz 1958, Blom & Gumperz 1968), suggest that significant
differences in speech between various kinds of groups that are in
frequent contact are not in themselves responsible for the establishment
and maintenance of social boundaries. These differences rather reflect
features of social organization through a process of social codifica-
tion, and thus serve as idioms of identification with particular group
values, whether sanctioned internally or forced upon the group by
outsiders.

As a final illustration of my point it may be instructive to contrast


=== PDF p43 L (book-seq 84) ===
84 JAN-PETTER BromM

the highland-lowland relationship as described above with the rela-
tions that obtain between Norwegians and certain nomadic pariah
groups such as Gypsies and Gypsy-like tramps (sigoynere, tatere, or
fant) (Sundt 1850-65, Barth 1955). Like the mountain peasants and
other specialized groups, these pariahs utilize specific niches in the
countryside and are thereby bound in symbiotic dependence to other
occupational categories — partly because they are willing to do low
ranking jobs, and partly because they have a near monopoly on some
forms of trade and handicrafts. In contrast to the mountain peasants
they overcommunicate their cultural peculiarities during contact; they
show disrespect for the standards of the peasant and especially for
his criteria of rank, and their behaviour is often arrogant and provoca-
tive. Within the sedentary population their very nomadism is
construed as a denial of the peasant’s basic values. As a result they are
distrusted, feared, and even persecuted, but they are also admired for
their autonomy and recklessness; this ambivalence is expressed in a
series of folk legends and songs. Interaction between Norwegians and
members of these groups is therefore built on differential treatment
within the frame of a clear complementarity of identities.

It should therefore be evident that ethnic boundaries do not depend
on cultural differences on the level of form, but rather on culture at
a more fundamental level, i.e. specific codification of these differences
into complimentary statuses which differentiate a population into
reference groups, supported by a charter of distinctive origins for each.
The reason for the existence of such organizations must therefore be
sought in the social processes which allow an initial and natural fear
and suspicion against strangers to be systematized into ethnic statuses.
These are social categories which provide obligatory standards for
judging the behaviour of self and others and which, consequently,
organize a whole range of activities into stereotyped clusters of mean-
ing.

1 The primary data on which this study is based were collected by the author in
1962 in the south-western part of the area concerned. A more detailed presentation
of the material will be published elsewhere.

To test the general validity of the set of hypotheses generated through my analysis
of these data, various works by folklorists, geographers and historians have been
used, the more important of which are: Eskeland, A.: Effektiviteten av ulike drifts-
former i fjellbygdene, Norges Landbruksekonomiske Institutt, Szrmelding nr. 2,
1953; Cabouret, M.: La transhumance du mouton dans le sud-ouest de la Norvége,
Norsk Geografisk Tidsskrift, 1967; Isachsen, F.: Uvdelenes skreppehandel og drifte-
trafikk, Norsk Geografisk Tidsskrift, 1930; Reinton, S.: Seterbruket i Noreg, I—I1I


=== PDF p43 R (book-seq 85) ===
ETHNIC AND CULTURAL DIFFERENTIATION /5

ISFK, Oslo 1955—61; Skappel, S.: Trzk av det norske kvagbrugs historie 1660—1814,
T.fd.n. landbr., 1903; Semme, A.: Geography of Norwegian Agriculture, Skrifter
fra Norges Handelshoyskole, Bergen 1949; Ostberg, Kr.: Norsk Bonderett, I—XII,
Oslo 1914—39.

The anthropological ficld investigations was financed by the Registration Service
of Norwegian Archeological Museums.


=== PDF p44 L (book-seq 86) ===
Dichotomization and Integration

Aspects of inter-ethnic relations in Southern Ethiopia
by Karl Eric Knutsson

This paper presents ethnographical material on ethnic groups and
ethno-dynamics in Southern Ethiopia. Because of the highly varied
pattern of inter-ethnic relations in this area I shall sketch the situation
in two different parts of Ethiopian Gallaland. By contrasting and
comparing two different sets of ethnic boundaries and their mainte-
nance I hope to avoid giving too one-sided a picture. I also hope that
this approach will make it possible to discuss aspects of boundary
dynamics, and thereby contribute to a more general discussion of the
problem of ethnicity.

The setting
The setting for ethnic relations that Ethiopia represents is indeed
complex. In the northern and central parts of the country, there have
existed during millenia kingdoms loosely organized Into an Abyssinian
Empire. Borders between these petty states were not very stable and
the struggle to achieve imperial dominance and control over the vast
Abyssinian conglomerate was continuous. In general the borders
between states or chiefdoms seem to have coincided with the boundaries
separating major ethnic groups inhabiting the Abyssinian plateau.
Before the conquests by Emperor Menelik during the end of the
last century through which Amhara/Tigre Abyssinia expanded into
the much larger Ethiopia of the present day, the central states were
surrounded by a number of independent tribal groups representing a
broad spectrum of organization, from anarchic segmentary structures
to centralized states such as Kaffa. Into these areas where conflicts
and tribal wars were endemic, Menelik and his generals brought the
‘pax amharica’ which set the stage for new forms of inter-ethnic
contacts and relations. Increased inter-group mobility, immigration
from the conquerors’ ethnic groups, introduction of the victors’, system


=== PDF p44 R (book-seq 87) ===
DICHOTOMIZATION AND INTEGRATION 87

THIOR A

Meps fe OSOMALIA

Macha Nl e

= Arsi

KENYA

XILOMETERS
% 20 (0 580

Main ethnic groups and sub-groups in Ethiopia. Dichotomization indicated for
Amhara/Shoa Galla.

of ethnic classification and valuation were incidents and circumstances
contributing to the present ethnic situation in Southern Ethiopia.

In many ways the setting is similar to that which was brought about
by colonialization in other parts of East Africa. There are, however,
important differences which invalidate a simple comparison. Time
has contributed to an integration of the new areas into the Ethiopian
nation in a way that was never achieved between colonizers and
colonized in other parts of Africa. It is true that the new rulers
recognized ethnic boundaries as did the European colonial powers;
the administrative division into sub-provinces and districts is princi-
pally built upon such a recognition. It is also true that elements of


=== PDF p45 L (book-seq 88) ===
88 KarL Eric KNUTSSON

indirect rule can be found, especially during the early days following
the incorporation of the new territories into Ethiopia. But for the most
part, Amharic control was of a more direct nature and did not there-
fore necessarily emphasize and strengthen tribal and ethnic identity,
as was often the case under British rule further south.

Another important difference between the colonial African and the
Ethiopian situation is that, although the influx of people from the
Northern parts of Ethiopia was large, the immigration did not produce
the ethnic and social cleavages which exist between European settlers
and native Africans. The immigrants from the north were for the most
part forced to live basically the same life and accept the same standard
as the indigenous ethnic groups.

However, in some instances, the new rulers’ policy to ethiopianize,
which was tantamount to amharize, the subject groups in order to
facilitate integration often had the opposite effect: ethnic identities
became emphasized and polarization on ethnic grounds was increased.
Thus Amharic administration produced results similar to those
observed in areas under British control.

The present forms of ethnic boundaries in Southern Ethiopia have
been generated within existing systems of inter-ethnic relations
through processes of this kind. In the following I shall concentrate on
two sets of such boundaries; those between the Rift Valley Arsi Galla
and their neighbours and the ones existing in a market village among
the Macha Galla in the western part of the Shoa province.

The Rift Valley Arsi and their neighbours !
The Rift Valley Arsi are members of the large Arsi Galla tribal
group which makes up the dominant part of the population of the
Arussi and Bali provinces. Until the last generation the Arsi, who now
inhabit the eastern shores of Lake Zwai and the adjoining dry
savannah, lived in an area of complete Galla dominance. They
subsisted on a transhumance pastoral economy that took them to the
highlands around Mt. Chilalo in the dry season and down to the Rift
valley plains in the wet season. Their only routine inter-ethnic con-
tacts were with the Laki islanders in Lake Zwai — a remnant from
earlier Abyssinian settlements during pre-Galla periods. With the
Ambharic conquest during the first decade of the present century the
picture changed radically. Veteran Amhara and Shoa-Galla soldiers
in the armies of Menelik were given land on the Arussi plateau.
Moving into the highland in great numbers they soon reduced and


=== PDF p45 R (book-seq 89) ===
R —— S R S S

DICHOTOMIZATION AND INTEGRATION /9

finally prohibited the transhumance of the pastoral Arsi-Galla. Being
deprived of one of the basic prerequisites for their ecological adapta-
tion the Rift valley Arsi in the Zwai area turned to a crude type of
maize and sorghum farming to compensate for the losses inflicted on
their cattle economy. As they had little previous agricultural experi-
ence and as the Rift valley climate necessitates either irrigation or
technically sophisticated dry farming, the Arsi experienced a rapid
pauperization. These changes coincided with major changes in their
tribal organization whereby the importance of the cohesion-creating
gada system declined and the ritual changed from a traditional to an
Islamized pattern — possibly as a protest against the Christian con-
querors,

These developments set the scene for the inter-ethnic relations
between the Arsi of today and their neighbours. As is clearly demon-
strated even by this very brief exposé, the character of the Arsi
ecological adaptation, their economy, and their political and cultural
life have undergone dramatic changes during a relatively short time.
In other words the Arsi of yesterday would not have had much in
common with the Arsi of today. Consequently a study of their cultural
inventory would not help us understand the maintenance of an Arsi
ethnic identity over generations. I shall therefore only include a
minimum of information on the way of life of the Rift valley Arsi,
and concentrate on the description of neighbour contacts in order to
indicate the nature of ethnic interaction and the mechanisms of
boundary maintenance in the area.

The Rift valley Arsi of today live in clusters of 5 to 15 homesteads,
inhabited by minimal lineages or segments thereof, on the dry acacia
savannah surrounding the Rift valley lakes. The normal homestead
is that of a polygynous household with three or four houses and a cattle
kraal fenced in by thorny acacia. Despite the recent adaptation of
maize and sorghum farming on some roughly cleared fields close to
the homesteads they still remain basically a cattle people. Part of the
herds use the still extensive areas of the clanlands between the shores
of Lake Zwai and the slopes towards the highland not yet cultivated
by the highland farmers. These herds are tended by the unmarried
men of the homestead under the leadership of some of the senior men.
Milch cows, calves, and young animals are kept close to the homestead
in order to provide milk and occasionally meat for the remainder of
the family.

Local political organization exhibits two dominant components: one


=== PDF p46 L (book-seq 90) ===
90 KArL Eric KNUTSSON

of government administration represented on the lower levels by
subdistrict governors and officially appointed local judges; the other
of local leadership furnished by groups of genealogically senior clans-
men, famous arbiters, descendants of former warleaders made hered-
itary nobles, so-called balabatts, by the administration (cf. Knutsson
1967), and kallus, ritual specialists claiming to perpetuate traditional
tribal religion and self-made sheiks. In many parts of southern
Ethiopia articulation between these two decision systems is poor. But
this is not the case in the Rift valley Arsi communities. In part because l
of reluctance on the part of the central administration to keep their
own officials in a potentially dangerous area in the lowlands, local
leaders are often appointed to administrative posts on the subdistrict
level.

Ethnic identity for the Arsi is intimately connected with the total
way of life on their dry, dusty and overgrazed plains. The few who
leave their cattle or those who have lost them and move into towns
are no longer regarded as ‘real’ Arsi. They have sold or lost the part
of their identity that derived from participation in Arsi life, although
they still retain their Arsi genealogical charters. In other areas of
Southern Ethiopia, especially in communities where inter-ethnic con-
tacts belong to the daily routine, the display of ethnic identity is either
restricted to certain sectors of interaction or determined by specific
individual or group strategies. Not so among the Arsi of the plain.
Here ethnic identity is continuously overtly expressed in what both
Arsi and their neighbours perceive as distinct forms of organization,
customs, and symbols. However, neither the Arsi nor the outsider are
able to attribute the identity to any specific element or factor. To be
an Arsi is to be born one, to be brought up like one, and live like one.
The realization of this represents an extra reason to abstain from any
attempt to map the whole inventory of Arsi culture and to concentrate
on the problems of inter-ethnic contacts.

Arsi and Laki.

The interaction between the Rift valley Arsi and the Laki islanders
in Lake Zwai presents most of the characteristics of a symbiotic inter-
relation. Some generations ago the Laki inhabited and cultivated large
portions of land on the eastern and southern shores of the lake.
Extensive traditions tell about fierce fighting between the Arsi and the
Laki over the control of the shore land. This district was of vital
importance to both groups, to the Laki as agricultural land from


=== PDF p46 R (book-seq 91) ===
DICHOTOMIZATION AND INTEGRATION o1

which they could supplement the limited produce of their island
terraces; to the Arsi for pastures and free access to the water for their
cattle. Eventually the Arsi succeeded in their raids and the Laki had
to withdraw to their islands. Today they are almost exclusively con-
fined to the islands of Tadecca, Tullu Guddu, and Fulduro, the only
exception being some hundred who live in a few clusters on the eastern
and southern shores of Lake Zwai. These latter have been able to
return to the old Laki shore territory only by completely adopting
the Arsi mixed cattle and agriculture economy and by conforming
closely to the Arsi style of life. The Laki on the islands subsist on
fishing and the meagre crops of their eroded and overcultivated
terraces. Without their skills as weavers and cloth traders survival on
their overpopulated stony islands would be difficult.

With the Arsi fully in control of the disputed shore-land, competi-
tion between the two groups has faded away and one finds instead
today the kind of symbiotic interrelation that can be expected between
two ethnic groups occupying distinct ecological niches. The islanders
supply cloth, fish, and some items of merchandise and the Arsi market
butter, ghee, fresh cheese, sorghum, corn, and occasionally meat. Of
especial interest is the increasing Laki sale or barter of fish, which is
caught in abundance in the shallow lake. All pastoral Galla as well as
their Sidamo neighbours observe a strong taboo against eating fish.
Fish was traditionally classified in the same general category as hippo-
potamus and regarded as unclean food. With the breakdown of the
transhumant system and the increasing shortage of food, the taboo on
fish has been weakened among the Rift valley Arsi, especially among
those close to the Zwai, who now consume fish quite regularly. Thev
do not, however, do any of the fishing themselves. This is left to the
Laki with their sophisticated technique of net-throwing from small
papyrus canoes.

Rift valley Arsi and the highland farmers.

The Amhara and the Shoa Galla of the Arussi highland are plough
farmers exploiting the same ecological niche with identical techniques.
They are members of the same, mainly immigrant, local communities.
In spite of their ethnically distinct origins they share a basically com-
mon value system dominated by Orthodox Christianity. Differences
between the two groups are articulated mainly in language and family
structure, and to some extent in land tenure and rituals. Thus the Shoa
Galla group tends towards bilingualism whereas the Amhara cling


=== PDF p47 L (book-seq 92) ===
92 KarL Eric KNUTSSON

to the exclusive use of Amharic; the Shoa Galla families are poly-
gynous where feasible, in contrast to the monogamy of the Amharas.
The Amhara adhere strictly to the rules of the Orthodox church while
the ritual life of the Shoa Galla exhibits a dual pattern of both
Orthodox Christianity and ecstatic tribal cults led by the kallus.
Another characteristic of this Amhara-Galla society is the presence of i
the general Ethiopian system of ethnic stratification, which in its turn
depends on differential control of such assets as administrative
authority, land, and access to the highly valued clerical knowledge of
the Orthodox church. According to this traditional stratification the
Ambhara both ascribe to themselves and are ascribed by the Shoa Galla
a higher rank than other groups in the highland community.

Despite this intra-community differentiation the Rift valley Arsi
lump the highland immigrants together in one big category, referring
to them either as Sidama (the Arsi word for Amhara) or as Shoa
(people from Shoa). Although the highland Galla farmers do not
identify themselves as Amhara in intercommunication with the Rift
people, they certainly dichotomize the lowland cattle people from
themselves and act towards them as do the Amhara. I therefore argue
that the boundary that exists between the highland community as a
whole and the Rift valley Arsi is the major one relevant to a discussion
of ethnic interrelations.

The main feature of the interrelation described here is that of
Highland superiority and Arsi inferiority. Most clearly this is seen
in the two groups’ competition over land. As indicated, the Arsi
pastoral type of land utilization has been displaced in the higher
zones by an agricultural technique and economy, the introduction of
which was made easy by the oscillatory nature of the former. The
only strategies for ecological readjustment that are left to the Arsi are
either sedentarization in the threatened areas or withdrawal to the as
yet uncultivated tracts which are today mostly areas where cultivation
without irrigation is impossible or close to impossible. There is also a
third course which has been tried. It consists of a compromise strategy
whereby part of a lineage settles in the neighbourhood of the highland
pole of their former transhumant territory, while the rest of the group
keeps a more mobile base at the bottom of the Rift. In some cases this
has made it possible to retain some transhumant mobility or to resort
to it during emergency situations.

Reviewing the ethnic interrelations between the Rift valley Arsi
and the highland farmers we do not find a boundary comparable to


=== PDF p47 R (book-seq 93) ===
DICHOTOMIZATION AND INTEGRATION 12

the ecological boundary between the Arsi and the Laki. Instead the

basic mechanism of ethnic differentiation is found in the different
technologies of land use, and the different efficiency of these for

retaining or expanding control over land. The ensuing competition

has increased the dichotomization of ethnic groups to a degree which

has made open conflicts common. Because of the dominance of the

highland group and especially because of the support it enjoys from

the Amhara-dominated administration, open defence of the tradi-

tionally pastoral areas by the Rift valley Arsi has not proved a

satisfying strategy. Violent resistance being ruled out, adaptation has

taken either of the two main forms described, dividing the present

Rift valley Arsi into two economically distinct groups: highland type

farmers on the slopes of the Rift, and savannah cattle herdsmen suf-

fering a progressive pauperization. A

As can be expected there are significant differences between both '

expression and maintenance of the ethnic identity between these two

groups. Among the Arsi farmers on the slopes of the Rift one finds a

more or less complete assimilation into the technological and economic

system introduced by the highland immigrants, although many of the [
Arsi farmers cooperate with their lowland kinsmen in the cattle sector
of their economy. However, even if the explicit aim of their new .
economic strategies is to become as much as possible like the highland

immigrants and even if overt expression of their ethnic affiliation in ‘
dress and symbols is reduced, an Arsi ethnic identity is still fiercely
maintained. This cannot be achieved in the traditional way, as this ‘
would imply retaining the whole pattern of their former pastoral life.

Instead it is done by the transition to a Moslem or rather semi-Moslem

system of knowledge, values and symbols that makes it possible in a

partly assimilated situation to maintain and perpetuate ethnic dichoto-

mization. This change provides an especially efficient mechanism for
polarization since the very core of the immigrant Amhara ethnic

identity has always been their Orthodox Christianity. Thus in contrast

to the process that made Baggara nomads out of Fur farmers, the

transition of Arsi cattle herdsmen to Amhara-like farmers has not
made them Ambhara. Instead the boundary maintaining mechanism is
transferred to another sector of their socio-cultural universe.

Rift valley Arsi and the Jille.

The Rift valley Arsi have as their northern neighbours the Jille, who '
belong to the Tulama tribal cluster among the Galla, and who strongly


=== PDF p48 L (book-seq 94) ===
94 KarL Eric KNUTSSON

deny any genealogical relationship with the Arsi, although both groups
agree that they are Galla. Like the Arsi, the Jille live on the Rift
slopes and bottom. They are not so pre-eminently a ‘cattle’ people
as Arsi, but have traditionally subsisted on a mixed economy of poor
maize, millet, and sorghum farming in combination with cattle herd-
ing. They have also traditionally been more sedentary and have never
adopted transhumance. They are the only northern Galla who still
have a functioning moiety system and they have also, more fiercely
perhaps than the rest of the Tulama group (with the exception possibly
of the Jidda), clung to their remnants of the Gada system and the
rituals accompanying it. Perhaps the interrelation between the Arsi
and the Jille should be classified as intertribal rather than interethnic.
After all they belong to the same main tribal group and speak dialects
not very remote from each other. However, the dichotomization
demonstrated in their interrelation, the fact that both stress not their
common but their different ancestry within the very large Galla
people, and finally the fact that they exhibit fairly different systems
of social organization, make it reasonable to include them in this
context.

In contrast to the cases already described, the territorial boundary
between the Arsi and the Jille is an absolute one following in the
main the Awash river in the east-west direction and the eastern side
of the Maki river in the north-south direction. In contrast also to the .
interaction between Arsi and both the Highlanders and the Laki,
where market exchange is a prominent feature, there are few, indeed
negligible, transactions of this kind between the Arsi and the Jille.
This can perhaps be correlated with the-fact that, in spite of other
differences, the two groups exploit similar types of territories with
similar techniques. The differences in technology and produce neces-
sary for the creation of an extensive market exchange simply does not
exist. The main markets in Jilleland are found in a semicircle to the
north where the Jille can trade with Tulama Galla from higher zones
and with immigrant Amhara, Gurage, and other groups.

Although presented here only as a sketch, the material allows a
rough identification of the interrelationship between the Arsi and
the Jille as one of segmentary opposition between groups striving to
monopolize the same type of ecological niche. The seriousness of the
competition over grazing land and plots of arable land has contributed
to both the hostility and to the creation of the jealously guarded
frontier. The similarities in their ecological adaptations have helped


=== PDF p48 R (book-seq 95) ===
DICHOTOMIZATION AND INTEGRATION R

not to bridge the boundary but to strengthen it as this very similarity
has precluded transactions and exchange. Thus paradoxically the
geographically and ‘politically’ most articulated ethnic boundary in
the Rift valley Arsiland obtains between the culturally most similar
groups.!

The polyethnic market village in Macha

Any discussion of inter-ethnic relations in Southern Ethiopia’s Galla-
land would be incomplete if it only contained reference to a system in
which ethnic groups tend to be territorial units. All over Southern
Ethiopia such a situation is actually rapidly changing into one where
different ethnic groups are living more or less mixed in the same areas
and local communities. It is in these communities that the typical
Ethiopian system of ethnic stratification can be observed.

When the rich Macha grazing and farming land was incorporated
into the Ethiopian Empire during the end of the last century radical
changes were brought about similar to those in highland Arussi. Tradi-
tional, segmentary rivalry between local groups was reduced and
eventually completely eliminated. Intra-Macha mobility and delocali-
zation increased and Machaland was opened up to immigration from
other parts of the Empire. The Amhara established their control over
local politics and administration. Veteran Amhara soldiers moved in to
become landlords and farmers.

With increased mobility went the creation of market villages and
the expansion of existing towns, a process that has received a tre-
mendous impetus from the construction of roads during the past few
decades. Although their couleur locale is influenced by the ethnic
origin of the people of the region and by the surrounding landscape,
these market towns have many traits in common all over Ethiopia.
They represent in the midst of their traditional rural hinterland a new
type of community. They serve as the administrative centres in their
districts and as such house government offices and courts both fre-
quented by crowds of people who, to the outsider, seem to be veritable
addicts to the procedures of litigation.

These towns grow rapidly by the immigration or rural population
from the hinterland attracted by town life and the services that can
be found in the shops, bars, clinics, and schools. To this comes the
influx of officials, traders, daily labourers, prostitutes, and beggars
often recruited from distant areas. Together, all this has created a


=== PDF p49 L (book-seq 96) ===
96 KARL Eric KNUTSSON

radically new setting for ethnic interrelations where ethnic boundaries

exist in the midst of the local community. The role of ethnicity as a

basis for organization consequently displays markedly different
features in comparison to the situation described above where ethnic
boundaries in the main coincided with territorial borders. Thus ethnic
amalgamation is more pronounced in the sense that all sectors
associated with decision-making and exchange are integrated. This is ]
readily seen in the field of local politics, where any mature male
member of the community may associate himself with any of the
existing factions. Likewise the exchange of goods and services com-
prises all groups in the town.

However, a tendency for single groups monopolize certain sectors
of community life is evident and overtly manifested. The administra-
tive machinery is in the hands of predominantly Amhara officials.
This is reflected in the sphere of factional politics, where the leaders
are usually Amharas or big ‘Amharized’ Macha landlords. In the |
sphere of economic exchange shopkeeping is more or less monopolized
by Gurage immigrants from the south-western part of the Shoa prov-
ince while grain trade is predominantly in the hands of Moslem
Galla immigrants from Jimma.

The system of ethnic stratification and the tendencies towards ethnic
monopolization of different sectors of community life are illustrated
by patterns of communication, specifically in language habits and
inter-ethnic marriages.

The ‘political’ language is without question Amharic. All com-

munication of an official nature, all court procedures, all discussions
within the ider — a community association — are held in Amharic.
If a significant group of the participants does not understand Ambharic,
translation may be arranged. Exceptions from this pattern are very
rare. Even if the judge, the official communicator, or the chairman
of the meeting happens to be a Galla he uses Amharic which may
then be retranslated into Galla.

In trade, which forms an interaction system incorporating the great
proportion of the total population of the village and its rural surround-
ings, choice of language is freer. But even here the system of ethnic
stratification can be registered. If one of the actors in a transaction
belongs to a ethnic group of higher rank, the tendency is to use, if
possible, his language in intercommunication. Thus the Galla grain
trader will use Amharic when discussing business with his Amhara
faction leader. He will, however, speak Galla to his Galla neighbour


=== PDF p49 R (book-seq 97) ===
DICHOTOMIZATION AND INTEGRATION o7

and also Galla to the Gurage shopkeeper, whom he regards as having
a ‘lower’ ethnic status.

The same observations are valid for the whole pattern of ethnic
identification both between members of the market village who are
well aware of their respective ethnic identity and between villagers
and outsiders. One can also easily recognize the ambivalence towards
ethnic identification associated with stratification. Thus rural Galla
with knowledge of Amharic would either deny or be reluctant to
accept an exclusive ethnic evaluation from any member of the market
village, which, by the rural population, is regarded as an Amhara
community. The same is true of ethnic demarcation between residents
of the village itself where such distinctions are accepted in dealings
with individuals of ‘higher’ ethnic status but rejected or suppressed
vis-a-vis members of a ‘lower’ ethnic group.

The same basic features are evident in the pattern of inter-ethnic
marriage. Intermarriage in the Macha market village largely con-
stitutes a one-way traffic of women from lower ethnic groups to
higher. An exception is the different pariah groups such as tanners,
potters, and the like, who are strictly endogamous. A similar situation
obtains for those with the lowest possible economic standard of life.

The upward transfer of women is related to the fact that a wife’s
ethnic background will not, or at least not seriously, affect the ethnic
status of the husband, his household or his children, whereas a woman
who marries a man of a lower ethnic status than herself will be down-
graded, since her household and her children are classified with the
husband.

Although strategies pursued by various ethnic groups in the fields
of politics and economics are ethnically determined, reference to ethnic
identity as such is rarely overtly expressed by the villagers in these
fields of interaction. The domains where ethnicity is explicitly used
as a basis for organization and as a criterion for separation and
dichotomization of persons are, as I have already indicated, most
prominently those of family and kinship and in part also the ritual
life, notably on the level of family and small group rituals.

Thus although marriages are no longer endo-ethnic, ethnic identi-
fication and references form a significant part of any marriage prep-
aration. But the overt expression of one’s ethnic identity is found in
small-scale rituals and feasts with exclusive participation of members
of a single ethnic group. During the Galla neighbourhood beer-feast
one can hear songs and stories about earlier independent periods. The

7. Barth


=== PDF p50 L (book-seq 98) ===
98 KARL Eric KNUTSSON

songs are about the brave Galla warrior and his cowardly enemies,
about the beautiful Galla girls, and the superiority of the Galla
pastoral life that the minstrel and the audience themselves have
abandoned. The same ethnically oriented up-grading and bragging
can be heard in the Macha Galla kallu rituals, the Moslem Jimma
Galla holidays, and the Gurage ritual brotherhood meetings.

So far I have emphasized trends towards ethnic monopolization
within the ethnically integrated sectors of the market village life and
circumscribed levels on which inter-ethnic integration is weaker and
polarization tendencies consequently stronger. Simultaneously, indica-
tions of decreasing polarization and diminishing influence of ethnicity
as a basis for organization are observed in the village today, partic-
ularly among the younger generation. Several conditions contribute
to this new trend:

The economic basis for all the villagers is the Central Ethiopian
Amhara type of agriculture or trade of agricultural products. The
majority of the village males and a large minority of the females are
bilingual, a fact that tends to neutralize the influence of ethnic,
cultural heritage and pave the way for smoother routine interaction.

The customs and habits of every day life are levelled little by little.

This also applies to ethnic symbols such as cloth, hair-do and orna- |
ments. The introduction, at least formally, of the Orthodox church
and its extensive regulation of life through its fasting and ceremonial
rules have also contributed to give the village community a unitary
set of symbols, although integration in the ritual field is, as I have
already pointed out, less marked than it might seem.

This general integration process has taken several different forms
in the market village community. One which is easily observed is the
Ambharization strategy adopted by a Galla or Gurage who has been
able to accumulate the resources needed that make such a role attrac-
tive — one must remember that to act the part of a poor Amhara
would be of little avail since one of the basic ingredients in the Amhara
ethnic status is its very connection with ecomomic and political
superiority. Amharization does not mean, however, that there is a com-
plete change of a person’s ethnic status. There is definitely a loss in
his original ethnic identity. It will be said about him that he is not
‘Galla any longer’, he likes to be ‘like Ambhara’. But he will
nevertheless not be accepted as Amhara either by his original group
or by the Amhara. He has lost part of his ethnic identity without
gaining a new one.


=== PDF p50 R (book-seq 99) ===
DICHOTOMIZATION AND INTEGRATION 3s

Another strategy is exemplified by some of the young and better
educated villagers: the teachers, the health personnel etc. It consists
of a conscious suppression of what the individual regards as tribal in
favour of what he believes to be an Ethiopian identity. The choice of
such a strategy does not, like the former, weaken the person’s original
ethnic identity in the eyes of his village neighbours, nor does it meet
with any envy from his group of origin or opposition from any aimed-
at ‘goal’ group. It creates instead a basis for more flexible interaction
with both high and low ethnic groups. In addition, although the ascrip-
tion of an ‘Ethiopic’ ethnic identity in most of the towns and villages
discussed here still mainly represents a theoretical strategy, it is being
increasingly acknowledged and promoted through the expanding
educational system.

Summary

This brief exposition of inter-ethnic relations and ethnic distinction
in Southern Ethiopia has certainly not helped to formulate any easy
answers to problems related to ethnicity. Instead it has revealed a
broad spectrum of various types of ethnic boundaries, boundary main-
taining mechanisms and inter-ethnic strategies. Here 1 shall only
briefly consider a few questions posed by the material.

It seems first of all to be quite clear that any concept of ethnic group
defined on the basis of ‘cultural content’ (e.g. Naroll 1964) will not
suffice as a tool for the analysis of ethnicity in its various interactional
contexts. Only when ethnic distinction, stratification, or dichotomiza-
tion are part of the individual’s or group’s strategies for preserving
or increasing control of resources social status or other values is a
meaningful interpretation feasible.

Hence ethnicity becomes not one single universally applicable term
but rather the representation of a wide range of inter-relations in
which the dominant reference is to an ethnic status ascribed on the
basis of birth, language, and socialization.

If one accepts this, a study of ethnic inter-relations becomes neces-
sarily a study of ethnic processes: that is the emergence, continuation,
and change of inter-ethnic relations. Thus several processes can be
recognized in the Ethiopian material:

In the case of the Rift valley Arsi versus the Highland peoples,
the tendency dominating the ethnic interaction is one of increasing
polarization and dichotomization in a situation of mounting competi-
tion over productive resources. Since the interaction is between a



=== PDF p51 L (book-seq 100) ===
100 KARL Eric KNUTSSON

dominant expanding highland population with a settled economy,
which controls administration and access to resources on the one hand,
and an originally transhumant and retreating Arsi lowland herdsman
population on the other, the latter’s only efficient strategy is adapta-
tion to, and, optimally, assimilation in, the highland ethnic groups.
This strategy, however, is not easily accemplished because of the
vested interests of the highland groups in the potentially rich agri-
cultural areas on the peripheries of the highland and because profitable
agriculture in the lowland areas is only possible for a sophisticated
plantation and irrigation agronomy.

In the East, the inter-ethnic relations between the Lake Zwai Laki
and the Arsi represents on the other hand a process of weakened
dichotomization in favour of symbiotic intercommunication, which
can certainly be explained by the reduction in this area through Arsi
dominance of the same competition over niche control and production
resources which are increasing on the highland slopes in the west. i

Towards the Jille no marked changes in a traditional polarized
relationship can be noted. Here a territorial division and a low degree
of intercommunication has continued because of the lack of the
minimum prerequisites for economic exchange and potentially con-
flicting interests in the same ecological niche.

A fourth basic process is finally found in the Macha market village,
where inter-ethnic integration is increasing in important sectors of
community life, although the Ethiopian ethnic stratification model is
still a decisive factor within the integrated spheres where it some-
times seems to form the very basis for the pattern of integration itself.

* I am here excluding the pariah groups of hippopotamus hunters, the Weyto,
who live scattered along the shores of Lake Zwai. Although there is complete social
separation between these and the Arsi, there exists economic exchange.


=== PDF p51 R (book-seq 101) ===
Ethnic Stability and Boundary

Dynamics in Southern Mexico
by Henning Siverts

Problem and area

The population of Highland Chiapas in southern Mexico is aptly
characterized as heterogeneous. Culturally distinct groups are in con-
tact within the same general area, forming a composite social entity,
the members of which are constantly interacting in certain spheres of
life, notably in the realm of business transactions (Siverts 1965b).

We are thus confronted with a typical ‘poly-ethnic society’ based
on economic specialization and symbiotic interdependence between the
constituent units. Interaction between representatives of ethnic cate-
gories seems to be founded on a dichotomization of generalized
identities, and the cultural differences are over-communicated, Trans-
actions across categories are therefore different in principle from
those in which the partners engage with people of their own kind.

Hence, Highland Chiapas may resemble the type of society which
Furnivall (1944) describes as ‘plural’, the characteristic of which is
the combination of ethnic segmentation and economic interdependence.

The present paper describes the distribution of assets and forms of
interaction in the area with reference to the question of boundary
maintenance. More specifically, it asks the question of why the Tzeltal-
speaking Oxchuc Mayas prefer to remain Indian and largely ignore
or resist national integration and westernization.

Thus the basic topic of this paper parallels Haaland’s discussion of
the Baggarization of the Fur (p. 58 ff.). But rather than showing how
individuals of one ethnic category change their identity, I am trying
to explain the circumstances which seem to discourage attempts to do
so. In both instances the line of argument is tied to economic con-
siderations; likewise the conceptual framework shows enough similarity
to warrant comparison.

The basic assumption on which the analysis rests is that a ‘steady


=== PDF p52 L (book-seq 102) ===
102 HENNING SIVERTS

Rio Tlacotalpa

Chalchihuitan
[}

OCancuc
@ Soyald ° Chenalho
Larrafnzar Oxchuc
TenejapaQ
[
Zinacantan, - Pamula @Huixtan
SAN CRISTOBAL LAS CASAS

PAN AMERITAN HIGHWAY,

Chacn)al

Rio Grijalva

Amatenango
O

Rfo Angostura '

LEGEND
D Ladino towns

@ T:zotzil pueblos
Q  Tzeltal pueblos

The central highlands of Chiapas (Tzeltal-Tzotzil area).
Only a few towns and pueblos are shown.

state’ of the sort met in Chiapas can only be brought about when
individual actors constantly face similar dilemmas of allocation of
labour and capital to which the repertoire of responses is limited and
stereotyped. It is further assumed that the cultural biases, which form
part of the constellation of constraints, tend to be confirmed and
hence perpetuated through the repeatedly rewarded choices.


=== PDF p52 R (book-seq 103) ===
ETHNIC STABILITY AND BOUNDARY DyNaMmics IN S. MExico  '1?

The area with which we are concerned comprises the colonial-style
town of San Cristébal Las Casas' and its hinterland, i.e. the plateau
summit of the Highland with its northern and eastern flanks of slightly
lower-lying districts. The whole area covers approximately 1,000
sq. miles. Elevations range from 3,000 to 6,000 ft. Gentle slopes make
human habitation easy in parts of the area, but much of it is extremely
rugged, with steep slopes, sharp ridges and deep gorges.

Despite unfavourable conditions, agriculture is the main productive
pursuit, with subsistence based upon the cultivation of maize and
beans. Among some of the rural inhabitants animal husbandry, notably
sheep-raising, is of considerable importance. The townspeople are
traders, merchants, artisans, officials, and professional men. Closer
inspection reveals the existence of systematic regional differences also
among the rural communities. Not only are there great variations in
productive activities; there are, in addition, contrasting social forms,
i.e. a juxtaposition of a number of distinct ways of life.

Language habits serve to accentuate these cultural distinctions. The
highlanders speak different languages and dialects. Furthermore they
show great variations in styles of clothing.

Chiapanecans make use of several verbal categories in referring to
these variations, A principal distinction is made between Ladino and
Indio. The first term is assigned to those who speak Spanish as their
main language and pursue a Spanish-derived way of life. The second
label is applied to persons who speak an Indian language as their
mother tongue, and who dress and ‘behave as Indians’.

In its turn the word indio or the diminutive indito may elicit a list
of sub-categories such as Zinacantecos, Chamulas, Oxchuqueros,
Cancuqueros, etc. These are names given to actual groups of people,
distinguished from each other in terms of particular features of dress,
and the products they carry to the market of San Cristébal Las Casas.
Thus, among the Chiapanecan highlanders, the following statement is
a sufficient characterization of one such category, viz. the Zinacante-
cos: ‘Zinacantecos wear big, flat hats with coloured ribbons, white
shorts, pink scarfs and sandals with tall leggings. They are salt traders
and live in the municipality of Zinacantan.’

Field observations over the last 40 years leave the impression that
the range and general content of these idioms are fairly constant, and
that the number of people using them is increasing.? Census reports
of the last 30 years seem to corroborate this belief:

The proportion of Indian speaking persons is stable, and in some


=== PDF p53 L (book-seq 104) ===
104 HENNING SIEVRTS

Chiapas Oxchuc

T

[] SPANISH
[[] INDIAN: Bilingual
P INDIAN: Monolingual

Proportion of Indian-speaking persons 5 years of age and older in the State
of Chiapas and in the municipality of Oxchuc.

Source: Censo General 1940/1950/1960 (Estado de Chiapas), Direccién ]

General de Estadistica, México D. F. M. German Parra: Densidad de la

poblacién indigena en la Repiblica Mexicana, conforme al censo de 1940.

Memorias del Instituto Nacional Indigenista, Vol. 1, No. 1, México D. F., 1950.

parts of the region under study a marked increase is noted (see
accompanying Table). Although the accuracy of Mexican vital statis-
tics may be questionable for certain areas and periods, we may never-
theless trust the general trend of the reports; and if this trend reflects
a social and demographic reality, our conclusion must be that the
Indian speaking ‘tribes’ or pueblos maintain their populations and
retain their idioms according to the stereotype established for each
group of people.

Considering the long period of contact between the indigenous
population and the colonists, military campaigns, epidemics, political


=== PDF p53 R (book-seq 105) ===
ETHNIC STABILITY AND BOUNDARY DyNaMIcS IN S. MExico 105

pressure, land expropriation, and finally, the impact of the national
policy of recent years to integrate the Indians in national political and
economical life — we find it remarkable that assimilation is minimal
and ethnic boundaries remain intact. It should be noted, however, that
the notion of ‘ethnic boundary’ does not involve the assumption of
identical idioms being transferred from time immemorial. Rather, the
boundary implies the constancy of a set of idioms communicating
minimal contrast between segments of the population. Indeed, many
traits considered typically Indian today have been identified as imita-
tions of ceremonial items and ‘customs’ of Spanish origin. A curious
instance illustrating this is the ceremonial costumes used by the
Chamulas during their fiesta de carnaval: Imitations of French gren-
adier uniforms used by Maximillian’s troops in 1862 (cf. Blom 1956:
281).

Signals of identification, whatever their ‘origin’, serve the purpose
of ascribing ethnic status to individuals, thus guiding or directing their
interaction. The problem of explaining the persistence of such char-
acteristics may consequently be approached through a study of the
sectors of life where representatives of the diverse categories articu-
late.

In the following I shall therefore present a sketch of the forms of
interaction which take place within fields or sectors of activity such as
the market and the administration. Both sectors are treated as rather
inclusive in this paper, i.e. education and ritual are not separated from
‘administration’, and the ‘market’ comprises various forms of busi-
ness transactions.

In the process of description I will attempt an analysis which will
expose an assemblage of factors sufficient to produce a situation of
boundary stability. However, in order to perform the analysis, we will
need to survey the form and nature of the assets which the actors can
bring to bear on the situations in which Ladinos and Indians interact.
Our first task, then, is to describe the distribution of resources.

Distribution of resources and productive activities
Land is a scarce resource, the ownership if which is in the hands of
both Indians and Ladinos. There are principally two forms of land
tenure:

1. The pastoralist ranch and cash crop plantation of the Ladinos.
The property is individually owned and subject to purchase; it is
exploited by means of a small number of hired hands and the labour


=== PDF p54 L (book-seq 106) ===
106 HENNING SIVERTS

provided by an attached Indian community, descendants of those who
originally owned the territory.

2. The collective and unalienable lands of an Indian community, or
section of community, in which individual households exploit limited
patches on the basis of usufruct. These lands are utilized by means of
slash-and-burn cultivation of maize and beans. Labour is provided by
the members of the household for most of the year. During the planting
season, larger work teams are formed on the basis of kinship and
friendship networks.

Regional variations in natural resources and technological skills
favour the development of specialization of production. In the Indian
communities part-time specialists manufacture traditional handicraft
goods such as pottery (waterjars), woollen ponchos and sashes, wooden
chairs, musical instruments, cordage, charcoal, firewood, and salt.
These wares are brought to the market of San Cristébal Las Casas
together with the other Indian surplus produce.

Other industries, including forges, gunsmiths’ shops, construction
works, and a great number of small-scale industries producing Indian
ceremonial paraphernalia are all exclusively Ladino; and most of these
activities are confined to the town itself, which, market included, is
controlled by Ladino merchants and intermediaries. The accompany-
ing figure shows the distribution of some of these items and productive
activities (p. 107).

Confrontation of assets and the sectors of articulation

Ladinos and Indians are competitors and opponents with regard to
certain land areas as well as interdependent partners in an economic
system where the Indians generally act as producers of agricultural
products and consumers of industrial goods, while the Ladinos appear
as traders and producers of industrial and handicraft wares and con-
sumers of Indian cultivated food.

Transactions are for the most part consummated in the town of San
Cristébal Las Casas.? Indians carry their products to the town market
and sell them directly to consumers, or, far more commonly, sell the
products to Ladino merchants who resell them in the market. A prom-
inent figure in the system of interchange of goods is that of the
atajadora (interceptor), a Ladino woman intermediary who makes her
living by waiting for Indians on the outskirts of the town, buying from
them and then reselling the products in the market or in her shop.

At first glance there seems to be little economic justification for the


=== PDF p54 R (book-seq 107) ===
ETHNIC STABILITY AND BOUNDARY DYNaMICS IN S. MEXTCO 107

Chamula
A. Musical instruments.
B. Firewood & charcoal.
C. Woolen fabrics.
D. Oranges from
Tenejapa.

Oxchuc
E. Fibres & cordage.

F. Eggs, poultry & pigs.

Amatenango
G. Waterjars & fine
pottery.

Zinacantin
H. Salt from Ixtapa.
I. Flowers.
J. Maize.

San Cristébal Las Casas
K. Ceremonial
paraphernalia.
L. Tools & equipment.

Simplified representation of the San Cristébal market indicating the main
flow of goods.

existence of these intermediaries, since the Indians are heading for the
market in any case and are likely to spend all day in town. However,
the bargaining for retail sales takes more time than Indians from dis-
tant places are willing to spend. An additional reason is that the busi-
ness of fractioning and haggling over prices demands certain skills in-
cluding full command of the Spanish language and experience of the
market. Hence the Indians prefer the rough but swift treatment by the
ladies. The manner in which the atajaedoras treat their Indian
suppliers illustrates the somewhat imperious way in which Ladinos
habitually behave towards Indians. The Indian is supposed to be
shy and a simpleton who does not know how to trade, a belief
which has the quality of a self-fulfilling prophecy. It makes it much
more difficult for the Indian to deal with Ladinos on any but the most
elementary commercial level. This invites harsh practice in dealings
with him; neither does he possess many civil resources, save for
the Office of Indian Affairs. It is likely that a considerable number of


=== PDF p55 L (book-seq 108) ===
108 HENNING SIVERTS

grave cases of cheating will occur before an Indian overcomes his
fear of authorities and offices in order to present his complaints to
them.

San Cristébal Las Casas may be characterized as an Indian market
town run by Ladinos. In the town, Indians get rid of their surplus
goods in return for which they can bring back tools, and equipment
of all sorts, including ceremonial paraphernalia, ‘Indian clothing
material’, and finally, all the various handicraft wares produced by
other Indian communities. The primary importance of the town is
indeed as a centre of redistribution for a tremendous hinterland (cf.
figure p. 107).

Characteristically, the town is divided into quarters or barrios, the
members of which specialize in one or another activity aimed at the
satisfaction of particular Indian appetites. The barrio of Santa Lucia
is dedicated to the production of fireworks — important for any
Indian fiesta. Another barrio, Cuxtitali, concentrates on buying and
butchering pigs; inhabitants of that barrio travel as far as the jungle
to the east, buying pigs ahead of the planting season, when the Indians
want to get rid of their pigs to avoid the fencing in of the molesting
animals. The pig-dealers also hawk cloth and trinkets during their
travels. It should be added that the Indians as a rule never eat their
pigs; they are raised for the single purpose of transforming maize into
cash.

The market town, furthermore, is the natural seat of local adminis-
tration and federal agencies, including police, a military garrison,
telegraph, telephone, post office and health authorities. Of prime
importance is the Labour Agency, mediating the seasonal labour
demand on behalf of the big coffee plantations on the Pacific Coast.
Coffee picking in the fall is the single labour offer made to the Indians
from the ‘outside’. Only impoverished Indians on the outskirts of town
may sometimes be put to odd jobs in the garden or in the shop of a
rich Ladino. Otherwise openings are non-existent for Indians simply
because they are not supposed to command the sufficient skills —
among them language and general education.

Thus the Ladinos control the labour market as well as the distribu-
tion of goods and services.

Except for two notable cases to the contrary (to be discussed later),
Ladinos hold all positions of authority and bureaucratic offices within
the regional government and administration. In the present context
this includes Federal and State agencies as well as the municipal


=== PDF p55 R (book-seq 109) ===
ETHNIC STABILITY AND BOUNDARY DyNAMIcs IN S. MExico 109

government of San Cristébal Las Casas — an entity of the first order
within the ranking system of municipalities.

The township of San Cristébal enjoys jurisdiction over a much more
extensive district than the mere municipal territory, an expression of
which is the placing of Ladino secretaries in the local governments of
the Indian communities, otherwise run by the native inhabitants.
Normally, then, political control of the hinterland is exercised through
administrative means. However, it should not be overlooked that
Ladino dominance is based on military superiority and the omnipresent
threat of resorting to physical force. At the slightest provocation a
military detachment or police force may be ordered to garrison an
Indian pueblo.* Indeed, neither the traditional tribal leaders, the
principales, nor the subordinate body of civil-religious officers are in
a favourable position to resist such a measure since their mandate is
questioned by the superimposed and officially recognized municipal
government, the Ayuntamiento Constitucional. This latter body con-
trols the police force and therefore has effective sanctions at its
disposal. However, in spite of the fact that the Ayuntamiento is pre-
dominantly Indian in composition, its extra-tribal sources of authority
and allocated tasks tend to canalize its decision-making activities. This
neutralization is reinforced and made effective through the presence
of the Ladino Secretary (cf. Siverts 1960). Thus the ‘old regime’ of
the principales is curtailed by the Ayuntamiento, and the ‘new
regime’, in its turn, is supervised by the Ladino functionary. As long
as the Ladinos are able to uphold this key position in local administra-
tion, their grip on internal politics will remain relatively firm; and
the only means by which an Indian body politic could possibly replace
the Ladino officer with an Indian would depend on the candidate’s
demonstrated ability to fulfill the requirements of the office — literacy
and sufficient knowledge of the Spanish language and the business of
Mexican administration.

This brings us to another important asset over which Ladinos have
almost exclusive control, education. Only quite recently has it been
possible for a few gifted Indians to attend secondary schools. Most
Indians have no education at all, but through the educational program
launched by Instituto Nacional Indigenista, primary schooling is now
offered to children in several Indian communities.

So far, however, the lack of means and knowledge of Spanish have
served as effective obstacles to Indian education and participation in
professional life. Hence the Ladino dominance of the police and


=== PDF p56 L (book-seq 110) ===
110 HENNING SIVERTS

military forces, telephone, telegraph and the courts, implying the total
control of information and coercive power on the part of the town
and its inhabitants.

Since the law students are recruited from the landowning and com-
mercial middle and upper classes of the town, loyalities toward repre-
sentatives of these categories of people are much more likely to occur
than some form of idealistic pro-Indian responsibility. From the Indian
point of view, ‘justice’, is secured through kin or friendship ties
between the lawyer and his clients. It is also very much a question
of money. The notoriously low level of wages and salaries for civil
service officers makes bribing an acknowledged, although illegal, pro-
cedure for obtaining advantageous judicial decisions. This is probably
why Asuntos Indigenas has instituted free legal aid to Indians. How-
ever, few Indians know that such an institution exists.

Generally speaking, Ladinos consider Indians as inferior beings,
or children, from whom it is proper to demand subordination and
obedience. They believe that they themselves represent the ‘superior
culture’ — another raza (race). Until recently only Ladinos were
permitted to mount a horse, and it is still very uncommon to see
Indian riders, even among the Indian horse owners. Since, however,
the Indians are the producers of necessities, represent an indispensable
labour force, and are the main consumers of Ladino products, efforts
are made not to affront or insult the Indians unnecessarily. Therefore,
in their daily dealings directly with Indians, Ladino merchants,
rancheros and plantation owners behave in a friendly, paternalistic
manner.’ On the other hand, they never invite Indians to their parties
and fiestas. An exception to this rule was observed in the ceremonial
centre of Oxchuc in 1962 when the Indian presidente of the municipal
government was invited to a formal betrothal party of a prominent
local Ladino; apparently the idea was to give the event an official
stamp.

Intermarriage between Ladinos and Indians is likewise exceptional
and looked upon with great disgust. A Chanalero (Indian) teacher
residing in Tenango married a poor Ladino woman, but although the
family as such enjoyed the prestige of the husband’s office, neither
Ladinos nor Indians accepted them as Ladinos.

This brings us to a related but quite separate issue, viz., instances
of change of identity, (cf. p. 101). In the highland setting, strikingly few
cases of ‘passing’ are on record, which is not surprising considering
that change of identity, by its very nature, is a matter of an


=== PDF p56 R (book-seq 111) ===
ETHNIC STABILITY AND BOUNDARY DYNaMICS 1N S. MEXICO 122

individual’s or family’s hidden past. Nevertheless, poor townspeople
are sometimes referred to as revistidos — ‘those who have changed
clothes’ — by their fellows a little better off. Fragments of life
histories reveal that Ladinization® is a social reality. There is a con-
stant seepage into the city of the unsuccessful from a small number of
Indian communities to the south and east of San Cristébal Las Casas.
A typical caseis P . . . . from Aguacatenango who was deserted by
her Chanalero husband; she claimed that no alternative solution
existed but to move to town with her two children to look for servant
jobs. Similarly, orphaned children are sometimes taken care of by a
Ladino family. They will grow up in a Ladino environment, even-
tually to be acknowledged as ‘semi-civilized’. Tt takes at least two
generations to get rid of the stigma of Indianhood.

Passing the ethnic barrier, then, requires a complete transposition,
involving the abandonment of home, family and whole way of life.
Commonly the decision to ‘become a Ladino’ is a desperate measure,
the only way out when everything else seems to fail. The decision to
move away and take up residence in town automatically involves a
precarious livelihood in the urban slum at the bottom of the social
ladder. Ladinization means leaving behind an existence in an egal-
itarian society to pick up the humblest status in a stratified one.

However, at least two well-known cases of successful passing may be
cited. Indeed, ‘passing’, may not be an adequate term since the cases
referred to involve Chamula Indians who managed to maintain a
double identity. They built personal careers on the basis of extensive
business enterprises in Ladino society while openly presenting them-
selves as Chamulas.

Their choices of business were of such a nature that the Indians
generally considered their activities beneficial to them. The most
spectacular of these entrepreneurs, the late Erasto Urbina, established
a hardware store to meet the Indian need for cheap tools. Urbina
spoke Tzotzil, and he did not cheat his customers, who consequently
preferred to deal with him rather than expose themselves to the bad
treatment by the Ladino shopkeepers. Thus his business grew, and his
power kept pace with the growth of the firm. He was even elected
presidente of San Cristébal Las Casas and married into a prominent
Ladino family.

But Erasto Urbina exemplifies the possible outcome of skilled ma-
nipulation with assets which most Indians do not have. For the
majority, the Ladino world is dangerous. In the Indian pueblo of


=== PDF p57 L (book-seq 112) ===
112 HENNING SIVERTS

San Bartolomé they narrate the myth that the Ladinos were created
from the horses’ excrement while the Indians are bac'il winik (true
men). In the foreign, Ladino setting, the Indians assume a modest and
subservient posture.

To summarize our description so far:

The main sectors of articulation, the market and the administration,
are differently organized, serving different ends. The gross effect of
both sectors is the maintenance of stereotype transactions between
partners in a dominant-subordinate relationship based on ethnic
criteria. As going concerns these two sectors of articulation form a
framework of mutually confirming regulations for interaction. The
‘market provides for the circulation of goods and services while the
administration offers political protection of the (status quo) distribu-
tion of assets on which the market activities are based, while collecting
part of the profit directly and indirectly in the form of taxes and
bribes.

Such a complementarity in the actual working of the two sectors
seems to be clearly related to certain basic premises in their respective
organizations. One such premise is the regional autonomy derived
from the Mexican Constitution, the implication of which is the develop-
ment of local social forms beyond effective Federal control. Provincial
administration may therefore establish rules and routines in direct
response to local power constellations. In Highland Chiapas, power is
shared by the plantation owners, the big merchants and the Catholic
Church. The administration is furthermore largely recruited from
these circles. The Indians are not represented. Except for cases like
Erasto Urbina, Indians do not enter the powerful elite which runs
the market and supports the administration. For the Indians, San
Cristébal Las Casas is an external site of exchange, a market place
rather than a market for major investments and profit seeking.”

This observation brings us to another basic condition for the smooth
operation of the market-administration constellation as a principally
Ladino undertaking: the ethnically defined barriers for the free
exchange of major factors of production such as land and labour,
implying a negligible or non-existent participation of Indians in this
sphere of transactions. In other words, local constraints on the alloca-
tion of labour and capital produce an opportunity situation which
seems to prevent Indians from extra-tribal investments. By the same
token, such investments can only be realized through the abandonment
of tribal territory and the change of identity. However, leaving the


=== PDF p57 R (book-seq 113) ===
ETHNIC STABILITY AND BOUNDARY DYNAMICS IN S, MEXTCO 12

home means renunciation of the very asset on which life is based:

land. Consequently Indians may not be in favour of such a solution.
This situation is most dramatically illustrated by the Oxchuc case.

In the following I will therefore describe in more detail how land

tenure tends to restrict Oxchuqueros in their choice of activity and
hence identity.

Land tenure and its implications in Oxchuc

In the pueblo of Oxchuc, males are entitled to a share in the jointly
owned landed estate through patrifiliation. Membership in the cor-
poration is determined by patronymics and common residence.

In order to utilize their asset, Oxchuqueros are obliged to cultivate
their allocated patches in the prescribed manner, i.e. slash-and-burn
agriculture based on the staples, maize and beans. In addition they
grow fruits and vegetables in small quantities (house site garden), and
raise hogs and poultry for sale. The only cash grop grown is the
maguey from which fibres and cordage are manufactured. Alternative
enterprises seem to be discouraged by local ecological conditions as
well as by cultural circumstances (or axioms of propriety and
demeanour): it is improper and associated with great social costs
(witchcraft and ridicule) to deviate, even in minor details, from the
ordinary Oxchuquero practices of production and consumption. This
has been amply illustrated by the social unrest which followed the
introduction of Protestantism in the area. Protestants were likely to
demonstrate their independence and ‘new way of life’; and even
their very moderate investments in equipment, whitewashing of houses
or a variant way of sowing beans were looked upon with great scep-
ticism, sometimes leading to witchcraft accusations and ending in
homicide.

This rigidity with regard to manner of exploitation of fields on the
part of the shareholders is understandable, considering the conse-
quences of permitting free enterprises on territories which are liable
to be returned for redistribution at any one time. Likewise no
part of the corporate estate may be alienated by any individual
member, the implication of which is that a2 man cannot claim compen-
sation for leaving his share to his companions if he wants to migrate
and start afresh where conditions are better. (Oxchuc is not well
suited to agriculture, and the scarcity of land is a grave problem.)
Thus he has no capital at his disposal with which to build a new life
outside the tribal borders. Another point is that there exist no alterna-

8. Barth


=== PDF p58 L (book-seq 114) ===
114 HENNING SIVERTS

tive places of settlement, except for certain remote resettlement areas
of dubious reputation. Nor is it possible to obtain well paid jobs out-
side Oxchuc which permit permanent settlement and transfer of the
family.

An Oxchuc male is therefore placed in an opportunity situation
which forces him to accept the membership in his patrilineal name-
group and make use of his rights in land at the locality in which he
was born. This choice involves a number of secondary privileges and
obligations, among them the right to be treated as a full member of
the tribe, entailing a set of aspirations with regard to positions of
prestige in the hierarchy of tribal offices. This right, however, is just
an aspect of a general obligation to serve one’s fellow tribesmen in
whatever capacity one’s superiors see fit. Thus a tribesman is bound
to accept a nomination as ceremonial sponsor of a fiesta whether he
thinks he can pay the expenses involved or not. Fear of the old men’s
wrath and supernatural powers keep most people in line with the
expectations.

Conclusion

One single factor, the principle of land allocation, produces a
situation which, in combination with the ecological constraints, such
as the presence of a Ladino ethnic category defending its position in
the web of transactions, tends to limit the range of activities of
individuals born as Oxchuqueros.

For a youth of Oxchuquero parents simply to disown his origin and
leave scems to be too costly to be worth the attempt. He has to live
with it, and the only way of doing it, is to accept the package deal
offered to him by his seniors: ‘Stay put as Oxchuquero and reap the
fruits of your only asset, for which you renounce the major portion of
your autonomy.’ His reward is a livelihood and potential power and
prestige within the Oxchuc frame of reference.

As already indicated the consumption profile is restricted by local
economy and cultural biases. It is furthermore directed by the available
offers of consumer goods in San Cristébal Las Casas where Ladinos
encourage certain purchases while impeding others. Consequently, by
acting as an Oxchuquero, and taking upon himself both household and
ceremonial responsibilities, an individual is constantly rewarded by
tribesmen and Ladinos alike. The spheres of action and conversions,
then, in which the Oxchuquero can most profitably participate, have
the feed-back effect of confirming the very axioms on which the system


=== PDF p58 R (book-seq 115) ===
ETHNIC STABILITY AND BOUNDARY DyYNAMICS IN S. MEXICO 115

is based. Hence, idioms such as language and costume, tend con-
tinually to communicate a social and cultural distance between the
groups of people which are complementary in the system of produc-
tion and consumption of the Highland Chiapas social entity.

Nevertheless the number of bilingual Indians is steadily growing.
Furthermore Indian teachers are operating in the Indian communities.
An Indian elite is taking shape (Siverts 1964). But does this imply
Ladinization? How much Spanish does a2 man need to know and how
much education is required before he is able to make the jump?

Apparently, language training and general knowledge are not
minimal factors as long as openings for this kind of expertise are
limited to positions in Indian society. What education brings to Indian
social life is an additional platform for political activity in a strictly
Indian setting (Siverts 1965¢). Hence the young elite, while boasting of
their knowledge of Ladino ways, do not aspire to be accepted as
Ladinos but are rather anxious to obtain recognition in their own
society. And the only way by which this can be done is by converting
their expertise into useful activities such as acting as interpreters and
backing their fellow tribesmen in their dealings with the outside world.
Thus the ‘new leaders’ constitute an asset for the whole community
in the sense that internal administration as well as negotiations
vis-a-vis the Ladinos and San Cristébal Las Casas are made more
efficient.

In return for their services, the ‘experts’ are given positions and
sometimes material benefits in kind and in money.® In other words,
the elite is incorporated into the community; and the Ladino educa-
tion, rather than producing Ladino ideals and Ladino identity, is
turned against Ladino administration and outside influence, reinforc-
ing tribal pride and Indianhood.

But Indianhood in this context is typically confined to the tribe,
one’s own pueblo. At present there is apparently no tendency to extend
the idea of Indianhood to neighbouring pueblos or to Mexican Indians
in general.® On the contrary, each pueblo is a self-contained unit; and
the tribesmen see no alternative way of dealing with people in this
world except commercial interaction with Ladinos on unequal terms,
and ceremonial communication and small scale trading on equal terms
with other Indians at patron saint feasts.1®

The poly-ethnic situation, then, such as is met in the Highlands of
Chiapas, is strikingly different from the typical minority situation of
Northern Norway, discussed by Eidheim (pp. 89 ff.). A Lapp may try to

8b. Barth


=== PDF p59 L (book-seq 116) ===
116 HENNING SIVERTS

fake his identity or to live a double life as a kind of Norwegian and
as a back-stage Lapp. The Indian highlander is always an Indian
whether at home or interacting with Ladinos. His destiny is shaped
by a situation in which his Indianhood is the very basis for interaction.

* Former capital of the State of Chiapas, still seat of the bishopric. It is recognized
as Cabecera de Distrito, i. e. ‘capital’ of the Highland district.

* Cf. Blom and La Farge 1927; Blom 1956; Aguirre Beltran 1953; Guiteras Holmes
1946; Pozas Arciniega 1948, 1959; Redfield and Villa Rojas 1939; Villa Rojas
1942—44, 1947; Cancian 1965; Vogt 1966; Siverts 1965a; Pitt-Rivers and McQuown
1964.

* Within the tribal border trade takes place at three levels: a) delayed exchange
between close relatives and neighbours; b) trade in kind (bananas for beans) with
indirect reference to Mexican currency between remote relatives and acquaintances:
50 ¢ = 1 bundle bananas = pulato (pot) beans, sizes of measures varying with the
season; c) ordinary exchange by means of currency between unrelated and distant
living tribesmen.

4 Cf. the case of ‘calling military assistance’ to Oxchuc in 1960 during a period of
alleged ‘unrest’ (Siverts 1964: 368).

& It is characteristic that Ladinos always address Indians in 2nd person (plural
and singular) which is otherwise insulting. The use of 2nd person plural is con-
sidered an archaism elsewhere in Mexico where the 3rd person is reserved for a
non-specified plurality (of persons).

* The neologism Ladinization (Ladinoization) is borrowed from McQuown and
Pitt-Rivers 1964.

7 Cf. the discussion of the ‘peripheral market’ (Bohannan 1963: 240 ff).
® Teachers receive salaries from Instituto Nacional Indigenista, relatives provide
labour for cultivating their fields, and friends and neighbours frequently bring gifts
to their households.
¢ ‘Indianhood’ in this sense only exists among romantic intellectuals and certain
idealistic absentee politicians.
1® Pan-Indianism is as foreign to the Oxchuguero or Cancuquero today as it was \
during the uprisings of ycsterday, notably the great insurrection of 1712 when these
two tribes temporarily joined forces in a frustrated attempt to fight the Spaniards
(Pineda 1888). It is perhaps symptomatic that they lost an obvious victory because
hesitation and disorganization were more prominent features of the military opera-
tions than determination and coordination; and this may serve as a dramatic ex-
pression of the poly-ethnic situation where a highly segmented majority fails to
make a concerted effort at neutralizing a dominant and organized minority. But
of course, the Spaniards never constituted a real minority; they represented the
larger society just as the Ladinos do today.


=== PDF p59 R (book-seq 117) ===
Pathan Identity and its Maintenance
by Fredrik Barth

Pathans (Pashtuns, Pakhtuns, Afghans) constitute a large, highly self-
aware ethnic group inhabiting adjoining areas of Afghanistan and
West Pakistan, generally organized in a segmentary, replicating social
system without centralized institutions.

A population of this size and organization, widely extended over an
ecologically diverse area and in different regions in contact with other
populations of diverse cultures, poses some interesting problems in the
present context. Though the members of such an ethnic group may
carry a firm conviction of identity, their knowledge of distant com-
munities who claim to share this identity will be limited; and inter-
communication within the ethnic group — though it forms an uninter-
rupted network — cannot lightly be assumed to disseminate adequate
information to maintain a shared body of values and understandings
through time. Thus, even if we can show that the maintenance of
Pathan identity is an overt goal, for all members of the group, this
will be a goal pursued within the limited perspective of highly
discrepant local settings. Consequently the aggregate result will not
automatically be the persistence of an undivided and distinctive, single
ethnic group. How then can we account for the character and the
boundaries of this unit? The following analysis attempts to answer this
question by analysing and comparing the processes of boundary
maintenance in different sectors of Pathan territory. Since our ques-
tions concern processes over time which have produced and sustained
a pattern that we observe today, I shall concern myself with the
traditional forms of organization which have predominated and still
largely obtain in the area, and not with the recent process of penetra-
tion of some parts of Pathan country by modern administration.

Pathan communities exhibit a great range of cultural and social
forms (see map on p. 118). (1) In a central belt of barren hills running


=== PDF p60 L (book-seq 118) ===
118 FREDRIK BARTH

@,
AFGHANISTAN

.
.

Pathan area : distribution of adaptational form.
Digits refer to numbers in the text pp. 117—119.

through most of the country are found villages of mixed agricul-
turalists, organized in egalitarian patrilineal descent segments with an
acephalous political form. (2) In favoured localities in the mountains,
and in the broader valleys and plains, more intensive agriculture is
practised, based on artificial irrigation; in these areas Pathans proper
are landowners or owner-cultivators, while part of the village popula-
tion consists of tenant Tajiks (south and west) or servile tenant and
menial castes (east and north). Political forms are largely based on
the segmentary organization of the Pathan descent groups, some places
in acephalous systems, elsewhere integrated in quasi-feudal systems
within the prevailing states and increasingly subject to bureaucratic


=== PDF p60 R (book-seq 119) ===
PATHAN IDENTITY AND ITS MAINTENANCE 119

administration. (3) Other sectors of the Pathan population live as
administrators, traders, craftsmen or labourers in the towns of Afghan-
istan and Pakistan, as an integrated part of those two states. (4) Par-
ticularly in the south, a large sector of the ethnic group lives a pastoral
nomadic life, politically organized as tribes with, in part, very great
autonomy. Finally, some groups practise extensive labour or trad-
ing migrations which bring individuals and small groups periodically
far outside the geographical boundaries of Pathan country.

Such diversities of life style do not appear significantly to impair
the Pathans’ self-image as a characteristic and distinctive ethnic unit
with unambiguous social and distributional boundaries. Thus the
cultural diversity which we observe between different Pathan com-
munities, and which objectively seems to be of an order of magnitude
comparable to that between any such community and neighbouring
non-Pathan groups, does not provide criteria for differentiating per-
sons in terms of ethnic identity. On the contrary, members of this
society select only certain cultural traits, and make these the unam-
biguous criteria for ascription to the ethnic group.

Pathans appear to regard the following attributes as necessarily
associated with Pathan identity (cf. Caroe 1962, Barth 1959):

1. Patrilineal descent. All Pathans have a common ancestor, who
lived 20-25 generations ago according to accepted genealogies.
Though genealogical interest is considerable, knowledge of accepted
genealogies varies both regionally and individually. The acceptance
of a strictly patrilineal descent criterion, however, is universal.

2. Islam. A Pathan must be an orthodox Moslem. The putative
ancestor, Qais, lived at the time of the Prophet. He sought the Prophet
out in Medina, embraced the faith, and was given the name of Abd-
ur-Rashid. Thus, Pathans have no infidel past, nor do they carry in
their history the blemish of defeat and forcible conversion.

3. Pathan custom. Finally, a Pathan is a man who lives by a body of
customs which is thought of as common and distinctive to all Pathans.
The Pashto language may be included under this heading — it is a
necessary and diacritical feature, but in itself not sufficient: we are
not dealing simply with a linguistic group. Pathans have an explicit
saying: ‘He is Pathan who does Pashto, not (merely) who speaks
Pashto’; and ‘doing’ Pashto in this sense means living by a rather
exacting code, in terms of which some Pashto speakers consistently fall
short.

Pathan customs are imagined by the actors to be consistent with, and


=== PDF p61 L (book-seq 120) ===
120 FREDRIK BARTH

complementary to, Islam. Parts of this body of custom have been
formalized and made overt by tribal councils and administrators as
custom law, while some written and a considerable oral literature
concerns itself in a normative and patriotic fashion with the distinc-
tiveness of Pathan culture. The value orientations on which it is based
emphasize male autonomy and egality, self-expression and aggressive-
ness in a syndrome which might be summarized under the concept of
honour (izzat), but which differs from the meaning that this word has
been given in Mediterranean studies, in ways that will become
apparent as the analysis proceeds.

Together, these characteristics may be thought of as the ‘native
model’ (cf. Ward 1965) of the Pathan. This model provides a Pathan
with a self-image, and serves him as a general canon for evaluating
behaviour on the part of himself and other Pathans. It can clearly
only be maintained if it provides a practicable self-image and is
moderately consistent with the sanctions that are experienced in social
interaction; and some arguments in my analysis of boundary-
crossing will be based in this very point. However, this ‘native model’
need not be a truly adequate representation of empirical facts, and for
our analytic purposes I believe that Pathan custom can more usefully
be depicted in a few central institutions of Pathan life. These combine
central value orientations, by which performance and excellence can
be judged, with fora or other organizational arrangements in which
the relevant behaviour can be consummated and exhibited. The
analysis of boundary-maintaining processes in different parts of the
Pathan area, which will be made below, requires an understanding of
three such institutions which dominate three major domains of activity:
Melmastia=hospitality, and the honourable uses of material goods,
jirga=councils, and the honourable pursuit of public affairs, and
purdah=seclusion, and the honourable organization of domestic life.

Hospitality involves a set of conventions whereby the person who
is on home ground has obligations towards the outsider to incorporate
him into the local group, temporarily be responsible for his security,
and provide for his needs. The obligation is brought into play by the
visitors’ presenting himself in the alien setting. Accordingly, a stranger
on the road who passes close to someone who is having a meal will
be offered food, someone coming to a village will be greeted and
helped by residents, a friend making his appearance will promptly be
made welcome. In return, the guest is obligated to recognize the
authority and sovereignty of the host over property and persons pres-


=== PDF p61 R (book-seq 121) ===
PATHAN IDENTITY AND ITS MAINTENANCE 121

ent. In this host-guest relation, any single encounter is temporary and
the statuses thereby reversible and reciprocal, and hospitality is thus
easily an idiom of equality and alliance between parties; a consistently
unilateral host-guest relationship, on the other hand, entails depen-
dence and political submission by the guest.

The appropriate forum for hospitality among Pathans varies in
distinctness and scale according to local circumstances, but involves
the allocation of publicly accessible space to the purpose: a special
men’s house, a separate guest room, or merely a place to sit. The space
and occasion together may be described as a forum because they pro-
vide the opportunity to act out behaviour which can be publicly judged
according to scale and quality. Specifically, it gives the host an oppor-
tunity to exhibit his competence in management, his surplus, and the
reliance others place on him. More importantly, it shows the ease with
which he assumes responsibility, and implies authority and assurance
— basic male Pathan virtues. On a deeper level, it confirms basic
premises of Pathan life: that wealth is not for amassing, but for use
and is basically without importance, that only the weak man is attached
to property and makes himself dependent on it, that the strong man
bases his position on qualities within himself and people’s recognition
of these qualities, and not on control of people by the control of objects.
The self-esteem of a poor hill farmer can thus be maintained in the
face of the wealth and luxury of neighbouring Oriental civilizations
— yet at the same time a means of converting wealth to political
influence through hospitality is provided within the terms of Pathan
values. While strangers are made to recognize the sovereignty of local
people, local leaders can build up followings by feasting fellow vil-
lagers in a unilateral pattern. Apart from the way in which these ideas
about hospitality facilitate the circulation of persons and information
in anarchic territory, and protect locals from invidious comparisons
with strangers, they can also further the political assimilation of servile
dependents under Pathan leaders.

The council among Pathans is a meeting of men, called together by
one or several of those present so as to arrive at a joint decision on a
matter of common concern, and may thus refer to an ad hoc meeting
or to an instituted tribunal. The matter of common interest may be a
conflict between the parties present or the planning of a joint action.
The relationship between members of a council is one of equals, with
no speaker or leader; the equality is emphasized by circular seating
on the ground and the equal right of all to speak. The body does not


=== PDF p62 L (book-seq 122) ===
122 FREDRIK BARTH

finalize its decision in a vote: discussion and negotiation continue
until the decision is unopposed, and thereby unanimous and binding
as an individual decision by each participant. A faction which will not
accept a decision can only avoid commitment by leaving the circle in
protest.

The council is thus a forum where important Pathan virtues, such
as courage, judgement, dependability, and morality can be acted out,
while a man’s influence and the respect shown him is made apparent
through the procedures. On the more fundamental level, this organiza-
tion of councils confirms the basic integrity and autonomy of men,
and the basically voluntary nature of the social contract among
Pathans. It allows groups of men to arrive at joint decisions without
compromising any participant’s independence; it produces binding
corporate decisions about concerted action without dissembling the
structure of egalitarian balanced segments through the introduction of
any one’s right to give commands.

Finally, seclusion establishes an organization of activities which
allows a simultaneous emphasis on virility and the primacy of male
society, and prevents the realities of performance in domestic life
from affecting a man’s public image. Pathan value orientations contain
a number of contradictions if they are to be made relevant simultane-
ously in behaviour before mixed audiences. Thus, the emphasis on
masculinity and virility has an aspect of sexual appetite and compe-
tence — yet eagerness to indulge oneself is ‘soft’ and severely
ridiculed. Agnatic ideology and the emphasis on virility implies a high
evaluation of males and male company over females; yet it must be
through the company of females that the essence of virility is consum-
mated. Finally, there is the problem of vulnerability through ‘things’
and the infringement of rights. We have seen how explicit valuations
of freedom and autonomy are furthered through hospitality, through
the denial of attachment and importance in things. Yet male rights
in women, in sisters and wives, cannot be denied and liquidated in that
way: a male is dependent on, and vulnerable through, his women.

To all these contradictions, the seclusion of women and encapsula-
tion of domestic life is an adequate behavioural solution. It also makes
possible a domestic organization that allows a realistic accommodation
between spouses. The sexuality, dominance, and patriarchy demanded
by public male values need not be consummated in public; the primacy
of male relations can be confirmed in the public sphere without any
associated sexual passivity; and at the same time the interaction


=== PDF p62 R (book-seq 123) ===
PATHAN IDENTITY AND ITS MAINTENANCE 123

between spouses need not be perverted by a male performance
designed for a public male audience. The resultant pattern of domestic
performance is difficult to document; but its adequacy is suggested
by the relative absence among Pathans of divorce or adultery murders,
by the trust placed in females by nomads and migrants who absent
themselves periodically from their wives, and by the traditional view
of mothers and sisters as upholders of family honour, spurring their
men to bravery, etc.

These three central institutions combine to provide Pathans with the
organizational mechanisms whereby they can realize core Pathan
values fairly successfully, given the necessary external circumstances.

They also facilitate the maintenance of shared values and identity
within an acephalous and poly-segmentary population. The public fora
provide opportunities to perform and be judged by other persons re-
gardless of residence and political allegiance; they mediate judgement
and public opinion over large areas. Whenever men meet in councils,
wherever guests arrive and hospitality is dispensed, core Pathan values
are acted out and adequacy of performance is judged and sanctioned.
Thus, agreements can be confirmed and maintained and the reality of
shared identity perpetuated despite the absence of any nuclear, proto-
type locus or example.

Moreover, the values thus realized are shared, in general terms,
by surrounding peoples: success as a Pathan implies behaviour which
is also admired by non-Pathans. The ethnic identity therefore remains
one that is highly valued by members also in contact situations, and
is retained wherever possible. An understanding of the boundary
mechanisms of the Pathan ethnic unit thus depends on an under-
standing of the special factors that can make it untenable or unattrac-
tive to sustain this identity. These vary in different marginal areas
of Pathan country, and will be discussed in turn.

The southern Pathan boundary is one where Pathan descent groups,
organized politically through lineage councils, face centrally organized
Baluch tribes along a clearly demarcated territorial border. This
border does not coincide with any critical ecologic difference, though
there is a cline from lower and drier areas in the south to slightly
wetter and more mountainous country towards the north. During
recent historic times, the ethnic boundary has been moving north-
ward through the intermittent encroachment of Baluch tribes on
marginal areas.

The main factors involved in this process have been analysed else-


=== PDF p63 L (book-seq 124) ===
124 FREDRIK BARTH

where (Barth 1964a) and need only be summarized briefly. The critical
factor is the difference in political structure between Baluch and
Pathans. Baluch tribes are based on a contract of political submission
of commoners under sub-chiefs and chiefs (Pehrson 1966). This is a
form that freely allows for reorganization and assimilation of per-
sonnel, and the evidence for the historical growth of Baluch tribes
through confederation and individual and small group accretion is
quite conclusive.!

Southern Pathans on the other hand are organized in localized
segmentary descent groups. Though many of them have chiefs, these
are headmen of descent segments from which clients are excluded; and
political decisions are made through egalitarian councils. Assimilation
of non-descent members can only take place through clientship under
persons or sections of the tribe. It involves, for the client, an inferior,
non-tribesman serf status, attractive merely as a last resort. What is
more, the arrangement is not very attractive to the potential patron
either, for several ecologic and social reasons. A client in this area
can produce only a very limited surplus from which a patron could
benefit, whereas the patron’s obligations to his clients are quite
comprehensive. He is not only responsible for protecting and defend- |
ing him; he is also held responsible for any offence which the client
may cause. And in an egalitarian society where security springs from

a man’s ability to rally communal support, the political advantages 1
of controlling a few clients are very limited. Thus, whereas Baluch
chiefs compete for influence and tax income by incorporating new l

members into the tribe, people secking attachment are turned away
from Pathan groups due to the inability of that structure to incorporate
them. Any person or small group who through war, accident, or crime
is torn lose from his social moorings will thus be drawn into a Baluch
political structure. Furthermore, as centrally led units, these are more
capable of pursuing long-term strategies than are the bodies of
Pathans, mobilized through fusion and ad hoc councils; and though
Baluch tribes may lose battles, they consequently tend to win wars —
swelling their own ranks in the process by uprooting fragments of
personnel — and thus steadily encroach on Pathan lands.

The result is a flow of personnel from Pathan groups to Baluch
groups, and not vice versa. Indeed, large parts of some Baluch tribes
acknowledge Pathan origin. However, the incorporation of Pathans
into Baluch type political structures goes hand in hand with a loss of
Pathan ethnic identity, so the categorical dichotomy of Pathan tribes


=== PDF p63 R (book-seq 125) ===
PATHAN IDENTITY AND ITS MAINTENANCE 125

and Baluch tribes remains. The reasons for this must be sought in the
clash between Pathan values and political circumstances.

Naturally, participation and success in a Baluch tribe requires
facility in Baluch speech and etiquette and thus a certain assimilation
of Baluch culture. However, this degree of versatility and bilingualism
is widely distributed and so the external situation does not seem to
require a change in identity. Rather, the critical factors are connected
with the actor’s own choice of identification, and all bias him in the
direction of Baluch identity. I have discussed how the council provides
a favoured forum for Pathan political activity, which allows Pathans
to act jointly without compromising their autonomy. Membership in
a centrally directed Baluch tribe, on the other hand, does irrevocably
compromise this autonomy: a man must make himself the dependent,
the client, of a leader and cannot speak for himself in the public forum.
Judged by Pathan standards, clientship places a man among the
despised failures, subordinates among independent commoners. Among
Baluch, on the other hand, self-respect and recognition as an honour-
able commoner does not require this degree of assertion and auto-
nomy: the costs, by Baluch standards, of being the client of a chief and
nobleman are very slight. Virility and competence need not be demon-
strated in the forum of political councils, to which commoners have
no access, but is pursued in other fields of activity. By retaining a
Pathan identity in a Baluch setting, a man would run the risk of being
judged by standards in terms of which his performance is a failure,
while judged by the standards current in the host group his behaviour
is perfectly honourable. It is hardly surprising, then, that any one
assimilated has chosen to embrace the identity that makes his situation
most tolerable. As a result, changes in political membership are
associated with changes in ethnic identity, and the clear dichotomy of
persons and tribes is maintained despite the movement of personnel.
Only one small category of people forms an exception to this: a few
families and segments of Pathans who have been subjected by Baluch
as serfs or slaves (cf. Pehrson 1966: 12), and being the dependents of
Baluch commoners cling to an identity which can at least offer them
a claim to honourable origin, though no recognition among free
Pathans.

The western margins of Pathan country exhibit a very different
picture (cf. Ferdinand 1962). Here, the adjoining area is largely
occupied by Persian-speaking Hazara, and Pathan pastoral nomads
and trading nomads penetrate deep into Hazara territory and settle


=== PDF p64 L (book-seq 126) ===
126 FREDRIK BARTH >

there in increasing numbers. This is apparently a recent situation which
came about only after Amir Abd-ur-Rahman of Afghanistan defeated
and subjugated the Hazara. Before that, ethnic intermixture seems to
have been limited. The Hazara were a poor mixed farming population
of mountaineers, organized under petty chiefs and capable of defending
their territory, while the Pathans held the broad valleys and plains.

The basis for this former exclusive territorialism should be sought
in a combination of political and ecologic factors. As mixed farmers,
the Hazara exploit both an agricultural and a pastoral niche, so both
Pathan farmers and nomads constitute competitors to them. More-
over, a tribal political system of petty chieftains, as found on both
sides, has very little capacity to provide for the articulation of dif-
ferently organized ethnic groups in a larger system. The relationship
between tribally organized Hazara and Pathan communities would
thus inevitably be one of competition and mutual attempts at mono-
polization of resources along the border. The apparent stability of the
border between them can be understood as a result of a balance |
between gains and losses: with the forms of political units that
obtained, the costs of conquest and penetration of Hazara country by
a Pathan tribe were greater than the expected returns. |

The relative pacification that resulted from the incorporation of
Hazarajat into the state structure of Afghanistan radically changed
these circumstances. Competition in the exploitation of resources was
freed from the concomitant costs of defence and penetration, and
pastoral nomad Pathans started moving in seasonally to utilize the 1
summer pastures. Moreover, greater freedom of movement has opened |
a niche for traders, and Pathans, with access to the sources of trade
goods, have swiftly moved into this niche. Whereas trade in settled
towns is somewhat despised and largely left to special, low ranking
groups, the life as a trading nomad, who, heavily armed, penetrates
foreign areas and takes large risks both personally and financially, is
one that provides rich opportunities to demonstrate male qualities
valued among Pathans. Through the institutional device of credit with
security in land, these traders have not only been able to create a
profitable volume of trade, but are also gaining control over agri-
cultural land. As a result, there is a progressive trend towards settle-
ment of Pathans as landowners among the Hazara.

This trend exemplifies a pattern of extension and ethnic co-resi-
dence which is characteristic of many Pathan areas. Pathan expansion |
northward and eastward, which has been taking place over a very


=== PDF p64 R (book-seq 127) ===
PATHAN IDENTITY AND ITS MAINTENANCE 127

long period, has certainly occasionally taken the form of migration
and conquest with wholesale eviction of the previous population; but
more frequently it has resulted in only a partial displacement of the
non-Pathan autochthones. In these cases, Pathans have established
themselves in stratified communities as a dominant, landholding group
in a poly-ethnic system. Through much of the western area, the
dichotomy is between Pashtun and Tajik, i.e. Persian-speaking serfs,
while in the eastern areas, Pakhtuns are contrasted with a more
highly differentiated, but largely Pashto-speaking, group of dependent
castes.

One of the preconditions for these compound systems is clearly
ecological. From the Pathan point of view, it is obvious that dependents
will only be accepted where the disadvantages of having them, i.e.
increased vulnerabilitiy, are estimated to be less than the economic
and political advantages. In the barren hills of the south, I have argued
that this leads to the rejection of clients. In richer agricultural areas,
on the other hand, particularly where there are opportunities for
artificial irrigation, farm labour produces very large surpluses so that
profitable enterprises can be based on the control of land. As a result,
the option of establishing oneself as a landowner and patron of others
is an attractive one. Political supremacy may variously be maintained
through an integration of serfs as true clients (hamsaya), or it may be
based on the less committing obligations that follow from unilateral
hospitality. Where surpluses are very large, this latter pattern is most
common, as seen in the development of men’s house feasting in the
north (Barth 1959: 52 ff.); and by this means Pathans can gain political
influence over dependents without very greatly increasing their own
vulnerability.

Pathan identity can readily be maintained under these circum-
stances, since they allow an adequate performance in the various fora
where such an identity is validated. However, political autonomy in
the system is founded on land ownership. Long-term ethnic boundary
maintenance will thus presuppose mechanisms for monopolization and
retention of land on Pathan hands. Persons who lose control of land
must either be given reallocated fields on the basis of descent position
or else denied rights as Pathan descendants and sloughed off from the
group. On the other hand, land acquisition by non-Pathans must be
contained and their participation in Pathan fora prevented unless they
can be fully assimilated to Pathan status.

Several patterns of this are found, among them that of Swat, where


=== PDF p65 L (book-seq 128) ===
128 FREDRIK BARTH

those who lose their land also lose their descent position, while Saints
and others who are given land are none the less excluded from parti-
cipation in council meetings or in men’s house hospitality. Thus con-
quering Pathans are able to integrate other populations in a political
and social system without assimilating them; other ethnic groups and
status groups can also infiltrate the system in dependent positions
where niches are available, as have pastoral Gujars or trading Para-
chas. However, the cultural differences that go with the Pathan iden-
tity versus dependent dichotomy clearly tend to become reduced over
time. Within the whole stratified community there is a very close and
multifaceted integration that furthers this trend. Most social life can
be related to a religious context of dogmatic equality. There is a con-
stant circulation of personnel through hypergamous marriages as well
as loss of land and rank. Finally, there are a multitude of contexts
where a fellowship of ideals and standards are made relevant to groups
that cross-cut strata: in games, in hunting, in war and bravery, non-
Pakhtun and Pakhtun are joined, and judged and rewarded by the
same standards of manliness.2 As a result, the whole stratified popula-
tion tends to approach a uniformly Pathan style of life as well as
speech. Therefore, though the local version of the ethnic name (Pakh-
tun in the case of Swat and Peshawar) continues to indicate the domi-
nant stratum internally, it is increasingly used collectively to designate
the whole population in contrast to the population of other, non-Pashto-
speaking areas. In this sense, then, the internal boundary tends to lose I
some of its ethnic character.
The eastern margins of Pathan country, towards the rich and
populous Indus plain, illustrate a different combination of some of
these factors. Repeatedly through history, tribes and groups of Pathans
have swept out of the hills and conquered large or small tracts of land
in the Panjab or further east, establishing themselves as landlords.
Yet, here it is the conquerors who have become progressively assimi-
lated, and the limits of Pathan country have never moved far from
the foothills area, except for the almost enclosed area of the Peshawar
plains. The ethnodynamics of this boundary may thus be simplified as 1
a continuous pressure and migration of personnel from the Pathan |
area, balanced by a continuous absorption of the migrants into the
plains population, with the rates of these two processes balancing along
a line at a certain distance from the foothills. The direction and rate
of assimilation must be understood in terms of the opportunity situa-
tion of Pathans settled in the plains. These plains have always been |


=== PDF p65 R (book-seq 129) ===
PATHAN IDENTITY AND ITS MAINTENANCE 129

under the sway of centralized governments; for purely geographical
and tactical reasons they can be controlled by armies directed from the
urban civilizations there. Any landholding, dominant group will
therefore be forced, sooner or later, to come to terms with these centres
of power, or they will be destroyed. However, Pathan landlords can
only come truly to terms with such superior powers by destroying the
bases for the maintenance of their own identity: the defence of honour,
the corporation through acephalous councils, ultimately the individual
autonomy that is the basis for Pathan self-respect. Such landlords are
trapped in a social system where pursuit of Pathan virtues is con-
sistently punished, whereas compromise, submission, and accommoda-
tion are rewarded. Under these circumstances, Pathan descent may be
remembered but the distinctive behaviour associated with the identity
is discontinued. To the extent that such groups retain the Pashto
language, they run the risk of ridicule: they are the ones scathingly
referred to by Pathans as speaking but not doing Pashto, and retaining
the pretence of being Pathans is not rewarded.

A few less ambitious niches are, however, found in the social system
of the Indo-Pakistan area where Pathan identity can be perpetuated
on a more individual basis. As money-lenders and as nightwatchmen,
Pathans can defend and capitalize on their virtues as fearless, indepen-
dent, and dominant persons, and in these capacities they are widely
dispersed through the subcontinent.

Internally, a somewhat analogous loss of identity has traditionally
taken place in the areas immediately under the control of the Afghan
(Pathan) dynasty of Afghanistan, particularly in Kabul and the other
urban centres. Here the proximity to the centralized authority is so
great that it becomes very difficult for people of any importance to
assert and exhibit the autonomy and independence that their identity
and position demand. Somewhat incongruously, the elite and urban
middle class in this purely Afghan kingdom have shown a strong
tendency to Persianization in speech and culture, representing — I
would argue — a sophisticate’s escape from the impossibility of
successfully consummating a Pathan identity under these circum-
stances. With the more recent developments of modern Afghan
nationalism, this has changed and new processes have been set in
motion.

I have analysed elsewhere (Barth 1956a) the ecologic factors that
determine the limits of Pathan distribution to the north: the critical
limits of double cropping, beyond which the surplus-demanding


=== PDF p66 L (book-seq 130) ===
130 FREDRIK BARTH

political structure based on men’s house hospitality, as found in the
northern Pathan areas, cannot be sustained. North of this very clear
geographical and ethnic boundary is found a congeries of diverse tribes
collectively referred to as Kohistanis. But this boundary also is not
entirely impermeable to the passage of personnel: several groups and
segments of Pathans are traditionally reported to have been driven
out of their territories in the south and escaped to Kohistan, while one
such group was encountered during a survey of Kohistan (Barth
1956b: 49). After residence as a compact and independent community
in the area for four generations, this group was like neighbouring
Kohistanis and radically unlike Pathans in economy, social organiza-
tion, and style of life. It is reasonable to assume that Pashto, still used
as a domestic language among them, will soon disappear, and that
other Kohistani areas contain similar segments of genetically Pathan |
populations that have been assimilated to a Kohistani ethnic identity.
That this should be so is consistent with the dynamics of assimila-
tion elsewhere. Pathan identity, as a style of life in Kohistan, must be
compared and contrasted to the forms found in the neighbouring
valleys, where a complex system of stratification constitutes a frame-
work within which Pakhtun landlords play prominent parts as political
leaders of corporate groups based on men’s houses. By contrast,

Kohistanis have a simple stratified system, with a majority of owner-
cultivator commoners and a minority stratum of dependent serfs, plus ]
a few Pashto-speaking craftsmen. Politically the area is highly anar-
chic and fragmented. l

In general value orientation, Kohistanis are not unlike Pathans; and
analogies to the institutional complexes I have described as fora for
Pathan activity are also found. Kohistani seclusion of women is at the |
same time even stricter and more problematical, since women are
deeply involved in farming and thus must work more in public,
occasioning more demonstrative escape and avoidance behaviour.
Councils are limited to instituted village councils, with men seated on !
benches in a square formation and grouping themselves as lineage
representatives. Finally, hospitality is very limited, for economic
reasons, and does not provide the basis for leadership: dependents are
landless serfs who are controlled through the control of land.

In the contact situation, it is a striking fact that Kohistanis over- ‘
communicate their identity through the use of several archaic features
of dress, most strikingly footwear-puttees of poorly cured hides, and
long hair. Pathans find these rustic features very amusing, but at the


=== PDF p66 R (book-seq 131) ===
PATHAN IDENTITY AND ITS MAINTENANCE 131

same time recognize the qualities of independence and toughness that
Kohistanis exhibit. Politically the Kohistani owner-cultivator is an
autonomous equal to the Pakhtun landowner and men’s house leader,
though he speaks for a smaller group, often only his own person.
Kohistanis and Pakhtuns are partners in the non-localized two-bloc
alliance system that pervades the area.

Pathans who are driven off their lands in the lower valleys can
escape subjection and menial rank by fleeing to Kohistan and con-
quering or buying land and supporting themselves as owner-cultivators.
As such, they retain the autonomy which is so highly valued by Pathan
and Kohistani alike. But in competition with Pathan leaders of men’s
houses, their performance in the fora of hospitality and gift-giving will
be miserable — what they can offer there can be matched by the
dependent menials of the richer areas. To maintain a claim to Pathan
identity under these conditions is to condemn oneself to utter failure
in performance, when by a change to Kohistani identity one can avoid
being judged as a Pathan, and emphasize those features of one’s situa-
tion and performance which are favourable. Just as Kohistanis find it
to their advantage in contact with Pathans to emphasize their identity,
so it is advantageous for Pathan migrants under these circumstances
to embrace this identity. In the fragmented, anarchic area of Kohistan,
with largely compatible basic value orientations, the impediments to
such passing are low, and as a result the ethnic dichotomy corresponds
closely to an ecologic and geographical division.

In the preceding pages, I have tried very briefly to sketch a picture
of the Pathan ethnic group and its distribution. It is apparent that
persons identifying themselves, and being identified by others, as
Pathans live and persist under various forms of organization as
members of societies constituted on rather different principles. Under
these various conditions, it is not surprising that the style of life in
Pathan communities should show considerable phenotypic variation.
At the same time, the basic values and the social forms of Pathans
are in a number of respects similar to those of other, neighbouring
peoples. This raises the problem of just what is the nature of the
categories and discontinuities that are referred to by ethnic names in
this region: how are cultural differences made relevant as ethnic
organization?

Superficially, it is true that ethnic groups are distinguished by a
number of cultural traits which serve as diacritica, as overt signals of
identity which persons will refer to as criteria of classification. These


=== PDF p67 L (book-seq 132) ===
132 FREDRIK BARTH

are specific items of custom, from style of dress to rules of inheritance.

On the other hand, it is equally obvious that the ethnic dichotomies do

not depend on these, so that the contrast between Pathan and Baluch

would not be changed if Pathan women started wearing the
embroidered tunic-fronts used among the Baluch. The analysis has
attempted rather to uncover the essential characteristics of Pathans !
which, if changed, would change their ethnic categorization vis-a-vis i
one or several contrasting groups. This has meant giving special
attention to boundaries and boundary maintenance.

The essential argument has been that people sustain their identity
through public behaviour, which cannot be directly evaluated: first it
must be interpreted with reference to the available ethnic alternatives.

Ethnic identities function as categories of inclusion/exclusion and of
interaction, about which both ego and alter must agree if their |
behaviour is to be meaningful. Signals and acceptance that one belongs
to the Pathan category imply that one will be judged by a set of values
which are characteristic or characteristically weighted. The most
characteristic feature of Pathan values lies in giving primary emphasis
to autonomy: in politics, in one’s relations to material objects, in one’s
escape from influence and vulnerability through kin relations. This
identity can be sustained only if it can be consummated moderately
successfully: otherwise individuals will abandon it for other identities,
or alter it through changing the criteria for the identity.

I have tried to show how different forms of Pathan organization
represent various ways of consummating the identity under changing i
conditions. I have tried to show how individual boundary crossing,

i.e. change of identity, takes place where the person’s performance is
poor and alternative identities are within reach, leaving the ethnic
organization unchanged. I have also touched on the problems that arise
when many persons experience the failure to excel, without having a
contrastive identity within reach which could provide an alternative
adjustment, and how this leads towards a change in the definition of
the ethnic identity and thus in the organization of units and boundaries. ‘
To recapitulate in connection with the organization of the political
sphere: the Pathan pattern of council organization allows men to
adjust to group living without compromising their autonomy, and thus
to realize and excel in a Pathan capacity. Under external constraints,
as members of larger and discrepantly organized societies, Pathans
seek other fora for consummating these capacities through bravery
and independent confrontation with hostile forces as trading nomads,


=== PDF p67 R (book-seq 133) ===
PATHAN IDENTITY AND ITS MAINTENANCE 133

nightwatchmen, and money-lenders. In some situations, however,
Pathans find themselves in the position of having to make accommoda-
tions that negate their autonomy: they become the clients of Baluch
chiefs, the vassals or taxpaying, disarmed citizens of effective cen-
tralized states, the effective dependents of landowner/hosts. Where
alternative identities are available which do not give the same emphasis
to the valuation of autonomy, these unfortunates embrace them and
‘pass’, becoming Baluch, Panjabis, or Persian-speaking townsmen.
In Swat and Peshawar District, where no such contrastive identity
is available, defeat and shame cannot be avoided that way. But here
the fact of such wholesale failure to realize political autonomy seems
to be leading towards a reinterpretation of the minimal requirements
for sustaining Pathan identity, and thus to a change in the organiza-
tional potential of the Pathan ethnic identity.

‘We are thus led into the problem of how, and under what circum-
stances, the characteristics associated with an ethnic identity are main-
tained, and when they change. The normal social processes whereby
continuity is effected are the social controls that maintain status
definitions in general, through public agreement and de facto positive
and negative sanctions. But where circumstances are such that a
number of persons in a status category, in casu Pathans, lose their
characteristics and live in a style that is discrepant from that of con-
ventional Pathans, what happens? Are they no longer Pathans by
public opinion, or are these characteristics no longer to be associated
with Pathan identity?

1 have tried to show that in most situations it is to the advantage
of the actors themselves to change their label so as to avoid the costs
of failure; and so where there is an alternative identity within
reach the effect is a flow of personnel from one identity to another
and no change in the conventional characteristics of the status. In
some cases this does not happen. There is the case of the Pathan serfs
of some Baluch tribal sections, where the serfs sustain a claim to
Pathan identity and have this confirmed by their Baluch masters. What
is actually involved in this case, however, is a kind of shame identity:
the Baluch patrons enjoy the triumph of having Pathan serfs, but do
explain that these people were only the serfs of the formerly dominant
Pathans. The masters were defeated and driven out, and these Pashto-
speakers are not in fact their descendants. And the ‘Pathan’ serfs
do not have access to Pathan fora and would not have their identity
confirmed by Pathans. Thus, the identity retains its character because

9. Barth


=== PDF p68 L (book-seq 134) ===
134 FREDRIK BARTH

many change their ethnic label, and only few are in a position where
they cling to it under adverse circumstances. Only where the many
choose to maintain the claim despite their failure — as where no
alternative identity is accessible — or where the failure is a common
and not very costly one, as in the main body of the population in
Peshawar district, do the basic contents or characteristics of the identity
start being modified.

The traditional version of Pathan identity has thus been one on
which a population could base a feasible pattern of life under certain
conditions only, and the distribution of Pathans and Pathan social
forms can be understood from this. The system has been most success-
ful, and self-maintaining, under anarchic conditions in low produc-
tion areas. Producing a demographic excess under these conditions,
Pathans have spread outward: extending Pathan territory northwards,
northeastward, and recently northwestward, while generating a large-
scale population movement through a relatively stable ethnic boundary
eastward and southward. Under changing conditions at present, with
urbanization and new forms of administration, the total situation has
changed so that one can expect a radical change both of Pathan culture

and of the organizational relevance it is given.

1 There are also in Baluchistan some persons who arc the clients of commoners or
corporate groups of commoners — these are few in numbers and socially and eco-
nomically deprived.

2 Except, that is, for some clearly discrepant groups like Saints, Mullahs, Dancers.
ete. who recoil from or are excluded from these activities.


=== PDF p68 R (book-seq 135) ===
Neighbours in Laos

by Karl G. Izikowitz

Ethnography or social anthropology has hitherto aimed mainly at
describing and analysing separate social systems from various aspects
with a view to contributing to a general social theory. That the social
systems of separate peoples should have received such concentrated
attention may perhaps be due in part to the influence of the old
national romantic movement, which sought to give prominence to each
people’s national characteristics and particular system of values. Pos-
sibly the countries tended to stress these as a means of holding their
own against their neighbours. I shall not, however, go into this matter
myself but leave it to be dealt with by historians of ideas.

As soon as a group wishes to improve its status and give prominence
to its own way of life, it is faced with the problem of neighbourhood
or — as I should like to call it — the relationship of different peoples
living next to each other. One then leaves the study of the separate
socictics — mono-ethnic groups, and turns to that of neighbouring
groups — poly-ethnic groups. In this article I shall give some views
on questions connected with this and take as my starting point some
comparatively meagre material from Laos, where I did short field-
studies in 1936-38 and more recently in 1963-64. As my aim had
not been to study these questions, this paper can so far only be a sketch
or outline.

Indo-China is very definitely a poly-ethnic society and some very
fine studies of it have already been made by E. R. Leach (1954), who
deals with conditions in Highland Burma. He has later also published
an article ‘The Frontiers of Burma' (Leach 1960) which, however,
deals chiefly with the differences between the mountain and the valley
tribes. Drawing mostly from Burmese material he shows the different
structures characteristic of these two different societies, and the con-
nection between them and Indian and Chinese systems.


=== PDF p69 L (book-seq 136) ===
136 KARL G. IZIKOWITZ

However, in the following I shall deal chiefly with the contact
between the tribes in Laos and my reflections will therefore be more
in line with those in Leach’s book The Political Systems of Highland
Burma.

Adaptation to neighbouring peoples, who often have entirely differ-
ent ways of life, social structures, and cultures, has always been a great
problem which we often see in history. In our day, however, these prob-
lems have greatly increased as a result of the influence of Western
civilization on the traditional poly-ethnic societies through coloniza-
tion, industrialization etc.. New relationships and new centres have
been created giving rise in many cases to difficult conflicts. In many
places they have also produced strong nationalistic movements which
in due course, by means of schools and other media, have led to assim-
ilation and uniformity.

‘One nation, one race, one people, one culture’, etc. has been more
than just a slogan in nationalistic propaganda. In this struggle, minor-
ities have often got the worst of it and, where not assimilated or
eradicated, have been forced into opposition and stronger unity.
Various ideologies have, of course, been used in the struggles. Philos-
ophers and politicians have tried to solve the problems of such con-
testing neighbours, but the results have perhaps not always been very
successful. For my part I presume that it is important to examine the
situation as it appears and occurs in reality, and I think anthropologists
could contribute much of value. It is not only a question of analysing
the conditions and the situation in the neighbourhood but also of trying
to evolve certain principles of more or less general character which
could be of help in dealing with such problems.

With decolonization these poly-ethnic problems have become burn-
ing ones as a large proportion of the new states is composed of a
mosaic of different tribes. Not having had so many of these problems
we lack experience in the West. European countries are well on the
way to being unified. They usually have a common language, common
customs, etc.. In some non-European areas such uniformity can also
be found, probably because the assimilation processes have already
taken place. One needs only study a map of the earth’s peoples to see
large uniform areas, e.g. in Asia, and compare these with the areas in
Southern Asia, Africa, and South America.

It is all a question of adapting oneself to one’s neighbours, and of
how this is accomplished. In many poly-ethnic communities, however,
the various groups live apart and contact is either non-existent or


=== PDF p69 R (book-seq 137) ===
NEIBHBOURS IN Laos 137

limited to a minimum. Maybe one meets at markets but hardly more.
But markets are neutral zones and when these become permanent, as
in the case of towns, mining communities, industrial areas, plantations,
etc. they become central areas and strong contacts are established
there, whereas contacts are often only slight between the various tribes
living out in the country. Contact is not always sought; some avoid it
(a kind of political-ethnic avoidance). Tibet and Nepal are examples
of this, as Bhutan also is still. It is particularly true of Burma today.
Its frontiers, as we know, are closed.

What interests me here, however, are the kinds of contact which
create interdependence between different groups. This causes concen-
tration of large groupings of peoples whose relationships — be they
positive or negative — form systems which generate dominant actions.
These sometimes remain even when the systems change.

Laos is a very sparsely populated country (about 4 persons per sq.
km) with difficult terrain, most of it mountainous. The Mekong, which
flows through the length of it, is navigable by canoes for most of its
course. The tributaries which flow down from the mountains are only
navigable at their mouths. The country’s network of roads is very
underdeveloped and the few relatively new roads for motorized traffic
are hardly usable except in the dry seasons. There are a few cross-
country caravan paths intended for pack-horses. Within the territory
of each tribe there are acceptable paths but between tribal territories
these are often overgrown or almost non-existent. Large uninhabited
stretches of wilderness separate one tribe from the next. The rivers
and the few caravan trails were the most important means of com-
munication before colonization; and only those who could navigate
the dangerous rapids in their canoes controlled the lines of communica-
tions.

The differences between the various ethnic groups are considerable.
The various mountain tribes are divided into many different language
groups. Even where there are similarities in the way of life and the
structure of the ethnic groups, differences exist. Most of them make
their livelihood from swidden agriculture, their main produce being
glutinous rice. The Mon-Klhmer-speaking peoples, the first to popu-
late the area, are fairly permanently settled (contrary to what is often
described in the French literature) which, in part may be related to
the fact that there is no particular shortage of land.

The more recent immigrants from Southern China and Tonkin, the
Meo- and Yao-speaking tribes, seem to be slowly spreading. Their


=== PDF p70 L (book-seq 138) ===
138 KARL G. IZIKOWITZ

cash-crop is poppies from which they extract opium, the trade in which
is of great importance.

The distribution of the ethnic groups is layered. The Meo tribe
lives highest in the mountains, as do certain other tribes. Halfway
down the mountain sides and below on the plains live some farmers
practising swidden agriculture.

The valleys and river plains, where wet rice can be cultivated, are
the home of the Thai tribes. Some of them, particularly the northern
groups, have very advanced irrigation. The Thai tribes have inhabited
South China and the northern parts of Indo-China for a long time.
When Kublai Khan invaded Indo-China in 1353 the Thai tribes
acquired political power over large parts of this territory and began
to settle there and assimilate other tribes. The Thai are organized in
a state headed by an aristocracy and form a contrast to the segmented
highlanders who, in Laos, do not seem politically to have passed the
village stage. The village chiefs usually act as ritual leaders presiding
over the village council.

Thus in the Thai districts there are states and the population is
somewhat denser. The Thai tribes in Thailand and Laos are Buddhists,
whereas the rest of the Thai people, especially those in Tonkin, are not.
Upon the latter the Chinese influence has been stronger and they
have constantly been under pressure from the Chinese. The Vietnamese
have been the most influenced by the Chinese. Thai expansion has
continued right into the twentieth century, partly as a result of Chinese
pressure. During the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries a number of
Thai communities left their home districts and emigrated south; some
even moved down to the Malay Peninsula. The Mekong valley is full
of different types of Thai tribes. Some of them are very conscious of
their origin and of the fact that they differ from the Siamese and the
Lao.

Even if the Thai tribes settle in areas where they can cultivate wet
rice, a strategic trading position is of importance to them. The Lii,
a Thai tribe living mostly on the Chinese frontiers bordering on Laos
and Burma, controlled not long ago a state called Sippsong Panna.
Several villages emigrated from Sippsong Panna at the end of the
nineteenth century and settled down at points along a caravan trail
which goes from China through Laos down to north eastern Siam. It
was along this path that opium was transported and the location of the
new Lii villages was partly determined by their participation in opium
smuggling. They were a link in the chain between certain mountain


=== PDF p70 R (book-seq 139) ===
NEIGHBOURS IN Laos 139

tribes, Chinese and many other members of the big international con-
federacy.

The Lao and other Thai controlled the trade on the Mekong. The
points where each tributary from the mountains flowed into the
Mekong were therefore naturally of strategic importance, and it is
there we find the big Lao villages. Their names all begin with Pak
which means mouth of a river. The locality was chosen to provide trade
facilities with mountain tribes. Local products were collected in these
villages and then sent on along the Mekong by raft and canoe. The
produce of the mountain tribes consisted of shellac, cane, wax, Spanish
pepper, rice, cardamom, etc. In exchange they received foresters’
knives and other iron implements. They also bought pots, Lao cloth,
etc.. They could only make few of these wares themselves.

These dominant Thai tribes had a very condescending attitude
towards the mountain tribes. They were called Kka = slave, servant,
and before the colonization had to pay taxes to the Lao in the form
of produce and services. Those living near the Lao centres were often
quite poor. Outside the Thai controlled area one finds, as Leach
(1960:64) also did in Burma, the large wealthy mountain villages. Con-
tempt for the mountain tribes is still widespread and in the political
situation of today this causes quite a lot of trouble.

There is usually no intermarriage between Thai and Kha, but there
are exceptions. When new Thai villages were being built along the
lower parts of tributaries, the Thai men first settled at such trading
stations. They took, and I have seen examples of this, wives from
among the local Lamet women. Their children were Thai, and when
Lao families moved in, these places became genuine Thai villages.

In certain parts such mixed marriages have had ritual significance.
I have heard of a newly immigrated Thai chief in Southern Laos who
gave his daughter in marriage to a Kha chief so that the latter in
return should use his expertise to perform the rites for phi muong,
i.e. the earth’s or area's spirit. At the royal court in Luangphrabang
there is also a custom that a Khmu chief (Khmu = a Kha tribe) should
conduct the Lao king to his throne on certain occasions.

The Thai who settled down among the original inhabitants and
came to dominate them were probably a small group. Gradually they
managed to assimilate the earlier inhabitants. The Thai families then
became an upper class and the Thai-ized inhabitants a lower class.
This is particularly noticeable among the black Thai in Tonkin. One
notices the difference between the two groups racially too. Leach


=== PDF p71 L (book-seq 140) ===
140 KarwL G. IzIKOwITZ

considers that as far as Burma is concerned there are no racial dif-
ferences. But I can hardly believe that this is always the case.

A Sek village (the Sek, who speak an archaic Thai language, prob-
ably came to Southern Laos very early) which I visited in 1964 was
divided in two by a deep ravine. One half was inhabited by Seks and
a few Lao families, the other by completely Thai-ized So (a Kha
tribe), who also organized the rites for the earth spirit. Although they
had the same culture as the Sek, the real Sek looked down upon them
so much that they did not like my visiting the other half of their
village. They held them in great contempt and marriages did not occur
between members of the different village halves. Here, too, one could
clearly distinguish differences in their appearances.

Intermarriage is also rare between mountain tribes. I found an
exception to this in the Lamet villages in Northern Laos, where 1
stayed before the War, and where there had been several intermar-
riages with the Khmu. Both these mountain tribes considered them-
selves to be closely related and aboriginal in the area.

Intermarriage between different Thai tribes seems to be easier,
particularly between villages close to each other. This probably has
some connection with the fact that the youngest daughter usually
remains in the home with her parents. She later inherits the house and
what land has not been divided among her elder brothers and sisters.
So when she gets married she stays at home to look after the old
people. It is then usually the custom for a boy from another Thai tribe
in the neighbourhood to marry her. In a future article I hope to give
some statistics to demonstrate this assertion.

The difference between mountain and valley dwellers is thus con-
siderable and is stressed by all those who have written about these
parts. In this case the governing Thai tribes lord it over the subjugated
Kha. The difference in status is very distinct. And it is this difference
which is so marked in the present-day political division of Laos
between the valley and the mountain tribes. One of its results is also
that the sons of noble and influential Laos get the best jobs, whereas
educated mountain tribesmen sometimes flee to Pathet Lao, i.e. the
East block on the other side of the ‘bamboo curtain’.

The Thai tribes and mountain tribes have up till now been in con-
tact with each other and are still partly so, but the relationship of Laos
to North Vietnam is changing this. Laos is of strategic importance to
North Vietnam. Prince Soupannivong of Laos, who is related to the
royal family in Lungphrabang, probably seeks to be a charismatic

4
{


=== PDF p71 R (book-seq 141) ===
NEIGHBOURS IN Laos 141

leader among the mountain tribes and uses them for his own strategy.
Strife and quarrels about succession are, as Leach points out, 2 com-
mon story in the Thai area (Leach 1960:57). The power of the princes
depends on the charisma they can create.

On the Vietnamese side of the Annamite mountain chain conditions
are quite different but have not yet been examined. The Vietnamese
can hardly have had the same contact as the Lao with the mountain
tribes. They have mostly been tied by their cultivation technique:
elevation irrigation. The tribes on that side of the mountains have
therefore been rather independent. The Vietnamese have hardly
showed any desire to settle down in the fruitful mountain valleys.
During the war with the French, which ended with the battle at
Dien-bien-phu and the Geneva settlement in 1954, some of the moun-
tain Thai, the Tho, helped Viet-Minh, after their nobles had fled over
to the French. During the war with the Americans the mountain tribes
have also helped FNL and the North Vietnamese. These latter have,
as a matter of fact, little experience of jungle and mountain terrain.
The South Vietnamese have looked down upon the mountain tribes,
whereas the Viet-Minh spread propaganda among them in their own
language.

The difference between the relationships Thai/mountain tribes and
Viet/mountain tribes is probably quite considerable. The Thai tribes
and mountain tribes had more contact with each other than with the
Vietnamese. I shall now attempt to explain this interdependence from
a more general point of view.

To understand the poly-ethnic relationships existing between neigh-
bouring tribes in Laos, it is necessary to make a few comparisons. I
shall here limit myself to a few aspects only, and I wish my treatment
of these to be considered tentative.

As far as I can see, the boundaries which separate different neigh-
bouring ethnic groups are made apparent by the social and cultural
differences between them. These differences seem to belong mainly
to three categories.

1. Differences in techniques of expression, whether it be in language,
ritual actions, gestures, etiquette, or customs. Here one should not over-
look such important matters as, for example, customary diet.

2. Value systems, which are probably a product of the world view
and the social structure. These are intimately connected with tech-
niques of expression.

3. Self-identification. Whether they themselves consider that they


=== PDF p72 L (book-seq 142) ===
e
l

142 KArL G. IzrkowITZ

belong to the group, at least in some respects, and whether this is
accepted by the members of the group. One should not forget the
negative side of this attitude, i.e. that one does not consider oneself to

belong to the neighbouring group. This may be important in cases

where identification with one’s own group is not particularly strong.
Identification can change and one can consider that one belongs to [
one’s own group only in certain situations, whereas in others one may

be on the way to identifying oneself with another group.

1 should like to call all these three categories introspective, i.e. they
are directed towards the group of identification. Within it one has a
social position and a certain rank.

Different conditions, however, exist for the outward-looking cate-

gories, which describe relationships between the different groups.
Partly these may be dependent on the difference between the intro-
spective traits of each of the two groups which somehow affect the
relations between them. I shall not, however, analyse this here. It is a
matter for later elucidation. Instead I shall turn to two categories
particularly apparent in poly-ethnic relationships.

1. Identification is important, but it is of a different kind from the
one previously mentioned. It is not a question of identification with
one’s own group but of outside evaluation of the group and whether
this evaluation will be accepted. In a poly-ethnic society, I should
imagine, there is often some sort of classification system based on
estimates about the characteristics of different tribes. Perhaps this is .
true mostly within hierarchical societies where the opinions of the l
leading group are decisive? By means of such classification each tribe
or ethnic group acquires a social position and, possibly, defined roles
and special status.

2. Relations between the ethnic groups must be expressed in some
forms of interaction if, that is, the different neighbours have any con-
tact with each other. As I shall now show in an example taken from
Laos, it is not a question of one sort of action but of several kinds often
on different levels.

Interaction then depends on the nature of the relations, the accepted
evaluation of the different ethnic groups etc., and can lead to war,
rebellion, persecution, flight, the imitation of customs, peaceful trade,
and many other types of action.

However, these relations between neighbours depend on their con-
tacts and on whether the two societies are democratic or whether at
least one has an autocratic system, i.e. whether it is a meeting between


=== PDF p72 R (book-seq 143) ===
NEIGHBOURS IN Laos 143

hierarchical or non-hierarchical societies. The forms of interaction
then depend on these two forms of society, the differences reminding
us a little of those between two of the more usual types of political
structure.

That the meeting-places or contact zones between the ethnic groups
play an important part here is rather obvious. Ecology is an important
factor, as I have shown in my examples from Laos and from Leach’s
Highland Burma. In Laos thesc points of contact are often situated
along lines of communication, rivers and caravan routes. It cases
where these meeting-places are located on ecologically strategic sites
they may be fairly stable.

There is also the question of how often these meeting-places are
used. Have they permanent inhabitants or not? In Laos the Thai and
mountain tribes only meet on a few rare occasions during the year to
exchange wares. In other parts of the world there are permanent
markets or at least regularly occurring ones. In the countries where
there are states, as, for example, in Laos, small market towns often
grow up where the administration is centred. One finds the more
important Buddhist temples and monasteries there too and these places
often attract craftsmen and trade.

In many of the countries studied by anthropologists there were no
towns in the traditional community. They first came with colonization
or as a result of Western influence. In modern Africa, for example,
Southall (1961) distinguishes between two types of towns of this kind,
and it is the ones beside plantations and mining communities which
attract working-power from many different directions. Thus the towns
become important poly-ethnical centres, where industries and admin-
istration create new social classes which are quite different from those
in the villages. Here identification changes too. In everyday situations
one might identify oneself with a certain class instead of one’s own
tribe. Identification changes according to one’s work and the education
one has received.

With these general assumptions and principles as a starting-point,
one can find various combinations and types which I shall not, how-
ever, attempt to systematize here. I shall only give a few examples
which may give some idea of the mobile system to be found in poly-
ethnical Laos.

It is clear that in Laos there is something I should like to call a
segmentary relationship. As I have already said, the Lamet and the
Khmu tribes are on good terms with each other and think of each


=== PDF p73 L (book-seq 144) ===
144 KARL G. IzZIKOWITZ

other as ‘brothers’, whereas there is strong opposition between them
and the autocratic Thai tribes, who form another solidary unit. An
exception to this are the Thai relations with the very independent
tribes of Man (Yao) and Meo, which immigrated from China com-
paratively late. They are often literate, in contrast to the usually
entirely illiterate Mon-Khmer-speaking tribes. o

I should think similar situations are to be found in many parts of '
the world. To name but one example from Algeria (Bourdieu 1958) f
the relations between Berbers and Arabs there are often strained, but
during the Algerian war they united aginst the common enemy. When
peace returned the enmity between them flamed up anew.

Many neighbouring tribes are often entirely dependent on products
from each other, making an exchange of wares and services necessary.
Here, too, Algeria can provide us with an example and this comple-
mentation between nomads and farmers is probably to be found over
large parts of the Orient. Even if there is enmity between the parties,
they must maintain a minimum of reciprocity.

In many parts, markets are important centres for contact between
different tribes, particularly when these markets are regularly in
operation and are firmly established. In connection with India’s first
election after her independence in 1952, I noticed that election pro-
paganda was spread in weekly markets. Up on the Koraput plateau
in the state of Orissa these market places were the meeting points for
all the different neighbouring tribes as well as for the Hindu customers
for their products.

In the cases where some of the tribes have a hierarchical organiza-
tion, something halfway between a democratic and an autocratic com-
munity is sometimes formed. Here I am thinking mainly of the
extremely interesting conditions which exist among the Kachin in
Burma and also of the similar oscillation between these forms of com-
munity to be found among a number of tribes in the mountains of
Burma. This mixed form, halfway between the aristocratically organ-
ized Shan tribes and the democratic Kachin, Leach calls gumsa, a
Kachin community of autocratic type but relatively unstable. It soon
disintegrates and returns to gumlao, the name for the democratic type,
only to be transformed again on some later occasion back to gumsa.
Leach considers that gumsa is an imitation of and influenced by the
Shan system. Gumlao is also unstable due to the mayu-dama system,
whereby one obtains a different status according to whether one is a
bride-taker or a bride-giver. The latter has the higher position. Thus


=== PDF p73 R (book-seq 145) ===
NEIGHBOURS IN Laos 145

it is a question of oscillating between one extreme and the other for
the Kachin, whose already unstable gumlao system is strengthened
by the influence from the Shan model to become gumsa. I do not think
I need relate more from this classic work, which is probably known
to most anthropologists (Leach 1954).

I have not come upon anything similar among the mountain tribes
in Laos. Maybe this has to do with the lack of real chieftainship among
the Mon-Khmer-speaking population. The only thing I have been able
to observe is perhaps a tendency in that direction among the Lamet
tribe, something which appeared with the change brought about by
the labour immigration to Thailand and the introduction of money.

Gluckman has a somewhat similar example from the Zulus. Here
we have three groups: the whites and the Africans, who are divided
into two groups, on one hand the Christians and the native officials
and on the other the non-Christians. The middle group composed of
the Christians and officials are dependent on the whites. They can,
however, never enter the closed circle of the whites and are at the
same time drawn back by their brothers in order to build a national
African union to fight against the whites. This middle group then
oscillates between the whites and the non-Christian Africans (Gluck-
man 1958).

I do not think it would be difficult to find more examples of such
middle groups, particularly in contact zones between Western societies
and the traditional ones.

It is not unusual to find in several societies a system of classification
whereby all kinds of groups including the ethnic ones are fitted into
a hierarchy. The most well-known is probably the Indian caste system,
which is applied all over India and even to such groups which are
not actually Hindu. Such hierarchical relations, in their turn, generate
certain typical actions. Hypergamy and dowries are part of all this and
in connection with these institutions there are several financial transac-
tions, such as the money-lending system and trade in gold and
precious stones, which have played an important part in Indian society.
Much of this is connected with the attempts constantly being made to
improve one’s social status, either in order to enter a caste, if one is
an outcast, or to climb up on to a higher rung in the Indian hierarchy.

I should, however, presume that this is not only true of the quite
special Indian situation but of all societies where the different groups
are arranged in a hierarchy. The relationship between the aristocratic
Thai tribes in Laos and their neighbours, the mountain tribes, is


=== PDF p74 L (book-seq 146) ===
146 KARL G. IzIKOWITZ

undoubtedly a hierarchy of this kind. Often the hierarchical system of
closed groups is confused with the caste system. Differences such as
those between the literate and the illiterate, as in the case of Laos,
can then be of importance. The language and religion of the leading
group is then forced upon its subordinates and Leach points out how
quickly the Kachin tribes with their different languages learn the
Thai language and adapt themselves to the Shan (Leach 1954: 239 et
seq.).

Many poly-ethnic relationships depend on the existence of a cen-
tralized state authority. The towns and administration centres spread
propaganda for the language and culture of the leading group. For
hierarchical as well as non-hierarchical societies such central places
as towns play quite a special part in the re-grouping and possible
fusing together of the different ethnical groups, as I have already
pointed out.

The poly-ethnic relationships in Laos are definitely hierarchical
but the different groups here have not gone together to form a unit.
It is still a very loose system, where one party, the Thai tribe, tries to
dominate the other which it superciliously calls Kha. The latter wish
to maintain their independence, quite an easy matter, at they can with
little difficulty retire to some distant place in the mountains. There is
no problem about land in this thinly populated country. In most places
one can find a hill-slope suitable for swidden cultivation.

To sum up, the aristocratic Thai try to dominate the democratic
mountain tribes, who simply avoid them and keep away from them
as much as possible. No integration has been possible in the state of
Laos and in the situation at present this division is emphasized since
most hill tribes are separated from the plain dwellers by the ‘bamboo
curtain’. This separation of valley tribes from hill tribes is now a
fact. An exception is, however, provided by immigrants from China
some of whom have left the east side and settled down in the govern-
ment’s area. It would be interesting to know how many of these
people now live west of the ‘bamboo curtain’.

The Lao domination of the mountain tribes certainly dates back a
long time. Before the war the Lao only managed to control the tribes
living near the towns and other administrative centres. Thus the
Khmu tribes around Luangphrabang have been subjugated for a long
time but there were rebellions even before colonization, and several
of these tribes were made slaves after they were defeated. Slavery
was, however, abolished by the French in 1884 (Reinach 1911).


=== PDF p74 R (book-seq 147) ===
NEIGHBOURS IN Laos 147

But the mountain tribes beyond the control of the Thai remained
free. Contact with them in the form of direct visits or in the few
markets in the towns through Thai merchants was peaceful. There
have been marriages between the two tribes but these have certainly
been very rare. Trade has indeed been the most important connection,
especially as the mountain tribes have been dependent on supplies of
iron wares, salt and other Thai products. Thus these relations have
been of quite a different quality than the above-mentioned domina-
tion.

As the mountain tribesmen usually need money for paying the bride-
price and capital for buying the valuable objects which belong to the
ancestor cult and which give prestige in their own society, it has been
customary for the young men to leave home to find work or to enrol
as soldiers in the service of some Thai prince. The latter is the case
of the Khuen tribe, a2 Khmu tribe in the province of Namntha, who
used to be soldiers of the prince of Nan (Thailand). Labour could be
found in the teak forest and plantations in Thailand.

The Thai tribes, however, aim at something quite different. Either
they want to acquire prestige by giving presents to the Buddhist
temples or by turning to politics and with the help their followers
attain a position of power. Examples of this are easy to find. All the
political coups which have occurred in that country since the last world
war are attributable to such activity! Even if the migration or expan-
sion of Thai groups to other parts of Indo-China has often occurred
because of Chinese pressure in earlier times, it was led by men who
showed charismatic qualities and acquired a following (Leach 1960:57,
Izikowitz 1963).

The boundaries between the two ethnic groups are formed chiefly
by differing political structures and differing aims. The ecological
adaptation has probably not been so important since both groups can
live side by side exploiting the same niches. Neither can the language
differences be of importance since most of the mountain tribes can
speak a Thai language as well as their own.

The various types of poly-ethnic relations should be considered as
social states — i.e. parts of a social change which is taking place. Rela-
tions can in certain cases change very rapidly, particularly poly-ethnic
relations of a segmentary type, where friendship and enmity alternate.
They can also do so in societies with a system like that of the Kachin
tribe, where there is constant oscillation between two extremes. Where
there are hierarchical societies with domination relationships, attempts


=== PDF p75 L (book-seq 148) ===
e —
|

148 KARL G. IzikowITZ

at assimilation occur, which lead in their turn to avoidance, flight, or
rebellion.

In a state like Laos with a developed system for propaganda via
schools, the Buddhist organization, etc., the poly-ethnic society may
gradually turn into 2 mono-ethnic one in times of peace. The present-
day nationalistic propaganda in many of the newly created states
which were earlier colonial countries seems really to be an action
towards changing the country into a national unit and obliterating
the great ethnic differences. In Laos, for example, all people are called
Lao but it is really only the Thai tribes who have so far showed a
tendency to merge.

Industrialization will no doubt lead to a general uniformity as far as
the ethnic groups are concerned. But it is a long and painful process.
Instead of identifying oneself with a tribe as before, one is on the way
to being assimilated into a group, where what counts is achieved status
and not ascribed status.

In any case, one must examine the state in all poly-ethnic societies
with special reference, among other things, to the kinds of strategy
used by the different groups, whether they be ethnic units or newly-
formed groups with a system grounded on education. In all such states
various forms of myth-creation and propaganda appear, as well as
multiple action forms, which have long interested historians. Anthro-
pologists must, however, go further into these things and see which
of all the relations and actions produced by poly-ethnic societies have
general validity. This would certainly also be of importance to the
peace research of our time. After all the whole earth is a segmentary
society.


=== PDF p75 R (book-seq 149) ===
Bibliography

Aarseth, B. 1967. Status og fremtidsperspektiver i reindriften. Same-
liv: Samisk Selskaps Arbok. Oslo.

Aguirre Beltran, A. 1953. Formas de gobierno indigena. México.

Arensberg, C. M. 1963. The Old World Peoples: The Place of Euro-
pean Cultures in World Ethnography. Anthropological Quarterly,
Vol. 36.

Barth, F. 1955. The Social Organization of a Pariah Group in Norway.
Norveg 5.

Barth, F. 1956a. Ecologic Relationships of Ethnic Groups in Swat,
North Pakistan. American Anthropologist, Vol. 5.

Barth, F. 1956b. Indus and Swat Kohistan — an Ethnographic Survey.
Studies Honouring the Centennial of Universitetets Etnografiske
Museum, 1857-1957, Vol. IL. Oslo.

Barth, F. 1959. Political Leadership among the Swat Pathans. London
School of Economics Monographs on Social Anthropology, No. 19.
London.

Barth, F. 1964a. Ethnic Processes on the Pathan-Baluch Boundary.
In G. Redard, ed.: Indo-Iranica. Wiesbaden.

Barth, F. 1964b. Competition and Symbiosis in North East Baluchistan.
Folk, Vol. 6. No. 1.

Barth, F. 1964c. The Fur of the Jebel Marra. ‘Outline of Society’
for Department of Anthropology, University of Khartoum. Mimeo.

Barth, F. 1966. Models of Social Organization. Royal Anthropological
Institute of Great Britain and Ireland, Occasional Papers, No. 23.

Barth, F. 1967a. Economic Spheres in Darfur. In R. Firth, ed.: Themes
in Economic Anthropology. London.

Barth, F. 1967b. Human Resources: social and cultural features of
the Jebel Marra Project Area. Department of Social Anthropology,
University of Bergen. Mimeo.

10. Barth


=== PDF p76 L (book-seq 150) ===
150 BIBLIOGRAPHY

Barth, F. 1968. On the Study of Social Change (Plenary Address to the
American Anthropological Association Meeting, 1966). American
Anthropologist, Vol. 70.

Blom, F. 1956. Vida precortesiana del indio chiapaneco de hoy. In
Estudios Antropolégicos publicados en homenaje al doctor Manuel
Gamio. México D.F.

Blom, F. & La Farge, O. 1927. Tribes and Temples. Louisiana.

Blom, J. P. & Gumperz J. J. 1968. Some Social Determinants of Verbal
Behaviour. In J. J. Gumperz & Dell Hymes, ed.: Directions in
Sociolinguistics. California.

Bogoras, W. 1904—9. The Chuckchee. Anthropological Memoirs,
American Museum of Natural History, Vol. II. New York.

Bohannan, P. 1963. Social Anthropology. New York.

Bourdien, P. 1958. Sociologie de I'Algérie. In Que sais-je? No. 802.
Paris.

Cancian, F. 1965. Economics and Prestige in a Maya Community.
Stanford, California.

Caroe, O. 1962. The Pathans 550 B.C.—A.D. 1957. London.

Colby, B. N. & van den Berghe, P. L. 1961. Ethnic Relations in South-
eastern Mexico. American Anthropologist, Vol. 63.

Cunnison, 1. 1966. Baggara Arabs: Power and the Lineage in a
Sudanese Nomad Tribe. Oxford.

Dahl, H. 1957. Sprakpolitikk og skolestell i Finnmark 1814-1905.
Oslo.

Eidheim, H. 1963. Entrepreneurship in Politics. In F. Barth, ed.: The
Role of the Entrepreneur in Social Change in Northern Norway.
Arbok for Universitetet i Bergen, Humanistisk Serie, No. 3.

Eidheim, H. 1966. Lappish Guest Relationships under Conditions of
Cultural Change. American Anthropologist, Vol. 68.

Eidheim, H. 1968. The Lappish Movement — an Innovative Political
Process. In M. Swartz, ed.: Local-level Politics. Chicago.

El Hadi El Nagar & Taha Baashar. 1962. A Psycho-Medical Aspect
of Nomadism in the Sudan. In The Effect of Nomadism on the Eco-
nomic and Social Development of the People of the Sudan. Philo-
sophical Society of the Sudan. Proceedings of the Tenth Annual
Conference. Khartoum.

Falkenberg, J. 1964. Samer og fastboende i Roros-traktene. Norveg 11.

Ferdinand, K. 1962. Nomadic Expansion and Commerce in Central
Afghanistan — a sketch of some modern trends. Folk, Vol. 4.

Ferdinand, K. 1967. Alttelinjestabilitet Blandt Nomader i @st-Af-


=== PDF p76 R (book-seq 151) ===
BIBLIOGRAPHY 151

ghanistan. Paper submitted in advance for participants in the
Wenner-Gren Symposium on ‘Ethnic Groups’, Bergen Feb. 23rd to
26th 1967.

Furnivall, J. S. 1944. Netherlands India: A study of Plural Economy.
Cambridge.

Furnivall, J. S. 1948. Colonial Policy and Practice. London.

Garvin P. L. 1958. Comment on the Concept of Ethnic Groups as
Related to Whole Societies, by Herbert H. Vreeland. In W. Austrin,
ed.: Report of the Ninth Annual Round Table Meeting in Linguistics
and Language Studies. Washington.

Gjessing, G. 1954. Changing Lapps: A Study in Culture Relations in
Northernmost Norway. London School of Economics Monographs
on Social Anthropology, No. 13. London.

Gluckman, M. 1958. An Analysis of the Social Situation in Modern
Zululand. Rhodes-Livingstone Papers, No. 28. Manchester.

Goffman, E. 1959. The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life. New
York.

Goffman, E. 1963. Stigma: Notes on the Management of Spoiled
Identity. New Jersey.

Greenberg, J. H. 1966. Languages of Africa. Bloomington.

Guiteras Holmes, C. 1946. Informe de Cancuc. Microfilm Collection
of Manuscripts on Middle American Cultural Anthropology, No. 8,
University of Chicago Library.

Gumperz, J. J. 1958. Dialect Differences and Social Stratification in
a North Indian Village. American Anthropologist, Vol. 60.

Haaland, G. 1968. Nomadization as an Economic Career among
Sedentaries in the Sudanic Savannah Belt. Department of Social
Anthropology, University of Bergen. Mimeo.

Izikowitz, K. G. 1963. Expansion. Folk, Vol. 5.

Kandre, P. 1967a. Autonomy and Integration of Social Systems: The
Tu Mien (Yao) Mountain Population and their Neighbours. In P.
Kunstadter, ed.: Southeast Asian Tribes, Minorities, and Nations.
Princeton.

Kandre, P. 1967b. Om etnisitet hos Iu Mien-Yao i Thailand, Laos och
Burma. Paper submitted in advance for participants at the Wenner-

Gren Symposium on ‘Ethnic Groups’, Bergen Feb. 23rd to 26th 1967.

Kirke- og undervisningsdepartementet, ed. 1959. Innstilling fra komi-
téen til @ utrede samesporsmdl. Oslo.

Kleivan, H. 1967. Gronlendere og andre dansker: Identitetsunder-
strekning og politisk integrasjon. Paper submitted in advance for


=== PDF p77 L (book-seq 152) ===
152 BIBLIOGRAPHY

Bergen Feb. 23rd to 26th 1967.

Knutsson, K. E. 1967. Authority and Change: A Study of the Kallu
Institutions among the Macha Galla of Ethiopia. Etnologiska Studier
29, Etnografiska Museet, Gothenburg.

Kroeber, A. L. 1939. Cultural and Natural Areas of Native North
America. Berkeley, California.

Leach, E. R. 1954. Political Systems of Highland Burma: A Study of
Kachin Social Structure. London. |

Leach, E. R. 1960. The Frontiers of Burma. Comparative Studies in |
Societies and History, Vol. 111,

Leach, E. R. 1967. Caste, Class and Slavery — the Taxonomic Prob-
lem. In A. de Reuck & J. Knight, eds.: Caste and Race: Compara-
tive Approaches. London.

Mitchell, J. C. 1956. The Kalela Dance: Aspects of Social Relation-
ships among Urban Africans in N. Rhodesia. The Rhodes-Living-
stone Papers, No. 27. Manchester.

Moerman, M. 1965. Who are the Lue: Ethnic Identification in a
Complex Civilization. American Anthropologist, Vol. 67.

Nadel, S. F. 1947. The Nuba. Oxford.

Narroll, R. 1964. Ethnic Unit Classification. Current Anthropology,
Vol. 5, No. 4.

Paine, R. 1965. Coast Lapp Society 11: A study of Economic Develop-
ment and Social Values. Tromss Museums Skrifter, Vol. IV. Oslo.

Pehrson, R. 1966. The Social Organization of the Marri Baluch
(compiled and analysed from his notes by F. Barth). Viking Fund
Publications in Anthropology No. 43. Chicago.

Pineda, V. 1888. Historia de las sublevaciones indigenas habidas en
el Estado de Chiapas. San Cristébal Las Casas, Chiapas.

Pitt-Rivers, J. & McQuown, N. A. 1964. Social Cultural and Linguistic
Changes in the Highland of Chiapas. Department of Anthropology
University of Chicago. Mimeo.

Pozas Arciniega, R. 1948. Juan Pérez Jolote: Biografia de un Tzotzil.
Acta Anthropologica, Vol. III, No. 3.

Pozas Arciniega, R. 1959. Chamula: Un pueblo indio de los altos de
Chiapas. Memorias del Instituto Nacional Indigenista, Vol. III,
México D.F.

Redfield, R. & Villa Rojas, A. 1989. Notes on the Ethnography of the
Tzeltal Communities of Chiapas. Carnegie Institution of Washing-
ton, Publication No. 509, Contribution 28.

participants in the Wenner-Gren Symposium on ‘Ethnic Groups’, \


=== PDF p77 R (book-seq 153) ===
BIBLIOGRAPHY 153

Reinach, L. 1911. Le Laos. 2 vols. (posthumous edition compiled by
P. Chemin-Duponts). Paris.

Sahlins, M. D. 1958. Social Siratification in Polynesia. The American
Ethnological Society. Washington.

Siverts, H. 1960. Political Organization in a Tzeltal Community in
Chiapas, Mexico. Alpha Kappa Delian, Vol. 30, No. 1.

Siverts, H. 1964. On Politics and Leadership in Highland Chiapas.
In E. Z. Vogt & A. Ruz Lhuillier, eds.: Desarrollo Cultural de los
Mayas. Universidad Nacional Auténoma de México.

Siverts, H. 1965a. Oxchujk’: En Mayastamme i Mexico. Oslo.

Siverts, H. 1965b. Some Economic Implications of Plural Society in
Highland Chiapas. Folk, Vol. 7.

Siverts, H. 1965¢c. The ‘Cacique’ of K'ankujk’: A Study of Leadership
and Social Change in Highland Chiapas, Mexico. Estudios de
Cultura Maya, Vol. V. Mexico D.F.

Sommerfelt, A. 1967. Inter-ctniske relasjoner i Toro. Paper sub-
mitted in advance for participants in the Wenner-Gren Symposium
on ‘Ethnic Groups’, Bergen Feb. 23rd to 26th 1967.

Southall, A. 1961. Social Change in Modern Africa. London.

Sundt, E. 1850-65. Beretning om Fante- eller Landstrygerfolket i
Norge. Christiania.

Villa Rojas, A. 1942-44. Notas sobre la etnografia de los indios
tzeltales de Oxchuc. Microfilm Colection of Mss. on Middle Ameri-
can Cultural Anthropology, No. 7. University of Chicago Library.

Villa Rojas, A. 1947. Kinship and Nagualism in a Tzeltal Community,
Southeastern Mexico. American Anthropologist, Vol. 49.

Vogt, E. Z. ed. 1966. Los zinacantecos: Un pueblo tzotzil de los altos
de Chiapas. Instituto Nacional Indigenista. Collecién de anthro-
pologia social, Vol. 7. Mexico D.F.

Vorren, O., ed. 1960. Norway North of 65. Tromse Museums Skrifter,
Vol. VIII. Oslo.

Ward, B. 1965. Varieties of the Conscious Model: The Fishermen of
South China. In The Relevance of Models for Social Anthropology.
A.S.A. Monographs 1. London.
