Ethnic Stability and Boundary

Dynamics in Southern Mexico
by Henning Siverts

Problem and area

The population of Highland Chiapas in southern Mexico is aptly
characterized as heterogeneous. Culturally distinct groups are in con-
tact within the same general area, forming a composite social entity,
the members of which are constantly interacting in certain spheres of
life, notably in the realm of business transactions (Siverts 1965b).

We are thus confronted with a typical ‘poly-ethnic society’ based
on economic specialization and symbiotic interdependence between the
constituent units. Interaction between representatives of ethnic cate-
gories seems to be founded on a dichotomization of generalized
identities, and the cultural differences are over-communicated, Trans-
actions across categories are therefore different in principle from
those in which the partners engage with people of their own kind.

Hence, Highland Chiapas may resemble the type of society which
Furnivall (1944) describes as ‘plural’, the characteristic of which is
the combination of ethnic segmentation and economic interdependence.

The present paper describes the distribution of assets and forms of
interaction in the area with reference to the question of boundary
maintenance. More specifically, it asks the question of why the Tzeltal-
speaking Oxchuc Mayas prefer to remain Indian and largely ignore
or resist national integration and westernization.

Thus the basic topic of this paper parallels Haaland’s discussion of
the Baggarization of the Fur (p. 58 ff.). But rather than showing how
individuals of one ethnic category change their identity, I am trying
to explain the circumstances which seem to discourage attempts to do
so. In both instances the line of argument is tied to economic con-
siderations; likewise the conceptual framework shows enough similarity
to warrant comparison.

The basic assumption on which the analysis rests is that a ‘steady



=== PDF p52 L (book-seq 102) ===
102 HENNING SIVERTS

Rio Tlacotalpa

Chalchihuitan
[}

OCancuc
@ Soyald ° Chenalho
Larrafnzar Oxchuc
TenejapaQ
[
Zinacantan, - Pamula @Huixtan
SAN CRISTOBAL LAS CASAS

PAN AMERITAN HIGHWAY,

Chacn)al

Rio Grijalva

Amatenango
O

Rfo Angostura '

LEGEND
D Ladino towns

@ T:zotzil pueblos
Q  Tzeltal pueblos

The central highlands of Chiapas (Tzeltal-Tzotzil area).
Only a few towns and pueblos are shown.

state’ of the sort met in Chiapas can only be brought about when
individual actors constantly face similar dilemmas of allocation of
labour and capital to which the repertoire of responses is limited and
stereotyped. It is further assumed that the cultural biases, which form
part of the constellation of constraints, tend to be confirmed and
hence perpetuated through the repeatedly rewarded choices.



=== PDF p52 R (book-seq 103) ===
ETHNIC STABILITY AND BOUNDARY DyNaMmics IN S. MExico  '1?

The area with which we are concerned comprises the colonial-style
town of San Cristébal Las Casas' and its hinterland, i.e. the plateau
summit of the Highland with its northern and eastern flanks of slightly
lower-lying districts. The whole area covers approximately 1,000
sq. miles. Elevations range from 3,000 to 6,000 ft. Gentle slopes make
human habitation easy in parts of the area, but much of it is extremely
rugged, with steep slopes, sharp ridges and deep gorges.

Despite unfavourable conditions, agriculture is the main productive
pursuit, with subsistence based upon the cultivation of maize and
beans. Among some of the rural inhabitants animal husbandry, notably
sheep-raising, is of considerable importance. The townspeople are
traders, merchants, artisans, officials, and professional men. Closer
inspection reveals the existence of systematic regional differences also
among the rural communities. Not only are there great variations in
productive activities; there are, in addition, contrasting social forms,
i.e. a juxtaposition of a number of distinct ways of life.

Language habits serve to accentuate these cultural distinctions. The
highlanders speak different languages and dialects. Furthermore they
show great variations in styles of clothing.

Chiapanecans make use of several verbal categories in referring to
these variations, A principal distinction is made between Ladino and
Indio. The first term is assigned to those who speak Spanish as their
main language and pursue a Spanish-derived way of life. The second
label is applied to persons who speak an Indian language as their
mother tongue, and who dress and ‘behave as Indians’.

In its turn the word indio or the diminutive indito may elicit a list
of sub-categories such as Zinacantecos, Chamulas, Oxchuqueros,
Cancuqueros, etc. These are names given to actual groups of people,
distinguished from each other in terms of particular features of dress,
and the products they carry to the market of San Cristébal Las Casas.
Thus, among the Chiapanecan highlanders, the following statement is
a sufficient characterization of one such category, viz. the Zinacante-
cos: ‘Zinacantecos wear big, flat hats with coloured ribbons, white
shorts, pink scarfs and sandals with tall leggings. They are salt traders
and live in the municipality of Zinacantan.’

Field observations over the last 40 years leave the impression that
the range and general content of these idioms are fairly constant, and
that the number of people using them is increasing.? Census reports
of the last 30 years seem to corroborate this belief:

The proportion of Indian speaking persons is stable, and in some



=== PDF p53 L (book-seq 104) ===
104 HENNING SIEVRTS

Chiapas Oxchuc

T

[] SPANISH
[[] INDIAN: Bilingual
P INDIAN: Monolingual

Proportion of Indian-speaking persons 5 years of age and older in the State
of Chiapas and in the municipality of Oxchuc.

Source: Censo General 1940/1950/1960 (Estado de Chiapas), Direccién ]

General de Estadistica, México D. F. M. German Parra: Densidad de la

poblacién indigena en la Repiblica Mexicana, conforme al censo de 1940.

Memorias del Instituto Nacional Indigenista, Vol. 1, No. 1, México D. F., 1950.

parts of the region under study a marked increase is noted (see
accompanying Table). Although the accuracy of Mexican vital statis-
tics may be questionable for certain areas and periods, we may never-
theless trust the general trend of the reports; and if this trend reflects
a social and demographic reality, our conclusion must be that the
Indian speaking ‘tribes’ or pueblos maintain their populations and
retain their idioms according to the stereotype established for each
group of people.

Considering the long period of contact between the indigenous
population and the colonists, military campaigns, epidemics, political



=== PDF p53 R (book-seq 105) ===
ETHNIC STABILITY AND BOUNDARY DyNaMIcS IN S. MExico 105

pressure, land expropriation, and finally, the impact of the national
policy of recent years to integrate the Indians in national political and
economical life — we find it remarkable that assimilation is minimal
and ethnic boundaries remain intact. It should be noted, however, that
the notion of ‘ethnic boundary’ does not involve the assumption of
identical idioms being transferred from time immemorial. Rather, the
boundary implies the constancy of a set of idioms communicating
minimal contrast between segments of the population. Indeed, many
traits considered typically Indian today have been identified as imita-
tions of ceremonial items and ‘customs’ of Spanish origin. A curious
instance illustrating this is the ceremonial costumes used by the
Chamulas during their fiesta de carnaval: Imitations of French gren-
adier uniforms used by Maximillian’s troops in 1862 (cf. Blom 1956:
281).

Signals of identification, whatever their ‘origin’, serve the purpose
of ascribing ethnic status to individuals, thus guiding or directing their
interaction. The problem of explaining the persistence of such char-
acteristics may consequently be approached through a study of the
sectors of life where representatives of the diverse categories articu-
late.

In the following I shall therefore present a sketch of the forms of
interaction which take place within fields or sectors of activity such as
the market and the administration. Both sectors are treated as rather
inclusive in this paper, i.e. education and ritual are not separated from
‘administration’, and the ‘market’ comprises various forms of busi-
ness transactions.

In the process of description I will attempt an analysis which will
expose an assemblage of factors sufficient to produce a situation of
boundary stability. However, in order to perform the analysis, we will
need to survey the form and nature of the assets which the actors can
bring to bear on the situations in which Ladinos and Indians interact.
Our first task, then, is to describe the distribution of resources.

Distribution of resources and productive activities
Land is a scarce resource, the ownership if which is in the hands of
both Indians and Ladinos. There are principally two forms of land
tenure:

1. The pastoralist ranch and cash crop plantation of the Ladinos.
The property is individually owned and subject to purchase; it is
exploited by means of a small number of hired hands and the labour



=== PDF p54 L (book-seq 106) ===
106 HENNING SIVERTS

provided by an attached Indian community, descendants of those who
originally owned the territory.

2. The collective and unalienable lands of an Indian community, or
section of community, in which individual households exploit limited
patches on the basis of usufruct. These lands are utilized by means of
slash-and-burn cultivation of maize and beans. Labour is provided by
the members of the household for most of the year. During the planting
season, larger work teams are formed on the basis of kinship and
friendship networks.

Regional variations in natural resources and technological skills
favour the development of specialization of production. In the Indian
communities part-time specialists manufacture traditional handicraft
goods such as pottery (waterjars), woollen ponchos and sashes, wooden
chairs, musical instruments, cordage, charcoal, firewood, and salt.
These wares are brought to the market of San Cristébal Las Casas
together with the other Indian surplus produce.

Other industries, including forges, gunsmiths’ shops, construction
works, and a great number of small-scale industries producing Indian
ceremonial paraphernalia are all exclusively Ladino; and most of these
activities are confined to the town itself, which, market included, is
controlled by Ladino merchants and intermediaries. The accompany-
ing figure shows the distribution of some of these items and productive
activities (p. 107).

Confrontation of assets and the sectors of articulation

Ladinos and Indians are competitors and opponents with regard to
certain land areas as well as interdependent partners in an economic
system where the Indians generally act as producers of agricultural
products and consumers of industrial goods, while the Ladinos appear
as traders and producers of industrial and handicraft wares and con-
sumers of Indian cultivated food.

Transactions are for the most part consummated in the town of San
Cristébal Las Casas.? Indians carry their products to the town market
and sell them directly to consumers, or, far more commonly, sell the
products to Ladino merchants who resell them in the market. A prom-
inent figure in the system of interchange of goods is that of the
atajadora (interceptor), a Ladino woman intermediary who makes her
living by waiting for Indians on the outskirts of the town, buying from
them and then reselling the products in the market or in her shop.

At first glance there seems to be little economic justification for the



=== PDF p54 R (book-seq 107) ===
ETHNIC STABILITY AND BOUNDARY DYNaMICS IN S. MEXTCO 107

Chamula
A. Musical instruments.
B. Firewood & charcoal.
C. Woolen fabrics.
D. Oranges from
Tenejapa.

Oxchuc
E. Fibres & cordage.

F. Eggs, poultry & pigs.

Amatenango
G. Waterjars & fine
pottery.

Zinacantin
H. Salt from Ixtapa.
I. Flowers.
J. Maize.

San Cristébal Las Casas
K. Ceremonial
paraphernalia.
L. Tools & equipment.

Simplified representation of the San Cristébal market indicating the main
flow of goods.

existence of these intermediaries, since the Indians are heading for the
market in any case and are likely to spend all day in town. However,
the bargaining for retail sales takes more time than Indians from dis-
tant places are willing to spend. An additional reason is that the busi-
ness of fractioning and haggling over prices demands certain skills in-
cluding full command of the Spanish language and experience of the
market. Hence the Indians prefer the rough but swift treatment by the
ladies. The manner in which the atajaedoras treat their Indian
suppliers illustrates the somewhat imperious way in which Ladinos
habitually behave towards Indians. The Indian is supposed to be
shy and a simpleton who does not know how to trade, a belief
which has the quality of a self-fulfilling prophecy. It makes it much
more difficult for the Indian to deal with Ladinos on any but the most
elementary commercial level. This invites harsh practice in dealings
with him; neither does he possess many civil resources, save for
the Office of Indian Affairs. It is likely that a considerable number of



=== PDF p55 L (book-seq 108) ===
108 HENNING SIVERTS

grave cases of cheating will occur before an Indian overcomes his
fear of authorities and offices in order to present his complaints to
them.

San Cristébal Las Casas may be characterized as an Indian market
town run by Ladinos. In the town, Indians get rid of their surplus
goods in return for which they can bring back tools, and equipment
of all sorts, including ceremonial paraphernalia, ‘Indian clothing
material’, and finally, all the various handicraft wares produced by
other Indian communities. The primary importance of the town is
indeed as a centre of redistribution for a tremendous hinterland (cf.
figure p. 107).

Characteristically, the town is divided into quarters or barrios, the
members of which specialize in one or another activity aimed at the
satisfaction of particular Indian appetites. The barrio of Santa Lucia
is dedicated to the production of fireworks — important for any
Indian fiesta. Another barrio, Cuxtitali, concentrates on buying and
butchering pigs; inhabitants of that barrio travel as far as the jungle
to the east, buying pigs ahead of the planting season, when the Indians
want to get rid of their pigs to avoid the fencing in of the molesting
animals. The pig-dealers also hawk cloth and trinkets during their
travels. It should be added that the Indians as a rule never eat their
pigs; they are raised for the single purpose of transforming maize into
cash.

The market town, furthermore, is the natural seat of local adminis-
tration and federal agencies, including police, a military garrison,
telegraph, telephone, post office and health authorities. Of prime
importance is the Labour Agency, mediating the seasonal labour
demand on behalf of the big coffee plantations on the Pacific Coast.
Coffee picking in the fall is the single labour offer made to the Indians
from the ‘outside’. Only impoverished Indians on the outskirts of town
may sometimes be put to odd jobs in the garden or in the shop of a
rich Ladino. Otherwise openings are non-existent for Indians simply
because they are not supposed to command the sufficient skills —
among them language and general education.

Thus the Ladinos control the labour market as well as the distribu-
tion of goods and services.

Except for two notable cases to the contrary (to be discussed later),
Ladinos hold all positions of authority and bureaucratic offices within
the regional government and administration. In the present context
this includes Federal and State agencies as well as the municipal



=== PDF p55 R (book-seq 109) ===
ETHNIC STABILITY AND BOUNDARY DyNAMIcs IN S. MExico 109

government of San Cristébal Las Casas — an entity of the first order
within the ranking system of municipalities.

The township of San Cristébal enjoys jurisdiction over a much more
extensive district than the mere municipal territory, an expression of
which is the placing of Ladino secretaries in the local governments of
the Indian communities, otherwise run by the native inhabitants.
Normally, then, political control of the hinterland is exercised through
administrative means. However, it should not be overlooked that
Ladino dominance is based on military superiority and the omnipresent
threat of resorting to physical force. At the slightest provocation a
military detachment or police force may be ordered to garrison an
Indian pueblo.* Indeed, neither the traditional tribal leaders, the
principales, nor the subordinate body of civil-religious officers are in
a favourable position to resist such a measure since their mandate is
questioned by the superimposed and officially recognized municipal
government, the Ayuntamiento Constitucional. This latter body con-
trols the police force and therefore has effective sanctions at its
disposal. However, in spite of the fact that the Ayuntamiento is pre-
dominantly Indian in composition, its extra-tribal sources of authority
and allocated tasks tend to canalize its decision-making activities. This
neutralization is reinforced and made effective through the presence
of the Ladino Secretary (cf. Siverts 1960). Thus the ‘old regime’ of
the principales is curtailed by the Ayuntamiento, and the ‘new
regime’, in its turn, is supervised by the Ladino functionary. As long
as the Ladinos are able to uphold this key position in local administra-
tion, their grip on internal politics will remain relatively firm; and
the only means by which an Indian body politic could possibly replace
the Ladino officer with an Indian would depend on the candidate’s
demonstrated ability to fulfill the requirements of the office — literacy
and sufficient knowledge of the Spanish language and the business of
Mexican administration.

This brings us to another important asset over which Ladinos have
almost exclusive control, education. Only quite recently has it been
possible for a few gifted Indians to attend secondary schools. Most
Indians have no education at all, but through the educational program
launched by Instituto Nacional Indigenista, primary schooling is now
offered to children in several Indian communities.

So far, however, the lack of means and knowledge of Spanish have
served as effective obstacles to Indian education and participation in
professional life. Hence the Ladino dominance of the police and



=== PDF p56 L (book-seq 110) ===
110 HENNING SIVERTS

military forces, telephone, telegraph and the courts, implying the total
control of information and coercive power on the part of the town
and its inhabitants.

Since the law students are recruited from the landowning and com-
mercial middle and upper classes of the town, loyalities toward repre-
sentatives of these categories of people are much more likely to occur
than some form of idealistic pro-Indian responsibility. From the Indian
point of view, ‘justice’, is secured through kin or friendship ties
between the lawyer and his clients. It is also very much a question
of money. The notoriously low level of wages and salaries for civil
service officers makes bribing an acknowledged, although illegal, pro-
cedure for obtaining advantageous judicial decisions. This is probably
why Asuntos Indigenas has instituted free legal aid to Indians. How-
ever, few Indians know that such an institution exists.

Generally speaking, Ladinos consider Indians as inferior beings,
or children, from whom it is proper to demand subordination and
obedience. They believe that they themselves represent the ‘superior
culture’ — another raza (race). Until recently only Ladinos were
permitted to mount a horse, and it is still very uncommon to see
Indian riders, even among the Indian horse owners. Since, however,
the Indians are the producers of necessities, represent an indispensable
labour force, and are the main consumers of Ladino products, efforts
are made not to affront or insult the Indians unnecessarily. Therefore,
in their daily dealings directly with Indians, Ladino merchants,
rancheros and plantation owners behave in a friendly, paternalistic
manner.’ On the other hand, they never invite Indians to their parties
and fiestas. An exception to this rule was observed in the ceremonial
centre of Oxchuc in 1962 when the Indian presidente of the municipal
government was invited to a formal betrothal party of a prominent
local Ladino; apparently the idea was to give the event an official
stamp.

Intermarriage between Ladinos and Indians is likewise exceptional
and looked upon with great disgust. A Chanalero (Indian) teacher
residing in Tenango married a poor Ladino woman, but although the
family as such enjoyed the prestige of the husband’s office, neither
Ladinos nor Indians accepted them as Ladinos.

This brings us to a related but quite separate issue, viz., instances
of change of identity, (cf. p. 101). In the highland setting, strikingly few
cases of ‘passing’ are on record, which is not surprising considering
that change of identity, by its very nature, is a matter of an



=== PDF p56 R (book-seq 111) ===
ETHNIC STABILITY AND BOUNDARY DYNaMICS 1N S. MEXICO 122

individual’s or family’s hidden past. Nevertheless, poor townspeople
are sometimes referred to as revistidos — ‘those who have changed
clothes’ — by their fellows a little better off. Fragments of life
histories reveal that Ladinization® is a social reality. There is a con-
stant seepage into the city of the unsuccessful from a small number of
Indian communities to the south and east of San Cristébal Las Casas.
A typical caseis P . . . . from Aguacatenango who was deserted by
her Chanalero husband; she claimed that no alternative solution
existed but to move to town with her two children to look for servant
jobs. Similarly, orphaned children are sometimes taken care of by a
Ladino family. They will grow up in a Ladino environment, even-
tually to be acknowledged as ‘semi-civilized’. Tt takes at least two
generations to get rid of the stigma of Indianhood.

Passing the ethnic barrier, then, requires a complete transposition,
involving the abandonment of home, family and whole way of life.
Commonly the decision to ‘become a Ladino’ is a desperate measure,
the only way out when everything else seems to fail. The decision to
move away and take up residence in town automatically involves a
precarious livelihood in the urban slum at the bottom of the social
ladder. Ladinization means leaving behind an existence in an egal-
itarian society to pick up the humblest status in a stratified one.

However, at least two well-known cases of successful passing may be
cited. Indeed, ‘passing’, may not be an adequate term since the cases
referred to involve Chamula Indians who managed to maintain a
double identity. They built personal careers on the basis of extensive
business enterprises in Ladino society while openly presenting them-
selves as Chamulas.

Their choices of business were of such a nature that the Indians
generally considered their activities beneficial to them. The most
spectacular of these entrepreneurs, the late Erasto Urbina, established
a hardware store to meet the Indian need for cheap tools. Urbina
spoke Tzotzil, and he did not cheat his customers, who consequently
preferred to deal with him rather than expose themselves to the bad
treatment by the Ladino shopkeepers. Thus his business grew, and his
power kept pace with the growth of the firm. He was even elected
presidente of San Cristébal Las Casas and married into a prominent
Ladino family.

But Erasto Urbina exemplifies the possible outcome of skilled ma-
nipulation with assets which most Indians do not have. For the
majority, the Ladino world is dangerous. In the Indian pueblo of



=== PDF p57 L (book-seq 112) ===
112 HENNING SIVERTS

San Bartolomé they narrate the myth that the Ladinos were created
from the horses’ excrement while the Indians are bac'il winik (true
men). In the foreign, Ladino setting, the Indians assume a modest and
subservient posture.

To summarize our description so far:

The main sectors of articulation, the market and the administration,
are differently organized, serving different ends. The gross effect of
both sectors is the maintenance of stereotype transactions between
partners in a dominant-subordinate relationship based on ethnic
criteria. As going concerns these two sectors of articulation form a
framework of mutually confirming regulations for interaction. The
‘market provides for the circulation of goods and services while the
administration offers political protection of the (status quo) distribu-
tion of assets on which the market activities are based, while collecting
part of the profit directly and indirectly in the form of taxes and
bribes.

Such a complementarity in the actual working of the two sectors
seems to be clearly related to certain basic premises in their respective
organizations. One such premise is the regional autonomy derived
from the Mexican Constitution, the implication of which is the develop-
ment of local social forms beyond effective Federal control. Provincial
administration may therefore establish rules and routines in direct
response to local power constellations. In Highland Chiapas, power is
shared by the plantation owners, the big merchants and the Catholic
Church. The administration is furthermore largely recruited from
these circles. The Indians are not represented. Except for cases like
Erasto Urbina, Indians do not enter the powerful elite which runs
the market and supports the administration. For the Indians, San
Cristébal Las Casas is an external site of exchange, a market place
rather than a market for major investments and profit seeking.”

This observation brings us to another basic condition for the smooth
operation of the market-administration constellation as a principally
Ladino undertaking: the ethnically defined barriers for the free
exchange of major factors of production such as land and labour,
implying a negligible or non-existent participation of Indians in this
sphere of transactions. In other words, local constraints on the alloca-
tion of labour and capital produce an opportunity situation which
seems to prevent Indians from extra-tribal investments. By the same
token, such investments can only be realized through the abandonment
of tribal territory and the change of identity. However, leaving the



=== PDF p57 R (book-seq 113) ===
ETHNIC STABILITY AND BOUNDARY DYNAMICS IN S, MEXTCO 12

home means renunciation of the very asset on which life is based:

land. Consequently Indians may not be in favour of such a solution.
This situation is most dramatically illustrated by the Oxchuc case.

In the following I will therefore describe in more detail how land

tenure tends to restrict Oxchuqueros in their choice of activity and
hence identity.

Land tenure and its implications in Oxchuc

In the pueblo of Oxchuc, males are entitled to a share in the jointly
owned landed estate through patrifiliation. Membership in the cor-
poration is determined by patronymics and common residence.

In order to utilize their asset, Oxchuqueros are obliged to cultivate
their allocated patches in the prescribed manner, i.e. slash-and-burn
agriculture based on the staples, maize and beans. In addition they
grow fruits and vegetables in small quantities (house site garden), and
raise hogs and poultry for sale. The only cash grop grown is the
maguey from which fibres and cordage are manufactured. Alternative
enterprises seem to be discouraged by local ecological conditions as
well as by cultural circumstances (or axioms of propriety and
demeanour): it is improper and associated with great social costs
(witchcraft and ridicule) to deviate, even in minor details, from the
ordinary Oxchuquero practices of production and consumption. This
has been amply illustrated by the social unrest which followed the
introduction of Protestantism in the area. Protestants were likely to
demonstrate their independence and ‘new way of life’; and even
their very moderate investments in equipment, whitewashing of houses
or a variant way of sowing beans were looked upon with great scep-
ticism, sometimes leading to witchcraft accusations and ending in
homicide.

This rigidity with regard to manner of exploitation of fields on the
part of the shareholders is understandable, considering the conse-
quences of permitting free enterprises on territories which are liable
to be returned for redistribution at any one time. Likewise no
part of the corporate estate may be alienated by any individual
member, the implication of which is that a2 man cannot claim compen-
sation for leaving his share to his companions if he wants to migrate
and start afresh where conditions are better. (Oxchuc is not well
suited to agriculture, and the scarcity of land is a grave problem.)
Thus he has no capital at his disposal with which to build a new life
outside the tribal borders. Another point is that there exist no alterna-

8. Barth



=== PDF p58 L (book-seq 114) ===
114 HENNING SIVERTS

tive places of settlement, except for certain remote resettlement areas
of dubious reputation. Nor is it possible to obtain well paid jobs out-
side Oxchuc which permit permanent settlement and transfer of the
family.

An Oxchuc male is therefore placed in an opportunity situation
which forces him to accept the membership in his patrilineal name-
group and make use of his rights in land at the locality in which he
was born. This choice involves a number of secondary privileges and
obligations, among them the right to be treated as a full member of
the tribe, entailing a set of aspirations with regard to positions of
prestige in the hierarchy of tribal offices. This right, however, is just
an aspect of a general obligation to serve one’s fellow tribesmen in
whatever capacity one’s superiors see fit. Thus a tribesman is bound
to accept a nomination as ceremonial sponsor of a fiesta whether he
thinks he can pay the expenses involved or not. Fear of the old men’s
wrath and supernatural powers keep most people in line with the
expectations.

Conclusion

One single factor, the principle of land allocation, produces a
situation which, in combination with the ecological constraints, such
as the presence of a Ladino ethnic category defending its position in
the web of transactions, tends to limit the range of activities of
individuals born as Oxchuqueros.

For a youth of Oxchuquero parents simply to disown his origin and
leave scems to be too costly to be worth the attempt. He has to live
with it, and the only way of doing it, is to accept the package deal
offered to him by his seniors: ‘Stay put as Oxchuquero and reap the
fruits of your only asset, for which you renounce the major portion of
your autonomy.’ His reward is a livelihood and potential power and
prestige within the Oxchuc frame of reference.

As already indicated the consumption profile is restricted by local
economy and cultural biases. It is furthermore directed by the available
offers of consumer goods in San Cristébal Las Casas where Ladinos
encourage certain purchases while impeding others. Consequently, by
acting as an Oxchuquero, and taking upon himself both household and
ceremonial responsibilities, an individual is constantly rewarded by
tribesmen and Ladinos alike. The spheres of action and conversions,
then, in which the Oxchuquero can most profitably participate, have
the feed-back effect of confirming the very axioms on which the system



=== PDF p58 R (book-seq 115) ===
ETHNIC STABILITY AND BOUNDARY DyYNAMICS IN S. MEXICO 115

is based. Hence, idioms such as language and costume, tend con-
tinually to communicate a social and cultural distance between the
groups of people which are complementary in the system of produc-
tion and consumption of the Highland Chiapas social entity.

Nevertheless the number of bilingual Indians is steadily growing.
Furthermore Indian teachers are operating in the Indian communities.
An Indian elite is taking shape (Siverts 1964). But does this imply
Ladinization? How much Spanish does a2 man need to know and how
much education is required before he is able to make the jump?

Apparently, language training and general knowledge are not
minimal factors as long as openings for this kind of expertise are
limited to positions in Indian society. What education brings to Indian
social life is an additional platform for political activity in a strictly
Indian setting (Siverts 1965¢). Hence the young elite, while boasting of
their knowledge of Ladino ways, do not aspire to be accepted as
Ladinos but are rather anxious to obtain recognition in their own
society. And the only way by which this can be done is by converting
their expertise into useful activities such as acting as interpreters and
backing their fellow tribesmen in their dealings with the outside world.
Thus the ‘new leaders’ constitute an asset for the whole community
in the sense that internal administration as well as negotiations
vis-a-vis the Ladinos and San Cristébal Las Casas are made more
efficient.

In return for their services, the ‘experts’ are given positions and
sometimes material benefits in kind and in money.® In other words,
the elite is incorporated into the community; and the Ladino educa-
tion, rather than producing Ladino ideals and Ladino identity, is
turned against Ladino administration and outside influence, reinforc-
ing tribal pride and Indianhood.

But Indianhood in this context is typically confined to the tribe,
one’s own pueblo. At present there is apparently no tendency to extend
the idea of Indianhood to neighbouring pueblos or to Mexican Indians
in general.® On the contrary, each pueblo is a self-contained unit; and
the tribesmen see no alternative way of dealing with people in this
world except commercial interaction with Ladinos on unequal terms,
and ceremonial communication and small scale trading on equal terms
with other Indians at patron saint feasts.1®

The poly-ethnic situation, then, such as is met in the Highlands of
Chiapas, is strikingly different from the typical minority situation of
Northern Norway, discussed by Eidheim (pp. 89 ff.). A Lapp may try to

8b. Barth



=== PDF p59 L (book-seq 116) ===
116 HENNING SIVERTS

fake his identity or to live a double life as a kind of Norwegian and
as a back-stage Lapp. The Indian highlander is always an Indian
whether at home or interacting with Ladinos. His destiny is shaped
by a situation in which his Indianhood is the very basis for interaction.

* Former capital of the State of Chiapas, still seat of the bishopric. It is recognized
as Cabecera de Distrito, i. e. ‘capital’ of the Highland district.

* Cf. Blom and La Farge 1927; Blom 1956; Aguirre Beltran 1953; Guiteras Holmes
1946; Pozas Arciniega 1948, 1959; Redfield and Villa Rojas 1939; Villa Rojas
1942—44, 1947; Cancian 1965; Vogt 1966; Siverts 1965a; Pitt-Rivers and McQuown
1964.

* Within the tribal border trade takes place at three levels: a) delayed exchange
between close relatives and neighbours; b) trade in kind (bananas for beans) with
indirect reference to Mexican currency between remote relatives and acquaintances:
50 ¢ = 1 bundle bananas = pulato (pot) beans, sizes of measures varying with the
season; c) ordinary exchange by means of currency between unrelated and distant
living tribesmen.

4 Cf. the case of ‘calling military assistance’ to Oxchuc in 1960 during a period of
alleged ‘unrest’ (Siverts 1964: 368).

& It is characteristic that Ladinos always address Indians in 2nd person (plural
and singular) which is otherwise insulting. The use of 2nd person plural is con-
sidered an archaism elsewhere in Mexico where the 3rd person is reserved for a
non-specified plurality (of persons).

* The neologism Ladinization (Ladinoization) is borrowed from McQuown and
Pitt-Rivers 1964.

7 Cf. the discussion of the ‘peripheral market’ (Bohannan 1963: 240 ff).
® Teachers receive salaries from Instituto Nacional Indigenista, relatives provide
labour for cultivating their fields, and friends and neighbours frequently bring gifts
to their households.
¢ ‘Indianhood’ in this sense only exists among romantic intellectuals and certain
idealistic absentee politicians.
1® Pan-Indianism is as foreign to the Oxchuguero or Cancuquero today as it was \
during the uprisings of ycsterday, notably the great insurrection of 1712 when these
two tribes temporarily joined forces in a frustrated attempt to fight the Spaniards
(Pineda 1888). It is perhaps symptomatic that they lost an obvious victory because
hesitation and disorganization were more prominent features of the military opera-
tions than determination and coordination; and this may serve as a dramatic ex-
pression of the poly-ethnic situation where a highly segmented majority fails to
make a concerted effort at neutralizing a dominant and organized minority. But
of course, the Spaniards never constituted a real minority; they represented the
larger society just as the Ladinos do today.



=== PDF p59 R (book-seq 117) ===
Pathan Identity and its Maintenance
by Fredrik Barth

Pathans (Pashtuns, Pakhtuns, Afghans) constitute a large, highly self-
aware ethnic group inhabiting adjoining areas of Afghanistan and
West Pakistan, generally organized in a segmentary, replicating social
system without centralized institutions.

A population of this size and organization, widely extended over an
ecologically diverse area and in different regions in contact with other
populations of diverse cultures, poses some interesting problems in the
present context. Though the members of such an ethnic group may
carry a firm conviction of identity, their knowledge of distant com-
munities who claim to share this identity will be limited; and inter-
communication within the ethnic group — though it forms an uninter-
rupted network — cannot lightly be assumed to disseminate adequate
information to maintain a shared body of values and understandings
through time. Thus, even if we can show that the maintenance of
Pathan identity is an overt goal, for all members of the group, this
will be a goal pursued within the limited perspective of highly
discrepant local settings. Consequently the aggregate result will not
automatically be the persistence of an undivided and distinctive, single
ethnic group. How then can we account for the character and the
boundaries of this unit? The following analysis attempts to answer this
question by analysing and comparing the processes of boundary
maintenance in different sectors of Pathan territory. Since our ques-
tions concern processes over time which have produced and sustained
a pattern that we observe today, I shall concern myself with the
traditional forms of organization which have predominated and still
largely obtain in the area, and not with the recent process of penetra-
tion of some parts of Pathan country by modern administration.

Pathan communities exhibit a great range of cultural and social
forms (see map on p. 118). (1) In a central belt of barren hills running



=== PDF p60 L (book-seq 118) ===
118 FREDRIK BARTH

@,
AFGHANISTAN

.
.

Pathan area : distribution of adaptational form.
Digits refer to numbers in the text pp. 117—119.

through most of the country are found villages of mixed agricul-
turalists, organized in egalitarian patrilineal descent segments with an
acephalous political form. (2) In favoured localities in the mountains,
and in the broader valleys and plains, more intensive agriculture is
practised, based on artificial irrigation; in these areas Pathans proper
are landowners or owner-cultivators, while part of the village popula-
tion consists of tenant Tajiks (south and west) or servile tenant and
menial castes (east and north). Political forms are largely based on
the segmentary organization of the Pathan descent groups, some places
in acephalous systems, elsewhere integrated in quasi-feudal systems
within the prevailing states and increasingly subject to bureaucratic



=== PDF p60 R (book-seq 119) ===
PATHAN IDENTITY AND ITS MAINTENANCE 119

administration. (3) Other sectors of the Pathan population live as
administrators, traders, craftsmen or labourers in the towns of Afghan-
istan and Pakistan, as an integrated part of those two states. (4) Par-
ticularly in the south, a large sector of the ethnic group lives a pastoral
nomadic life, politically organized as tribes with, in part, very great
autonomy. Finally, some groups practise extensive labour or trad-
ing migrations which bring individuals and small groups periodically
far outside the geographical boundaries of Pathan country.

Such diversities of life style do not appear significantly to impair
the Pathans’ self-image as a characteristic and distinctive ethnic unit
with unambiguous social and distributional boundaries. Thus the
cultural diversity which we observe between different Pathan com-
munities, and which objectively seems to be of an order of magnitude
comparable to that between any such community and neighbouring
non-Pathan groups, does not provide criteria for differentiating per-
sons in terms of ethnic identity. On the contrary, members of this
society select only certain cultural traits, and make these the unam-
biguous criteria for ascription to the ethnic group.

Pathans appear to regard the following attributes as necessarily
associated with Pathan identity (cf. Caroe 1962, Barth 1959):

1. Patrilineal descent. All Pathans have a common ancestor, who
lived 20-25 generations ago according to accepted genealogies.
Though genealogical interest is considerable, knowledge of accepted
genealogies varies both regionally and individually. The acceptance
of a strictly patrilineal descent criterion, however, is universal.

2. Islam. A Pathan must be an orthodox Moslem. The putative
ancestor, Qais, lived at the time of the Prophet. He sought the Prophet
out in Medina, embraced the faith, and was given the name of Abd-
ur-Rashid. Thus, Pathans have no infidel past, nor do they carry in
their history the blemish of defeat and forcible conversion.

3. Pathan custom. Finally, a Pathan is a man who lives by a body of
customs which is thought of as common and distinctive to all Pathans.
The Pashto language may be included under this heading — it is a
necessary and diacritical feature, but in itself not sufficient: we are
not dealing simply with a linguistic group. Pathans have an explicit
saying: ‘He is Pathan who does Pashto, not (merely) who speaks
Pashto’; and ‘doing’ Pashto in this sense means living by a rather
exacting code, in terms of which some Pashto speakers consistently fall
short.

Pathan customs are imagined by the actors to be consistent with, and



=== PDF p61 L (book-seq 120) ===
120 FREDRIK BARTH

complementary to, Islam. Parts of this body of custom have been
formalized and made overt by tribal councils and administrators as
custom law, while some written and a considerable oral literature
concerns itself in a normative and patriotic fashion with the distinc-
tiveness of Pathan culture. The value orientations on which it is based
emphasize male autonomy and egality, self-expression and aggressive-
ness in a syndrome which might be summarized under the concept of
honour (izzat), but which differs from the meaning that this word has
been given in Mediterranean studies, in ways that will become
apparent as the analysis proceeds.

Together, these characteristics may be thought of as the ‘native
model’ (cf. Ward 1965) of the Pathan. This model provides a Pathan
with a self-image, and serves him as a general canon for evaluating
behaviour on the part of himself and other Pathans. It can clearly
only be maintained if it provides a practicable self-image and is
moderately consistent with the sanctions that are experienced in social
interaction; and some arguments in my analysis of boundary-
crossing will be based in this very point. However, this ‘native model’
need not be a truly adequate representation of empirical facts, and for
our analytic purposes I believe that Pathan custom can more usefully
be depicted in a few central institutions of Pathan life. These combine
central value orientations, by which performance and excellence can
be judged, with fora or other organizational arrangements in which
the relevant behaviour can be consummated and exhibited. The
analysis of boundary-maintaining processes in different parts of the
Pathan area, which will be made below, requires an understanding of
three such institutions which dominate three major domains of activity:
Melmastia=hospitality, and the honourable uses of material goods,
jirga=councils, and the honourable pursuit of public affairs, and
purdah=seclusion, and the honourable organization of domestic life.

Hospitality involves a set of conventions whereby the person who
is on home ground has obligations towards the outsider to incorporate
him into the local group, temporarily be responsible for his security,
and provide for his needs. The obligation is brought into play by the
visitors’ presenting himself in the alien setting. Accordingly, a stranger
on the road who passes close to someone who is having a meal will
be offered food, someone coming to a village will be greeted and
helped by residents, a friend making his appearance will promptly be
made welcome. In return, the guest is obligated to recognize the
authority and sovereignty of the host over property and persons pres-



=== PDF p61 R (book-seq 121) ===
PATHAN IDENTITY AND ITS MAINTENANCE 121

ent. In this host-guest relation, any single encounter is temporary and
the statuses thereby reversible and reciprocal, and hospitality is thus
easily an idiom of equality and alliance between parties; a consistently
unilateral host-guest relationship, on the other hand, entails depen-
dence and political submission by the guest.

The appropriate forum for hospitality among Pathans varies in
distinctness and scale according to local circumstances, but involves
the allocation of publicly accessible space to the purpose: a special
men’s house, a separate guest room, or merely a place to sit. The space
and occasion together may be described as a forum because they pro-
vide the opportunity to act out behaviour which can be publicly judged
according to scale and quality. Specifically, it gives the host an oppor-
tunity to exhibit his competence in management, his surplus, and the
reliance others place on him. More importantly, it shows the ease with
which he assumes responsibility, and implies authority and assurance
— basic male Pathan virtues. On a deeper level, it confirms basic
premises of Pathan life: that wealth is not for amassing, but for use
and is basically without importance, that only the weak man is attached
to property and makes himself dependent on it, that the strong man
bases his position on qualities within himself and people’s recognition
of these qualities, and not on control of people by the control of objects.
The self-esteem of a poor hill farmer can thus be maintained in the
face of the wealth and luxury of neighbouring Oriental civilizations
— yet at the same time a means of converting wealth to political
influence through hospitality is provided within the terms of Pathan
values. While strangers are made to recognize the sovereignty of local
people, local leaders can build up followings by feasting fellow vil-
lagers in a unilateral pattern. Apart from the way in which these ideas
about hospitality facilitate the circulation of persons and information
in anarchic territory, and protect locals from invidious comparisons
with strangers, they can also further the political assimilation of servile
dependents under Pathan leaders.

The council among Pathans is a meeting of men, called together by
one or several of those present so as to arrive at a joint decision on a
matter of common concern, and may thus refer to an ad hoc meeting
or to an instituted tribunal. The matter of common interest may be a
conflict between the parties present or the planning of a joint action.
The relationship between members of a council is one of equals, with
no speaker or leader; the equality is emphasized by circular seating
on the ground and the equal right of all to speak. The body does not



=== PDF p62 L (book-seq 122) ===
122 FREDRIK BARTH

finalize its decision in a vote: discussion and negotiation continue
until the decision is unopposed, and thereby unanimous and binding
as an individual decision by each participant. A faction which will not
accept a decision can only avoid commitment by leaving the circle in
protest.

The council is thus a forum where important Pathan virtues, such
as courage, judgement, dependability, and morality can be acted out,
while a man’s influence and the respect shown him is made apparent
through the procedures. On the more fundamental level, this organiza-
tion of councils confirms the basic integrity and autonomy of men,
and the basically voluntary nature of the social contract among
Pathans. It allows groups of men to arrive at joint decisions without
compromising any participant’s independence; it produces binding
corporate decisions about concerted action without dissembling the
structure of egalitarian balanced segments through the introduction of
any one’s right to give commands.

Finally, seclusion establishes an organization of activities which
allows a simultaneous emphasis on virility and the primacy of male
society, and prevents the realities of performance in domestic life
from affecting a man’s public image. Pathan value orientations contain
a number of contradictions if they are to be made relevant simultane-
ously in behaviour before mixed audiences. Thus, the emphasis on
masculinity and virility has an aspect of sexual appetite and compe-
tence — yet eagerness to indulge oneself is ‘soft’ and severely
ridiculed. Agnatic ideology and the emphasis on virility implies a high
evaluation of males and male company over females; yet it must be
through the company of females that the essence of virility is consum-
mated. Finally, there is the problem of vulnerability through ‘things’
and the infringement of rights. We have seen how explicit valuations
of freedom and autonomy are furthered through hospitality, through
the denial of attachment and importance in things. Yet male rights
in women, in sisters and wives, cannot be denied and liquidated in that
way: a male is dependent on, and vulnerable through, his women.

To all these contradictions, the seclusion of women and encapsula-
tion of domestic life is an adequate behavioural solution. It also makes
possible a domestic organization that allows a realistic accommodation
between spouses. The sexuality, dominance, and patriarchy demanded
by public male values need not be consummated in public; the primacy
of male relations can be confirmed in the public sphere without any
associated sexual passivity; and at the same time the interaction



=== PDF p62 R (book-seq 123) ===
PATHAN IDENTITY AND ITS MAINTENANCE 123

between spouses need not be perverted by a male performance
designed for a public male audience. The resultant pattern of domestic
performance is difficult to document; but its adequacy is suggested
by the relative absence among Pathans of divorce or adultery murders,
by the trust placed in females by nomads and migrants who absent
themselves periodically from their wives, and by the traditional view
of mothers and sisters as upholders of family honour, spurring their
men to bravery, etc.

These three central institutions combine to provide Pathans with the
organizational mechanisms whereby they can realize core Pathan
values fairly successfully, given the necessary external circumstances.

They also facilitate the maintenance of shared values and identity
within an acephalous and poly-segmentary population. The public fora
provide opportunities to perform and be judged by other persons re-
gardless of residence and political allegiance; they mediate judgement
and public opinion over large areas. Whenever men meet in councils,
wherever guests arrive and hospitality is dispensed, core Pathan values
are acted out and adequacy of performance is judged and sanctioned.
Thus, agreements can be confirmed and maintained and the reality of
shared identity perpetuated despite the absence of any nuclear, proto-
type locus or example.

Moreover, the values thus realized are shared, in general terms,
by surrounding peoples: success as a Pathan implies behaviour which
is also admired by non-Pathans. The ethnic identity therefore remains
one that is highly valued by members also in contact situations, and
is retained wherever possible. An understanding of the boundary
mechanisms of the Pathan ethnic unit thus depends on an under-
standing of the special factors that can make it untenable or unattrac-
tive to sustain this identity. These vary in different marginal areas
of Pathan country, and will be discussed in turn.

The southern Pathan boundary is one where Pathan descent groups,
organized politically through lineage councils, face centrally organized
Baluch tribes along a clearly demarcated territorial border. This
border does not coincide with any critical ecologic difference, though
there is a cline from lower and drier areas in the south to slightly
wetter and more mountainous country towards the north. During
recent historic times, the ethnic boundary has been moving north-
ward through the intermittent encroachment of Baluch tribes on
marginal areas.

The main factors involved in this process have been analysed else-



=== PDF p63 L (book-seq 124) ===
124 FREDRIK BARTH

where (Barth 1964a) and need only be summarized briefly. The critical
factor is the difference in political structure between Baluch and
Pathans. Baluch tribes are based on a contract of political submission
of commoners under sub-chiefs and chiefs (Pehrson 1966). This is a
form that freely allows for reorganization and assimilation of per-
sonnel, and the evidence for the historical growth of Baluch tribes
through confederation and individual and small group accretion is
quite conclusive.!

Southern Pathans on the other hand are organized in localized
segmentary descent groups. Though many of them have chiefs, these
are headmen of descent segments from which clients are excluded; and
political decisions are made through egalitarian councils. Assimilation
of non-descent members can only take place through clientship under
persons or sections of the tribe. It involves, for the client, an inferior,
non-tribesman serf status, attractive merely as a last resort. What is
more, the arrangement is not very attractive to the potential patron
either, for several ecologic and social reasons. A client in this area
can produce only a very limited surplus from which a patron could
benefit, whereas the patron’s obligations to his clients are quite
comprehensive. He is not only responsible for protecting and defend- |
ing him; he is also held responsible for any offence which the client
may cause. And in an egalitarian society where security springs from

a man’s ability to rally communal support, the political advantages 1
of controlling a few clients are very limited. Thus, whereas Baluch
chiefs compete for influence and tax income by incorporating new l

members into the tribe, people secking attachment are turned away
from Pathan groups due to the inability of that structure to incorporate
them. Any person or small group who through war, accident, or crime
is torn lose from his social moorings will thus be drawn into a Baluch
political structure. Furthermore, as centrally led units, these are more
capable of pursuing long-term strategies than are the bodies of
Pathans, mobilized through fusion and ad hoc councils; and though
Baluch tribes may lose battles, they consequently tend to win wars —
swelling their own ranks in the process by uprooting fragments of
personnel — and thus steadily encroach on Pathan lands.

The result is a flow of personnel from Pathan groups to Baluch
groups, and not vice versa. Indeed, large parts of some Baluch tribes
acknowledge Pathan origin. However, the incorporation of Pathans
into Baluch type political structures goes hand in hand with a loss of
Pathan ethnic identity, so the categorical dichotomy of Pathan tribes



=== PDF p63 R (book-seq 125) ===
PATHAN IDENTITY AND ITS MAINTENANCE 125

and Baluch tribes remains. The reasons for this must be sought in the
clash between Pathan values and political circumstances.

Naturally, participation and success in a Baluch tribe requires
facility in Baluch speech and etiquette and thus a certain assimilation
of Baluch culture. However, this degree of versatility and bilingualism
is widely distributed and so the external situation does not seem to
require a change in identity. Rather, the critical factors are connected
with the actor’s own choice of identification, and all bias him in the
direction of Baluch identity. I have discussed how the council provides
a favoured forum for Pathan political activity, which allows Pathans
to act jointly without compromising their autonomy. Membership in
a centrally directed Baluch tribe, on the other hand, does irrevocably
compromise this autonomy: a man must make himself the dependent,
the client, of a leader and cannot speak for himself in the public forum.
Judged by Pathan standards, clientship places a man among the
despised failures, subordinates among independent commoners. Among
Baluch, on the other hand, self-respect and recognition as an honour-
able commoner does not require this degree of assertion and auto-
nomy: the costs, by Baluch standards, of being the client of a chief and
nobleman are very slight. Virility and competence need not be demon-
strated in the forum of political councils, to which commoners have
no access, but is pursued in other fields of activity. By retaining a
Pathan identity in a Baluch setting, a man would run the risk of being
judged by standards in terms of which his performance is a failure,
while judged by the standards current in the host group his behaviour
is perfectly honourable. It is hardly surprising, then, that any one
assimilated has chosen to embrace the identity that makes his situation
most tolerable. As a result, changes in political membership are
associated with changes in ethnic identity, and the clear dichotomy of
persons and tribes is maintained despite the movement of personnel.
Only one small category of people forms an exception to this: a few
families and segments of Pathans who have been subjected by Baluch
as serfs or slaves (cf. Pehrson 1966: 12), and being the dependents of
Baluch commoners cling to an identity which can at least offer them
a claim to honourable origin, though no recognition among free
Pathans.

The western margins of Pathan country exhibit a very different
picture (cf. Ferdinand 1962). Here, the adjoining area is largely
occupied by Persian-speaking Hazara, and Pathan pastoral nomads
and trading nomads penetrate deep into Hazara territory and settle



=== PDF p64 L (book-seq 126) ===
126 FREDRIK BARTH >

there in increasing numbers. This is apparently a recent situation which
came about only after Amir Abd-ur-Rahman of Afghanistan defeated
and subjugated the Hazara. Before that, ethnic intermixture seems to
have been limited. The Hazara were a poor mixed farming population
of mountaineers, organized under petty chiefs and capable of defending
their territory, while the Pathans held the broad valleys and plains.

The basis for this former exclusive territorialism should be sought
in a combination of political and ecologic factors. As mixed farmers,
the Hazara exploit both an agricultural and a pastoral niche, so both
Pathan farmers and nomads constitute competitors to them. More-
over, a tribal political system of petty chieftains, as found on both
sides, has very little capacity to provide for the articulation of dif-
ferently organized ethnic groups in a larger system. The relationship
between tribally organized Hazara and Pathan communities would
thus inevitably be one of competition and mutual attempts at mono-
polization of resources along the border. The apparent stability of the
border between them can be understood as a result of a balance |
between gains and losses: with the forms of political units that
obtained, the costs of conquest and penetration of Hazara country by
a Pathan tribe were greater than the expected returns. |

The relative pacification that resulted from the incorporation of
Hazarajat into the state structure of Afghanistan radically changed
these circumstances. Competition in the exploitation of resources was
freed from the concomitant costs of defence and penetration, and
pastoral nomad Pathans started moving in seasonally to utilize the 1
summer pastures. Moreover, greater freedom of movement has opened |
a niche for traders, and Pathans, with access to the sources of trade
goods, have swiftly moved into this niche. Whereas trade in settled
towns is somewhat despised and largely left to special, low ranking
groups, the life as a trading nomad, who, heavily armed, penetrates
foreign areas and takes large risks both personally and financially, is
one that provides rich opportunities to demonstrate male qualities
valued among Pathans. Through the institutional device of credit with
security in land, these traders have not only been able to create a
profitable volume of trade, but are also gaining control over agri-
cultural land. As a result, there is a progressive trend towards settle-
ment of Pathans as landowners among the Hazara.

This trend exemplifies a pattern of extension and ethnic co-resi-
dence which is characteristic of many Pathan areas. Pathan expansion |
northward and eastward, which has been taking place over a very



=== PDF p64 R (book-seq 127) ===
PATHAN IDENTITY AND ITS MAINTENANCE 127

long period, has certainly occasionally taken the form of migration
and conquest with wholesale eviction of the previous population; but
more frequently it has resulted in only a partial displacement of the
non-Pathan autochthones. In these cases, Pathans have established
themselves in stratified communities as a dominant, landholding group
in a poly-ethnic system. Through much of the western area, the
dichotomy is between Pashtun and Tajik, i.e. Persian-speaking serfs,
while in the eastern areas, Pakhtuns are contrasted with a more
highly differentiated, but largely Pashto-speaking, group of dependent
castes.

One of the preconditions for these compound systems is clearly
ecological. From the Pathan point of view, it is obvious that dependents
will only be accepted where the disadvantages of having them, i.e.
increased vulnerabilitiy, are estimated to be less than the economic
and political advantages. In the barren hills of the south, I have argued
that this leads to the rejection of clients. In richer agricultural areas,
on the other hand, particularly where there are opportunities for
artificial irrigation, farm labour produces very large surpluses so that
profitable enterprises can be based on the control of land. As a result,
the option of establishing oneself as a landowner and patron of others
is an attractive one. Political supremacy may variously be maintained
through an integration of serfs as true clients (hamsaya), or it may be
based on the less committing obligations that follow from unilateral
hospitality. Where surpluses are very large, this latter pattern is most
common, as seen in the development of men’s house feasting in the
north (Barth 1959: 52 ff.); and by this means Pathans can gain political
influence over dependents without very greatly increasing their own
vulnerability.

Pathan identity can readily be maintained under these circum-
stances, since they allow an adequate performance in the various fora
where such an identity is validated. However, political autonomy in
the system is founded on land ownership. Long-term ethnic boundary
maintenance will thus presuppose mechanisms for monopolization and
retention of land on Pathan hands. Persons who lose control of land
must either be given reallocated fields on the basis of descent position
or else denied rights as Pathan descendants and sloughed off from the
group. On the other hand, land acquisition by non-Pathans must be
contained and their participation in Pathan fora prevented unless they
can be fully assimilated to Pathan status.

Several patterns of this are found, among them that of Swat, where



=== PDF p65 L (book-seq 128) ===
128 FREDRIK BARTH

those who lose their land also lose their descent position, while Saints
and others who are given land are none the less excluded from parti-
cipation in council meetings or in men’s house hospitality. Thus con-
quering Pathans are able to integrate other populations in a political
and social system without assimilating them; other ethnic groups and
status groups can also infiltrate the system in dependent positions
where niches are available, as have pastoral Gujars or trading Para-
chas. However, the cultural differences that go with the Pathan iden-
tity versus dependent dichotomy clearly tend to become reduced over
time. Within the whole stratified community there is a very close and
multifaceted integration that furthers this trend. Most social life can
be related to a religious context of dogmatic equality. There is a con-
stant circulation of personnel through hypergamous marriages as well
as loss of land and rank. Finally, there are a multitude of contexts
where a fellowship of ideals and standards are made relevant to groups
that cross-cut strata: in games, in hunting, in war and bravery, non-
Pakhtun and Pakhtun are joined, and judged and rewarded by the
same standards of manliness.2 As a result, the whole stratified popula-
tion tends to approach a uniformly Pathan style of life as well as
speech. Therefore, though the local version of the ethnic name (Pakh-
tun in the case of Swat and Peshawar) continues to indicate the domi-
nant stratum internally, it is increasingly used collectively to designate
the whole population in contrast to the population of other, non-Pashto-
speaking areas. In this sense, then, the internal boundary tends to lose I
some of its ethnic character.
The eastern margins of Pathan country, towards the rich and
populous Indus plain, illustrate a different combination of some of
these factors. Repeatedly through history, tribes and groups of Pathans
have swept out of the hills and conquered large or small tracts of land
in the Panjab or further east, establishing themselves as landlords.
Yet, here it is the conquerors who have become progressively assimi-
lated, and the limits of Pathan country have never moved far from
the foothills area, except for the almost enclosed area of the Peshawar
plains. The ethnodynamics of this boundary may thus be simplified as 1
a continuous pressure and migration of personnel from the Pathan |
area, balanced by a continuous absorption of the migrants into the
plains population, with the rates of these two processes balancing along
a line at a certain distance from the foothills. The direction and rate
of assimilation must be understood in terms of the opportunity situa-
tion of Pathans settled in the plains. These plains have always been |



=== PDF p65 R (book-seq 129) ===
PATHAN IDENTITY AND ITS MAINTENANCE 129

under the sway of centralized governments; for purely geographical
and tactical reasons they can be controlled by armies directed from the
urban civilizations there. Any landholding, dominant group will
therefore be forced, sooner or later, to come to terms with these centres
of power, or they will be destroyed. However, Pathan landlords can
only come truly to terms with such superior powers by destroying the
bases for the maintenance of their own identity: the defence of honour,
the corporation through acephalous councils, ultimately the individual
autonomy that is the basis for Pathan self-respect. Such landlords are
trapped in a social system where pursuit of Pathan virtues is con-
sistently punished, whereas compromise, submission, and accommoda-
tion are rewarded. Under these circumstances, Pathan descent may be
remembered but the distinctive behaviour associated with the identity
is discontinued. To the extent that such groups retain the Pashto
language, they run the risk of ridicule: they are the ones scathingly
referred to by Pathans as speaking but not doing Pashto, and retaining
the pretence of being Pathans is not rewarded.

A few less ambitious niches are, however, found in the social system
of the Indo-Pakistan area where Pathan identity can be perpetuated
on a more individual basis. As money-lenders and as nightwatchmen,
Pathans can defend and capitalize on their virtues as fearless, indepen-
dent, and dominant persons, and in these capacities they are widely
dispersed through the subcontinent.

Internally, a somewhat analogous loss of identity has traditionally
taken place in the areas immediately under the control of the Afghan
(Pathan) dynasty of Afghanistan, particularly in Kabul and the other
urban centres. Here the proximity to the centralized authority is so
great that it becomes very difficult for people of any importance to
assert and exhibit the autonomy and independence that their identity
and position demand. Somewhat incongruously, the elite and urban
middle class in this purely Afghan kingdom have shown a strong
tendency to Persianization in speech and culture, representing — I
would argue — a sophisticate’s escape from the impossibility of
successfully consummating a Pathan identity under these circum-
stances. With the more recent developments of modern Afghan
nationalism, this has changed and new processes have been set in
motion.

I have analysed elsewhere (Barth 1956a) the ecologic factors that
determine the limits of Pathan distribution to the north: the critical
limits of double cropping, beyond which the surplus-demanding



=== PDF p66 L (book-seq 130) ===
130 FREDRIK BARTH

political structure based on men’s house hospitality, as found in the
northern Pathan areas, cannot be sustained. North of this very clear
geographical and ethnic boundary is found a congeries of diverse tribes
collectively referred to as Kohistanis. But this boundary also is not
entirely impermeable to the passage of personnel: several groups and
segments of Pathans are traditionally reported to have been driven
out of their territories in the south and escaped to Kohistan, while one
such group was encountered during a survey of Kohistan (Barth
1956b: 49). After residence as a compact and independent community
in the area for four generations, this group was like neighbouring
Kohistanis and radically unlike Pathans in economy, social organiza-
tion, and style of life. It is reasonable to assume that Pashto, still used
as a domestic language among them, will soon disappear, and that
other Kohistani areas contain similar segments of genetically Pathan |
populations that have been assimilated to a Kohistani ethnic identity.
That this should be so is consistent with the dynamics of assimila-
tion elsewhere. Pathan identity, as a style of life in Kohistan, must be
compared and contrasted to the forms found in the neighbouring
valleys, where a complex system of stratification constitutes a frame-
work within which Pakhtun landlords play prominent parts as political
leaders of corporate groups based on men’s houses. By contrast,

Kohistanis have a simple stratified system, with a majority of owner-
cultivator commoners and a minority stratum of dependent serfs, plus ]
a few Pashto-speaking craftsmen. Politically the area is highly anar-
chic and fragmented. l

In general value orientation, Kohistanis are not unlike Pathans; and
analogies to the institutional complexes I have described as fora for
Pathan activity are also found. Kohistani seclusion of women is at the |
same time even stricter and more problematical, since women are
deeply involved in farming and thus must work more in public,
occasioning more demonstrative escape and avoidance behaviour.
Councils are limited to instituted village councils, with men seated on !
benches in a square formation and grouping themselves as lineage
representatives. Finally, hospitality is very limited, for economic
reasons, and does not provide the basis for leadership: dependents are
landless serfs who are controlled through the control of land.

In the contact situation, it is a striking fact that Kohistanis over- ‘
communicate their identity through the use of several archaic features
of dress, most strikingly footwear-puttees of poorly cured hides, and
long hair. Pathans find these rustic features very amusing, but at the



=== PDF p66 R (book-seq 131) ===
PATHAN IDENTITY AND ITS MAINTENANCE 131

same time recognize the qualities of independence and toughness that
Kohistanis exhibit. Politically the Kohistani owner-cultivator is an
autonomous equal to the Pakhtun landowner and men’s house leader,
though he speaks for a smaller group, often only his own person.
Kohistanis and Pakhtuns are partners in the non-localized two-bloc
alliance system that pervades the area.

Pathans who are driven off their lands in the lower valleys can
escape subjection and menial rank by fleeing to Kohistan and con-
quering or buying land and supporting themselves as owner-cultivators.
As such, they retain the autonomy which is so highly valued by Pathan
and Kohistani alike. But in competition with Pathan leaders of men’s
houses, their performance in the fora of hospitality and gift-giving will
be miserable — what they can offer there can be matched by the
dependent menials of the richer areas. To maintain a claim to Pathan
identity under these conditions is to condemn oneself to utter failure
in performance, when by a change to Kohistani identity one can avoid
being judged as a Pathan, and emphasize those features of one’s situa-
tion and performance which are favourable. Just as Kohistanis find it
to their advantage in contact with Pathans to emphasize their identity,
so it is advantageous for Pathan migrants under these circumstances
to embrace this identity. In the fragmented, anarchic area of Kohistan,
with largely compatible basic value orientations, the impediments to
such passing are low, and as a result the ethnic dichotomy corresponds
closely to an ecologic and geographical division.

In the preceding pages, I have tried very briefly to sketch a picture
of the Pathan ethnic group and its distribution. It is apparent that
persons identifying themselves, and being identified by others, as
Pathans live and persist under various forms of organization as
members of societies constituted on rather different principles. Under
these various conditions, it is not surprising that the style of life in
Pathan communities should show considerable phenotypic variation.
At the same time, the basic values and the social forms of Pathans
are in a number of respects similar to those of other, neighbouring
peoples. This raises the problem of just what is the nature of the
categories and discontinuities that are referred to by ethnic names in
this region: how are cultural differences made relevant as ethnic
organization?

Superficially, it is true that ethnic groups are distinguished by a
number of cultural traits which serve as diacritica, as overt signals of
identity which persons will refer to as criteria of classification. These



=== PDF p67 L (book-seq 132) ===
132 FREDRIK BARTH

are specific items of custom, from style of dress to rules of inheritance.

On the other hand, it is equally obvious that the ethnic dichotomies do

not depend on these, so that the contrast between Pathan and Baluch

would not be changed if Pathan women started wearing the
embroidered tunic-fronts used among the Baluch. The analysis has
attempted rather to uncover the essential characteristics of Pathans !
which, if changed, would change their ethnic categorization vis-a-vis i
one or several contrasting groups. This has meant giving special
attention to boundaries and boundary maintenance.

The essential argument has been that people sustain their identity
through public behaviour, which cannot be directly evaluated: first it
must be interpreted with reference to the available ethnic alternatives.

Ethnic identities function as categories of inclusion/exclusion and of
interaction, about which both ego and alter must agree if their |
behaviour is to be meaningful. Signals and acceptance that one belongs
to the Pathan category imply that one will be judged by a set of values
which are characteristic or characteristically weighted. The most
characteristic feature of Pathan values lies in giving primary emphasis
to autonomy: in politics, in one’s relations to material objects, in one’s
escape from influence and vulnerability through kin relations. This
identity can be sustained only if it can be consummated moderately
successfully: otherwise individuals will abandon it for other identities,
or alter it through changing the criteria for the identity.

I have tried to show how different forms of Pathan organization
represent various ways of consummating the identity under changing i
conditions. I have tried to show how individual boundary crossing,

i.e. change of identity, takes place where the person’s performance is
poor and alternative identities are within reach, leaving the ethnic
organization unchanged. I have also touched on the problems that arise
when many persons experience the failure to excel, without having a
contrastive identity within reach which could provide an alternative
adjustment, and how this leads towards a change in the definition of
the ethnic identity and thus in the organization of units and boundaries. ‘
To recapitulate in connection with the organization of the political
sphere: the Pathan pattern of council organization allows men to
adjust to group living without compromising their autonomy, and thus
to realize and excel in a Pathan capacity. Under external constraints,
as members of larger and discrepantly organized societies, Pathans
seek other fora for consummating these capacities through bravery
and independent confrontation with hostile forces as trading nomads,



=== PDF p67 R (book-seq 133) ===
PATHAN IDENTITY AND ITS MAINTENANCE 133

nightwatchmen, and money-lenders. In some situations, however,
Pathans find themselves in the position of having to make accommoda-
tions that negate their autonomy: they become the clients of Baluch
chiefs, the vassals or taxpaying, disarmed citizens of effective cen-
tralized states, the effective dependents of landowner/hosts. Where
alternative identities are available which do not give the same emphasis
to the valuation of autonomy, these unfortunates embrace them and
‘pass’, becoming Baluch, Panjabis, or Persian-speaking townsmen.
In Swat and Peshawar District, where no such contrastive identity
is available, defeat and shame cannot be avoided that way. But here
the fact of such wholesale failure to realize political autonomy seems
to be leading towards a reinterpretation of the minimal requirements
for sustaining Pathan identity, and thus to a change in the organiza-
tional potential of the Pathan ethnic identity.

‘We are thus led into the problem of how, and under what circum-
stances, the characteristics associated with an ethnic identity are main-
tained, and when they change. The normal social processes whereby
continuity is effected are the social controls that maintain status
definitions in general, through public agreement and de facto positive
and negative sanctions. But where circumstances are such that a
number of persons in a status category, in casu Pathans, lose their
characteristics and live in a style that is discrepant from that of con-
ventional Pathans, what happens? Are they no longer Pathans by
public opinion, or are these characteristics no longer to be associated
with Pathan identity?

1 have tried to show that in most situations it is to the advantage
of the actors themselves to change their label so as to avoid the costs
of failure; and so where there is an alternative identity within
reach the effect is a flow of personnel from one identity to another
and no change in the conventional characteristics of the status. In
some cases this does not happen. There is the case of the Pathan serfs
of some Baluch tribal sections, where the serfs sustain a claim to
Pathan identity and have this confirmed by their Baluch masters. What
is actually involved in this case, however, is a kind of shame identity:
the Baluch patrons enjoy the triumph of having Pathan serfs, but do
explain that these people were only the serfs of the formerly dominant
Pathans. The masters were defeated and driven out, and these Pashto-
speakers are not in fact their descendants. And the ‘Pathan’ serfs
do not have access to Pathan fora and would not have their identity
confirmed by Pathans. Thus, the identity retains its character because

9. Barth



=== PDF p68 L (book-seq 134) ===
134 FREDRIK BARTH

many change their ethnic label, and only few are in a position where
they cling to it under adverse circumstances. Only where the many
choose to maintain the claim despite their failure — as where no
alternative identity is accessible — or where the failure is a common
and not very costly one, as in the main body of the population in
Peshawar district, do the basic contents or characteristics of the identity
start being modified.

The traditional version of Pathan identity has thus been one on
which a population could base a feasible pattern of life under certain
conditions only, and the distribution of Pathans and Pathan social
forms can be understood from this. The system has been most success-
ful, and self-maintaining, under anarchic conditions in low produc-
tion areas. Producing a demographic excess under these conditions,
Pathans have spread outward: extending Pathan territory northwards,
northeastward, and recently northwestward, while generating a large-
scale population movement through a relatively stable ethnic boundary
eastward and southward. Under changing conditions at present, with
urbanization and new forms of administration, the total situation has
changed so that one can expect a radical change both of Pathan culture

and of the organizational relevance it is given.

1 There are also in Baluchistan some persons who arc the clients of commoners or
corporate groups of commoners — these are few in numbers and socially and eco-
nomically deprived.

2 Except, that is, for some clearly discrepant groups like Saints, Mullahs, Dancers.
ete. who recoil from or are excluded from these activities.



=== PDF p68 R (book-seq 135) ===
