
Without being able to specify the boundaries of cultures, it is not
possible to construct phyletic lines in the more rigorous evolutionary
sense. But from the analysis that has been argued here, it should be
possible to do so for ethnic groups, and thus in a sense for those aspects
of culture which have this organizational anchoring.

1 The emphatic ideological denial of the primacy of ethnic identity (and rank)
which characterises the universal religions that have arisen in the Middle East is
understandable in this perspective, since practically any moyement for social or
ethical reform in the poly-ethnic societies of that region would clash with conven-
tions and standards of ethnic character.

* The difference between ethnic groups and social strata, which seems problematical
at this stage of the argument, will be taken up below.

3 T am here concerned only with individual failure to maintain identity, where most
members do so successfully, and not with the broader questions of cultural vitality
and anomie.

¢ As opposed to presumptive classification in passing social encounters — I am
thinking of the person in his normal social context where others have a considerable
amount of previous information about him, not of the possibilities afforded occasion-
ally for mispresenting one’s identity towards strangers.

s The condemned behaviour which gives pariah position to the gypsies is com-
pound, but rests prominently on their wandering life, originally in contrast to the
serf bondage of Europe, later in their flagrant violation of puritan cthics of respon-
sibility, toil and morality.

* To my knowledge, Mitchell's essay on the Kalela dance (Mitchell 1956) is the
first and still the most penetrating study on this topic.



=== PDF p20 R (book-seq 39) ===
When Ethnic Identity
is a Social Stigma

by Harald Eidheim

The problem of delimiting ethnic groups as contrasting cultural units,
and of defining ethnic borders, has occupied many anthropologists, in
particular many of the cultural anthropological school. The distribution
of cultural and other ‘objective’ traits has usually been the empirical
evidence on which their approaches have been built. Analyses of such
data may provide us with a statistical and distributive picture (if it is
possible to agree on a definition of a trait) and may show how the
concentration of traits correlates with named groups. However, if ethnic
groups should not happen to coincide with contrasting economic
systems or with firm and enduring political groups, there will always
be the problem of ‘transitional zomes’, i.e. where such criteria give
ill-defined ethnic borders. Yet in many such areas, people themselves
apparently have no difficulties in ascribing ethnic membership, i.e. we
might find a high degree of ‘homogeneity’ (rather insignificant distri-
bution of objective traits) but still indications of ethnic diversity,
expressed in native theory and also articulated in the routine of
interpersonal behaviour (cf. Nadel 1947, Garvin 1958, Moerman
1965.

This poses the general problem of how ethnic diversity is socially
articulated and maintained.

To analyse the social organization of ethnic borders we need a
relational frame of reference, in which we can single out those objec-
tive phenomena that we somewhat dubiously called ‘traits’, by con-
cepts logically consistent with a relational language. The basic axiom
for such analyses is that ethnic groups are social categories which
provide a basis for status ascription, and consequently that inter-
cthnic relations are organized with reference to such statuses. My
material shows a situation where an ethnic status (or identity) is, in a
sense, illegitimate, and therefore not acted out in institutional



=== PDF p21 L (book-seq 40) ===
e ——

40 HArALD EIDHEM

inter-ethnic behaviour. Nevertheless, this very illegitimacy has definite
implications in the process of role-taking in elementary ‘nteraction
and thus adds form to inter-ethnic relations.

My case refers to an area of mixed Norwegian — Coast Lappish
population inhabiting the fjords and inlets of West-Finnmark, Nor-
thern Norway.! Throughout West-Finnmark there is a conspicuous
lack of ‘contrasting cultural traits’ between Lapps and Norwegians, but
these ethnic labels are attached to communities as well as to families
and individual persons, and are in daily use. The consistent, though not
public use of such labels indicates that an ethnic identity is a topic of
importance in the relationships between persons carrying contrasting
as well as similar identities. The language of symbols which bear on
an identity cleavage is rich and finely shaded. I have been able to
understand and analyze only the gross forms of these symbols and
their differentiating significance. It is fairly evident, however, that
very few of them may be classified as contrasting traits with reference
to ethnic provenance, the mother tongue dichotomy (Lapp-Norwegian)
being perhaps the only obvious contrast. The language of symbols thus
must be understood in a local social context; we are faced with the
difficult task of understanding the local mode of valuation and inter-
pretation of general behaviour expressed in such terms as, for instance,
self-sufficiency, covertness, politeness, or cleanliness.

Under the disability of a stigmatized ethnic identity, members of
the Coast Lappish population in question seek to qualify themselves
as full participants in the Norwegian society. In order to obtain this
membership they have to develop techniques to avoid or tolerate sanc-
tions from the local Norwegian population. In the following I hope
to be able to show that the behavioural forms which under such con-
straints are displayed on the stages of everyday life, are organized
in distinct spheres of interaction which articulate and maintain an
identity dichotomy. Spheres of interaction as well as identities emerge
through everyday interaction because impression management about
identities is of constant concern to the actors.

Let me now turn more concretely to the ethnic situation in Finn-
mark, the northernmost county in Norway.

In the townships (Norw. kommuner) of the inland region, which
are the strongholds of Lappish culture in Norway, the Lappish speak-
ing population constitutes an 80-90 per cent majority. The Norwegian
part of the population is engaged in various administrative and social
services and in commerce. Some of these Norwegians are bilingual, as



=== PDF p21 R (book-seq 41) ===
WHEN ETHNIC IDENTITY IS A SOCIAL STIGMA -

is the Lappish population in general. Of a population of more than
8,000, fifteen per cent are Reindeer Lapps. These live in their perma-
nent houses while their herds are on their winter pastures in the
vicinity, but most of them leave the region in summer when they stay
with their herds on headlands and islands along the Arctic coast. The
reindeer population in the region is slightly above 100,000 head (Aar-
seth 1967). The great bulk of the Lappish population pursue dairy
farming and have inland fishing and cloudberry picking as subsidiary
occupations. Quite a few are also engaged in social and administrative
services and in transportation.

As one moves from the interior towards the townships of the fjord
and coast area, the ethnic proportions of the population are reversed.
The proportion of Lappish speakers in some townships is inconsider-
able, while in others it might amount to 20-25 per cent. (The only
exception is one fjordal township in East Finnmark with a 50/50-
constellation.) Lapps as well as Norwegians combine farming and
fishing with no difference in ecologic adaptation along ethnic lines.
Spatially, however, there is a tendency to ethnic clustering. The towns
and fishing villages on the coast are entirely dominated by Norwegians
(cf. Vorren (ed.) 1963, Kirke- og undervisningsdepartementet 1959).
In the fjord area and especially in the western part which concerns us
here, visible signs of Lappishness, which prevail e.g. in the inland
region, are either absent in the indigenous population, (as are reindeer
herding and nomad life, Lappish costume and the public use of Lap-
pish language) or they are rather unreliable criteria for classification
of individual persons (as is physical type).2 People make a living from
fishing and small farming in the same way as in peripheral settlements
all along the North Norwegian coast. Clothing, food habits, housing,
the major forms of social institutions, ideals and values are also so
evenly distributed that there are seemingly only trivial differences
from one locality to another. In short, an outsider, paying a casual and
short visit in the area, will most likely notice no signs of ethnic
diversity, not to speak of an ethnic border.

Such were also my own first impressions as a field worker. I knew,
of course, that I was on the edges of the Lappish area, but my eyes
and ears told me that I was inside a Norwegian fjord community. It
was not until I was able to observe and learn from the daily events of
my own socialization into the community that I became sensitized to
the relational aspect of the local ethnic dichotomy. I will therefore
take the liberty of reviewing some of the initial, and, I think, important



=== PDF p22 L (book-seq 42) ===
—'

42 HARALD EIDHEIM

phases of this process, leaving aside the obvious traumatic aspects
caused by my own blunders.

At first I was merely looked upon as some kind of travelling Nor-

wegian, maybe a somewhat unusual one, because a visit from a com-
plete stranger who has no definite and conventional task is an extreme-
ly rare occasion. In any case, 1 was a person towards whom people
in the community considered it appropriate to show off their Norwe-
gianness. They made efforts to underline this quality of theirs by com-
municating their competence in modern fishing and agriculture, and
by telling about local public events which they thought meritorious
with reference to this quality. Many people liked to stress that they
were well travelled and pretended to have a good knowledge of other
parts of Norway, and they did not forget to mention that people from
this fjord were settled as far away as Oslo, Germany, Alaska, and
Australia. In addition, they liked to dwell on their good standard of
housing, and the quality of their stables compared to what they had
seen during their evacuation period 1944/45 farther south. (All the
buildings in this area were burnt down by the Germans in 1944 and
the population evacuated, but the communities were rebuilt and
resettled through a governmental aid program after the war.) House-
wives constantly took pride in showing their well-furnished kitchens.
They also had what to me seemed to be a craze for cleanliness, and
entertained me for hours about their precautions and good habits in
their daily housekeeping. (In local Norwegian native theory, unclean-
liness is one of the vices of the Lapps.)

All this was communicated in the local Norwegian dialect which
all spoke quite well, but which very few, if any, had a perfect com-
mand of, since the structure of Lappish to some extent, is likely to
invade their speech and produce a slightly broken Norwegian. This
is even true in those homes in the community which have abandoned
the Lappish language (see below).

I have mentioned a few themes which local people were eager to
pursue in our conversations. As mere themes they are conventional in
normal Norwegian discourse, and might be thought sociologically
unimportant. But it was the recurrent management of these themes,
combined with the fact that themes which pointed to ethnic differentia-
tion in the population were obviously avoided, which eventually led
me to look upon them as a vital part of a process of presentation of
identity (cf. Goffman 1959). This became more evident to me as my
socialization proceeded into the next stage.



=== PDF p22 R (book-seq 43) ===
WHEN ETHNIC IDENTITY 1S A SOCIAL STIGMA 43

Gradually I accentuated my interests in the Lappish population and
cautiously presented myself more concretely by telling about my
studies and reproducing what is recorded in books about the area,
and I apparently added depth and concreteness to their image of me
as a most unusual Norwegian. Needless to say, however, my interests
and questions annoyed most people in the community. Some young
people avoided me for weeks when rumours about my interests spread
through kitchen conversations; they took me for some sort of unpleasant
detective. Others, notably some of the middle-aged, took me into their
confidence. I was concerned with Lapps in a way which they could
perceive as being far from negative, and I appeared to be a useful
source of information about the wider society. (Other anthropologists
have, of course, experienced similar field situations.) Regarding me
little by little as an acceptable stranger, uncommitted on controversies
about ethnicity, people became more relaxed in their relations with
me. They became more careless with the ‘secret’ that they habitually
used Lappish in their daily life, and when they also discovered that I
could join in a simple conversation in Lappish, we had established
such relations that 1 was able to broach the question of ethnicity more
openly and directly than before. The themes of discussion which were
current in my initial socialization faded more and more into the back-
ground. However, except within separate households and small groups
of three—four persons, I was never able to engage people in discussion
about these matters. In public encounters, such as parties which 10-15
people attended, in the small crowds of customers gathered at the
merchant’s shop or in the crowd waiting on the quay for the local
steamer, I had little success.

In short, this first groping phase of my field work, which also
brought me to neighbouring communities, including the adminis-
trative centre of the township, led me eventually to some basic social
facts which were at odds with the facade that people presented as
long as they regarded me as an ordinary Norwegian.

These facts were:

1. People in the area have a good personal knowledge of each other,
and can classify each other very precisely as either Lapp or Norwegian
(or finn versus ddZa which are the labels in Norwegian and Lappish
respectively).

This is true only within local districts: I define the district, with
reference to interaction and communication, as the area within which
people have mutual personal knowledge of place of residence, heritage,



=== PDF p23 L (book-seq 44) ===
O —— e —

44 HARALD EIDHEM

doings and personal inclinations. Thus, we have to visualize the
district from the point of view of a central fixed point, which in this
case is the fjord community where 1 concentrated my field-work.
Obviously, the district so defined has no definite borders; it represents
a concentration in a field of personal information; but for the present
purpose we may say that within a diffuse range of 30-50 kilometers
it encompasses scattered, small communities of from one or two house-
holds up to a hundred or more which people think of as inhabited by
Lapps and Norwegians in various proportions. The fjord community
in which I worked was one of the most Lappish with only six persons
out of ca. 150 classified as Norwegians, and the administrative centre
of the township being the most Norwegian with about 20 out of 300
classified as Lapps.

2. In this fjord community, Lappish was the domestic language in
about 40 of the 50 odd households. In each of the ten which used
Norwegian, at least one person knew Lappish and used it in other
social contexts. Outside the households Lappish was a medium of
communication within the wider district, but language behaviour is
such that Lappish must be regarded as a secret language or code.
regularly used only in situations where trusted Lappish identities are
involved.

Having grasped these facts, which clearly indicated that the question
of Lappish identity was a topic of general concern, and having
realized that the dimension of social space must be a promising frame
of observations, I could engage in more selective data collecting.

Not surprisingly, my best friends among the Lapps in the fjord at
this point started admitting me to their personal dilemmas of identity.
This would often take the form of confessions: They were after all 2
kind of Lapp. Their parents and grandparents lived in turf huts, some
of them as late as the 1930s. Some people even wore Lappish costumes
at that time, and Lappish foot-wear was in common use until World
War II. They were bothered by not being fully proficient in Nor-
wegian and by the spite and ridicule to which they were often exposed
for this and other reasons in interactions with self-confident and ar-
rogant Norwegians. They even had the suspecion that their low stan-
dard of living and the lack of industrial enterprises in the fjord might
derive from their being of an inferior race.® “The Lapps must be stupid’,
they said. Certainly they believed the average Norwegian to be of that
opinion. In all details their miserable self-image was a reflection of
the Lappish stigma as local Norwegians define it.



=== PDF p23 R (book-seq 45) ===
WHEN ETHNIC IDENTITY IS A SOCIAL STIGMA 45 &

This dilemma appeared to be most developed in persons from
16-17 up to 50, the age classes where aspirations are strongest; a
psychiatrist would probably say that this part of the population was
subject to an identity-neurosis.

In my article on guest relationships (Eidheim 1966) I have described
how people in this fjord behave towards Nomad Lapps. Displaying
their preference for contract relations, their new and comfortable
houses, their cleanliness and their command of Norwegian, the fjord
dwellers very ostentatiously act out a ‘Norwegian’ identity. How-
ever, as is understood, the relationships with people whom they them-
selves classify as ddzat (Norwegians) show quite another aspect of
their situation.

In very general terms one may say that the basis for their dilemma
is that in order to achieve the material and social goods they appreciate,
and to share the opportunities available in the society, people have to
get rid of, or cover up, those social characteristics which Norwegians
take as signs of Lappishness.

This must be understood on the background of certain traits of local .
ecology and society.* Local resources, the amount of arable soil and
the local fishing grounds give little or no opportunities for increased
or diversified production. Capital management beyond the level of
single households is non-existent (the only exception is the local
private shopkeeper), nor have any other forms of associations or
corporations, which could have promoted social differentiation in the
neighbourhood society, gained foothold.? Only very few households
can, or are willing to, live exclusively within the confines of neigh-
bourhood and kin relations or exclusively from local fishing and the
yields of their small farms (a cow or two and four-six sheep). A wide
range of attainments therefore can only be secured through careers
or at least temporary wage work, outside the fjord community, in
situations where Norwegians are their social partners and where these
also possess or assume the positions of formal and informal author-

Apart from guest-relations with members of a nomadic unit (Eid-
heim 1966), these fjord dwellers have no relations with Lapps in the
inland regions. They never go there, they are indifferent to the debate
about the Lappish minority situation in mass media and they are out-
side the influence of the Lappish movement which works for consolida-
tion and promotion of an ethnic esprit de corps. Their orientation and
their social aspirations are confined to a social landscape where the




=== PDF p24 L (book-seq 46) ===
e —————

46 HARALD EIDHEIM

actors are either people of Norwegian identity or people in the same
opportunity situation as themselves.

The preceding description indicates that interaction is organized
here in three distinct spheres, namely (1) a public sphere, (2) a Lappish
closed sphere, and (3) a Norwegian closed sphere. Each of these is
associated with characteristic codes, themes, and valuations, and furth-
er distinguished by the ethnic composition of the acting personnel. The
spheres in their generalized forms emerge as an organizational result
of ethnic heritage in this particular dual context. Situationally, how-
ever, behaviour belonging in one or another of these spheres is depen-
dent on definable circumstances or opportunity situations.

There is first the public sphere of interaction. Inside the fjord
community, the most common encounters belonging in this sphere are
occasions where one or more of the local Norwegians participate.
Infrequently, these are big celebrations like weddings, funerals, and
baptisms; more commonly they are encounters in the routine of daily
life in the community. All formally organized activity at the local
public school also belongs in this sphere. Not surprisingly, therefore,
a wide sector of daily encounters outside the school where children
and teenagers are involved also has these public overtones: the Nor-
wegian code is used and themes and valuations are those of the public
sphere.®

People in the fjord community think it is ‘necessary’ and therefore
‘right’ to speak Norwegian to children. ‘They shall not have the
same handicap as we have had,’ they say. Interaction among the small
crowd of customers at the merchant’s shop also belongs to the public
sphere. Even when no Norwegians are present (the merchant is a
local Lapp) people regard it as appropriate to define the situation
as public. The merchant himself is the apparent initiator and he
bluntly answers in Norwegian if it happens that someone asks a
question in Lappish.

As already suggested the verbal code in this sphere of interaction
is local Norwegian. The themes around which the interactions are
concentrated are domestic work and the conventional problems
of daily life inside the fjord community as well as outside, and the
valuations are those which fit in with North Norwegian coast culture.

‘When people are temporarily outside the fjord they likewise define
interactions with Norwegians as events in the public sphere. Locals,
both Norwegians and Lapps, present themselves behaviouristically
in the idioms of this sphere, and, as I have described above, they tried



=== PDF p24 R (book-seq 47) ===
WHEN ETHNIC IDENTITY IS A SOCIAL STIGMA 47 &

to constrain me by these conventions as long as they regarded me as
a stranger.

Of course, the public sphere must also be defined with reference
to the social properties or behaviour which are excluded from it. This
behaviour is first and foremost the use of Lappish language, secondly
themes, stories, and other possible pointers to the ethnic dichotomy and
other actions which are regarded as the presentation of a Lappish
identity. For a Norwegian explicitly to present himself as a Norwegian
and to draw attention to the ethnic dichotomy is less uncommon and
somewhat more legitimate than the corresponding behaviour by a
Lapp, since it is implicit in the process of role-taking in public situa-
tions and congruent with a Norwegianizing intent (cf. fn. 6). Let me
turn to some examples for purposes of illustration.

Per, a Lapp from the fjord community, is a member of the town-
ship’s school board, which has its regular meetings in the administrative
centre of the township. But he never argues in these meetings for a
Lappish oriented public school in his community, nor does he suggest
to fellow passengers on board the local steamer that the state has for-
gotten the Coast Lapps in its program for economic development of
the outlying districts.

Why then, is Per recognized as a Lapp? To answer this question
we must go to the syndrome of signs which the Norwegians look for.
This syndrome or image is much of the same order as the term stigma
used by Goffman (cf. Goffman 1963). There are a very great number
of such signs and they are unevenly distributed among individuals.
In the case of Per we might list some of the most releyant ones: (1)
He comes from a certain community, which Norwegians call by a
name which is a slight twist of its proper name, and which gives it
an oblique derogatory edge. We might say that by this nickname
persons are associated with a spatial criterion of Lappishness. (2) He
has what is considered to be Lappish physiognomy. (3) He speaks a
slightly broken Norwegian. (4) He seldom plays an active role in the
discussions at the school board meetings. (5) He misses the meetings
more often than the average member and does not instruct a deputy
to go in his place. (6) ‘He sticks to his own.” This is demonstrated even
at the administrative centre where he frequently visits a household
which is regarded as Lappish.”

Per and a couple of other persons from the area experience the
school board meetings as a confrontation with people of Norwegian
identity. A common Norwegian fisherman and the inspector of the




=== PDF p25 L (book-seq 48) ===
S —— e —

48 Hararp EmpHEIM

school, though dissimilar in many respects, are in another and more
vital sense the same sort of person. Per thinks that they know the
nuances of suitable behaviour and effective action better than he him-
self, and objectively they have a fuller command of the code. They
have the right identity, which makes them authorized initiators in the
situation, while he is only some kind of satellite.

What has been said so far about the public sphere of interaction
enables us to sum up some of its characteristics. Most conspicuous
among these is the fact that interaction in this sphere takes place
within the statuses and institutions of the dominant Norwegian popula-
tion. However, it is an overruling axiom that the local population is
made up of two ethnic categories, Lapps and Norwegians. Since public
presentation of a Lappish identity is not an alternative, it follows that
in this sphere there is no institutionalized interaction in which a status
‘Lapp’ has accepted roles, i.e. Lapp and Norwegian are not comple-
mentary statuses. What perpetuates the axiom of an identity cleavage,
then, is the fact that people are able to identify each other as belonging
to separate categories on the basis of their performance of any role in
the public sphere. This reinforces the syndrome of signs attached to
ethnic categories as well as the notion that separate identities are
mirrored in the social landscape. Against this background we can
understand that to be a Lapp is a primary restriction on impression
management to the extent that all Coast Lapps avoid as much as
possible behaviour which in the local language of symbols and signs
points to their identity.

Such public encounters between Coast Lapps and Norwegians are
part of the daily routine in the area, in all places where people meet
and interact. It might be said that a pseudo-agreement on a shared
identity is established when the mutually recognized pragmatic con-
tent of the relations in the public sphere is not severely violated. (The
degree of severity must of course be subject to a situational definition.)
The seemingly unproblematic flow of interaction in the public sphere,
or the fact that the flow goes on, indicates that the gross qualities of
public encounters reflect mutual agreement, and to strangers the two
parties seem to communicate adequately.® However, each party turns to
ethnically closed stages to interpret and discuss the idiomatic content
of public encounters with reference to identity. The Lappish closed
stages, which I made most effort to observe, constitute 2 sphere of
interaction that can only be understood in relation to the public sphere.
It is in the articulation between these two, i.e. in the routine of



=== PDF p25 R (book-seq 49) ===
WHEN ETENIC IDENTITY IS A SOCIAL STIGMA 49

establishment of public stages versus ethnically closed stages that the
organizational significance of identity emerges most clearly.

I think it might be a defensible simplification to leave out a full
treatment of the Norwegians’ closed stages, i.e. to take them more or
less for granted, and concentrate upon the Lappish ones. As
indicated above, in my review of the fieldworker’s socialization I was
successively admitted to this sphere of interaction, if not as a full parti-
cipant, then at least as a harmless bystander.

The Lappish closed sphere coincides with kin and neighbourhood
relations between Lapps but it also includes relations between non-
kin and non-neighbours within the wider district who are known to
be Lappish. Lappish language is the code of interaction. Failure to
use Lappish in such interaction is sanctioned negatively, except in the
case of the youngsters who have little or no command of the language.
In view of the Lapps’ participation also in the public sphere, and the
preference for use of a stigmatizing code between neighbours/kinsfolk/
friends, it is obvious that the daily round of encounters calls for a quick
social apprehension and the command of shared and smooth techniques
to define and redefine situations.

A most common occurrence in daily life inside the community was
the entry of one of the local Norwegians into a pre-established closed
stage. People then immediately switched from Lappish to Norwegian,
and themes of conversation were adjusted. The Norwegians not only
regard Lappish as an inferior language in a general sense, but also
judge it highly improper and challenging if it is used in their presence.
(All Norwegians are monolingual.) Now, of course, it happens fre-
quently that local Norwegians are within earshot of the performance
in such closed stages and they are thus regularly reminded of what
kind of people they live among. Norwegians also let me into
their closed stages in order to ‘deepen’ my understanding of the
Lappish syndrome as it prevailed in their own minds and to contrast
it to what they considered to be Norwegian character.?

At home in the fjord, the technique of changing code and theme is
not felt to be very inconvenient; interaction in the closed sphere can
always be resumed later. Other circumstances, however, require other
solutions. The steamer on the [jordal route was a forum of consider-
able social importance. Here people exchanged news and gossip and
here they met acquaintances as well as strangers; Norwegians and
Lapps mingled. One might expect people in this setting to interact
in any or all of three capacities: (a) as passengers, defining stages

4. Barth



=== PDF p26 L (book-seq 50) ===
EEEEE—

50 HARALD EIDHEIM

according to the conventions of the public sphere. (b) as Norwegians,
defining closed stages of passengers, and (c) as Lapps, likewise defin-
ing closed stages of passengers. What can be observed empirically,
however, is almost imperceptible transitions from (a) to (b) and vice
versa (exchange of eloquent glances, pregnant silence or verbal twists
which are a kind of meta-communication in plain speech). On the
other hand there is a fairly high frequency of unmistakable transitions
from (a) to (c) and vice versa, although the crowding on board a little
boat offers few opportunities for spatial arrangements in order to
avoid leakages. When a Lapp has played the role of passenger for a
while with both Lapps and Norwegians as role partners, he is inclined
to switch to the role of kinsman/friend in order to interact with a fel-
low-passenger, a Lappish person he perhaps has not met for six months
or more. They both wish to exchange greetings and information in
Lappish and they provisionally separate themselves spatially from the
public stage. Thus, groups of two or three may for a few minutes carry
on a low-voiced conversation in Lappish in a corridor, on a staircase
landing or close together along the rail if the weather is not too bad.
The next moment, if a person with Norwegian or uncertain identity
approaches, the situation is smoothly redefined to a public one before
the intruder is within earshot.

The dynamics of interaction on board the coastal steamer may
serve as an illustration of some crucial points. The average public
situation offers a near optimum for Norwegians to realize their
spectrum of intentions, and the maintenance of a Norwegian identity
is not a question of serious concern. The Lapp, on the other hand, may
find himself in a serious dilemma. If he ignores Lapps, in the sense
that he continues to act as passenger in the idioms of the public sphere,
his kin/neighbour/friend relations with such persons will suffer; and
if he avoids encounters in the public sphere in favour of such kin/
neighbour/friend relations, he will be considered a covert Lapp, even
if he should be successful in controlling the audio-space.

Some crucial negative statements can be deduced logically from
this contrast, and may also be observed empirically: the totality of
passengers never divide into two permanent or semi-permanent groups
with reference to identity; nor will the simultaneous performance of
roles belonging to the public sphere and the Lappish sphere ever be
observed.

Given a situation of some duration where people of Lappish and
Norwegian identity come together for some purpose, alternation or



=== PDF p26 R (book-seq 51) ===
WHEN ETHNIC IDENTITY 1S A SOCIAL STIGMA 81

switching between situations of a public Norwegian type and a closed
Lappish type will invariably take place if the audio-space can be
controlled. A work situation that I witnessed a few times was when
a carrier came to the fjord to load dried fish. Five or six local men
were engaged in the work together with the Norwegian crew of three,
whose main job was the trimming of the vessel. The spatial setting
was a boat alongside the quay with a relatively big storehouse on
the shoreside where the fish was kept. On the quay among themselves
and in direct interaction with the crew on the quay edge, the local men
used Norwegian, inside the storchouse they used Lappish; they
switched every time they passed the door.

‘We have seen how the stigma of Lappishness is related to perfor-
mance on public stages as well as to unintentional leakages from their
ethnically homogeneous closed stages. There is also a third but uncom-
mon variant: situations where one of the parties is so much offended
that, in anger, he gives up all pretences, and an overt inter-ethnic
quarrel results. Inevitably, the Norwegians have as a rule the last
word in such quarrels and the Lapps are the losers. Let me review a
couple of incidents which exemplify this. A man from the fjord, one
of eight siblings, was educated as a school teacher. For some years
he held a position in a community in East Finnmark, known to people
in West Finnmark to be a Lappish dominated community; and when
a vacancy occurred at his home fjord he applied for appointment
there. This represented a challenge to the Norwegian dominated school
board who appeared to be against having a Lappish teacher in a Lap-
pish community, In their opinion the former Norwegian teacher had
carried on successful work of Norwegianization in the fjord, and they
were afraid that the new man might reverse this. A member of the
school board is reported to have said, in a public situation: ‘Let him
just stay on there in East Finnmark together with the Lapps, he really
fits in with conditions there . . .” He did not get the job.

The Norwegians’ authority to define behavioural standards, even,
for instance, in such a dignified institution as the school-board or in a
public place like the coastal steamer, is never questioned publicly by the
Lapps. But all Norwegians are not granted equal authority to define
situations and set standards. One man, who came to the fjord through
an uxorilocal marriage, exemplifies this situation. He accentuated his
Norwegianness very arrogantly and busied himself with leakage-
rumour about neighbouring Lapps. Most people in the fjord were
provoked by him, and occasionally when he was alone among a



=== PDF p27 L (book-seq 52) ===
L ——

52 HARALD EIDHEIM

plurality of local Lapps, his definition of the situation and role play
would be destroyed by some of the participants. Thus one day he set
out together with a few of the local Lapps to build a small bridge
across a brook. As usual he pretended to be the only expert in the
gang, but the others challenged his expertise and an argument
developed. Once the breach was obvious, the Lapps switched to Lappish
and continued the work according to their own design. The Norwegian,
now almost out of his mind with rage, waved his arms and shouted
insults and curses against the others; but their front was unbreakable.
In a few hours he had had enough and left the place in great indigna-
tion, having confirmed the truth in the familiar North-Norwegian
laconism: ‘There is a (real) difference between people and Lapps.’
(Det er forskjell pa folk og finn). This incident exemplifies the rare
situations where Lappish ‘cthnic solidarity’ is stressed in public.

Although rare, such incidents have definite and often long lasting
effects. They are remembered, recapitulated and interpreted in ethni-
cally homogeneous closed stages, and they reinforce the Norwegians'
jealous search for any signs of Lappish uppishness, while to the Lapps
each incident represents a reminder to be more cautious in their role-
play in the public sphere. A general feature of Lappish behaviour
in the public sphere is therefore an effort to avoid provocation. The
Lapp is often either a rather passive partner or he grants Norwegians
extravagant role support by being servile and manageable. If he
anticipates confrontations which may focus upon his identity he is apt
to withdraw, avoid persons, or even to change place of work.!®

The fact that the flow of interaction in the public sphere goes on
does not indicate that the relations are based on mutual and real
agreement about a shared identity. One may easily be misled to believe
this, but we must realize that an inherent quality of the public sphere
is that it gives no scope for Lapps to show behaviour which springs
from their Lappish identity without great social costs. Such behaviour
is reserved for closed stages, where the social dangers and defeats
that people have been subject to in public encounters are redundantly
reviewed and to some extent mended, or at least made temporarily
less severe, through the sharing of adversities with other Lapps. Hour-
long conversations will take place, as for instance when an adult man
came home from 2-3 months’ work outside the community, dropped
down into a chair in the kitchen, and blurted out: ‘It is fine to be able to
speak Lappish again and not to be constantly cautious about how to
express myself in Norwegian.” Or a Lapp might rail against the boss



=== PDF p27 R (book-seq 53) ===
WHEN ETHNIC IDENTITY IS A SOCIAL STIGMA 53

(something he could never do face to face) who gave him the worst
jobs and made hints about his being a Lapp when he thought the
job was not properly done. Others respond with old stories, and thus
the conversation goes on and on.

We have now seen how persons indirectly identify each other in
institutional behaviour in the public sphere and how Lapps also from
time to time expose their identity in non-institutional encounters. We
have also seen how indirect the sanctions are, i.e. it is clearly the
anticipation of future role dilemmas and not direct sanctions which
delimits and thereby adds form to the conventional roles played by
Lapps in public situations. This contrasts with the clear public con-
frontation between the two ethnic categories that is seen in the inland
regions of Finnmark (cf. the mobilization of clients in the entrepreneur
case (Eidheim 1963) and the programmatic idealization of pluralism
which is the basis of the nativistic Lappish movement (Eidheim 1968)).
In this area a Lappish identity is not only relevant in inter-ethnic
relations in the daily routine of public interpersonal behaviour, it is
also claimed and made relevant in the more formalized sectors of
social life, i.e. on boards and committees on township and higher levels
of administration. Furthermore, it is expressed in mass media and in
voluntary associations, and it is displayed in a growing cult of Lappish
nativistic idioms like language, dress, folk songs, and cultural history.

Compared with this general picture of the inland regions, a Lappish
identity in the Coast-Lappish area described here has very limited
organizational potential. It is only relevant on closed stages which
are established under the protective constraints of limited time and
space. Lappish co-activity in the inland regions is a public affair which
also allows the maximization and defence of Lappish values; in the
coastal area, however, the manipulation of time and space in order to
establish closed stages, and what goes on on these stages, may rather be
understood as techniques to hide, but thereby also to sustain, a disa-
bility (or stigma) which people cannot escape.

I have used the term sphere of interaction to conceptualize ‘public
life’ and ‘Lappish secret life’ respectively. One might alternately use
the term network and define network as a field of relations in which
exchangeable values flow, thus taking exchange in a wide and
behavouristic sense. Networks emerge then as a consequence of the
local distribution of exchange resources in the population.

Exchange resources in this sense are part of the social landscape
(provenance, kinship relations, physiognomy, etc) and they are



=== PDF p28 L (book-seq 54) ===
54 HarALD EIDHEIM

recognizable in people’s actions (command of language, role-taking
etc.). The Lapps’ exchange resources may also be effected by leakages
from closed stages and occasional inter-ethnic quarrels. The existence
of a Lappish network indicates that there are exchange resources
which can only be marketed to certain persons, i.e. to persons of one’s
own identity, while the public network shows the field of relations
where the exchange is such that ethnic identity is overlooked, through
tact on the part of the Norwegians and covering on the part of the
Lapps.

Both parties try to behave as if ethnicity ‘does not count’; however,
we have the paradoxical situation that it is ethnic status which under-
lies and delimits relations in the public network. In this network per-
sons of different identities interact in conventional and narrowly
defined role-dyads or role-clusters, and there are ‘agreements’ on
exchange if pragmatic and proximate ends are fulfilled. It is for
instance very unlikely that a Norwegian merchant will obstruct
customer/merchant relations because he knows where a customer
comes from, or because the customer makes grammatical errors when
asking for a commodity. Quite another thing is the type of relations
where ‘whole persons’ are involved. By and large such intimate rela-
tions are only consummated between persons of the same identity.
Within the local area, a Lapp might establish such a relation with a
Norwegian. Those who have a perfect command of Norwegian, and a
Norwegian physiognomy, have the best chances of doing this, especial-
ly if they are willing to cut themselves off from intimate interaction
with other Lapps. This indicates that in such relations cthnic idioms
rank highly among the exchange resources. To pursue the above illus-
tration: the merchant’s daughter would not think of marrying a man
from a stigmatized Lappish community, who in addition has a Lappish
physiognomy and makes grammatical errors.'*

It is implicit in such terms as ‘district’ and ‘social landscape’ that
exchange resources are in part conditioned by local knowledge and
valuations and to this extent only locally valid. Thus chances to pass
can be improved by moving out.!* If a person has other exchange
resources and is willing to settle in a Norwegian community or a town
outside his district there are certainly better possibilities to establish
and consummate intimate or comprehensive relations with Norwegians.
I have mentioned above that there is historical evidence to show that
the synchronic situation depicted here represents a phase in a long
range and directional process of assimilation (N orwegianization). This



=== PDF p28 R (book-seq 55) ===
WHEN ETHNIC IDENTITY IS A SOCIAL STIGMA =
long range process of de-stigmatization of total Lappish communities
is of course a more complex and intriguing problem than the ex area
Norwegianization of individual persons. I have not myself done field
work in communities which earlier — say hundred years ago — were
regarded as Lappish but are now Norwegian; such communities are on
record. What I can conclude about such processes is therefore only
a deduction from the present analysis.

It would seem as if Lappish closed stages represent a necessary
solution to a series of dilemmas as long as people’s behaviour rein-
forces a cognitive dualistic system in the local Norwegian population.
This system also constitutes a charter of identification and a mode of
sanctioning. People in the Lappish fjord community, with their aspira-
tions directed towards participation in the public network as it is
defined by Norwegians, do what they can to present themselves as
full-fledged participants. Many families have even made the drastic
decision to prevent their children from learning Lappish. Presumably,
as their performance in Norwegian language improves, there will be
a concomitant decrease in the reinforcing effect of their behaviour
upon the charter of identification which in turn brings about a reduc-
tion in sanctions. Likewise one would expect a decrease in the necessity
to maintain a Lappish network as the principal field for intimate
relations and as stages where social costs may be shared.

However, it is not only actual behaviour in this district and com-
munity which has repercussions on the local charter of identification.
This is also affected by the great variety of public display of Lappish-
ness in the wider Lappish population, for instance in the inland area
of the county. As the notion of physical descent is linked to Lappish
behaviour, one would suppose that a Lappish stigma on this particular
community will prevail in some rudimentary form even generations
after the complete abandonment of the Lappish language, granted that
a flourishing Lappish culture is maintained in the inland.

What is said here about the long range process is tentative and has
obvious limitations. But we need to consider the question of long range
persistence of ethnic cleavages, something which usually is not exposed
in the day-to-day processes we observe in the field situation. Based
on precisely that kind of material it has been my main intention to
analyze the dynamics of inter-ethnic relations in a population where
institutionalized inter-ethnic relations are not organized with reference
to the respective ethnic status directly, but which nevertheless are
shaped by them. It is in some sense an analogue to a shadow play. The



=== PDF p29 L (book-seq 56) ===
e ——

56 HARALD EIDHEIM

behavioural forms which have classificatory significance for the actors
can only be understood by uncovering and systematizing local values
and sanctions. The behavioural forms may be ‘objective’, as for in-
stance language, or they may be implications of the general character
of inter-ethnic behaviour as role-taking. The organizational potential
of separate identities is clearly indicated in the stages of everyday life.

‘We must bear in mind that it is the general character of local ecology
and society which provide the meaningful context in which a Lappish/
Norwegian ethnic dichotomy is articulated. The organizational poten-
tial of ethnic identities is conditioned by local circumstances. Thus
the local context of Reindeer Lapps/marginal Norwegian farmers,
which for instance prevails in the southern Lapp districts of Norway,
will generate quite other patterns of inter-ethnic relations (cf. Falken-
berg 1964).

1 The author did field work here for five months in 1960 and has earlier published
an article on social relations between coast Lapps and Nomad Lapps in the district
(Eidheim 1966).

2 In some localities, however, like the fjord community where I lived during most
of my field work, there is a certain concentration of what is currently understood
to be the Lappish physical type.

3 And they also had other ‘secrets’ which they now unveiled to me; preferences
for dishes which were regarded as Lappish, some old people preferred to eat with
their fingers, and three or four of these also used Lappish fur moccasins (but only
in their houses). Most people had put coins and other amulets into the foundations
of their new houses and they also used certain spells when slaughtering, the first
time they set their nets after New Year, etc.

4 See also Eidheim (1966).

5 Attempts to establish and run local branches of various national associations have
been made at intervals since the beginning of this century, usually promoted by
teachers or other ddZat. However, all attempts have been short-lived. This is in
contrast to the material presented by Robert Paine from another Lappish Coast
fjord (cf. Paine 1965).

® The school aims exclusively at communicating those values which are current
in an idealized Norwegian society, and for generations it has had the implicit goal
(at times also explicit) to Norwegianize the Lappish communities (Dahl 1957).
Norwegian teachers and the few Norwegians who have married into the community
have always assumed the role of agents in the process of Norwegianization, i.c.
they have defined the behaviour standards in the public sphere.

7 Only very few adult Lappish persons in the district do not show traces of one or
more of the stigmata listed under 1, 2, 3 and 6; as a rule they exhibit all these. In
addition local Norwegians enrich the syndrome e. g. by referring to concrete role-
behaviour which in their opinion demonstrates that Lapps are secretive, superstitious,
stupid, etc.

8 In fact, if we add a time perspective we will easily see how the public sphere
progressively has taken on new dimensions in the last generations. This, of course,
is an indication of the directional and long range process we call assimilation.

 An example: One of them said, speaking about housing: ‘I made up my mind not



=== PDF p29 R (book-seq 57) ===
— e —

WHEN ETHNIC IDENTITY 1S A SOCIAL STIGMA 57

to accept these drawings of standard houses. It did cost me a lot of extra money, but
I wanted to show them what a real house looks like and how it is to be furnished.’
He was the only one in the community who had built a house with a concrete base-
ment under the whole house. The house was built on an elevated site, and he had
painted the lower part of it in a bold pink colour. ‘Of course,’ he said, ‘people here
have good houses now (you would not believe how they lived before the War) but
remember that the administration forced these standard houses on them: if you
come back here in a few years time you may learn something about the way they
have kept them!”

'* However, Norwegians bchave with considerable “tact’ in public relations. They
point out in private to me or to each other that ‘yes, he is a Lap, but he is all
right” A teacher said: ‘I know that many of my pupils are Lapps, of course, I have
the tact not to take notice of the fact.”

It is symptomatic that five out of six persons with a Norwegian identity who have
married into the fjord, come from communities outside the district.

* Such emigration, especially by young unmarried people, takes place, but not to
the extent that the population is drained off from the community.




=== PDF p30 L (book-seq 58) ===
Economic Determinants

in Ethnic Processes
by Gunnar Haaland

This essay describes and analyses processes of boundary maintenance
between two of the major ethnic groups in Western Sudan: the Fur
and the Baggara. I shall discuss the nature of ethnic identities and the
determinants in change of identity. In the discussion I shall draw on
data collected during one year’s field work in the Lower Wadi Zone
of the District of Western Darfur.

The Fur are probably autochthonous to the district, with the Jebel
Marra Mountain as their core area (cf. map on p. 60). Their language
is only remotely related to other languages in the Sudan savannah belt
(Greenberg 1966). They are sedentary hoe cultivators relying mainly
on subsistence cultivation of millet in the rainy season. Residentially
they are divided into villages of varying size, from about fifty to a
few thousand inhabitants. In total population they probably number
about half a million.

Their territory borders in the east and west on the territories of
other sedentary ethnic groups (Masalit, Tama, Berti, Birgid and Daju
are the most important). To the north is the area of nomadic and semi-
nomadic tribes (Beni Hussein Baggara, Zaghawa cattle and camel
nomads and various Arabic camel driving tribes) and to the south there
are several Baggara tribes (Taisha, Beni Helba, and Rizeigat).

Before colonial administration (established in Darfur 1916) a Fur
sultan ruled the Fur and at times also neighbouring groups. Today the
Sudan government maintains peace in the area. A shallow hierarchy
of Fur chiefs is incorporated in the Sudan administrative system. They
are delegated administrative functions (collection of taxes and jurisdic-
tion) and their decisions are sanctioned by the central government
(Barth 1964c).

The historical origin of the Baggara is connected with the Arabic
invasion of Sudan from the fourteenth century onwards. The Baggara



=== PDF p30 R (book-seq 59) ===
EconoMic DETERMINANTS IN ETHNIC PROCESSES <]

claim descent from the Arabic invaders and consider themselves
Arabs. While they have remained culturally distinct from earlier
inhabitants of negro stock, they can today hardly be distinguished
from this population on the basis of physical features.

The Baggara are cattle nomads, but most of them also practise some
millet cultivation in the rainy season. They are divided into several
tribal groups, each with a recognized homeland (dar) and with a
hierarchy of chiefs. Their area extends in a belt from the Nile to
Lake Chad. The Baggara local communities are migratory camps of
two to twenty tents. In the rainy season they stay in their dar where
conditions are favourable for the cattle. As the dry season approaches,
lack of water and grass forces them to migrate to other areas (Cun-
nison 1966).

About 30,000 Baggara nomads (mainly members of the Beni Hussein
and Beni Helba tribes) spend the dry season among the Fur in the
lower parts of the Western Darfur. Competition for resources is slight
since the two groups exploit different ecological niches. In the rainy
season, when the Fur do most of their cultivation, the presence of flies
and leeches makes the areca unfavourable for cattle and thus also for
the Baggara. Conflict does arise when cows invade dry season irrigated
gardens, but this is not very important since irrigated agriculture is
still only pursued on a small scale.

Ethnic categories and inter-ethnic relations

The Fur and Baggara have remained culturally distinct although they
have been in contact for centuries. They differ with regard to general
style of life, subsistence pattern, overt cultural features like language,
house type and weapons, and standards for evaluation of performance.

Fur-Baggara contact is regulated by shared codification of the
reciprocal statuses that are appropriate for members of the two groups
respectively. Both the Fur and the Baggara are Muslims and may thus
interact on ritual occasions. A Baggara may camp in the Fur area in
the dry season, but is then subject to the jurisdiction of the local Fur
chief (sheikh or omda). In the market place they provide complemen-
tary goods: the Baggara supply milk and livestock, and the Fur supply
agricultural products of which millet is of major importance to the
Baggara. The herding contract is another basis for Fur-Baggara
transactions. Persons in Fur villages may own cattle, but ecological
conditions make it risky to keep them in the villages in the Fur area
in the rainy season. Cattle-owning Fur farmers may avoid this problem



=== PDF p31 L (book-seq 60) ===
60 GUNNAR HAALAND

Arab camel nomads carnel nomads

® E| Fasner

Rizeigat (B)

LEGEND
Ethnic groups I tribes

KILOMETRE'S

9 2 40 S5 80 W0

District of Western Darfur : Distribution of major ethnic groups.

by handing their cows over to Baggara nomads. The Baggara keeps
the cows in his own herd and drives them to his dar in the rainy
season. He gets the milk from the cows while the owner gets the calves.
The Baggara is not responsible if predatory animals or disease kill
the cows.

The articulation of Fur and Baggara is thus mainly based on the
complementarity of goods and services connected with their different
subsistence patterns. They agree on the codes and values that apply
to the situations in which they articulate, whereas comprehensive
differences are maintained in other sectors of activity. These dif-
ferences do not just relate to features that are of differential functional
value in the pursuit of agriculture and animal husbandry respectively,



=== PDF p31 R (book-seq 61) ===
EcoNoMic DETERMINANTS IN ETHNIC PROCESSES &1

but are of a more arbitrary character like language, standards relating
to kinship and marriage, and the importance of hospitality.

I shall argue here that these differences are maintained because
Fur and Baggara are categories in terms of which actors identify them-
selves and their partners. Interaction is structured by a categorical
dichotomization of people who are like oneself, with whom one may
have relations covering all sectors of activity, and people who are
different from oneself, having different evaluations, with whom one
only interacts in a limited number of capacities. These identities are
signalized by several easily identifiable features: villages of huts made
of mud and straw versus camps of mat tents arranged in a circle, Fur
language versus Arabic, the throwing-spear versus the Baggara lance.
I shall argue that this dichotomization of ethnic identities implies
restrictions on interaction and that these restrictions are crucial in
maintaining the cultural distinctiveness of the Fur and the Baggara,
because it allows inter-ethnic relations to cover only a small sector of
activity. Differences in codes and values applying to other sectors of
activity are not made relevant to inter-ethnic encounters, and conse-
quently they are not adjusted. It is generally accepted by both the
Fur and the Baggara that a person’s behaviour should be judged
according to the standards of evaluation that apply to Ais ethnic group.

Processes of identity change

The two groups are recruited not only by biological reproduction, but
also by the incorporation of people from other groups. In the following
I shall analyse the determinants by which individuals are sloughed off
from the Fur local community and incorporated into a Baggara com-
munity. I shall try to show how these processes can be explained as a
result of the specific character of the Fur economic system and the
ecological restrictions on cattle husbandry in Darfur.

The economic system will be described here as a set of alternative
strategies for the allocation of value. Such an approach focuses on the
cconomic units, the forms of value they allocate, and the institutional
mechanisms by which values in various forms may be transformed to
other forms.

Among the Fur every adult individual, male or female, is an
cconomic unit.! The marriage contract does not establish a family
household; husband and wife thus constitute two management units.
They have usufruct rights to separate fields, they plan their produc-
tion separately, they keep the product in separate stores and they



=== PDF p32 L (book-seq 62) ===
62 GUNNAR HAALAND

allocate the product independently. The only reciprocal economic
commitments that the marriage contract establishes are the wife’s duty
to make porridge and beer for the husband (of millet taken from his
store) and the husband’s duty to buy clothes for his wife and children
once a year. The wife is responsible for growing millet to feed the
children.

Every person who is recognized as a member of a Fur local com-
munity has access to land. Land is administrated by the local chief
and is allocated to members of the community according to need.
Usufruct rights can be exercised only as long as one cultivates the
land. When land is laid fallow after a few years’ cultivation, the
farmer has no rights to it any longer; rights to reallocation revert to
the chief. The farmer has no right to alienate his land.

Each adult individual among the Fur has the necessary resources
for a farming enterprise: access to land and his own working capacity.
The management of these resources is relatively simple. The larger
part of agricultural production is oriented towards the cultivation of
crops for private consumption. Millet is the staple crop and is consumed
in the form of beer and porridge which are the main items in the Fur
diet. Several institutional rules constitute limitations and possibilities
for transformations of value through the process of exchange. The sale
of porridge and beer for cash is restricted by ideas of shame associated
with such transactions. The institution of the beer-party does, how-
ever, allow for an exchange of beer for labour. By providing beer, one
can invite neighbours to drink and help weed the millet fields. The
institution of the market place allows for cash exchanges of agri-
cultural products (onion, tomatoes, okra, chili, millet, mango, citrus),
animal products (livestock, meat, milk), the blacksmith’s products, and
imported goods (sugar, tea, salt, cloth). The character of land-rights
makes it impossible to exchange money for land. Exchange of money
for labour is also restricted, since it is considered shameful to work
for money. The bride price institution allows for conversion of value
from the cash sector to a wife. Money is furthermore convertible into
social esteem if it is spent on pilgrimage (haj) or feast (karama).

It is within these institutional rules that a Fur has to manage his
resources in order to satisfy his consumption needs.

The alternative strategies of value-transformations that are possible
within this framework are depicted in the diagram.

This is a multicentric system where there are restrictions on trans-
formation of value from some forms to other forms. Some forms of



=== PDF p32 R (book-seq 63) ===
EcoNomIic DETERMINANTS IN ETHNIC PROCESSES 62

CONSUMPTION

Hay

Diagrams showing the principal allocative choices open to the Fur farmers in the Lower Wadi.
Thick arrows indicate the main direction of flow ; dotted lines separate spheres of the economy.

value are thus not reciprocally convertible. One implication of this is
that they are not made comparable to each other, i.e. one has no con-
ception of their relative value. In this system there are only two invest-
ment possibilities. One may grow millet, brew beer and invite to a
beer-party and thereby mobilize labour. Decreasing efficiency of labour
in bigger beer-parties limits the profitability of investment in this
sector. The other investment possibility is cattle. Cattle constitute the
only way of accumulating capital and are an investment that gives
profit in the form of calves. The profitability of this mode of invest-
ment is, among other things, dependent upon how the cows thrive in
the area where they are kept in the rainy season. Most Fur farmers
therefore prefer to leave their cows with a Baggara. This, however,
is also a hazardous arrangement, because it is difficult for the Fur
farmer to know whether losses stem from causes for which the Baggara
herdsman is not responsible, or whether the herdsman has slaughtered
and sold the owner’s stock. The more capital a Fur has invested in
cattle, the more concerned will he be about the risk he takes when



=== PDF p33 L (book-seq 64) ===
64 GUNNAR HAALAND

handing over his cows to the Baggara. Five cows represent a value of
about £40-50, a considerable amount of money. The Fur farmer’s
dilemma is that, on the one hand, the cows do not thrive in the farm-
land area, but that, on the other hand, the herding contract is a risky
venture.

The solution which cattle-owning farmers frequently choose when
they have from five to ten cows is to establish themselves as nomads
(Haaland 1968). This seems to be a paradoxical choice: the most
wealthy farmers become the most marginal nomads. As nomads they
will not be able to maintain the level of consumption (in terms of their
evaluation of consumption goods) that they could as farmers. I will
argue that the rationality of the choice can be understood when it is
related to the multicentric character of the economic system.

By being a member of a local community, a villager automatically
has the right to usufruct of land. A Fur has, therefore, no conception
of the value of land relative to other forms of value. The choice
between being a farmer and becoming a nomad is thus not a choice
of whether to accumulate capital in the form of land or in the form
of cattle. The choice is whether to secure the cattle capital by becom-
ing 2 nomad one-self and living with the reduced level of consump-
tion that this implies, or to continue as a farmer with a satisfying level
of consumption and take the risk of losing the capital one has accumu-
lated. When the cattle capital reaches £40-50 the Fur finds the
first alternative preferable.

In choosing seasonal migrations the nomadic novice has to consider
what conditions will be like for the cattle in various arcas as well as
for millet cultivation. The smaller the herd, the more heavily cultiva-
tion opportunities are weighed. The income from a herd of five to ten
cows is still so small that the nomad will, to a large extent, be depen-
dent on millet cultivation. This implies that he cannot migrate to the
Baggara land in the rainy season, because conditions for millet culti-
vation are not good enough there. The Fur nomads migrate to higher,
sandy parts of the Fur area where the risk of losing the cattle is smaller
than on the low-lying farmlands, and where the conditions for millet
cultivation are better than in the Baggara area. If the herd increases the
nomad can take the welfare of his cattle more into account when he
makes his choice of migrations. When he has about twenty-five cows
he does not have to rely on millet cultivation, and he therefore chooses
to migrate to the Baggara area in the rainy season. A successful
economic career among the Fur thus starts in the village and leads to



=== PDF p33 R (book-seq 65) ===
EcoNoMic DETERMINANTS IN ETHNIC PROCESSES 65

nomadic migrations within the Fur area, and finally ends up with the
long rainy season migrations to the Baggara area.

In the first phase of nomadization, the Fur nomad camps together
with other marginal nomads from his own area. Due to the differential
growth of the various herds of the camp, disagreements about migra-
tions may easily arise. A critical situation emerges when a herdowner
has enough cattle to migrate out of the Fur area in the rainy season.
If he starts the long migrations, he will have to leave the camp of
Fur-speaking nomads and try to attach himself to a camp of Arabic
speaking Baggara nomads. His children will then grow up learning
Arabic, not Fur, and they will eventually get spouses from the Baggara
communities. Each year about one per cent of the population of the
lower-lying areas of Western Darfur leave the villages and establish
themselves as nomads. Although those who do not succeed will return
to a sedentary life in the villages where they are accepted as members,
some will manage to build up herds of considerable size, and their
descendants will not learn the Fur culture. They will constitute disap-
pearing lines in local Fur genealogies.

Through the nomadization process individuals are thus sloughed
off from Fur local communities and eventually incorporated into
Baggara communities. But at what point does the change of identity
actually take place. When does a Fur become a Baggara? Is it when
he establishes himself as a nomad? Is it when he has enough cattle to
attach himself to Baggara camp? Or is the ethnic transformation
process completed only with his children, who have not learned Fur
culture and who are not recognized as members of any Fur com-
munity? To solve this problem I find it necessary to specify the nature
of ethnic identity change and the criteria applied in ethnic clas-
sification. Are we to study this as a long-lasting process of personality
change and concentrate on the socializing mechanisms? Should we
look at the cultural inventory of the nomads and compare it to that
of the sedentary Fur and that of the Baggara, or should we try to
discover how people categorize the nomadized Fur and what the
crucial criteria for categorization are? I shall discuss these problems
by a further analysis of some consequences of this nomadization.

I have claimed that the identities of Fur and Baggara are associated
with different value standards. Some of these differences relate to the
evaluation of goods and activities associated with a sedentary versus
a nomadic style of life, where Fur preferences are for village-life and
Baggara preferences are for nomadism, respectively. If a Fur, how-

5. Barth



=== PDF p34 L (book-seq 66) ===
66 GUNNAR HAALAND

ever, succeeds in accumulating cattle, he will sooner or later realize
that the optimal way of maintaining this form of value is to establish
himself as a nomad. This choice implies that he puts himself into a
position where he will not have access to other values current among
the Fur. According to Fur standards of evaluation, the consumption
pattern of the nomad is a poor substitute for the consumption pattern
of the villager: ‘Milk yesterday, milk today, milk tomorrow, that is
not good’, complained one newly established nomad. The implication
was that beer was preferable, but as a nomad he could not afford it.
Unfavourable comments on the small tent that is used by the nomads,
as compared to the larger and more comfortable hut of the sedentary
Fur, are also frequently heard from nomadized Fur. The nomad will
furthermore not have the opportunity to participate in communal
activities like village dances, beer-parties and other feasts. These are
the hardships faced by a Fur when he chooses nomadization. If he
specializes in maximizing one form of value, cattle, his satisfaction in
other goods is reduced. Judged according to Fur standards a nomad
is more successful than villagers with regard to accumulation of
wealth, but the activities he has to perform as a nomad clearly imply
disadvantages compared with village life. An evaluation of the
advantages and disadvantages of nomadic life according to Fur stan-
dards can thus not give a conclusive answer to the problem of whether
a nomad will maintain his allegiance to these standards or whether
he will prefer to assume Baggara identity and be judged according to
the standards of that culture.

The total life situation in the nomad camp is, however, radically
different from that of the village. As a nomad a person’s interest is
focused on cattle, the resource on which his livelihood depends, and
this form of capital requires a kind of foresight in management that
is not present among the sedentary Fur farmers. A subsistence based
on animal husbandry thus generates a different attitude towards
saving and investment. The more corporate character of the nomad
family also gives a basis for long-term planning that is not present in
the atomistically organized village community where the individuals’
need for achieving recognition of social identity leads them to orientate
a great deal of their activity towards participation in informal com-
munity life. These are circumstances that generate differences of
evaluation between nomads and settled people. Do we conclude then
that the value changes that are generated by the practice of nomadic
subsistence will sooner or later make it impossible for a nomad to



=== PDF p34 R (book-seq 67) ===
EcoNoMic DETERMINANTS IN ETHNIC PROCESSES =

maintain his allegiance to Fur standards of evaluation? Comparative
material from other ethnographic contexts suggests that the answer
is no. Such circumstances do not invariably lead to a change of identity.
There are cthnic groups that maintain their unity despite the fact
that their populations are distributed over niches that imply just as
radical differences in life situation as that between sedentary and
nomadic Fur. Arabic nomads, farmers and townsmen is one such case.
However, a Fur who has established himself as a nomad exhibits
several socio-cultural traits that make him distinct from sedentary
Fur. As farmers, husband and wife constitute separate households, as
nomads they pool their resources and establish a family household
similar to the household form of the Baggara. With respect to the
relationship between marriage partners, there seems to be greater
similarity between the nomadized Fur and the Baggara than between
nomadized and sedentary Fur. But are we permitted to present social
forms of that order as criteria for classification of persons as Fur or
Baggara? If so, the family form of the nomadized Fur would indicate
that they must be classified as Baggara when they establish themselves
as nomads. Such a point of view would have to be based on a hypoth-
esis that the similarities in social forms are a consequence of the Fur
adopting Baggara ideas about the marriage relationship. I would
argue, however, that this change in family form can be more ade-
quately explained by an alternative hypothesis that does not take
cultural borrowing into account (Barth 1968, Haaland 1968). Cattle
nomadism implies organizational problems that make the Fur pattern
of individual houscholds inadequate. Cattle have to be herded and
milked, milk has to be churned and marketed, new pastures and camp
sites have to be located, and millet has to be cultivated in the rainy
season. Several of these activities have to be performed simultaneously.
The economic units practising cattle husbandry can therefore not be
built on single individuals; they have to be built on units that include
at least two persons. While the Fur value husband-wife autonomy in
economic life, there is no prohibition on cooperation. As long as the
family subsists by millet cultivation there is no great economic advan-
tage gained by pooling resources; it makes no difference for the result
of production if husband and wife work together or separately.

When a Fur establishes himself as a nomad, he bases his subsistence
on a more complex process of production. Great economic advantages
are obtained if the spouses agree on a division of labour within a
joint economic enterprise. The emergence of family households among



=== PDF p35 L (book-seq 68) ===
68 GUNNAR HAALAND

the nomadized Fur can be explained, then, by the mutual advantages
secured by the pooling of resources; i.e. family households would have
emerged whether there were Baggara nomads present or not. Overt
similarities in social forms can thus not be used as criteria for ethnic
classification if these similarities are generated by the restricting
effects of ecologic conditions.

Observing a camp of nomadized Fur we notice few visible criteria
by which it can be distinguished from a Baggara camp. The tents are
made of the same kind of straw mats, and are arranged in the same
circular pattern as in Baggara camps. The personnel of the camp use
the same kind of material equipment as do the Baggara. There are
thus no diacritica that signal an identity different from the Baggara
(but they are easily distinguished from recently immigrated Fulani
nomads). It is only when one recognizes that the language used in daily
conversation is Fur and not Arabic that one can identify their Fur
origin. When asked what tribe (Arabic: gabila) they belong to, the
nomads will identify themselves as Fur. In fact, I first became aware
of the existence of nomadized Fur when one of my informants in a
village inquired whether I wanted to visit Fur people who live as
nomads.

By their inventory of objective cultural traits, these nomadized Fur
therefore can neither be classified unambiguously as Fur nor as
Baggara. They seem to be persons in an intermediate position exhibit-
ing traits associated with both of these ethnic groups, and if these
traits are the basis for classification one is led to see them as constitut-
ing a transitional category. Are they then identified by themselves and
by others as belonging to such a category? 1 have said that they identify
themselves as Fur when asked about their tribe. But this does not
imply that ‘Fur’ is their actual label, the category that defines their
position in situations of contact with Fur or Baggara. If one asks a
Baggara what his tribe is, he will not say he is a Baggara, but will
identify himself as a member of one of the many Baggara tribes such

as Rizeigat, and Beni Helba. In this context the term ‘Fur’ is of the
same order as ‘Rizeigat’ or ‘Beni Helba’. It is a name referring to
the ancestry of the person. A Fur nomad could not have identified
himself as Rizeigat because too many people would have known that
his father was a Fur. The fact that the term Fur is applied to 2 nomad
in this context does not necessarily imply that social situations in which
he participates are structured by the codes and values applying to a
person of Fur identity. This is the crucial criterion of ethnic classifica-



=== PDF p35 R (book-seq 69) ===
EcoNoMic DETERMINANTS IN ETHNIC PROCESSES 69

tion if we approach ethnicity as a principle of social organization, as a
categorization defining what can be made relevant in interaction
between persons of the same and persons of different ethnic identity.
From this point of view the nomadized Fur will be classified as Fur,
Baggara or a separate category depending on how their participation
in social situations is defined, what status sets are mobilized, and what
standards are applied in judging their role performance.

As a nomad, a Fur offers the same prestations as a Baggara in
transactions with members of the sedentary population. Market-like
situations are defined by the same status sets whether a nomadized
Fur or a Baggara interacts with the settled Fur. He will, furthermore,
have the same kinds of conflicts with the sedentary Fur as the Baggara
have, because of the problems involved in keeping the cows away
from the irrigated gardens. But these are again similarities that arise
from the practice of animal husbandry and not from sharing the same
ethnic identity.

As distinct ethnic groups the Fur and the Baggara have different
preferences and they accept the fact that their behaviour is not judged
by the same standards. The way actors (Fur and Baggara) categorize
a nomadized Fur will then be manifest in the standards they apply
when they judge his behaviour.

If the nomadized Fur were judged by the standards of Fur culture,
one would expect role differences to emerge between them and the
Baggara. One would furthermore expect that their Fur identity would
be signalized by easily visible cultural features. This, however, is, as
I have said, not the case: the origin of the Fur nomads can be
discovered only from the persistence of such habits as are difficult
to change overnight, like language. Sociologically significant dif-
ferences in role play can hardly be distinguished. This indicates that
nomadized Fur are subject to the same role restraints as the Baggara,
ie. they are categorized as if they were Baggara and their
performance is judged by the standards of Baggara culture. This
was once clearly brought out by comments exchanged between my
assistant (a Fur) and one of my informants from a Fur village com-
munity when we had visited a camp of newly established Fur nomads.
When visiting a Baggara camp one expects to be received with a
show of hospitality; tea is brought forth and served generously. The
situation is not tense, for the Baggara act with confidence towards
strangers and conversation is easy. In a Fur community there are
similar idioms of hospitality, but strangers are not received in the



=== PDF p36 L (book-seq 70) ===
70 GUNNAR HaaranD

same confident way. The Fur are suspicious towards people they do
not know, and it usually takes them some time to overcome their
reluctance to engage in conversation. There is thus qualitative dif-
ference between the Fur and the Baggara in situations where a show
of hospitality is expected. When we came to the camp of the Fur
nomads we were received in a manner resembling more the expected
reception in a Fur village than in a Baggara camp. Tea was not brought
forth, conversation was difficult, and a bowl of milk was served only
after some time. On our way back to the village my two companions
complained about the behaviour of the nomads: ‘This was not the way
one should be received by a nomad.’ In other words, they evaluated
the performance of the nomadized Fur with reference to the Baggara’s
standards of hospitality and not with reference to their own Fur
standards.

This exemplifies, I shall argue, the crucial point in the categorical
dichotomization of Fur and Baggara: a person who pursues a
nomadic subsistence is categorized as a Baggara, i.e. he is expected
to behave like a Baggara and he is judged as if he were a Baggara.
That he speaks Fur only implies that his interaction with the farmers
can be easier. Nomadized Fur still have relatives in the village com-
munity, but the kinship relations are not mobilized as often as they
were formerly, and kinship status is only made relevant in a limited
sector of interaction with the related villagers. The fact that nomadiza-
tion is not an irreversible choice (the nomadized Fur will still be
accepted as member of a local community, if he wants to turn farmer
again) does not contradict this statement. The nomadized Fur has a
resource that the Baggara does not have, but this it not a resource
that he can exploit as a nomad, nor does it have to be maintained by
any kind of prestation to the local community. It derives simply from
his knowledge of Fur culture and does not affect any of his activities
as a nomad. That some of the nomads have a background which makes
it easier for them to return to the local community if they
fail as nomads does not alter the fact that they are considered Baggara
as long as they practise nomadism.

If one approaches the problem of how to classify the nomadized
Fur from the social point of view, through the categories held by the
actors, the difficulties of classification are solved. According to this
perspective, a Fur becomes a Baggara as soon as he establishes himself
as a nomad. People categorize him as Baggara, and his participation
in social situations is therefore prescribed by the same rules as those



=== PDF p36 R (book-seq 71) ===
EcoNoMic DETERMINANTS IN ETHNIC PROCESSES et

which apply to members of Baggara tribes. By this approach one
avoids the psychological problems involved in considering change of
ethnic identity as a question of personality adjustments. Of course
these problems are important and interesting, but I argue that one
can most adequately study the organizational consequences of ethnic
categorization when the psychological constitution of the actors is
excluded from the analysis. The fact that a Fur does not change his
personality immediately when he establishes himself as nomad and
that he, in some situations, is not able to act like a Baggara does not
alter the fact that the adequacy of his role performance is judged by
Baggara standards. The social constraints imposed on him are of the
same kind as those imposed on a Baggara, but he may be less able to
make a successful performance within these constraints,

Nomadized Fur may therefore be regarded by other Baggara as
inferior, but this means that they are inferior as Baggara, not that
they are an inferior ethnic group. The inclusion of successful Fur
nomads in Baggara camps and their marriages with members of
Baggara tribes are facts that validate this assertion.

Thus the maintenance of the boundary between the Fur and the
Baggara is probably related to the distribution of rights in productive
resources. Right to utilize land accrues to everybody who is accepted
as a member of a Fur village. Agricultural land is held only as long
as it is actually cultivated. Access to grazing is free for those who have
cattle to herd. Consequently, a person can control the factors of pro-
duction only by practising the activities involved in the processes of
production. The activities of farming and of cattle husbandry imply
two different styles of life, and these styles are categorized as Fur and
Baggara. Land and grazing rights can thus not be accumulated by any
specific transaction. Only by practising activities that identify him as
Fur or Baggara can a person acquire access to these resources.

Conclusion

I have tried to show the determinants underlying the nomadization of
sedentary Fur hoe cultivators, and I have argued that this nomadiza-
tion implies a change of ethnic identity. This analysis has been focused
on conditions as they can be observed today, and I have said nothing
about the time perspective of this process. I have argued that given
the specific economic structure of the Fur, and given the ecological
setting of the lowlands of Western Darfur, a nomadization of some
Fur will follow. Both of these factors may be assumed to have been



=== PDF p37 L (book-seq 72) ===
72 GUNNAR HAALAND

fairly constant for centuries, thus suggesting that this process has had
some permanence over time.

One circumstance that I have taken as given in the analysis is the
political situation. In situations characterized by inter-ethnic tension
and warfare, the restrictions on change of identity would be radically
different from what they are in the present situation where peace is
maintained by the central administration, as the case has been since
1916. It is therefore not possible to project the rates of nomadization
to periods when political conditions may have been different. I have,
however, information about cases of nomadization that date back to
the time before colonial rule, a fact that shows that nomadization also
occurred in politically more unstable periods in the history of Darfur.

Hence, 1 will hypothesize that there has been some nomadization
of the sedentary hoe cultivators ever since the arrival of the Arabs in
Darfur, although at varying rates. Before that time cattle may have
been kept in favourably located villages, but nomadism was probably
not practiced as a technique of husbandry.

Certain linguistic data point to the same conclusion: Fur words for
those aspects of cattle husbandry that are connected with nomadism
are clearly derived from Arabic, whereas the vocabulary for describing
the animal itself is Fur.

In the future, this trend towards nomadization will probably stop.
1 have related nomadization to the lack of investment objects in
traditional Fur economy. Today, changes are taking place which alter
these circumstances (Barth 1967b, Haaland 1968). Both land and
labour are being monetized, a process that opens new investment
alternatives for the actors. In the two villages in my field sample
which have progressed furthest in the direction of a comprehensive
market economy, no cases of nomadization have occurred over the
last 25 years.

The nomadization trend has important consequences for the demo-
graphic balance between Fur and Baggara. The Baggara is a group
that probably cannot maintain its present numerical size by biological
reproduction. Two processes tend to reduce their population: seden-
tarization and low fertility rate. I am not able to specify any rate of
sedentarization, but there is evidence of Baggara nomads settling,
mainly in towns and rural areas elsewhere. The Baggara who settle
are mainly those who have not succeeded in maintaining the minimum
number of cattle needed in order to pursue a nomadic subsistence.

My data do not allow any assessment of the fertility rate of the



=== PDF p37 R (book-seq 73) ===
EcoNoumic DETERMINANTS IN ETHNIC PROCESSES 73

Baggara. The composition of families in the camps I visited, however,
gives an impression of low fertility. That this generally may be
the case among the Baggara is supported by information indicating
prevalence of venereal disease (El Hadi El Nagar & T. Baashar 1962).
In this essay I have described a process of recruitment to the
Baggara population through the penetration of an ethnic boundary
by individuals and elementary families. This process, involving the
nomadization of sedentary hoe cultivators, is in fact not unique for
the Fur; it also takes place among the other sedentary ethnic groups
of Darfur (Haaland 1968) and it probably has an even wider occur-
rence in the Sudan savannah belt. The organizing effect of ethnic
dichotomizations is clearly demonstrated by the fact that this noma-
dization process does not lead to the emergence of nomadic sections
of the groups in question, but to the replenishment of the Baggara.

* For a more detailed documentation and analysis of the Fur economic system, see
Barth (1967 a).



=== PDF p38 L (book-seq 74) ===
