


=== PDF p4 L (book-seq 6) ===



=== PDF p4 R (book-seq 7) ===
Preface

This collection of essays presents the results of a symposium in which
a small group of Scandinavian social anthropologists cooperated in a
joint effort to further the analysis of ethnic groups. The symposium
meetings, supported by a grant-in-aid from the Wenner-Gren Foun-
dation for Anthropological Research, were held at the University of
Bergen, 23rd to 26th February 1967. The participants were Klaus
Ferdinand, Aarhus; Karl Gustav Izikowitz and Karl Eric Knutsson,
Gothenburg; Peter Kandre, Stockholm; Axel Sommerfelt, Harald Eid-
heim and Helge Kleivan, Oslo; and Henning Siverts, Jan-Petter Blom,
Gunnar Haaland, and Fredrik Barth, Bergen. A brief statement of
problems and a sketch of analytical concepts by Barth was circulated
with the original invitation. Participants then prepared their essays in
advance of the meeting, and these were circulated. After the meetings
it was decided to publish the results in one book, and each participant
was invited to revise and rewrite his essays as he saw fit. Seven com-
plied with this wish, and Barth wrote the general introduction, basing
it on his original points and on the results of the discussion, drawing
freely on the essays in their original or revised forms. The result is thus
in a real sense a joint product from all the participants which, we
feel, illustrates the application of some common analytical viewpoints
to different sides of the problems of poly-ethnic organization in differ-
ent ethnographic areas. As host to the symposium I wish to thank all
the participants for their contribution to its success, and to express
our joint appreciation to the Wenner-Gren Foundation for making
our work possible.

Bergen, January 1969 Fredrik Barth



=== PDF p5 L (book-seq 8) ===



=== PDF p5 R (book-seq 9) ===
Introduction
by Fredrik Barth

This collection of essays addresses itself to the problems of ethnic
groups and their persistence. This is a theme of great, but neglected,

importance to social anthropology. _Eﬁhﬁl_ly_a_ll_anﬂmpnlogmal
reasoning rests on the premise that cultural variation is discontinuous:
that there are aggregates of people who essentially share a common .
culture, and interconnected differences that distinguish each such
discrete culture from all others. Since culture is nothing but a way to
describe human behaviour, it would follow that there are discrete
groups of people, i.e. ethnic units, to correspond to each culture. The
differences between cultures, and their historic boundaries and con-
nections, have been given much attention; the constitution of ethnic
groups, and the nature of the boundaries between them, have not been
correspondingly investigated. Social anthropologists have largely
avoided these problems by using a highly abstracted concept of
‘society’ to represent the encompassing social system within which
smaller, concrete groups and units may be analysed. But this leaves
untouched the empirical characteristics and boundaries of ethnic
groups, and the important theoretical issues which an investigation
of them raises.

Though the naive assumption that each tribe and people has main-
tained its culture through a bellicose ignorance of its neighbours is no
longer entertained, the simplistic view that geographical and social
isolation have been the critical factors in sustaining cultural diversity
persists. An empirical investigation of the character of ethnic boun-
daries, as documented in the following essays, produces two discoveries
which are hardly unexpected, but which demonstrate the inadequacy
of this view. First, it is clear that boundaries persist despite a flow
of personnel across them. In other words, categorical ethnic distinc-
tlons do not depend on an absence of mobility, contact and mformatlon,




=== PDF p6 L (book-seq 10) ===
10 FREDRIK BARTH

but do entail social processes of exclusion and incorporation whereby
discrete categories are maintained despite changing participation and
membership in the course of individual life histories. Secondly, one
finds that stable, persisting, and often vitally important social relations
are maintained across such boundaries, and are frequently based pre-
cisely on the dichotomized ethnic statuses. In other words, ethnic
distinctions do not depend on an absence of social interaction and
acceptance, but are quite to the contrary often the very foundations
on which embracing social systems are built. Interaction in such a
social system does not lead to its liquidation through change and
acculturation; cultural differences can persist despite inter-ethnic
contact and interdependence.

General approach

There is clearly an important field here in need of rethinking. What
is required is a combined theoretical and empirical attack: we need
to investigate closely the empirical facts of a variety of cases, and fit
our concepts to these empirical facts so that they elucidate them as
simply and adequately as possible, and allow us to explore their
implications. In the following essays, each author takes up a case
with which he is intimately familiar from his own fieldwork, and tries
to apply a common set of concepts to its analysis. The main theoretical
departure consists of several interconnected parts. First, we give
primary emphasis to the fact that ethnic groups are categories of
ascription and identification by the actors themselves, and thus have
the characteristic of organizing interaction between people. We at-
tempt to relate other characteristics of ethnic groups to this primary
feature. Second, the essays all apply a generative viewpoint to the
analysis: rather than working through a typology of forms of ethnic
groups and relations, we attempt to explore the different processes
that seem to be involved in generating and maintaining ethnic groups.
Third, to observe these processes we shift the focus of investigation
from internal constitution and history of separate groups to ethnic
boundaries and boundary maintenance. Each of these points needs
some elaboration.

Ethnic group defined

The term ethnic group is generally understood in anthropological
literature (cf. e.g. Narroll 1964) to designate a population which:

1. is largely biologically self-perpetuating



=== PDF p6 R (book-seq 11) ===
INTRODUCTION 11

2. shares fundamental cultural values, realized in overt unity in
cultural forms

3. makes up a field of communication and interaction

4. has a membership which identifies itself, and is identified by others,
as constituting a category distinguishable from other categories of
the same order.

This ideal type definition is not so far removed in content from the
traditional proposition that a race = a culture = a language and that
a society = a unit which rejects or discriminates against others. Yet,
in its modified form it is close enough to many empirical ethnographic
situations, at least as they appear and have been reported, so that this
meaning continues to serve the purposes of most anthropologists. My
quarrel is not so much with the substance of these characteristics,
though as I shall show we can profit from a certain change of emphasis;
my main objection is that such a formulation prevents us from under-
standing the phenomenon of ethnic groups and their place in human
society and culture. This is because it begs all the critical questions:
while purporting to give an ideal type model of a recurring empirical
form, it implies a preconceived view of what are the significant factors
in the genesis, structure, and function of such groups.

Most critically, it allows us to assume that boundary maintenance
is unproblematical and follows from the isolation which the itemized
characteristics imply: racial difference, cultural difference, social sepa-
ration and language barriers, spontaneous and organized enmity. This
also limits the range of factors that we use to explain cultural diversity:
we are led to imagine each group developing its cultural and social
form in relative isolation, mainly in response to local ecologic factors,
through a history of adaptation by invention and selective borrowing.
This history has produced a world of separate peoples, each with their
culture and each organized in a society which can legitimately be
isolated for description as an island to itself.

Ethnic groups as culture-bearing units

Rather than discussing the adequacy of this version of culture history
for other than pelagic islands, let us look at some of the logical flaws
in the viewpoint. Among the characteristics listed above, the sharing
of a common culture is generally given central importance. In my
view, much can be gained by regarding this very important feature
as an implication or result, rather than a primary and definitional
characteristic of ethnic group organization. If one chooses to regard




=== PDF p7 L (book-seq 12) ===
‘ l
12 FREDRIK BARTH

the culture-bearing aspect of ethnic groups as their primary charac-
teristic, this has far-reaching implications. One is led to identify and
distinguish ethnic groups by the morphological characteristics of the
cultures of which they are the bearers. This entails a prejudged view-
point both on (1) the nature of continuity in time of such units, and (2)
the locus of the factors which determine the form of the units.

1. Given the emphasis on the culture-bearing aspect, the classifica-
tion of persons and local groups as members of an ethnic group must
depend on their exhibiting the particular traits of the culture. This is
something that can be judged objectively by the ethnographic observer,
in the culture-area tradition, regardless of the categories and prejudices
of the actors, Differences between groups become differences in trait
inventories; the attention is drawn to the analysis of cultures, not of
ethnic organization. The dynamic relationship between groups will
then be depicted in acculturation studies of the kind that have been
attracting decreasing interest in anthropology, though their theoretical
madequacies have never been seriously discussed. Since the historical
provenance of any assemblage of culture traits is diverse, the viewpoint
also gives scope for an ‘ethnohistory’ which chronicles cultural accre-
tion and change, and seeks to explain why certain items were bor-
rowed. However, what is the unit whose continuity in time is deplcted (I
in such studlm""ﬁPEra&)xxca]]y, lt must include cu]tures in the past
which would clearly be excluded in the present because of dlfferencesJ
in form — differences of precisely the kind that are diagnostic in syn-
chronic differentiation of ethnic units. The interconnection between(
‘cthnic group’ and ‘culture’ is certainly not clarified through thlsi
confusion.

2. The overt cultural forms which can be itemized as traits exhibit
the effects of ecology. By this I do not mean to refer to the fact that
they reflect a history of adaptation to environment; in a more immedi-
ate way they also reflect the external circumstances to which actors
must accommodate themselves. The same group of people, with un-
changed values and ideas, would surely pursue different patterns of
life and institutionalize different forms of behaviour when faced with
the different opportunities offered in different environments? Like-
wise, we must expect to find that one ethnic group, spread over a
territory with varying ecologic circumstances, will exhibit regional
diversities of overt institutionalized behaviour which do not reflect
differences in cultural orientation. How should they then be classified
if overt institutional forms are diagnostic? A case in point is the



=== PDF p7 R (book-seq 13) ===
INTRODUCTION 13

distributions and diversity of Pathan local social systems, discussed
below (pp. 117 f£.). By basic Pathan values, a Southern Pathan from the
homogeneous, lineage-organized mountain areas, can only find the
behaviour of Pathans in Swat so different from, and reprehensible in
terms of, their own values that they declare their northern brothers
‘no longer Pathan’. Indeed, by ‘objective’ criteria, their overt pat-
tern of organization seems much closer to that of Panjabis. But I found
it possible, by explaining the circumstances in the north, to make
Southern Pathans agree that these were indeed Pathans too, and
grudgingly to admit that under those circumstances they might indeed
themselves act in the same way. It is thus inadequate to regard overt
institutional forms as constituting the cultural features which at any
time distinguish an ethnic group — these overt forms are determined
by ecology as well as by transmitted culture. Nor can it be claimed
that every such diversification within a group represents a first step
in the direction of subdivision and multiplication of units. We have
well-known documented cases of one ethnic group, also at a relatively
simple level of economic organization, occupying several different
ecologic niches and yet retaining basic cultural and ethnic unity over
long periods (cf., e.g., inland and coastal Chuckchee (Bogoras 1904-9)
or reindeer, river, and coast Lapps (Gjessing, 1954).

In one of the following essays, Blom (pp. 74 ff.) argues cogently on
this point with reference to central Norwegian mountain farmers. He
shows how their participation and self-evaluation in terms of general
Norwegian values secures them continued membership in the larger
ethnic group, despite the highly characteristic and deviant patterns of
activity which the local ecology imposes on them. To analyse such
cases, we need a viewpoint that does not confuse the effects of ecologic
circumstances on behaviour with those of cultural tradition, but which
makes it possible to separate these factors and investigate the non-
ecological cultural and social components creating diversity.

Ethnic groups as an erganizational type

By concentrating on what is socially effective, ethnic groups are seen
as a form of social organization. The critical feature then becomes
item (4) in the list on p. 11 the characteristic of self-ascription and
ascription by others. A categorical ascription is an ethnic ascription
when it classifies a person in terms of his basic, most general identity,
presumptively determined by his origin and background. To the extent
that actors use ethnic identities to categorize themselves and others for



=== PDF p8 L (book-seq 14) ===
14 FREDRIK BARTH

purposes of interaction, they form ethnic groups in this organizational
sense.

It is important to recognize that although ethnic categories take cul-
tural differences into account, we can assume no simple one-to-one
relationship between ethnic units and cultural similarities and differ-
ences. The features that are taken into account are not the sum of
‘objective’ differences, but only those which the actors themselves
regard as significant. Not only do ecologic variations mark and exag-
gerate differences; some cultural features are used by the actors as
signals and emblems of differences, others are ignored, and in some
relationships radical differences are played down and denied. The cul-
tural contents of ethnic dichotomies would seem analytically to be of
two orders: (i) overt signals or signs — the diacritical features that
people look for and exhibit to show identity, often such features as
dress, language, house-form, or general style of life, and (ii) basic value
orientations: the standards of morality and excellence by which per-
formance is judged. Since belonging to an ethnic category implies being
a certain kind of person, having that basic identity, it also implies a
claim to be judged, and to judge oneself, by those standards that are
relevant to that identity. Neither of these kinds of cultural ‘contents’
follows from a descriptive list of cultural features or cultural differ-
ences; one cannot predict from first principles which features will be
emphasized and made organizationally relevant by the actors. In other
words, ethnic categories provide an organizational vessel that may be
given varying amounts and forms of content in different socio-cultural
systems. They may be of great relevance to behaviour, but they need
not be; they may pervade all social life, or they may be relevant only
in limited sectors of activity. There is thus an obvious scope for
ethnographic and comparative descriptions of different forms of ethnic
organization.

The emphasis on ascription as the critical feature of ethnic groups
also solves the two conceptual difficulties that were discussed above.

1. When defined as an ascriptive and exclusive group, the nature
of continuity of ethnic units is clear: it depends on the maintenance
of a boundary. The cultural features that signal the boundary may
change, and the cultural characteristics of the members may likewise
be transformed, indeed, even the organizational form of the group may
change — yet the fact of continuing dichotomization between members
and outsiders allows us to specify the nature of continuity, and investi-
gate the changing cultural form and content.



=== PDF p8 R (book-seq 15) ===
INTRODUCTION 15

2. Socially relevant factors alone become diagnostic for member-
ship, not the overt, ‘objective’ differences which are generated by
other factors. It makes no difference how dissimilar members may be
in their overt behaviour — if they say they are A, in contrast to an-
other cognate category B, they are willing to be treated and let their
own behaviour be interpreted and judged as A’s and not as B’s; in
other words, they declare their allegiance to the shared culture of A’s.
The effects of this, as compared to other factors influencing actual
behaviour, can then be made the object of investigation.

The boundaries of ethnic groups

The critical focus of investigation from this point of view becomes the
ethnic boundary that defines the group, not the cultural stuff that it
encloses. The boundaries to which we must give our attention are of
course social boundaries, though they may have territorial counter-
parts. If a group maintains its identity when members interact with
others, this entails criteria for determining membership and ways of
signalling membership and exclusion. Ethnic groups are not merely or
necessarily based on the occupation of exclusive territories; and the
different ways in which they are maintained, not only by a once-and-
for-all recruitment but by continual expression and validation, need
to be analysed.

‘What is more, the ethnic boundary canalizes social life — it entails
a frequently quite complex organization of behaviour and social rela-
tions. The identification of another person as a fellow member of an
ethnic group implics a sharing of criteria for evaluation and judge-
ment. It thus entails the assumption that the two are fundamentally
‘playing the same game’, and this means that there is between them
a potential for diversification and expansion of their social relation-
ship to cover eventually all different sectors and domains of activity.
On the other hand, a dichotomization of others as strangers, as
members of another ethnic group, implies a recognition of limitations
on shared understandings, differences in criteria for judgement of
value and performance, and a restriction of interaction to sectors of
assumed common understanding and mutual interest.

This makes it possible to understand one final form of boundary
maintenance whereby cultural units and boundaries persist. Entailed
in ethnic boundary maintenance are also situations of social contact
between persons of different cultures: ethnic groups only persist as
significant units if they imply marked difference in behaviour, i.e.



=== PDF p9 L (book-seq 16) ===
16 FREDRIK BARTH

persisting cultural differences. Yet where persons of different cul-
. ture interact, one would expect these differences to be reduced,

since interaction both requires and generates a congruence of codes
[ and values — in other words, a similarity or community of culture
I (cf. Barth 1966, for my argumentation on this point). Thus the persis-
¢ tence of ethnic groups in contact implies not only criteria and signals
! for identification, but also a structuring of interaction which allows
1 the persistence of cultural differences. The organizational feature
‘ which, I would argue, must be general for all inter-ethnic relations
s is a systematic set of rules governing inter-ethnic social encounters.
In all organized social life, what can be made relevant to interaction
[ in any particular social situation is prescribed (Goffman 1959). If
{ people agree about these prescriptions, their agreement on codes and
values need not extend beyond that which is relevant to the social
situations in which they interact. Stable inter-ethnic relations pre-
« suppose such a structuring of interaction: a set of prescriptions govern-
I ing situations of contact, and allowing for articulation in some sectors
E or domains of activity, and a set of proscriptions on social situations
( preventing inter-ethnic interaction in other sectors, and thus insulating
i parts of the cultures from confrontation and modification.

Poly-ethnic social systems
. This of course is what Furnivall (1944) so clearly depicted in his
analysis of plural society: a poly-ethnic society integrated in the
market place, under the control of a state system dominated by one
[ of the groups, but leaving large areas of cultural diversity in the
1 religious and domestic sectors of activity.
What has not been adequately appreciated by later anthropologists
‘ is the possible variety of sectors of articulation and separation, and
[ the variety of poly-ethnic systems which this entails. ‘We know of
some of the Melanesian trade systems in objects belonging to the high-
prestige sphere of the economy, and even some of the etiquette and
prescriptions governing the exchange situation and insulating it from
( other activities. We have information on various traditional poly-
centric systems from S.E. Asia (discussed below, Izikowitz pp. 135 ff.)
integrated both in the prestige trade sphere and in quasi-feudal political
structures. Some regions of S.W. Asia show forms based on a more
fully monetized market economy, while political integration is poly-
centric in character. There is also the ritual and productive coopera-
tion and political integration of the Indian caste system to be con-



=== PDF p9 R (book-seq 17) ===
INTRODUCTION 17

sidered, where perhaps only kinship and domestic life remain as a
proscribed sector and a wellspring for cultural diversity. Nothing
can be gained by lumping these various systems under the increasingly
vague label of ‘plural’ society, whereas an investigation of the
varieties of structure can shed a great deal of light on social and
cultural forms.

What can be referred to as articulation and separation on the
macro-level corresponds to systematic sets of role constraints on the
micro-level. Common to all these systems is the principle that ethnic
identity implies a series of constraints on the kinds of roles an indi-
vidual is allowed to play, and the partners he may choose for different
kinds of transactions.! In other words, regarded as a status, ethnic
identity is superordinate to most other statuses, and defines the per-
missible constellations of statuses, or social personalities, which an
individual with that identity may assume. In this respect ethnic identity
is similar to sex and rank, in that it constrains the incumbent in all his
activities, not only in some defined social situations.? One might thus
also say that it is imperative, in that it cannot be disregarded and
temporarily set aside by other definitions of the situation. The con-
straints on a person’s behaviour which spring from his ethnic identity
thus tend to be absolute and, in complex poly-cthnic societies, quite
comprehensive; and the component moral and social conventions are
made further resistant to change by being joined in stereotyped
clusters as characteristics of one single identity.

The associations of identities and value standards

The analysis of interactional and organizational features of inter-

ethnic relations has suffered from a lack of attention to problems of

boundary maintenance. This is perhaps because anthropologists have '
reasoned from a misleading idea of the prototype inter-ethnic situation. ‘
One has tended to think in terms of different peoples, with different

histories and cultures, coming together and accommodating themselves ]
to each other, generally in a colonial setting. To visualize the basic
requirements for the coexistence of ethnic diversity, I would suggest

that we rather ask ourselves what is needed to make ethnic distinc-

tions emerge in an area. The organizational requirements are clearly,

first, a categorization of population sectors in exclusive and imperative

status categories, and second, an acceptance of the principle that

standards applied to one such category can be different from that

applied to another. Though this alone does not explain why cultural

2, Barth



=== PDF p10 L (book-seq 18) ===
18 FREDRIK BARTH

differences emerge, it does allow us to see how they persist. Each
category can then be associated with a separate range of value stan-
dards. The greater the differences between these value orientations
are, the more constraints on inter-ethnic interaction do they entail:
the statuses and situations in the total social system involving
behaviour which is discrepant with a person’s value orientations must
be avoided, since such behaviour on his part will be negatively
sanctioned. Moreover, because identities are signalled as well as
embraced, new forms of behaviour will tend to be dichotomized: one
would expect the role constraints to operate in such a way that persons
would be reluctant to act in new ways from a fear that such behaviour
might be inappropriate for a person of their identity, and swift to
classify forms of activity as associated with one or another cluster of
ethnic characteristics. Just as dichotomizations of male versus female
work seem to proliferate in some societies, so also the existence of
basic ethnic categories would seem to be a factor encouraging the
proliferation of cultural differentiae.

In such systems, the sanctions producing adherence to group-specific
values are not only exercised by those who share the identity. Again,
other imperative statuses afford a parallel: just as both sexes ridicule
the male who is feminine, and all classes punish the proletarian who
puts on airs, 5o also can members of all ethnic groups in a poly-ethnic
society act to maintain dichotomies and differences. Where social
identities are organized and allocated by such principles, there will
thus be a tendency towards canalization and standardization of inter-
action and the emergence of boundaries which maintain and generate
cthnic diversity within larger, encompassing social systems.

Interdependence of ethnic groups
The positive bond that connects several ethnic groups in an encom- [
passing social system depends on the complementarity of the groups
with respect to some of their characteristic cultural features. Such
complementarity can give rise to interdependence or symbiosis, and
constitutes the areas of articulation referred to above; while in the
fields where there is no complementarity there can be no basis for
organization on ethnic lines — there will either be no interaction, or
interaction without reference to ethnic identity.

Social systems differ greatly in the extent to which ethnic identity,
as an imperative status, constrains the person in the variety of statuses
and roles he may assume. Where the distinguishing values connected



=== PDF p10 R (book-seq 19) ===
INTRODUCTION 19

with ethnic identity are relevant only to a few kinds of activities, the
social organization based on it will be similarly limited. Complex poly-
ethnic systems, on the other hand, clearly entail the existence of
extensively relevant value differences and multiple constraints on
status combinations and social participation. In such systems, the
boundary maintaining mechanisms must be highly effective, for the
following reasons: (i) the complexity is based on the existence of
important, complementary cultural differences; (ii) these differences
must be generally standardized within the ethnic group — i.e. the
status cluster, or social person, of every member of a group must be
highly stereotyped — so that inter-ethnic interaction can be based on
ethnic identities; and (iii) the cultural characteristics of each ethnic
group must be stable, so that the complementary differences on which
the systems rest can persist in the face of close inter-ethnic contact.
‘Where these conditions obtain, ethnic groups can make stable and
symbiotic adaptations to each other: other ethnic groups in the region
become a part of the natural environment; the sectors of articulation
provide areas that can be exploited, while the other sectors of activity
of other groups are largely irrelevant from the point of view of
members of any one group.

Ecologic perspective

Such interdependences can partly be analysed from the point of view of
cultural ecology, and the sectors of activity where other populations
with other cultures articulate may be thought of as niches to which
the group is adapted. This ecologic interdependence may take several
different forms, for which one may construct a rough typology. Where
two or more ethnic groups are in contact, their adaptations may entail
the following forms:

(1) They may occupy clearly distinct niches in the natural environ-
ment and be in minimal competition for resources. In this case their
interdependence will be limited despite co-residence in the area, and
the articulation will tend to be mainly through trade, and perhaps in
a ceremonial-ritual sector.

(2) They may monopolize separate territories, in which case they
are in competition for resources and their articulation will involve
politics along the border, and possibly other sectors.

(3) They may provide important goods and services for each other,
i.e. occupy reciprocal and therefore different niches but in close inter-
dependence. If they do not articulate very closely in the political



=== PDF p11 L (book-seq 20) ===
20 FREDRIK BARTH

sector, this entails a classical symbiotic situation and a variety of
possible fields of articulation. 1f they also compete and accommodate
through differential monopolization of the means of production, this
entails a close political and economic articulation, with open possibi-
Lities for other forms of interdependence as well.

These alternatives refer to stable situations. But very commonly,
one will also find a fourth main form: where two or more interspersed
groups are in fact in at least partial competition within the same niche.
With time one would expect one such group to displace the other, or
an accommodation involving an increasing complementarity and inter-
dependence to develop.

From the anthropological literature one can doubtless think of type
cases for most of these situations. However, if one looks carefully at
most empirical cases, one will find fairly mixed situations obtaining,
and only quite gross simplifications can reduce them to simple types.
I have tried elsewhere (Barth 1964b) to illustrate this for an area of
Baluchistan, and expect that it is generally true that an ethnic group,
on the different boundaries of its distribution and in its different
accommodations, exhibits several of these forms in its relations to

other groups.

Demographic perspective

These variables, however, only go part of the way in describing the
adaptation of a group. While showing the qualitative, (and ideally
quantitative) structure of the niches occupied by a group, one cannot
ignore the problems of number and balance in its adaptation. When-
ever a population is dependent on its exploitation of a niche in nature,
this implies an upper limit on the size it may attain corresponding to
the carrying capacity of that niche; and any stable adaptation entails
a control on population size. If, on the other hand, two populations
are ecologically interdependent, as two ethnic groups in a symbiotic
relationship, this means that any variation in the size of one must have
important effects on the other. In the analysis of any poly-ethnic
system for which we assert any degree of time depth, we must there-
fore be able to explain the processes whereby the sizes of the interde-
pendent ethnic groups are balanced. The demographic balances in-
volved are thus quite complex, since a group’s adaptation to a niche in
nature is affected by its absolute size, while a group’s adaptation to a
niche constituted by another ethnic group is affected by its relative

size.



=== PDF p11 R (book-seq 21) ===
INTRODUCTION 21

The demographic problems in an analysis of ethnic inter-relations
in a region thus centre on the forms of recruitment to ethnic groups and
the question of how, if at all, their rates are sensitive to pressures on
the different niches which each group exploits. These factors are highly
critical for the stability of any poly-ethnic system, and it might look
as if any population change would prove destructive. This does not
necessarily seem to follow, as documented e.g. in the essay by Siverts
(pp- 101 ff.), but in most situations the poly-ethnic systems we observe
do entail quite complex processes of population movement and adjust-
ment. It becomes clear that a number of factors other than human
fertility and mortality affect the balance of numbers. From the point
of view of any one territory, there are the factors of individual and
group movements: emigration that relieves pressure, immigration that
maintains one or several co-resident groups as outpost settlements of
larger population reservoirs elsewhere. Migration and conquest play
an intermittent role in redistributing populations and changing their
relations. But the most interesting and often critical role is played by
another set of processes that effect changes of the identity of indi-
viduals and groups. After all, the human material that is organized
in an ethnic group is not immutable, and though the social mechanisms
discussed so far tend to maintain dichotomies and boundaries, they
do not imply ‘stasis’ for the human material they organize: boundaries
may persist despite what may figuratively be called the ‘osmosis” of
personnel through them.

This perspective leads to an important clarification of the conditions
for complex poly-ethnic systems. Though the emergence and persis-
tence of such systems would seem to depend on a relatively high
stability in the cultural features associated with ethnic groups — i.e.
a high degree or rigidity in the interactional boundaries — they do
not imply a similar rigidity in the patterns of recruitment or ascription
to ethnic groups: on the contrary, the ethnic inter-relations that we
observe frequently entail a variety of processes which effect changes
in individual and group identity and modify the other demographic
factors that obtain in the situation. Examples of stable and persisting
ethnic boundaries that are crossed by a flow of personnel are clearly
far more common than the ethnographic literature would lead us to
believe. Different processes of such crossing are exemplified in these
essays, and the conditions which cause them are shown to be various.
‘We may look briefly at some of them.



=== PDF p12 L (book-seq 22) ===
22 FREDRIK BARTH

Factors in identity change

The Yao described by Kandre (1967b) are one of the many hill
peoples on the southern fringe of the Chinese area. The Yao are
organized for productive purposes in extended family households,
aligned in clans and in villages. Household leadership is very clear,
while community and region are autochthonously acephalous, and
variously tied to poly-ethnic political domains. Identity and distinc-
tions are expressed in complex ritual idioms, prominently involving
ancestor worship. Yet this group shows the drastic incorporation rate
of 10 non-Yao becoming Yao in each generation (Kandre 1967a:
594). Change of membership takes place individually, mostly with
children, where it involves purchase of the person by a Yao house-
leader, adoption to kinship status, and full ritual assimilation. Occa-
sionally, change of ethnic membership is also achieved by men through
uxorilocal marriage; Chinese men are the acceptable parties to such
arrangements.

The conditions for this form of assimilation are clearly twofold:
first, the presence of cultural mechanisms to implement the incorpora-
tion, including ideas of obligations to ancestors, compensation by pay-
ment, etc., and secondly, the incentive of obvious advantages to the
assimilating household and leader. These have to do with the role of
households as productive units and agro-managerial techniques that
imply an optimal size of 6-8 working persons, and the pattern of
intra-community competition between household leaders in the field
of wealth and influence.

Movements across the southern and northern boundaries of the
Pathan area (cf. pp. 123 ff.) illustrate quite other forms and conditions.
Southern Pathans become Baluch and not vice versa; this transforma-
tion can take place with individuals but more readily with whole
households or small groups of households; it involves loss of position
in the rigid genealogical and territorial segmentary system of Pathans
and incorporation through clientage contract into the hierarchical,
centralized system of the Baluch. Acceptance in the receiving group
is conditional on the ambition and opportunism of Baluch political
leaders. On the other hand, Pathans in the north have, after an
analogous loss of position in their native system, settled in and often
conquered new territories in Kohistan. The effect in due course has
been a reclassification of the settling communities among the congeries
of locally diverse Kohistani tribes and groups.



=== PDF p12 R (book-seq 23) ===
INTRODUCTION 23

Perhaps the most striking case is that from Darfur provided by
Haaland (pp. 58 ff.), which shows members of the hoe-agricultural Fur
of the Sudan changing their identity to that of nomadic cattle Arabs.
This process is conditional on a very specific economic circumstance:
the absence of investment opportunities for capital in the village
economy of the Fur in contrast to the possibilities among the nomads.
Accumulated capital, and the opportunities for its management and
increase, provide the incentive for Fur households to abandon their
fields and villages and change to the life of the neighbouring Baggara,
incidentally also joining one of the loose but nominally centralized
Baggara political units if the change has been economically completely
successful.

These processes that induce a flow of personnel across ethnic
boundaries will of necessity affect the demographic balance between
different ethnic groups. Whether they are such that they contribute to
stability in this balance is an entirely different question. To do so,
they would have to be sensitive to changes in the pressure on ecologic
niches in a feed-back pattern. This does not regularly seem to be the
case. The assimilation of non-Yao seems further to increase the rate
of Yao growth and expansion at the expense of other groups, and can
be recognized as one, albeit minor, factor furthering the progressive
Sinization process whereby cultural and ethnic diversity has steadily
been reduced over vast areas. The rate of assimilation of Pathans by
Baluch tribes is no doubt sensitive to population pressure in Pathan
areas, but simultaneously sustains an imbalance whereby Baluch tribes
spread northward despite higher population pressures in the northern
areas. Kohistani assimilation relieves population pressure in Pathan
area while maintaining a geographically stable boundary. Nomadiza-
tion of the Fur replenishes the Baggara, who are elsewhere becoming
sedentarized. The rate, however, does not correlate with pressure on
Fur lands — since nomadization is conditional on accumulated wealth,
its rate probably decreases as Fur population pressure increases. The
Fur case also demonstrates the inherent instability of some of these
processes, and how limited changes can have drastic results: with the
agricultural innovation of orchards over the last ten years, new invest-
ment opportunities are provided which will probably greatly reduce,
or perhaps for a while even reverse, the nomadization process.

Thus, though the processes that induce change of identity are impor-
tant to the understanding of most cases of ethnic interdependence,
they need not be conducive to population stability. In general, however,



=== PDF p13 L (book-seq 24) ===
24 FREDRIK BARTH

one can argue that whenever ethnic relations are stable over long
periods, and particularly where the interdependence is close, one can
expect to find an approximate demographic balance. The analysis of
the different factors involved in this balance is an important part of
the analysis of the ethnic inter-relations in the area.

The persistence of cultural boundaries
In the preceding discussion of ethnic boundary maintenance and inter-
change of personnel there is one very important problem that I have
left aside. We have seen various examples of how individuals and
small groups, because of specific economic and political circumstances
in their former position and among the assimilating group, may change
their locality, their subsistence pattern, their political allegiance and
form, or their household membership. This still does not fully explain
why such changes lead to categorical changes of ethnic identity, leaving
the dichotomized ethnic groups unaffected (other than in numbers) by
the interchange of personnel. In the case of adoption and incorporation
of mostly immature and in any case isolated single individuals into
pre-established households, as among the Yao, such complete cultural
assimilation is understandable: here every new person becomes totally
immersed in a Yao pattern of relationships and expectations. In the
other examples, it is less clear why this total change of identity takes
place. One cannot argue that it follows from a universally imputable
rule of cultural integration, so that the practice of the politics of one
group or the assumption of its pattern of ecologic adaptation in subsis-
tence and economy, entails the adoption also of its other parts and
forms. Indeed, the Pathan case (Ferdinand 1967) directly falsifies this
argument, in that the boundaries of the Pathan ethnic group cross-
cuts ecologic and political units. Using self-identification as the critical
criterion of ethnic identity, it should thus be perfectly possible for a
small group of Pathans to assume the political obligations of member-
ship in a Baluch tribe, or the agricultural and husbandry practices of
Kohistanis, and yet continue to call themselves Pathans. By the same
token one might expect nomadization among the Fur to lead to the
emergence of a nomadic section of the Fur, similar in subsistence to the
Baggara but different from them in other cultural features, and in
ethnic label.

Quite clearly, this is precisely what has happened in many historical
situations. In cases where it does not happen we see the organizing
and canalizing effects of ethnic distinctions. To explore the factors



=== PDF p13 R (book-seq 25) ===
INTRODUCTION 25

responsible for the difference, let us first look at the specific explana-
tions for the changes of identity that have been advanced in the
examples discussed above.

In the case of Pathan borderlands, influence and security in the
segmentary and anarchic societies of this region derive from a man’s
previous actions, or rather from the respect that he obtains from these
acts as judged by accepted standards of evaluation. The main fora for
exhibiting Pathan virtues are the tribal council, and stages for the
display of hospitality. But the villager in Kohistan has a standard of
living where the hospitality he can provide can hardly compete with
that of the conquered serfs of neighbouring Pathans, while the client
of a Baluch leader cannot speak in any tribal council. To maintain
Pathan identity in these situations, to declare oneself in the running
as a competitor by Pathan value standards, is to condemn oneself in
advance to utter failure in performance. By assuming Kohistani or
Baluch identity, however, a man may, by the same performance, score
quite high on the scales that then become relevant. The incentives to a
change in identity are thus inherent in the change in circumstances.

Different circumstances obviously favour different performances.
Since ethnic identity is associated with a culturally specific set of value
standards, it follows that there are circumstances where such an
identity can be moderately successfully realized, and limits beyond
which such success is precluded. I will argue that ethnic identities will
not be retained beyond these limits, because allegiance to basic value
standards will not be sustained where one’s own comparative perfor-
mance is utterly inadequate.® The two components in this relative mea-
sure of success are, first, the performance of others and, secondly, the
alternatives open to oneself. I am not making an appeal to ecologic
adaptation. Ecologic feasibility, and fitness in relation to the natural
environment, matter only in so far as they set a limit in terms of sheer
physical survival, which is very rarely approached by ethnic groups.
‘What matters is how well the others, with whom one interacts and to
whom one is compared, manage to perform, and what alternative
identities and sets of standards are available to the individual.

Ethnic identity and tangible assets

The boundary-maintaining factors in the Fur are not immediately
illuminated by this argument. Haaland (pp. 65 f.) discusses the evalua-
tion of the nomad’s life by Fur standards and finds the balance between
advantages and disadvantages inconclusive. To ascertain the compara-



=== PDF p14 L (book-seq 26) ===
26 FREDRIK BARTH

Jook more generally at all the factors
The materials derive from grossly
number of factors are varied

bility of this case, we need to
that affect the behaviour in question.
different ethnographic contexts and so a

simultaneously.
The individual’s relation to productive resources stands out as the

significant contrast between the two regions. In the Middle East, the
means of production are conventionally held as private or corporate,
defined and transferable property. A man can obtain them through a
specific and restricted transaction, such as purchase or lease; even in
conquest the rights that are obtained are standard, delimited rights. In
Darfur, on the other hand, as in much of the Sudanic belt, the prevail-
ing conventions are different. Land for cultivation is allocated, as
needed, to members of a local community. The distinction between
owner and cultivator, so important in the social structure of most
Middle Eastern communities, cannot be made because ownership does
not involve separable, absolute, and transferable rights. Access to the
means of production in a Fur village is therefore conditional only on
inclusion in the village community — i.e. on Fur ethnic identity.
Similarly, grazing rights are not allocated and monopolized, even as
between Baggara tribes. Though groups and tribes tend to use the
same routes and areas every year, and may at times try in an ad hoc
way to keep out others from an area they wish to use, they normally
intermix and have no defined and absolute prerogatives. Access to
grazing is thus an automatic aspect of practising husbandry, and
entails being a Baggara.

The gross mechanisms of boundary maintenance in Darfur are thus

quite simple: 2 man has access to the critical means of production by
virtue of practising a certain subsistence; this entails a whole style of
life, and all these characteristics are subsumed under the ethnic labels
Fur and Baggara. In the Middle East, on the other hand, men can
obtain control over means of production through a transaction that
does not involve their other activities; ethnic identity is then not
necessarily affected and this opens the way for diversification. Thus
nomad, peasant, and city dweller can belong to the same ethnic group
in the Middle East; where ethnic boundaries persist they depend on
more subtle and specific mechanisms, mainly connected with the
unfeasibility of certain status and role combinations.



=== PDF p14 R (book-seq 27) ===
INTRODUCTION 27 -

Ethnic groups and stratification

Where one ethnic group has control of the means of production uti-
lized by another group, a relationship of inequality and stratification
obtains. Thus Fur and Baggara do not make up a stratified system,
since they utilize different niches and have access to them indepen-
dently of each other, whereas in some parts of the Pathan area one finds
stratification based on the control of land, Pathans being landowners,
and other groups cultivating as serfs. In more general terms, one may
say that stratified poly-ethnic systems exist where groups are charac-
terized by differential control of assets that are valued by all groups
in the system. The cultures of the component ethnic groups in such
systems are thus integrated in a special way: they share certain general
value orientations and scales, on the basis of which they can arrive
at judgements of hierarchy.

Obversely, a system of stratification does not entail the existence
of ethnic groups. Leach (1967) argues convincingly that social classes
are distinguished by different sub-cultures, indeed, that this is a more
basic characteristic than their hierarchical ordering. However, in many
systems of stratification we are not dealing with bounded strata at all: ‘
the stratification is based simply on the notion of scales and the
recognition of an ego-centered level of ‘people who are just like us’
versus those more select and those more vulgar. In such systems,
cultural differences, whatever they are, grade into each other, and
nothing like a social organization of ethnic groups emerges. Secondly,
most systems of stratification allow, or indecd entail, mobility based l
on evaluation by the scales that define the hierarchy. Thus a moderate
failure in the ‘B’ sector of the hierarchy makes you a ‘C’, etc. Ethnic
groups are not open to this kind of penetration: the ascription of ethnic
identity is based on other and more restrictive criteria. This is most
clearly illustrated by Knutsson’s analysis of the Galla in the context of
Ethiopian society (pp. 86 ff.) — a social system where whole ethnic
groups are stratified with respect to their positions of privilege and
disability within the state. Yet the attainment of a governorship does
not make an Amhara of a Galla, nor does estrangement as an outlaw
entail loss of Galla identity.

From this perspective, the Indian caste system would appear to be
a special case of a stratified poly-ethnic system. The boundaries of
castes are defined by ethnic criteria: thus individual failures in perfor-
mance lead to out-casting and not to down-casting. The process

NN e



=== PDF p15 L (book-seq 28) ===
28 FREDRIK BARTH

whereby the hierarchical system incorporates new ethnic groups is
demonstrated in the sanscritization of tribals: their acceptance of the
critical value scales defining their position in the hierarchy of ritual
purity and pollution is the only change of values that is necessary for
a people to become an Indian caste. An analysis of the different
processes of boundary maintenance involved in different inter-caste
relations and in different regional variants of the caste system would,
1 believe, illuminate many features of this system.

The preceding discussion has brought out a somewhat anomalous
general feature of ethnic identity as a status: ascription* is not condi-
tional on the control of any specific assets, but rests on criteria of
origin and commitment; whereas performance in the status, the ade-
quate acting out of the roles required to realize the identity, in many
systems does require such assets. By contrast, in a bureaucratic office
the incumbent is provided with those assets that are required for the
performance of the role; while kinship positions, which are ascribed
without reference to a person’s assets, likewise are not conditional on
performance — you remain a father even if you fail to feed your child.

Thus where ethnic groups are interrelated in a stratified system,
this requires the presence of special processes that maintain diff erential
control of assets. To schematize: a basic premise of ethnic group
organization is that every A can act roles, 1, 2 and 3. If actors agree
on this, the premise is self-fulfilling, unless acting in these roles re-
quires assets that are distributed in a discrepant pattern. If these assets
are obtained or lost in ways independent of being an A, and sought and
avoided without reference to one’s identity as an A, the premise will
be falsified: some A’s become unable to act in the expected roles. Most
systems of stratification are maintained by the solution that in such
cases, the person is no longer an A. In the case of ethnic identity, the
solution on the contrary is the recognition that every A no longer can
or will act in roles 1 and 2. The persistence of stratified poly-ethnic
systems thus entails the presence of factors that generate and maintain
a categorically different distribution of assets: state controls, as in
some modern plural and racist systems; marked differences in evalua-
tion that canalize the efforts of actors in different directions, as in
systems with polluting occupations; or differences in culture that
generate marked differences in political organization, economic orga-
nization, or individual skills.



=== PDF p15 R (book-seq 29) ===
INTRODUCTION ol

The problem of variation

Despite such processes, however, the ethnic label subsumes a number
of simultaneous characteristics which no doubt cluster statistically,
but which are not absolutely interdependent and connected. Thus there
will be variations between members, some showing many and some
showing few characteristics. Particularly where people change their
identity, this creates ambiguity since ethnic membership is at once a
question of source of origin as well as of current identity. Indeed,
Haaland was taken out to see ‘Fur who live in nomad camps’, and I
have heard members of Baluch tribal sections explain that they are
‘really Pathan’. What is then left of the boundary maintenance and
the categorical dichotomy, when the actual distinctions are blurred in
this way? Rather than despair at the failure of typological schematism,
one can legitimately note that people do employ ethnic labels and that
there are in many parts of the world most spectacular differences
whereby forms of behaviour cluster so that whole actors tend to fall
into such categories in terms of their objective behaviour. What is
surprising is not the existence of some actors that fall between these
categories, and of some regions in the world where whole persons do
not tend to sort themselves out in this way, but the fact that variations
tend to cluster at all. We can then be concerned not to perfect a
typology, but to discover the processes that bring about such cluster-
ing.

An alternative mode of approach in anthropology has been to
dichotomize the ethnographic material in terms of ideal versus actual
or conceptual versus empirical, and then concentrate on the consis-
tencies (the ‘structure’) of the ideal, conceptual part of the data,
employing some vague notion of norms and individual deviance to
account for the actual, statistical patterns. It is of course perfectly
feasible to distinguish between a people’s model of their social system
and their aggregate pattern of pragmatic behaviour, and indeed quite
necessary not to confuse the two. But the fertile problems in social
anthropology are concerned with how the two are interconnected, and
it does not follow that this is best elucidated by dichotomizing and
confronting them as total systems. In these essays we have tried to
build the analysis on a lower level of interconnection between status
and behaviour. I would argue that people’s categories are for acting,
and are significantly affected by interaction rather than contemplation.
In showing the connection between ethnic labels and the maintenance



=== PDF p16 L (book-seq 30) ===
40 FREDRIK BARTH

of cultural diversity, I am therefore concerned primarily to show how,
under varying circumstances, certain constellations of categorization
and value orientation have a self-fulfilling character, how others will
tend to be falsified by experience, while others again are incapable
of consummation in interaction. Ethnic boundaries can emerge and
persist only in the former situation, whereas they should dissolve or be
absent in the latter situations. With such a feedback from people’s
experiences to the categories they employ, simple ethnic dichotomies
can be retained, and their stereotyped behavioural differential rein-
forced, despite a considerable objective variation. This is so because
actors struggle to maintain conventional definitions of the situation
in social encounters through selective perception, tact, and sanctions,
and because of difficulties in finding other, more adequate codifica-
tions of experience. Revision only takes place where the categorization
is grossly inadequate — not merely because it is untrue in any objec-
tive sense, but because it is consistently unrewarding to act upon,
within the domain where the actor makes it relevant. So the dichotomy
of Fur villagers and Baggara nomads is maintained despite the patent
presence of a nomadic camp of Fur in the neighbourhood: the fact
that those nomads speak Fur and have kinship connections with
villagers somewhere does not change the social situation in which the
villager interacts with them — it simply makes the standard transac-
tions of buying milk, allocating camp sites, or obtaining manure, which
one would have with other Baggara, flow a bit more smoothly. But a
dichotomy between Pathan landowners and non-Pathan labourers
can no longer be maintained where non-Pathans obtain land and
embarrass Pathans by refusing to respond with the respect which their
imputed position as menials would have sanctioned.

Minorities, pariahs, and organizational characteristics of the periphery
In some social systems, ethnic groups co-reside though no major aspect
of structure is based on ethnic inter-relations. These are generally
referred to as societies with minorities, and the analysis of the minority
situation involves a special variant of inter-ethnic relations. I think
in most cases, such situations have come about as a result of external
historical events; the cultural differentiae have not sprung from the
local organizational context — rather, a pre-established cultural con-
trast is brought into conjunction with a pre-established social system,
and is made relevant to life there in a diversity of ways.

An extreme form of minority position, illustrating some but not all



=== PDF p16 R (book-seq 31) ===
INTRODUCTION L}

features of minorities, is that of pariah groups. These are groups
actively rejected by the host population because of behaviour or
characteristics positively condemned, though often useful in some
specific, practical way. European pariah groups of recent centuries
(executioners, dealers in horseflesh and -leather, collectors of night-
soil, gypsies, etc.) exemplify most features: as breakers of basic taboos
they were rejected by the larger society. Their identity imposed a
definition on social situations which gave very little scope for interac-
tion with persons in the majority population, and simultaneously as an
imperative status represented an inescapable disability that prevented
them from assuming the normal statuses involved in other definitions
of the situation of interaction. Despite these formidable barriers, such
groups do not seem to have developed the internal complexity that
would lead us to regard them as full-fledged ethnic groups; only the
culturally foreign gypsies® clearly constitute such a group.

The boundaries of pariah groups are most strongly maintained by
the excluding host population, and they are often forced to make use
of easily noticeable diacritica to advertise their identity (though since
this identity is often the basis for a highly insecure livelihood, such
over-communication may sometimes also serve the pariah individual’s
competitive interests). Where pariahs attempt to pass into the larger
society, the culture of the host population is generally well known;
thus the problem is reduced to a question of escaping the stigmata of
disability by dissociating with the pariah community and faking
another origin.

Many minority situations have a trace of this active rejection by the
host population. But the general feature of all minority situations lies
in the organization of activities and interaction: In the total social
system, all sectors of activity are organized by statuses open to members
of the majority group, while the status system of the minority has
only relevance to relations within the minority and only to some
sectors of activity, and does not provide a basis for action in other
sectors, equally valued in the minority culture. There is thus a disparity
between values and organizational facilities: prized goals are outside
the field organized by the minority’s culture and categories. Though “

P

such systems contain several ethnic groups, interaction between
members of the different groups of this kind does not spring from the
complementarity of ethnic identities; it takes place entirely within
the framework of the dominant, majority group’s statuses and institu-
tions, where identity as a minority member gives no basis for action,

.



=== PDF p17 L (book-seq 32) ===
LY FREDRIK BARTH

Wiyl it may in varying degrees represent a disability in assuming
the uperalive statuses. Eidheim’s paper gives a very clear analysis of
(il sltuntion, as it obtains among Coast Lapps.

Wal I o different way, one may say that in such a poly-ethnic
swalei. e contrastive cultural characteristics of the component groups
wre locnted in the non-articulating sectors of life. For the minority,
{hese sectors constitute a ‘backstage’ where the characteristics that
are sligmatic in terms of the dominant majority culture can covertly
e made the objects of transaction.

The present-day minority situation of Lapps has been brought about
I recent external circumstances. Formerly, the important context of
inleraction was the local situation, where two ethnic groups with
wfficient knowledge of each other’s culture maintained a relatively
limited, partly symbiotic relationship based in their respective identi-
tics. With the fuller integration of Norwegian society, bringing the
northern periphery into the nation-wide system, the rate of cultural |
change increased drastically. The population of Northern Norway ]
became increasingly dependent on the institutional system of the
larger society, and social life among Norwegians in Northern Norway
was increasingly organized to pursue activities and obtain benefits
within the wider system. This system has not, until very recently, taken
ethnic identity into account in its structure, and until 2 decade ago
there was practically no place in it where one could participate as @
Lapp. Lapps as Norwegian citizens, on the other hand, are perfectly
free to participate, though under the dual disability of peripheral loca-
tion and inadequate command of Norwegian language and culture.
“This situation has elsewhere, in the inland regions of Finnmark, given

scope for Lappish innovators with a political program based on the
ideal of ethnic pluralism (cf. Eidheim 1967), but they have gained no
following in the Coast Lapp area here discussed by Eidheim. For these
Lapps, rather, the relevance of Lappish statuses and conventions
decreases in sector after sector (cf. Eidheim 1966), while the relative
inadequacy of performance in the widest system brings about frustra-

tions and a crisis of identity.

Culture contact and change

This is a very widespread process under present conditions as de
dence on the products and institutions of industrial societies spreads
in all parts of the world. The important thing to recognize is that a
drastic reduction of cultural differences between ethnic groups does

pen-



=== PDF p17 R (book-seq 33) ===
INTRODUCTION 33

not correlate in any simple way with a reduction in the organizational
relevance of ethnic identities, or a breakdown in boundary-maintain-
ing processes. This is demonstrated in much of the case material.

We can best analyse the interconnection by looking at the agents
of change: what strategies are open and attractive to them, and what
are the organizational implications of different choices on their part?
The agents in this case are the persons normally referred to somewhat
ethno-centrically as the new elites: the persons in the less industrialized
groups with greater contact and more dependence on the goods and
organizations of industrialized societies. In their pursuit of participa-
tion in wider social systems to obtain new forms of value they can
choose between the following basic strategies: (i) they may attempt
to pass and become incorporated in the pre-established industrial
society and cultural group; (ii) they may accept a ‘minority’ status,
accommodate to and seek to reduce their minority disabilities by
encapsulating all cultural differentiae in sectors of non-articulation,
while participating in the larger system of the industrialized group
in the other sectors of activity; (iii) they may choose to emphasize
ethnic identity, using it to develop new positions and patterns to
organize activities in those sectors formerly not found in their society,
or inadequately developed for the new purposes. If the cultural inno-
vators are successful in the first strategy, their ethnic group will be
denuded of its source of internal diversification and will probably
remain as a culturally conservative, low-articulating ethnic group with
low rank in the larger social sytem. A general acceptance of the second
strategy will prevent the emergence of a clearly dichotomizing poly-
ethnic organization, and — in view of the diversity of industrial society
and consequent variation and multiplicity of fields of articulation —
probably lead to an eventual assimilation of the minority. The third
strategy generates many of the interesting movements that can be
observed today, from nativism to new states.

1 am unable to review the variables that affect which basic strategy
will be adopted, which concrete form it may take, and what its degree
of success and cumulative implications may be. Such factors range
from the number of ethnic groups in the system to features of the
ecologic regime and details of the constituent cultures, and are illus-
trated in most of the concrete analyses of the following essays. It may
be of interest to note some of the forms in which ethnic identity is made
organizationally relevant to new sectors in the current situation.

Firstly, the innovators may choose to emphasize one level of identity

3. Bark




=== PDF p18 L (book-seq 34) ===
L —

34 FREDRIK BARTH

among the several provided by the traditional social organization.
Tribe, caste, language group, region or state all have features that
make them a potentially adequate primary ethnic identity for group
reference, and the outcome will depend on the readiness with which
others can be led to embrace these identities, and the cold tactical
facts. Thus, though tribalism may rally the broadest support in many
African areas, the resultant groups seem unable to stand up against
the sanctioning apparatus even of a relatively rudimentary state
organization.

Secondly, the mode of organization of the ethnic group varies, as
does the inter-ethnic articulation that is sought. The fact that con-
temporary forms are prominently political does not make them any
less ethnic in character. Such political movements constitute new ways
of making cultural differences organizationally relevant (Kleivan
1967), and new ways of articulating the dichotomized ethnic groups.
The proliferation of ethnically based pressure groups, political parties,
and visions of independent statehood, as well as the multitude of sub-
political advancement associations (Sommerfelt 1967) show the
importance of these new forms. In other areas, cult-movements or
mission-introduced sects are used to dichotomize and articulate groups
in new ways. It is striking that these new patterns are so rarely
concerned with the economic sector of activities, which is so major
a factor in the culture contact situation, apart from the forms
of state socialism adopted by some of the new nations. By contrast, the
traditional complex poly-ethnic systems have been prominently based
on articulation in this sector, through occupational differentiation and
articulation at the market place in many regions of Asia and Middle
Anmerica, or most elaborately, through agrarian production in South
Asia. Today, contending ethnic groups not infrequently become differ-
entiated with respect to educational level and attempt to control or
monopolize educational facilities for this purpose (Sommerfelt 1967),
but this is not so much with a view to occupational differentiation
as because of the obvious connection between bureaucratic competence
and opportunities for political advancement. One may speculate that
an articulation entailing complex differentiation of skills, and sanc-
tioned by the constant dependence on livelihood, will have far greater
strength and stability than one based on revocable political affiliation
and sanctioned by the exercise of force and political fiat, and that
these new forms of poly-ethnic systems are probably inherently more
turbulent and unstable than the older forms.



=== PDF p18 R (book-seq 35) ===
INTRODUCTION 29

When political groups articulate their opposition in terms of ethnic
criteria, the direction of cultural change is also affected. A political
confrontation can only be implemented by making the groups similar
and thereby comparable, and this will have effect on every new sector
of activity which is made politically relevant. Opposed parties thus
tend to become structurally similar, and differentiated only by a few
clear diacritica. Where ethnic groups are organized in political con-
frontation in this way, the process of opposition will therefore lead
to a reduction of the cultural differences between them.

For this reason, much of the activity of political innovators is
concerned with the codification of idioms: the selection of signals for
identity and the assertion of value for these cultural diacritica, and
the suppression or denial of relevance for other differentiae. The issue
as to which new cultural forms are compatible with the native ethnic
identity is often hotly contended, but is generally settled in favour of
syncretism for the reasons noted above. But a great amount of atten-
tion may be paid to the revival of select traditional culture traits, and
to the establishment of historical traditions to justify and glorify the
idioms and the identity.

The interconnection between the diacritica that are chosen for
emphasis, the boundaries that are defined, and the differentiating
values that are espoused, constitute a fascinating field for study.’
Clearly, a number of factors are relevant. Idioms vary in their
appropriateness for different kinds of units. They are unequally
adequate for the innovator’s purposes, both as means to mobilize sup-
port and as supports in the strategy of confrontation with other groups.
Their stratificational implications both within and between groups are
important: they entail different sources and distributions of influence
within the group, and different claims to recognition from other groups
through suppression or glorification of different forms of social

stigmata. Clearly, there is no simple connection between the ideological
basis of a movement and the idioms chosen; yet both have implica-

tions for subsequent boundary maintenance, and the course of further
change.

Variations in the setting for ethnic relations

These modern variants for poly-ethnic organization emerge in a world
of bureaucratic administration, developed communications, and pro-
gressive urbanization. Clearly, under radically different circumstances,
the critical factors in the definition and maintenance of ethnic boun- -




=== PDF p19 L (book-seq 36) ===
36 FREDRIK BARTH

daries would be different. In basing ourselves on limited and con-
temporary data, we are faced with difficulties in generalizing about
ethnic processes, since major variables may be ignored because they
are not exhibited in the cases at our disposal. There can be little doubt
that social anthropologists have tended to regard the rather special
situation of colonial peace and external administration, which has
formed the backdrop of most of the influential monographs, as if this
were representative of conditions at most times and places. This may
have biased the interpretation both of pre-colonial systems and of
contemporary, emergent forms. The attempt in these essays to cover
regionally very diverse cases is not alone an adequate defence against
such bias, and the issue needs to be faced directly.

Colonial regimes are quite extreme in the extent to which the
administration and its rules are divorced from locally based social life.
Under such a regime, individuals hold certain rights to protection
uniformly through large population aggregates and regions, far beyond
the reach of their own social relationships and institutions. This allows
physical proximity and opportunities for contact between persons of
different ethnic groups regardless of the absence of shared under-
standings between them, and thus clearly removes one of the con-
straints that normally operate on inter-ethnic relations. In such situa-
tions, interaction can develop and proliferate — indeed, only those
forms of interaction that are directly inhibited by other factors will
be absent and remain as sectors of non-articulation. Thus ethnic
boundaries in such situations represent a positive organization of
social relations around differentiated and complementary values, and
cultural differences will tend to be reduced with time and approach
the required minimum.

In most political regimes, however, where there is less security and
people live under a greater threat of arbitrariness and violence out-
side their primary community, the insecurity itself acts as a constraint
on inter-ethnic contacts. In this situation, many forms of interaction
between members of different ethnic groups may fail to develop, even
though a potential complementarity of interests obtains. Forms of
interaction may be blocked because of a lack of trust or a lack of
opportunities to consummate transactions. What is more, there are
also internal sanctions in such communities which tend to enhance
overt conformity within and cultural differences between communities.
If a person is dependent for his security on the voluntary and spon-
taneous support of his own community, self-identification as a member



=== PDF p19 R (book-seq 37) ===
INTRODUCTION 7

of this community needs to be explicitly expressed and confirmed; and
any behaviour which is deviant from the standard may be interpreted
as a weakening of the identity, and thereby of the bases of security.
In such situations, fortuitous historical differences in culture between
different communities will tend to perpetuate themselves without any
positive organizational basis; many of the observable cultural differ-
entiae may thus be of very limited relevance to the ethnic organiza-
tion.

The processes whereby ethnic units maintain themselves are thus
clearly affected, but not fundamentally changed, by the variable of
regional security. This can also be shown by an inspection of the cases
analysed in these essays, which represent a fair range from the colonial
to the poly-centric, up to relatively anarchic situations. It is important,
however, to recognize that this background variable may change very
rapidly with time, and in the projection of long-range processes this
is a serious difficulty. Thus in the Fur case, we observe a situation of
externally maintained peace and very small-scale local political
activity, and can form a picture of inter-ethnic processes and even
rates in this setting. But we know that over the last few generations,
the situation has varied from one of Baggara-Fur confrontation under
an expansive Fur sultanate to a nearly total anarchy in Turkish and
Mahdi times; and it is very difficult to estimate the effects of these
variations on the processes of nomadization and assimilation, and
arrive at any long-range projection of rates and trends.

Ethnic groups and cultural evolution

The perspective and analysis presented here have relevance to the
theme of cultural evolution. No doubt human history is a story of the
development of emergent forms, both of cultures and societies. The
issue in anthropology has been how this history can best be depicted,
and what kinds of analyses are adequate to discover general principles
in the courses of change. Evolutionary analysis in the rigorous sense
of the biological fields has based its method on the construction of
phyletic lines. This method presumes the existence of units where the
boundaries and the boundary-maintaining processes can be described,
and thus where the continuity can be specified. Concretely, phyletic
lines are meaningful because specific boundaries prevent the inter-
change of genetic material; and so one can insist that the reproductive
isolate is the unit, and that it has maintained an identity undisturbed
by the changes in the morphological characteristics of the species.



=== PDF p20 L (book-seq 38) ===
Y=

38 FREDRIK BARTH

I have argued that boundaries are also maintained between ethnic
units, and that consequently it is possible to specify the nature of
continuity and persistence of such units. These essays try to show that
ethnic boundaries are maintained in each case by a limited set of
cultural features. The persistence of the unit then depends on the
persistence of these cultural differentiae, while continuity can also be
specified through the changes of the unit brought about by changes in
the boundary-defining cultural differentiae.

However, most of the cultural matter that at any time is associated
with a human population is not constrained by this boundary; it can
vary, be learnt, and change without any critical relation to the
boundary maintenance of the ethnic group. So when one traces the
history of a ethnic group through time, one is not simultaneously, in
the same sense, tracing the history of ‘a culture’: the elements of the
present culture of that ethnic group have not sprung from the partic-
ular set that constituted the group’s culture at a previous time, whereas
the group has a continual organizational existence with boundaries
(criteria of membership) that despite modifications have marked off a
continuing unit.
