Neighbours in Laos

by Karl G. Izikowitz

Ethnography or social anthropology has hitherto aimed mainly at
describing and analysing separate social systems from various aspects
with a view to contributing to a general social theory. That the social
systems of separate peoples should have received such concentrated
attention may perhaps be due in part to the influence of the old
national romantic movement, which sought to give prominence to each
people’s national characteristics and particular system of values. Pos-
sibly the countries tended to stress these as a means of holding their
own against their neighbours. I shall not, however, go into this matter
myself but leave it to be dealt with by historians of ideas.

As soon as a group wishes to improve its status and give prominence
to its own way of life, it is faced with the problem of neighbourhood
or — as I should like to call it — the relationship of different peoples
living next to each other. One then leaves the study of the separate
socictics — mono-ethnic groups, and turns to that of neighbouring
groups — poly-ethnic groups. In this article I shall give some views
on questions connected with this and take as my starting point some
comparatively meagre material from Laos, where I did short field-
studies in 1936-38 and more recently in 1963-64. As my aim had
not been to study these questions, this paper can so far only be a sketch
or outline.

Indo-China is very definitely a poly-ethnic society and some very
fine studies of it have already been made by E. R. Leach (1954), who
deals with conditions in Highland Burma. He has later also published
an article ‘The Frontiers of Burma' (Leach 1960) which, however,
deals chiefly with the differences between the mountain and the valley
tribes. Drawing mostly from Burmese material he shows the different
structures characteristic of these two different societies, and the con-
nection between them and Indian and Chinese systems.



=== PDF p69 L (book-seq 136) ===
136 KARL G. IZIKOWITZ

However, in the following I shall deal chiefly with the contact
between the tribes in Laos and my reflections will therefore be more
in line with those in Leach’s book The Political Systems of Highland
Burma.

Adaptation to neighbouring peoples, who often have entirely differ-
ent ways of life, social structures, and cultures, has always been a great
problem which we often see in history. In our day, however, these prob-
lems have greatly increased as a result of the influence of Western
civilization on the traditional poly-ethnic societies through coloniza-
tion, industrialization etc.. New relationships and new centres have
been created giving rise in many cases to difficult conflicts. In many
places they have also produced strong nationalistic movements which
in due course, by means of schools and other media, have led to assim-
ilation and uniformity.

‘One nation, one race, one people, one culture’, etc. has been more
than just a slogan in nationalistic propaganda. In this struggle, minor-
ities have often got the worst of it and, where not assimilated or
eradicated, have been forced into opposition and stronger unity.
Various ideologies have, of course, been used in the struggles. Philos-
ophers and politicians have tried to solve the problems of such con-
testing neighbours, but the results have perhaps not always been very
successful. For my part I presume that it is important to examine the
situation as it appears and occurs in reality, and I think anthropologists
could contribute much of value. It is not only a question of analysing
the conditions and the situation in the neighbourhood but also of trying
to evolve certain principles of more or less general character which
could be of help in dealing with such problems.

With decolonization these poly-ethnic problems have become burn-
ing ones as a large proportion of the new states is composed of a
mosaic of different tribes. Not having had so many of these problems
we lack experience in the West. European countries are well on the
way to being unified. They usually have a common language, common
customs, etc.. In some non-European areas such uniformity can also
be found, probably because the assimilation processes have already
taken place. One needs only study a map of the earth’s peoples to see
large uniform areas, e.g. in Asia, and compare these with the areas in
Southern Asia, Africa, and South America.

It is all a question of adapting oneself to one’s neighbours, and of
how this is accomplished. In many poly-ethnic communities, however,
the various groups live apart and contact is either non-existent or



=== PDF p69 R (book-seq 137) ===
NEIBHBOURS IN Laos 137

limited to a minimum. Maybe one meets at markets but hardly more.
But markets are neutral zones and when these become permanent, as
in the case of towns, mining communities, industrial areas, plantations,
etc. they become central areas and strong contacts are established
there, whereas contacts are often only slight between the various tribes
living out in the country. Contact is not always sought; some avoid it
(a kind of political-ethnic avoidance). Tibet and Nepal are examples
of this, as Bhutan also is still. It is particularly true of Burma today.
Its frontiers, as we know, are closed.

What interests me here, however, are the kinds of contact which
create interdependence between different groups. This causes concen-
tration of large groupings of peoples whose relationships — be they
positive or negative — form systems which generate dominant actions.
These sometimes remain even when the systems change.

Laos is a very sparsely populated country (about 4 persons per sq.
km) with difficult terrain, most of it mountainous. The Mekong, which
flows through the length of it, is navigable by canoes for most of its
course. The tributaries which flow down from the mountains are only
navigable at their mouths. The country’s network of roads is very
underdeveloped and the few relatively new roads for motorized traffic
are hardly usable except in the dry seasons. There are a few cross-
country caravan paths intended for pack-horses. Within the territory
of each tribe there are acceptable paths but between tribal territories
these are often overgrown or almost non-existent. Large uninhabited
stretches of wilderness separate one tribe from the next. The rivers
and the few caravan trails were the most important means of com-
munication before colonization; and only those who could navigate
the dangerous rapids in their canoes controlled the lines of communica-
tions.

The differences between the various ethnic groups are considerable.
The various mountain tribes are divided into many different language
groups. Even where there are similarities in the way of life and the
structure of the ethnic groups, differences exist. Most of them make
their livelihood from swidden agriculture, their main produce being
glutinous rice. The Mon-Klhmer-speaking peoples, the first to popu-
late the area, are fairly permanently settled (contrary to what is often
described in the French literature) which, in part may be related to
the fact that there is no particular shortage of land.

The more recent immigrants from Southern China and Tonkin, the
Meo- and Yao-speaking tribes, seem to be slowly spreading. Their



=== PDF p70 L (book-seq 138) ===
138 KARL G. IZIKOWITZ

cash-crop is poppies from which they extract opium, the trade in which
is of great importance.

The distribution of the ethnic groups is layered. The Meo tribe
lives highest in the mountains, as do certain other tribes. Halfway
down the mountain sides and below on the plains live some farmers
practising swidden agriculture.

The valleys and river plains, where wet rice can be cultivated, are
the home of the Thai tribes. Some of them, particularly the northern
groups, have very advanced irrigation. The Thai tribes have inhabited
South China and the northern parts of Indo-China for a long time.
When Kublai Khan invaded Indo-China in 1353 the Thai tribes
acquired political power over large parts of this territory and began
to settle there and assimilate other tribes. The Thai are organized in
a state headed by an aristocracy and form a contrast to the segmented
highlanders who, in Laos, do not seem politically to have passed the
village stage. The village chiefs usually act as ritual leaders presiding
over the village council.

Thus in the Thai districts there are states and the population is
somewhat denser. The Thai tribes in Thailand and Laos are Buddhists,
whereas the rest of the Thai people, especially those in Tonkin, are not.
Upon the latter the Chinese influence has been stronger and they
have constantly been under pressure from the Chinese. The Vietnamese
have been the most influenced by the Chinese. Thai expansion has
continued right into the twentieth century, partly as a result of Chinese
pressure. During the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries a number of
Thai communities left their home districts and emigrated south; some
even moved down to the Malay Peninsula. The Mekong valley is full
of different types of Thai tribes. Some of them are very conscious of
their origin and of the fact that they differ from the Siamese and the
Lao.

Even if the Thai tribes settle in areas where they can cultivate wet
rice, a strategic trading position is of importance to them. The Lii,
a Thai tribe living mostly on the Chinese frontiers bordering on Laos
and Burma, controlled not long ago a state called Sippsong Panna.
Several villages emigrated from Sippsong Panna at the end of the
nineteenth century and settled down at points along a caravan trail
which goes from China through Laos down to north eastern Siam. It
was along this path that opium was transported and the location of the
new Lii villages was partly determined by their participation in opium
smuggling. They were a link in the chain between certain mountain



=== PDF p70 R (book-seq 139) ===
NEIGHBOURS IN Laos 139

tribes, Chinese and many other members of the big international con-
federacy.

The Lao and other Thai controlled the trade on the Mekong. The
points where each tributary from the mountains flowed into the
Mekong were therefore naturally of strategic importance, and it is
there we find the big Lao villages. Their names all begin with Pak
which means mouth of a river. The locality was chosen to provide trade
facilities with mountain tribes. Local products were collected in these
villages and then sent on along the Mekong by raft and canoe. The
produce of the mountain tribes consisted of shellac, cane, wax, Spanish
pepper, rice, cardamom, etc. In exchange they received foresters’
knives and other iron implements. They also bought pots, Lao cloth,
etc.. They could only make few of these wares themselves.

These dominant Thai tribes had a very condescending attitude
towards the mountain tribes. They were called Kka = slave, servant,
and before the colonization had to pay taxes to the Lao in the form
of produce and services. Those living near the Lao centres were often
quite poor. Outside the Thai controlled area one finds, as Leach
(1960:64) also did in Burma, the large wealthy mountain villages. Con-
tempt for the mountain tribes is still widespread and in the political
situation of today this causes quite a lot of trouble.

There is usually no intermarriage between Thai and Kha, but there
are exceptions. When new Thai villages were being built along the
lower parts of tributaries, the Thai men first settled at such trading
stations. They took, and I have seen examples of this, wives from
among the local Lamet women. Their children were Thai, and when
Lao families moved in, these places became genuine Thai villages.

In certain parts such mixed marriages have had ritual significance.
I have heard of a newly immigrated Thai chief in Southern Laos who
gave his daughter in marriage to a Kha chief so that the latter in
return should use his expertise to perform the rites for phi muong,
i.e. the earth’s or area's spirit. At the royal court in Luangphrabang
there is also a custom that a Khmu chief (Khmu = a Kha tribe) should
conduct the Lao king to his throne on certain occasions.

The Thai who settled down among the original inhabitants and
came to dominate them were probably a small group. Gradually they
managed to assimilate the earlier inhabitants. The Thai families then
became an upper class and the Thai-ized inhabitants a lower class.
This is particularly noticeable among the black Thai in Tonkin. One
notices the difference between the two groups racially too. Leach



=== PDF p71 L (book-seq 140) ===
140 KarwL G. IzIKOwITZ

considers that as far as Burma is concerned there are no racial dif-
ferences. But I can hardly believe that this is always the case.

A Sek village (the Sek, who speak an archaic Thai language, prob-
ably came to Southern Laos very early) which I visited in 1964 was
divided in two by a deep ravine. One half was inhabited by Seks and
a few Lao families, the other by completely Thai-ized So (a Kha
tribe), who also organized the rites for the earth spirit. Although they
had the same culture as the Sek, the real Sek looked down upon them
so much that they did not like my visiting the other half of their
village. They held them in great contempt and marriages did not occur
between members of the different village halves. Here, too, one could
clearly distinguish differences in their appearances.

Intermarriage is also rare between mountain tribes. I found an
exception to this in the Lamet villages in Northern Laos, where 1
stayed before the War, and where there had been several intermar-
riages with the Khmu. Both these mountain tribes considered them-
selves to be closely related and aboriginal in the area.

Intermarriage between different Thai tribes seems to be easier,
particularly between villages close to each other. This probably has
some connection with the fact that the youngest daughter usually
remains in the home with her parents. She later inherits the house and
what land has not been divided among her elder brothers and sisters.
So when she gets married she stays at home to look after the old
people. It is then usually the custom for a boy from another Thai tribe
in the neighbourhood to marry her. In a future article I hope to give
some statistics to demonstrate this assertion.

The difference between mountain and valley dwellers is thus con-
siderable and is stressed by all those who have written about these
parts. In this case the governing Thai tribes lord it over the subjugated
Kha. The difference in status is very distinct. And it is this difference
which is so marked in the present-day political division of Laos
between the valley and the mountain tribes. One of its results is also
that the sons of noble and influential Laos get the best jobs, whereas
educated mountain tribesmen sometimes flee to Pathet Lao, i.e. the
East block on the other side of the ‘bamboo curtain’.

The Thai tribes and mountain tribes have up till now been in con-
tact with each other and are still partly so, but the relationship of Laos
to North Vietnam is changing this. Laos is of strategic importance to
North Vietnam. Prince Soupannivong of Laos, who is related to the
royal family in Lungphrabang, probably seeks to be a charismatic

4
{



=== PDF p71 R (book-seq 141) ===
NEIGHBOURS IN Laos 141

leader among the mountain tribes and uses them for his own strategy.
Strife and quarrels about succession are, as Leach points out, 2 com-
mon story in the Thai area (Leach 1960:57). The power of the princes
depends on the charisma they can create.

On the Vietnamese side of the Annamite mountain chain conditions
are quite different but have not yet been examined. The Vietnamese
can hardly have had the same contact as the Lao with the mountain
tribes. They have mostly been tied by their cultivation technique:
elevation irrigation. The tribes on that side of the mountains have
therefore been rather independent. The Vietnamese have hardly
showed any desire to settle down in the fruitful mountain valleys.
During the war with the French, which ended with the battle at
Dien-bien-phu and the Geneva settlement in 1954, some of the moun-
tain Thai, the Tho, helped Viet-Minh, after their nobles had fled over
to the French. During the war with the Americans the mountain tribes
have also helped FNL and the North Vietnamese. These latter have,
as a matter of fact, little experience of jungle and mountain terrain.
The South Vietnamese have looked down upon the mountain tribes,
whereas the Viet-Minh spread propaganda among them in their own
language.

The difference between the relationships Thai/mountain tribes and
Viet/mountain tribes is probably quite considerable. The Thai tribes
and mountain tribes had more contact with each other than with the
Vietnamese. I shall now attempt to explain this interdependence from
a more general point of view.

To understand the poly-ethnic relationships existing between neigh-
bouring tribes in Laos, it is necessary to make a few comparisons. I
shall here limit myself to a few aspects only, and I wish my treatment
of these to be considered tentative.

As far as I can see, the boundaries which separate different neigh-
bouring ethnic groups are made apparent by the social and cultural
differences between them. These differences seem to belong mainly
to three categories.

1. Differences in techniques of expression, whether it be in language,
ritual actions, gestures, etiquette, or customs. Here one should not over-
look such important matters as, for example, customary diet.

2. Value systems, which are probably a product of the world view
and the social structure. These are intimately connected with tech-
niques of expression.

3. Self-identification. Whether they themselves consider that they



=== PDF p72 L (book-seq 142) ===
e
l

142 KArL G. IzrkowITZ

belong to the group, at least in some respects, and whether this is
accepted by the members of the group. One should not forget the
negative side of this attitude, i.e. that one does not consider oneself to

belong to the neighbouring group. This may be important in cases

where identification with one’s own group is not particularly strong.
Identification can change and one can consider that one belongs to [
one’s own group only in certain situations, whereas in others one may

be on the way to identifying oneself with another group.

1 should like to call all these three categories introspective, i.e. they
are directed towards the group of identification. Within it one has a
social position and a certain rank.

Different conditions, however, exist for the outward-looking cate-

gories, which describe relationships between the different groups.
Partly these may be dependent on the difference between the intro-
spective traits of each of the two groups which somehow affect the
relations between them. I shall not, however, analyse this here. It is a
matter for later elucidation. Instead I shall turn to two categories
particularly apparent in poly-ethnic relationships.

1. Identification is important, but it is of a different kind from the
one previously mentioned. It is not a question of identification with
one’s own group but of outside evaluation of the group and whether
this evaluation will be accepted. In a poly-ethnic society, I should
imagine, there is often some sort of classification system based on
estimates about the characteristics of different tribes. Perhaps this is .
true mostly within hierarchical societies where the opinions of the l
leading group are decisive? By means of such classification each tribe
or ethnic group acquires a social position and, possibly, defined roles
and special status.

2. Relations between the ethnic groups must be expressed in some
forms of interaction if, that is, the different neighbours have any con-
tact with each other. As I shall now show in an example taken from
Laos, it is not a question of one sort of action but of several kinds often
on different levels.

Interaction then depends on the nature of the relations, the accepted
evaluation of the different ethnic groups etc., and can lead to war,
rebellion, persecution, flight, the imitation of customs, peaceful trade,
and many other types of action.

However, these relations between neighbours depend on their con-
tacts and on whether the two societies are democratic or whether at
least one has an autocratic system, i.e. whether it is a meeting between



=== PDF p72 R (book-seq 143) ===
NEIGHBOURS IN Laos 143

hierarchical or non-hierarchical societies. The forms of interaction
then depend on these two forms of society, the differences reminding
us a little of those between two of the more usual types of political
structure.

That the meeting-places or contact zones between the ethnic groups
play an important part here is rather obvious. Ecology is an important
factor, as I have shown in my examples from Laos and from Leach’s
Highland Burma. In Laos thesc points of contact are often situated
along lines of communication, rivers and caravan routes. It cases
where these meeting-places are located on ecologically strategic sites
they may be fairly stable.

There is also the question of how often these meeting-places are
used. Have they permanent inhabitants or not? In Laos the Thai and
mountain tribes only meet on a few rare occasions during the year to
exchange wares. In other parts of the world there are permanent
markets or at least regularly occurring ones. In the countries where
there are states, as, for example, in Laos, small market towns often
grow up where the administration is centred. One finds the more
important Buddhist temples and monasteries there too and these places
often attract craftsmen and trade.

In many of the countries studied by anthropologists there were no
towns in the traditional community. They first came with colonization
or as a result of Western influence. In modern Africa, for example,
Southall (1961) distinguishes between two types of towns of this kind,
and it is the ones beside plantations and mining communities which
attract working-power from many different directions. Thus the towns
become important poly-ethnical centres, where industries and admin-
istration create new social classes which are quite different from those
in the villages. Here identification changes too. In everyday situations
one might identify oneself with a certain class instead of one’s own
tribe. Identification changes according to one’s work and the education
one has received.

With these general assumptions and principles as a starting-point,
one can find various combinations and types which I shall not, how-
ever, attempt to systematize here. I shall only give a few examples
which may give some idea of the mobile system to be found in poly-
ethnical Laos.

It is clear that in Laos there is something I should like to call a
segmentary relationship. As I have already said, the Lamet and the
Khmu tribes are on good terms with each other and think of each



=== PDF p73 L (book-seq 144) ===
144 KARL G. IzZIKOWITZ

other as ‘brothers’, whereas there is strong opposition between them
and the autocratic Thai tribes, who form another solidary unit. An
exception to this are the Thai relations with the very independent
tribes of Man (Yao) and Meo, which immigrated from China com-
paratively late. They are often literate, in contrast to the usually
entirely illiterate Mon-Khmer-speaking tribes. o

I should think similar situations are to be found in many parts of '
the world. To name but one example from Algeria (Bourdieu 1958) f
the relations between Berbers and Arabs there are often strained, but
during the Algerian war they united aginst the common enemy. When
peace returned the enmity between them flamed up anew.

Many neighbouring tribes are often entirely dependent on products
from each other, making an exchange of wares and services necessary.
Here, too, Algeria can provide us with an example and this comple-
mentation between nomads and farmers is probably to be found over
large parts of the Orient. Even if there is enmity between the parties,
they must maintain a minimum of reciprocity.

In many parts, markets are important centres for contact between
different tribes, particularly when these markets are regularly in
operation and are firmly established. In connection with India’s first
election after her independence in 1952, I noticed that election pro-
paganda was spread in weekly markets. Up on the Koraput plateau
in the state of Orissa these market places were the meeting points for
all the different neighbouring tribes as well as for the Hindu customers
for their products.

In the cases where some of the tribes have a hierarchical organiza-
tion, something halfway between a democratic and an autocratic com-
munity is sometimes formed. Here I am thinking mainly of the
extremely interesting conditions which exist among the Kachin in
Burma and also of the similar oscillation between these forms of com-
munity to be found among a number of tribes in the mountains of
Burma. This mixed form, halfway between the aristocratically organ-
ized Shan tribes and the democratic Kachin, Leach calls gumsa, a
Kachin community of autocratic type but relatively unstable. It soon
disintegrates and returns to gumlao, the name for the democratic type,
only to be transformed again on some later occasion back to gumsa.
Leach considers that gumsa is an imitation of and influenced by the
Shan system. Gumlao is also unstable due to the mayu-dama system,
whereby one obtains a different status according to whether one is a
bride-taker or a bride-giver. The latter has the higher position. Thus



=== PDF p73 R (book-seq 145) ===
NEIGHBOURS IN Laos 145

it is a question of oscillating between one extreme and the other for
the Kachin, whose already unstable gumlao system is strengthened
by the influence from the Shan model to become gumsa. I do not think
I need relate more from this classic work, which is probably known
to most anthropologists (Leach 1954).

I have not come upon anything similar among the mountain tribes
in Laos. Maybe this has to do with the lack of real chieftainship among
the Mon-Khmer-speaking population. The only thing I have been able
to observe is perhaps a tendency in that direction among the Lamet
tribe, something which appeared with the change brought about by
the labour immigration to Thailand and the introduction of money.

Gluckman has a somewhat similar example from the Zulus. Here
we have three groups: the whites and the Africans, who are divided
into two groups, on one hand the Christians and the native officials
and on the other the non-Christians. The middle group composed of
the Christians and officials are dependent on the whites. They can,
however, never enter the closed circle of the whites and are at the
same time drawn back by their brothers in order to build a national
African union to fight against the whites. This middle group then
oscillates between the whites and the non-Christian Africans (Gluck-
man 1958).

I do not think it would be difficult to find more examples of such
middle groups, particularly in contact zones between Western societies
and the traditional ones.

It is not unusual to find in several societies a system of classification
whereby all kinds of groups including the ethnic ones are fitted into
a hierarchy. The most well-known is probably the Indian caste system,
which is applied all over India and even to such groups which are
not actually Hindu. Such hierarchical relations, in their turn, generate
certain typical actions. Hypergamy and dowries are part of all this and
in connection with these institutions there are several financial transac-
tions, such as the money-lending system and trade in gold and
precious stones, which have played an important part in Indian society.
Much of this is connected with the attempts constantly being made to
improve one’s social status, either in order to enter a caste, if one is
an outcast, or to climb up on to a higher rung in the Indian hierarchy.

I should, however, presume that this is not only true of the quite
special Indian situation but of all societies where the different groups
are arranged in a hierarchy. The relationship between the aristocratic
Thai tribes in Laos and their neighbours, the mountain tribes, is



=== PDF p74 L (book-seq 146) ===
146 KARL G. IzIKOWITZ

undoubtedly a hierarchy of this kind. Often the hierarchical system of
closed groups is confused with the caste system. Differences such as
those between the literate and the illiterate, as in the case of Laos,
can then be of importance. The language and religion of the leading
group is then forced upon its subordinates and Leach points out how
quickly the Kachin tribes with their different languages learn the
Thai language and adapt themselves to the Shan (Leach 1954: 239 et
seq.).

Many poly-ethnic relationships depend on the existence of a cen-
tralized state authority. The towns and administration centres spread
propaganda for the language and culture of the leading group. For
hierarchical as well as non-hierarchical societies such central places
as towns play quite a special part in the re-grouping and possible
fusing together of the different ethnical groups, as I have already
pointed out.

The poly-ethnic relationships in Laos are definitely hierarchical
but the different groups here have not gone together to form a unit.
It is still a very loose system, where one party, the Thai tribe, tries to
dominate the other which it superciliously calls Kha. The latter wish
to maintain their independence, quite an easy matter, at they can with
little difficulty retire to some distant place in the mountains. There is
no problem about land in this thinly populated country. In most places
one can find a hill-slope suitable for swidden cultivation.

To sum up, the aristocratic Thai try to dominate the democratic
mountain tribes, who simply avoid them and keep away from them
as much as possible. No integration has been possible in the state of
Laos and in the situation at present this division is emphasized since
most hill tribes are separated from the plain dwellers by the ‘bamboo
curtain’. This separation of valley tribes from hill tribes is now a
fact. An exception is, however, provided by immigrants from China
some of whom have left the east side and settled down in the govern-
ment’s area. It would be interesting to know how many of these
people now live west of the ‘bamboo curtain’.

The Lao domination of the mountain tribes certainly dates back a
long time. Before the war the Lao only managed to control the tribes
living near the towns and other administrative centres. Thus the
Khmu tribes around Luangphrabang have been subjugated for a long
time but there were rebellions even before colonization, and several
of these tribes were made slaves after they were defeated. Slavery
was, however, abolished by the French in 1884 (Reinach 1911).



=== PDF p74 R (book-seq 147) ===
NEIGHBOURS IN Laos 147

But the mountain tribes beyond the control of the Thai remained
free. Contact with them in the form of direct visits or in the few
markets in the towns through Thai merchants was peaceful. There
have been marriages between the two tribes but these have certainly
been very rare. Trade has indeed been the most important connection,
especially as the mountain tribes have been dependent on supplies of
iron wares, salt and other Thai products. Thus these relations have
been of quite a different quality than the above-mentioned domina-
tion.

As the mountain tribesmen usually need money for paying the bride-
price and capital for buying the valuable objects which belong to the
ancestor cult and which give prestige in their own society, it has been
customary for the young men to leave home to find work or to enrol
as soldiers in the service of some Thai prince. The latter is the case
of the Khuen tribe, a2 Khmu tribe in the province of Namntha, who
used to be soldiers of the prince of Nan (Thailand). Labour could be
found in the teak forest and plantations in Thailand.

The Thai tribes, however, aim at something quite different. Either
they want to acquire prestige by giving presents to the Buddhist
temples or by turning to politics and with the help their followers
attain a position of power. Examples of this are easy to find. All the
political coups which have occurred in that country since the last world
war are attributable to such activity! Even if the migration or expan-
sion of Thai groups to other parts of Indo-China has often occurred
because of Chinese pressure in earlier times, it was led by men who
showed charismatic qualities and acquired a following (Leach 1960:57,
Izikowitz 1963).

The boundaries between the two ethnic groups are formed chiefly
by differing political structures and differing aims. The ecological
adaptation has probably not been so important since both groups can
live side by side exploiting the same niches. Neither can the language
differences be of importance since most of the mountain tribes can
speak a Thai language as well as their own.

The various types of poly-ethnic relations should be considered as
social states — i.e. parts of a social change which is taking place. Rela-
tions can in certain cases change very rapidly, particularly poly-ethnic
relations of a segmentary type, where friendship and enmity alternate.
They can also do so in societies with a system like that of the Kachin
tribe, where there is constant oscillation between two extremes. Where
there are hierarchical societies with domination relationships, attempts



=== PDF p75 L (book-seq 148) ===
e —
|

148 KARL G. IzikowITZ

at assimilation occur, which lead in their turn to avoidance, flight, or
rebellion.

In a state like Laos with a developed system for propaganda via
schools, the Buddhist organization, etc., the poly-ethnic society may
gradually turn into 2 mono-ethnic one in times of peace. The present-
day nationalistic propaganda in many of the newly created states
which were earlier colonial countries seems really to be an action
towards changing the country into a national unit and obliterating
the great ethnic differences. In Laos, for example, all people are called
Lao but it is really only the Thai tribes who have so far showed a
tendency to merge.

Industrialization will no doubt lead to a general uniformity as far as
the ethnic groups are concerned. But it is a long and painful process.
Instead of identifying oneself with a tribe as before, one is on the way
to being assimilated into a group, where what counts is achieved status
and not ascribed status.

In any case, one must examine the state in all poly-ethnic societies
with special reference, among other things, to the kinds of strategy
used by the different groups, whether they be ethnic units or newly-
formed groups with a system grounded on education. In all such states
various forms of myth-creation and propaganda appear, as well as
multiple action forms, which have long interested historians. Anthro-
pologists must, however, go further into these things and see which
of all the relations and actions produced by poly-ethnic societies have
general validity. This would certainly also be of importance to the
peace research of our time. After all the whole earth is a segmentary
society.



=== PDF p75 R (book-seq 149) ===
Bibliography

Aarseth, B. 1967. Status og fremtidsperspektiver i reindriften. Same-
liv: Samisk Selskaps Arbok. Oslo.

Aguirre Beltran, A. 1953. Formas de gobierno indigena. México.

Arensberg, C. M. 1963. The Old World Peoples: The Place of Euro-
pean Cultures in World Ethnography. Anthropological Quarterly,
Vol. 36.

Barth, F. 1955. The Social Organization of a Pariah Group in Norway.
Norveg 5.

Barth, F. 1956a. Ecologic Relationships of Ethnic Groups in Swat,
North Pakistan. American Anthropologist, Vol. 5.

Barth, F. 1956b. Indus and Swat Kohistan — an Ethnographic Survey.
Studies Honouring the Centennial of Universitetets Etnografiske
Museum, 1857-1957, Vol. IL. Oslo.

Barth, F. 1959. Political Leadership among the Swat Pathans. London
School of Economics Monographs on Social Anthropology, No. 19.
London.

Barth, F. 1964a. Ethnic Processes on the Pathan-Baluch Boundary.
In G. Redard, ed.: Indo-Iranica. Wiesbaden.

Barth, F. 1964b. Competition and Symbiosis in North East Baluchistan.
Folk, Vol. 6. No. 1.

Barth, F. 1964c. The Fur of the Jebel Marra. ‘Outline of Society’
for Department of Anthropology, University of Khartoum. Mimeo.

Barth, F. 1966. Models of Social Organization. Royal Anthropological
Institute of Great Britain and Ireland, Occasional Papers, No. 23.

Barth, F. 1967a. Economic Spheres in Darfur. In R. Firth, ed.: Themes
in Economic Anthropology. London.

Barth, F. 1967b. Human Resources: social and cultural features of
the Jebel Marra Project Area. Department of Social Anthropology,
University of Bergen. Mimeo.

10. Barth



=== PDF p76 L (book-seq 150) ===
150 BIBLIOGRAPHY

Barth, F. 1968. On the Study of Social Change (Plenary Address to the
American Anthropological Association Meeting, 1966). American
Anthropologist, Vol. 70.

Blom, F. 1956. Vida precortesiana del indio chiapaneco de hoy. In
Estudios Antropolégicos publicados en homenaje al doctor Manuel
Gamio. México D.F.

Blom, F. & La Farge, O. 1927. Tribes and Temples. Louisiana.

Blom, J. P. & Gumperz J. J. 1968. Some Social Determinants of Verbal
Behaviour. In J. J. Gumperz & Dell Hymes, ed.: Directions in
Sociolinguistics. California.

Bogoras, W. 1904—9. The Chuckchee. Anthropological Memoirs,
American Museum of Natural History, Vol. II. New York.

Bohannan, P. 1963. Social Anthropology. New York.

Bourdien, P. 1958. Sociologie de I'Algérie. In Que sais-je? No. 802.
Paris.

Cancian, F. 1965. Economics and Prestige in a Maya Community.
Stanford, California.

Caroe, O. 1962. The Pathans 550 B.C.—A.D. 1957. London.

Colby, B. N. & van den Berghe, P. L. 1961. Ethnic Relations in South-
eastern Mexico. American Anthropologist, Vol. 63.

Cunnison, 1. 1966. Baggara Arabs: Power and the Lineage in a
Sudanese Nomad Tribe. Oxford.

Dahl, H. 1957. Sprakpolitikk og skolestell i Finnmark 1814-1905.
Oslo.

Eidheim, H. 1963. Entrepreneurship in Politics. In F. Barth, ed.: The
Role of the Entrepreneur in Social Change in Northern Norway.
Arbok for Universitetet i Bergen, Humanistisk Serie, No. 3.

Eidheim, H. 1966. Lappish Guest Relationships under Conditions of
Cultural Change. American Anthropologist, Vol. 68.

Eidheim, H. 1968. The Lappish Movement — an Innovative Political
Process. In M. Swartz, ed.: Local-level Politics. Chicago.

El Hadi El Nagar & Taha Baashar. 1962. A Psycho-Medical Aspect
of Nomadism in the Sudan. In The Effect of Nomadism on the Eco-
nomic and Social Development of the People of the Sudan. Philo-
sophical Society of the Sudan. Proceedings of the Tenth Annual
Conference. Khartoum.

Falkenberg, J. 1964. Samer og fastboende i Roros-traktene. Norveg 11.

Ferdinand, K. 1962. Nomadic Expansion and Commerce in Central
Afghanistan — a sketch of some modern trends. Folk, Vol. 4.

Ferdinand, K. 1967. Alttelinjestabilitet Blandt Nomader i @st-Af-



=== PDF p76 R (book-seq 151) ===
BIBLIOGRAPHY 151

ghanistan. Paper submitted in advance for participants in the
Wenner-Gren Symposium on ‘Ethnic Groups’, Bergen Feb. 23rd to
26th 1967.

Furnivall, J. S. 1944. Netherlands India: A study of Plural Economy.
Cambridge.

Furnivall, J. S. 1948. Colonial Policy and Practice. London.

Garvin P. L. 1958. Comment on the Concept of Ethnic Groups as
Related to Whole Societies, by Herbert H. Vreeland. In W. Austrin,
ed.: Report of the Ninth Annual Round Table Meeting in Linguistics
and Language Studies. Washington.

Gjessing, G. 1954. Changing Lapps: A Study in Culture Relations in
Northernmost Norway. London School of Economics Monographs
on Social Anthropology, No. 13. London.

Gluckman, M. 1958. An Analysis of the Social Situation in Modern
Zululand. Rhodes-Livingstone Papers, No. 28. Manchester.

Goffman, E. 1959. The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life. New
York.

Goffman, E. 1963. Stigma: Notes on the Management of Spoiled
Identity. New Jersey.

Greenberg, J. H. 1966. Languages of Africa. Bloomington.

Guiteras Holmes, C. 1946. Informe de Cancuc. Microfilm Collection
of Manuscripts on Middle American Cultural Anthropology, No. 8,
University of Chicago Library.

Gumperz, J. J. 1958. Dialect Differences and Social Stratification in
a North Indian Village. American Anthropologist, Vol. 60.

Haaland, G. 1968. Nomadization as an Economic Career among
Sedentaries in the Sudanic Savannah Belt. Department of Social
Anthropology, University of Bergen. Mimeo.

Izikowitz, K. G. 1963. Expansion. Folk, Vol. 5.

Kandre, P. 1967a. Autonomy and Integration of Social Systems: The
Tu Mien (Yao) Mountain Population and their Neighbours. In P.
Kunstadter, ed.: Southeast Asian Tribes, Minorities, and Nations.
Princeton.

Kandre, P. 1967b. Om etnisitet hos Iu Mien-Yao i Thailand, Laos och
Burma. Paper submitted in advance for participants at the Wenner-

Gren Symposium on ‘Ethnic Groups’, Bergen Feb. 23rd to 26th 1967.

Kirke- og undervisningsdepartementet, ed. 1959. Innstilling fra komi-
téen til @ utrede samesporsmdl. Oslo.

Kleivan, H. 1967. Gronlendere og andre dansker: Identitetsunder-
strekning og politisk integrasjon. Paper submitted in advance for



=== PDF p77 L (book-seq 152) ===
152 BIBLIOGRAPHY

Bergen Feb. 23rd to 26th 1967.

Knutsson, K. E. 1967. Authority and Change: A Study of the Kallu
Institutions among the Macha Galla of Ethiopia. Etnologiska Studier
29, Etnografiska Museet, Gothenburg.

Kroeber, A. L. 1939. Cultural and Natural Areas of Native North
America. Berkeley, California.

Leach, E. R. 1954. Political Systems of Highland Burma: A Study of
Kachin Social Structure. London. |

Leach, E. R. 1960. The Frontiers of Burma. Comparative Studies in |
Societies and History, Vol. 111,

Leach, E. R. 1967. Caste, Class and Slavery — the Taxonomic Prob-
lem. In A. de Reuck & J. Knight, eds.: Caste and Race: Compara-
tive Approaches. London.

Mitchell, J. C. 1956. The Kalela Dance: Aspects of Social Relation-
ships among Urban Africans in N. Rhodesia. The Rhodes-Living-
stone Papers, No. 27. Manchester.

Moerman, M. 1965. Who are the Lue: Ethnic Identification in a
Complex Civilization. American Anthropologist, Vol. 67.

Nadel, S. F. 1947. The Nuba. Oxford.

Narroll, R. 1964. Ethnic Unit Classification. Current Anthropology,
Vol. 5, No. 4.

Paine, R. 1965. Coast Lapp Society 11: A study of Economic Develop-
ment and Social Values. Tromss Museums Skrifter, Vol. IV. Oslo.

Pehrson, R. 1966. The Social Organization of the Marri Baluch
(compiled and analysed from his notes by F. Barth). Viking Fund
Publications in Anthropology No. 43. Chicago.

Pineda, V. 1888. Historia de las sublevaciones indigenas habidas en
el Estado de Chiapas. San Cristébal Las Casas, Chiapas.

Pitt-Rivers, J. & McQuown, N. A. 1964. Social Cultural and Linguistic
Changes in the Highland of Chiapas. Department of Anthropology
University of Chicago. Mimeo.

Pozas Arciniega, R. 1948. Juan Pérez Jolote: Biografia de un Tzotzil.
Acta Anthropologica, Vol. III, No. 3.

Pozas Arciniega, R. 1959. Chamula: Un pueblo indio de los altos de
Chiapas. Memorias del Instituto Nacional Indigenista, Vol. III,
México D.F.

Redfield, R. & Villa Rojas, A. 1989. Notes on the Ethnography of the
Tzeltal Communities of Chiapas. Carnegie Institution of Washing-
ton, Publication No. 509, Contribution 28.

participants in the Wenner-Gren Symposium on ‘Ethnic Groups’, \



=== PDF p77 R (book-seq 153) ===
BIBLIOGRAPHY 153

Reinach, L. 1911. Le Laos. 2 vols. (posthumous edition compiled by
P. Chemin-Duponts). Paris.

Sahlins, M. D. 1958. Social Siratification in Polynesia. The American
Ethnological Society. Washington.

Siverts, H. 1960. Political Organization in a Tzeltal Community in
Chiapas, Mexico. Alpha Kappa Delian, Vol. 30, No. 1.

Siverts, H. 1964. On Politics and Leadership in Highland Chiapas.
In E. Z. Vogt & A. Ruz Lhuillier, eds.: Desarrollo Cultural de los
Mayas. Universidad Nacional Auténoma de México.

Siverts, H. 1965a. Oxchujk’: En Mayastamme i Mexico. Oslo.

Siverts, H. 1965b. Some Economic Implications of Plural Society in
Highland Chiapas. Folk, Vol. 7.

Siverts, H. 1965¢c. The ‘Cacique’ of K'ankujk’: A Study of Leadership
and Social Change in Highland Chiapas, Mexico. Estudios de
Cultura Maya, Vol. V. Mexico D.F.

Sommerfelt, A. 1967. Inter-ctniske relasjoner i Toro. Paper sub-
mitted in advance for participants in the Wenner-Gren Symposium
on ‘Ethnic Groups’, Bergen Feb. 23rd to 26th 1967.

Southall, A. 1961. Social Change in Modern Africa. London.

Sundt, E. 1850-65. Beretning om Fante- eller Landstrygerfolket i
Norge. Christiania.

Villa Rojas, A. 1942-44. Notas sobre la etnografia de los indios
tzeltales de Oxchuc. Microfilm Colection of Mss. on Middle Ameri-
can Cultural Anthropology, No. 7. University of Chicago Library.

Villa Rojas, A. 1947. Kinship and Nagualism in a Tzeltal Community,
Southeastern Mexico. American Anthropologist, Vol. 49.

Vogt, E. Z. ed. 1966. Los zinacantecos: Un pueblo tzotzil de los altos
de Chiapas. Instituto Nacional Indigenista. Collecién de anthro-
pologia social, Vol. 7. Mexico D.F.

Vorren, O., ed. 1960. Norway North of 65. Tromse Museums Skrifter,
Vol. VIII. Oslo.

Ward, B. 1965. Varieties of the Conscious Model: The Fishermen of
South China. In The Relevance of Models for Social Anthropology.
A.S.A. Monographs 1. London.
