Ethnic and Cultural Differentiation

by Jan-Petter Blom

The purpose of this paper is to discuss the cultural and organizational
requirements for the establishment of ethnic boundaries. I shall present
a case in which the cultural diversification of a peasant popula-
tion within a national state is shown to reflect continuous pro-
cesses of adaptation to shifting circumstances in the natural and social
environment. Socially, the situation is one in which the resultant dif-
ferentiation presupposes symbiotic interdependencies of people in dis-
similar adaptational positions and is thus reminiscent of the so-called
plural society (Furnivall 1948).

However, although stereotypes and prejudices referring to cate-
gorizations of observed cultural differences are frequently held, they
are never made directly relevant to the relationships between people
with dissimilar backgrounds and ways of life.

Consequently, ethnic homogeneity is maintained throughout the area
in spite of the apparent diversity in behavioural styles and forms of
social organization. My case is thus a negative one, and through the
analysis I shall try to show that the organization of ethnic identities
does not depend on cultural diversity per se, as generally assumed in
anthropology, but rather on the assignment of particular social mean-
ings to a limited set of acts.

There is within the South Norwegian peasantry a population
characterized by direct dependence upon the utilization of the high
mountain environment for hunting, fishing and the grazing of live-
stock. This population, collectively referred to as mountain peasants
(fjellbonder), lives in local communities which are situated in deep,
narrow river valleys and lake basins close to the central high mountain
plateaus.! These run from northeast to southwest and adjoin four major
regions (see map on page 75): the eastern region (@stlandet) with farm-



=== PDF p38 R (book-seq 75) ===
ETHNIC AND CULTURAL DIFFERENTIATION 75

KILOMETERS
S0 1o ase

South Norway. Narrow hatching : the location of the true mountain communities. Spaced
hatching : the adjacent area of central valley and inner Siordal communities with somewhat
similar adaptational features.

ing or combined farming/timbering; the southern region (Serlandet)
with smaller farming/timbering areas inland and farmer/fishermen on
the coast; the western region (Vestlandet) with farming populations
in the interior fiord areas and farmer/fishermen on the coast; and
finally the northern region (Trondelag) with rich agricultural areas
which are similar to the eastern region. Normally Norwegian farming
is mixed. combining the raising of livestock and the cultivation of grain
and root crops. The relative importance of these sectors depends on
ecologic conditions and therefore varies regionally.

As the map shows, the main concentration of the high mountain



=== PDF p39 L (book-seq 76) ===
76 JAN-PETTER BLoM

communities is found in the eastern area at altitudes between 500-
1000 m. The winters are severe and the summers short (about three
months) and cool, with middle temperatures for July varying locally
from 8-12° C. The landscape takes its character from the close juxta-
position of valley and mountain. An ecologic cline extends visibly with
increasing altitude from open coniferous forest through mountain
birch forest to high mountain vegetation such as heather and lichen.
Due to the prevalence of metamorphic rock over the area, the wood-
land floor, as well as the mountain slopes and plains, are rich in grass,
which provides excellent summer pastures. Topographically the condi-
tions vary: some valleys are quite narrow with steep sides, others are
relatively open with more broken terrain. The local communities or
districts are split up into clusters of adjoining farms (grender), which
crowd together whenever the valley bottom or lower slopes provide
small strips of arable land. Such settlements are found mostly on
moraine soils away from the valley bottoms, preferably on the north
or east sides where the danger of frost is least.

In regard to opportunities for farming, there is naturally a marked
ecological barrier between this mountain area and the surrounding
low valleys, plains and fiordal districts. In contrast to lowland farming
areas, the mountain communities are located above or near the
boundary for the guaranteed ripening of grain and root crops. Further-
more, even where the arable land allows for the cultivation of such
crops, it is nowhere sufficient to support the population. The ‘moun-
taineers’ may therefore be characterized as a population of marginal
farmers who are almost completely dependent on livestock for a living
and whose in-fields are, for a large part, cultivated meadows produc-
ing only hay.

Archaeological and historical sources indicate that this area was
not settled by agriculturalists until the lowland was filled. After the
Black Death (1349) most of the high valleys were completely or
partially depopulated, either as a direct result of the Black Death or
because the people moved down to the lowlands to take possession of
farms or tenant contracts which were vacant after the ravages of the
plague. It was not until the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries that
the high valleys again reached their former population level. Later
they became greatly over-populated in the course of the eighteenth
2nd nineteenth centuries, until the pressure was relieved by emigration
to America and by later industrial development.

It is therefore reasonable to assume that the whole southern Nor-



=== PDF p39 R (book-seq 77) ===
ETHNIC AND CULTURAL DIFFERENTIATION v
wegian farming population, mountaineers and lowlanders alike, has
a common cultural source. On the other hand, this population has
developed divergent cultural traits, or styles of life, in response to
adaptive requirements and opportunities provided by variations in
ecological conditions. While the lowland peasant is tied to the farm
and lives a stable and regular life, the mountain peasant’s adaptation
is based on the exploitation of large areas. He is constantly on the
move, trekking across the mountains; he is a hunter and a stock buyer.
As a result the mountaineer is often attributed a certain type of
character: he is a gambler, an artist and a ruffian in contrast to the
sturdy, mild lowlander.

However, if we want to demonstrate the validity of the ecological
approach to the problem of cultural diversification, we must be able
to make a model which shows the synchronic processes that generate
these empirical forms from a common cultural basis,

Since the high valleys are mainly dependent on livestock, the size
of the capital (cattle, sheep, goats) of a management unit is dependent
on the amount of fodder which can be acquired in the course of the
short harvest season. In the traditional system of production, where
the high quality of summer grazing is utilized by spring calving, haying
comes in the peak season of the dairy work. This situation prevents the
full utilization of the household’s labour in haying. Such labour
becomes men’s work, since the women are able to participate only
when they are free from the demands of caring for the livestock and
dairying.

Moreover, as the arable patches in the high valleys are steep and
stony, cultivation is labour consuming, much more so than in the low-
land where it is possible to apply more efficient techniques.

Because of the density of population relative to the amount of
arable land, farms are on the average too small to utilize fully the
available labour potential for cultivation and likewise too small to
provide a surplus of dairy products. Many peasants are therefore
forced to collect fodder from the forest and natural meadows, a
technique which requires a considerably larger investment of labour
than does the harvesting of arable ficlds.

Since these resources are available in practically unlimited quan-
tities, one can safely say that the work input in collecting fodder
represents the minimal factor in this production.

While a three generation family with small children, or a two
generation family with grown and half grown children, has a surplus



=== PDF p40 L (book-seq 78) ===
78 JAN-PETTER BLoM

of labour for the year as a whole, it has too little labour potential at
harvest time to enable it to collect fodder for flocks that would be
large enough to exploit completely the rich summer pastures. Nor
would it be realistic to base production on the import of seasonal
labour, since there is no easily tapped supply of labour at this season;
moreover, such labour is too expensive in relation to expected profit.
A significant augmentation of the household through the incorporation
of additional adult members is therefore neither a feasible nor an
attractive alternative.

Considering the labour potential available throughout the year, and
the large resources of pasturage which the mountain peasants control
de jure or de facto, it becomes clear that available productive capital
is the limiting factor in increasing the rate of utilization. The most
adequate adaptation would be one that made possible the acquisition
of seasonal capital, in the form of livestock, during the period when
pastures are available.

This situation has long been, and continues to be, a major deter-
minant for productive activity in the high valleys. The mountain
peasants have solved the problem by importing livestock from the
lowlands. This is done by several institutionalized arrangements:

1. Mountaineers establish agreements with lowlanders for the seasonal
rental of livestock, primarily cows and goats, thereby increasing
milk production in the summer.

2. Mountaineers buy up lowland calves in the spring for fattening;
these are sold in the autumn.

3. Mountaineers rent out mountain areas for the pasturing of sheep
or horses.

These solutions may be combined in various ways depending on the
resources of the individual farm unit, i.e. pasturage and labour.

Lowlanders also find such arrangements attractive, for a number
of reasons:

1. It saves labour.

2. It supplements inadequate lowland pastures.

3. It improves the quality of the stock, since mountain pasturage is,
especially for sheep, of considerably higher quality than lowland
pasturage.

4. This demand for capital makes it possible to utilize otherwise



=== PDF p40 R (book-seq 79) ===
ETHNIC AND CULTURAL DIFFERENTIATION 79

unexploited resources, such as winter pasturage on islands and
peninsulas along the west coast. By renting out or selling livestock,
peasants in such areas can keep herds larger than the household

alone could manage to make productive, even through intensive
utilization.

In this way, the mountain peasants’ demand for capital has caused
many lowlanders to grasp this opportunity for basing their system of
production upon a symbiotic relationship. The specific details of
contracts differ regionally and historically, reflecting the varying
tactical advantages of the partners, but they are all founded on the
unalterable ecologic contrast between the high valleys and the lowland
farming areas adjoining them.

The contracts are, as far as the mountain peasant is concerned,
based on three conditions: availability of abundant pastures in the
summer season, an external market for seasonal rental or buying of
livestock, and an external market for sale of surplus animal products.
The resultant pattern of utilization of resources contributes to make
the mountain farmers culturally distinctive in regard both to the type
of work they do and to the specific organizational solutions which are
embraced by individual households and local communities. Moreover,
these circumstances not only imply specialized techniques and skills,
but also contribute to the development of a characteristic mountaineer
style of life, with correlates on the level of attitude and world view.

A successful adaptation presupposes the solution of a number of
special technical and organizational problems. The stock must be
moved to the pastures early in the summer and back to the owner or to
the markets in the fall. Before the road system was sufficiently well
developed for truck transport, the animals were driven long distances
up the valleys or over the mountains and ferried by boat in the fiordal
areas. Driving livestock was very risky, especially the crossing of high
mountains in the autumn and early spring, because of unseasonal
cold and snow storms. However, different types of cooperation between
households made transport more efficient and reduced the risk. Cooper-
ative agreements were also made concerning the marketing of cheese
and meat. These are the basis for more recent joint efforts such as
the building of proper roads to summer dairy (seter) areas, joint
motorized transport of milk to main roads leading to dairies in the
towns or cities, and the founding of smaller, local cheese dairies.

Even so, this kind of farming carries a great deal of economic risk



=== PDF p41 L (book-seq 80) ===
80 JAN-PETTER BrLoM

for the individual unit. On the other hand, it also involves the pos-
sibility of growth through net investments in the enterprise. This is
achieved through purchase of more or better pasturage or through
seasonal buying and selling of yearlings. A successful enterprise entails I
geographical mobility and the ability, as well as the possibility to
exploit the changing opportunities in the market. This picture of the
mountaineer as a gambler is corroborated by his activities as reindeer
hunter and travelling middleman (skreppekar). The mountain com-
munities also tend to be the main areas for the recruitment of artist
craftsmen and musicians, who sell their output or expertise over wide
areas.

The foregoing analysis has attempted to show the ecological and
social bases for a cultural situation which in many important respects
is reminiscent of poly-ethnic societies, ie. culturally differentiated
regional populations in symbiotic interdependence based on the
exploitation of different ecologic niches. However, in a poly-ethnic
context, the interaction of the representatives of the discrete units
observes and maintains boundaries since all, by their actions, will
emphasize their respective ethnic identities — and thereby their mutual
cultural differences — in such a way that their relationship is
restricted to impersonal or role-specific forms. However, there is
no empirical evidence to support an assertion that interaction between
these mountain farmers and lowlanders is based on dichotomization
of such generalized, ethnic character. On the contrary, one finds that
the cultural difference is undercommunicated (Goffman 1959) by the
parties to the transaction: they display the same values and utilize
common idioms which stress similarity and mutual trust. Their inter-
action is therefore in principle identical with that which obtains
between individuals within a local community or district when they
are engaged in similar transactions.

These findings take us to our starting point, ie. the question of
social meanings implied by cultural diversification. The question sug-
gests an analytical dichotomy between culture, in the sense of stan-
dards of evaluation and their codification in social categories and
statuses, and culture in the sense of the manifest forms generated by
such values under specific ecologic and social conditions (Barth 1966,
1968).

Consequently, if we wish to explain, on this basis, the growth and
maintenance of the specialized forms of activity in the high valleys
and the traditions that are established as a result, we must be able to



=== PDF p41 R (book-seq 81) ===
ETHNIC AND CULTURAL DIFFERENTIATION o3

point to an intention on the part of this population to realize ideals
concerning their way of life which are common to Norwegians, or at
least to the whole agricultural population.

This can be demonstrated through an examination of the way in
which the mountain peasant allocates his annual production. Taking
into consideration the market price for his produce, and the amount
of money he needs to invest in the farm, he reserves some of his prod-
ucts for private consumption while income from the sale of the
remainder is used to buy imports, such as flour or grain, coffee, sugar,
household equipment, and some farm implements. Depending in this
way on the success of his various enterprises, it is possible for a moun-
tain peasant to achieve a consumption profile which corresponds
to that of the lowlander. This is shown to some extent in the every-
day diet but more importantly through the stress which is placed
on conspicuous consumption, as in housing and hospitality. Optimally
a part of the profit is saved either as movable property or money.
This capital is transferred to the children as inheritance or dowry
and serves as compensation to those who do not inherit land. In this
way the child who inherits the farm, normally the eldest son, may be
given the complete holding without prejudicing the position of his
siblings.

It is therefore safe to say that the mountain peasants not only
recognize the general criteria of rank which apply to the wider society,
but that by striving to live up to the standards of the richest and most
powerful people in the larger society — particularly those of the
peasants who constitute their natural reference group — they also
struggle to achieve the highest possible rank both within the local
community and beyond it. A farmer’s claim to rank is perhaps most
clearly shown in situations of hospitality, since this situation gives
the most dependable result in the form of social recognition. Large
amounts of food are stored for this purpose, often at the expense of
daily consumption. In the case of the mountain peasant, this often
means that he and his family may have to restrict themselves quite
drastically to achieve adequate visible advancement in the social
sphere.

My analysis thus indicates that the more a mountaineer involves
himself in social competition with peasants of the lowlands, and
through them with most Norwegians, the more his overt style of living
must diverge from that of people in other tactical positions. Through
this specialization, distinctive regional cultures emerge; but the pro-

6. Barth



=== PDF p42 L (book-seq 82) ===
82 JAN-PETTER BLoM

cess of diversification depends on the operation of factors that militate
against the systematization of cultural differences in the form of ethnic
boundaries. Confronted by specific ecologic and social limitations, the
mountain peasant tries to maximize ideals which, if he is successful
in his enterprise, will substantially raise his rank despite his natural
handicap; thus a situation arises which sometimes generates great
differences in rank within the local community in the high valleys.
A more concrete result of wealth and higher rank is often that one or
more of a mountain peasant’s children marry heirs to better farms,
either locally or in lower areas, or are launched into other types of
careers in the society at large. In rare cases a mountain peasant may
even himself manage to transform his resources and his wealth into a
reasonably good farm outside the high valley area.

Most of the mountain communities, especially in the years after
the last World War, have changed considerably. The extension of the
national road net crossing the area, construction of dams in connection
with hydro-electric enterprises, the growth of tourism and the pos-
sibility of local industrial development have given the mountain
peasant alternative productive uses for his time and local resources.
The same factors which previously favoured a growing cultural
diversification between regions now make a reintegration possible
through urbanization.

Aspects of the analysis above are reminiscent of studies such as that
of Sahlins (1958), who shows that the variation in the forms of social
stratification in Polynesia can be understood as adaptive variability
from a single cultural source. Historically, the argument implies the
geographic expansion of a population with an identical cultural
background and further implies processes of adaptation to particular
local environments that offer unique possibilities for the development
of patterns of leadership and inequality.

In a similar analytical tradition Arensberg (1963) shows that the
peoples of the Old World are set off from all others by a unique
cultural complex characterized by a food base of bread, milk, and meat
associated with a particular ecological pattern of mixed agriculture on
clean-cropped fields. This adaptation is based on a cycle of land use
rotating from hard field grains for bread to grassland fodder for
hoofed animals, which, in turn, provide manure for the fields and
consumption goods such as meat and milk, hide and wool. However,
variable natural circamstances throughout the area modify this com-



=== PDF p42 R (book-seq 83) ===
ETHNIC AND CULTURAL DIFFERENTIATION a3

plex, causing significant variations on the level of economic organiza-
tion from patterns of simple subsistence to forms of specialization and
market exchange.

Being more or less in the culture area tradition, as developed by
Kroeber (1939), this ‘phylogenetic’ perspective on culture diversifica-
tion and change might demonstrate a perfect merger of cultural and
ethnic boundaries for some areas (as is the case for Polynesia) and
considerable overlap for others. Thus the cultural-natural regions of
Europe as generated through Arensberg’s approach to the problems
of diversification seem to be ethnically irrelevant for most areas. How-
ever, apart from the total empirical picture, it is always possible to
point at some kind of co-variation between the distribution of ethnic
groups and cultural features. My quarrel is consequently not with the
empirical pictures established through this procedure, but with their
assumed explanatory value for the existence of ethnic groups and
boundaries. As long as a study only shows co-variations of ethnic and
cultural boundaries, one can only make tautologies about the interde-
pendencies between variables.

My case has demonstrated that the existence, between regional popu-
lations, of considerable cultural differences which provide a basis for
symbiotic complementarity and ample material for regional stereotypes
and distinctions, yet do not in themselves entail a social organization
of activity based on ethnic units. As already mentioned, we have to
add a further dimension, that of the social codification of some of
these cultural differences into contrastive total identities, in order to
produce cthnic groups; and this does not spring from the cultural con-
trast per se.

Against this some might argue that whenever, for example, a co-
variation of language and ethnic boundaries is emphasized, this implies
the hypothesis that language barriers are instrumental in generating
the ethnic picture. Recent socio-linguistic findings, however
(Gumperz 1958, Blom & Gumperz 1968), suggest that significant
differences in speech between various kinds of groups that are in
frequent contact are not in themselves responsible for the establishment
and maintenance of social boundaries. These differences rather reflect
features of social organization through a process of social codifica-
tion, and thus serve as idioms of identification with particular group
values, whether sanctioned internally or forced upon the group by
outsiders.

As a final illustration of my point it may be instructive to contrast



=== PDF p43 L (book-seq 84) ===
84 JAN-PETTER BromM

the highland-lowland relationship as described above with the rela-
tions that obtain between Norwegians and certain nomadic pariah
groups such as Gypsies and Gypsy-like tramps (sigoynere, tatere, or
fant) (Sundt 1850-65, Barth 1955). Like the mountain peasants and
other specialized groups, these pariahs utilize specific niches in the
countryside and are thereby bound in symbiotic dependence to other
occupational categories — partly because they are willing to do low
ranking jobs, and partly because they have a near monopoly on some
forms of trade and handicrafts. In contrast to the mountain peasants
they overcommunicate their cultural peculiarities during contact; they
show disrespect for the standards of the peasant and especially for
his criteria of rank, and their behaviour is often arrogant and provoca-
tive. Within the sedentary population their very nomadism is
construed as a denial of the peasant’s basic values. As a result they are
distrusted, feared, and even persecuted, but they are also admired for
their autonomy and recklessness; this ambivalence is expressed in a
series of folk legends and songs. Interaction between Norwegians and
members of these groups is therefore built on differential treatment
within the frame of a clear complementarity of identities.

It should therefore be evident that ethnic boundaries do not depend
on cultural differences on the level of form, but rather on culture at
a more fundamental level, i.e. specific codification of these differences
into complimentary statuses which differentiate a population into
reference groups, supported by a charter of distinctive origins for each.
The reason for the existence of such organizations must therefore be
sought in the social processes which allow an initial and natural fear
and suspicion against strangers to be systematized into ethnic statuses.
These are social categories which provide obligatory standards for
judging the behaviour of self and others and which, consequently,
organize a whole range of activities into stereotyped clusters of mean-
ing.

1 The primary data on which this study is based were collected by the author in
1962 in the south-western part of the area concerned. A more detailed presentation
of the material will be published elsewhere.

To test the general validity of the set of hypotheses generated through my analysis
of these data, various works by folklorists, geographers and historians have been
used, the more important of which are: Eskeland, A.: Effektiviteten av ulike drifts-
former i fjellbygdene, Norges Landbruksekonomiske Institutt, Szrmelding nr. 2,
1953; Cabouret, M.: La transhumance du mouton dans le sud-ouest de la Norvége,
Norsk Geografisk Tidsskrift, 1967; Isachsen, F.: Uvdelenes skreppehandel og drifte-
trafikk, Norsk Geografisk Tidsskrift, 1930; Reinton, S.: Seterbruket i Noreg, I—I1I



=== PDF p43 R (book-seq 85) ===
ETHNIC AND CULTURAL DIFFERENTIATION /5

ISFK, Oslo 1955—61; Skappel, S.: Trzk av det norske kvagbrugs historie 1660—1814,
T.fd.n. landbr., 1903; Semme, A.: Geography of Norwegian Agriculture, Skrifter
fra Norges Handelshoyskole, Bergen 1949; Ostberg, Kr.: Norsk Bonderett, I—XII,
Oslo 1914—39.

The anthropological ficld investigations was financed by the Registration Service
of Norwegian Archeological Museums.



=== PDF p44 L (book-seq 86) ===
Dichotomization and Integration

Aspects of inter-ethnic relations in Southern Ethiopia
by Karl Eric Knutsson

This paper presents ethnographical material on ethnic groups and
ethno-dynamics in Southern Ethiopia. Because of the highly varied
pattern of inter-ethnic relations in this area I shall sketch the situation
in two different parts of Ethiopian Gallaland. By contrasting and
comparing two different sets of ethnic boundaries and their mainte-
nance I hope to avoid giving too one-sided a picture. I also hope that
this approach will make it possible to discuss aspects of boundary
dynamics, and thereby contribute to a more general discussion of the
problem of ethnicity.

The setting
The setting for ethnic relations that Ethiopia represents is indeed
complex. In the northern and central parts of the country, there have
existed during millenia kingdoms loosely organized Into an Abyssinian
Empire. Borders between these petty states were not very stable and
the struggle to achieve imperial dominance and control over the vast
Abyssinian conglomerate was continuous. In general the borders
between states or chiefdoms seem to have coincided with the boundaries
separating major ethnic groups inhabiting the Abyssinian plateau.
Before the conquests by Emperor Menelik during the end of the
last century through which Amhara/Tigre Abyssinia expanded into
the much larger Ethiopia of the present day, the central states were
surrounded by a number of independent tribal groups representing a
broad spectrum of organization, from anarchic segmentary structures
to centralized states such as Kaffa. Into these areas where conflicts
and tribal wars were endemic, Menelik and his generals brought the
‘pax amharica’ which set the stage for new forms of inter-ethnic
contacts and relations. Increased inter-group mobility, immigration
from the conquerors’ ethnic groups, introduction of the victors’, system



=== PDF p44 R (book-seq 87) ===
DICHOTOMIZATION AND INTEGRATION 87

THIOR A

Meps fe OSOMALIA

Macha Nl e

= Arsi

KENYA

XILOMETERS
% 20 (0 580

Main ethnic groups and sub-groups in Ethiopia. Dichotomization indicated for
Amhara/Shoa Galla.

of ethnic classification and valuation were incidents and circumstances
contributing to the present ethnic situation in Southern Ethiopia.

In many ways the setting is similar to that which was brought about
by colonialization in other parts of East Africa. There are, however,
important differences which invalidate a simple comparison. Time
has contributed to an integration of the new areas into the Ethiopian
nation in a way that was never achieved between colonizers and
colonized in other parts of Africa. It is true that the new rulers
recognized ethnic boundaries as did the European colonial powers;
the administrative division into sub-provinces and districts is princi-
pally built upon such a recognition. It is also true that elements of



=== PDF p45 L (book-seq 88) ===
88 KarL Eric KNUTSSON

indirect rule can be found, especially during the early days following
the incorporation of the new territories into Ethiopia. But for the most
part, Amharic control was of a more direct nature and did not there-
fore necessarily emphasize and strengthen tribal and ethnic identity,
as was often the case under British rule further south.

Another important difference between the colonial African and the
Ethiopian situation is that, although the influx of people from the
Northern parts of Ethiopia was large, the immigration did not produce
the ethnic and social cleavages which exist between European settlers
and native Africans. The immigrants from the north were for the most
part forced to live basically the same life and accept the same standard
as the indigenous ethnic groups.

However, in some instances, the new rulers’ policy to ethiopianize,
which was tantamount to amharize, the subject groups in order to
facilitate integration often had the opposite effect: ethnic identities
became emphasized and polarization on ethnic grounds was increased.
Thus Amharic administration produced results similar to those
observed in areas under British control.

The present forms of ethnic boundaries in Southern Ethiopia have
been generated within existing systems of inter-ethnic relations
through processes of this kind. In the following I shall concentrate on
two sets of such boundaries; those between the Rift Valley Arsi Galla
and their neighbours and the ones existing in a market village among
the Macha Galla in the western part of the Shoa province.

The Rift Valley Arsi and their neighbours !
The Rift Valley Arsi are members of the large Arsi Galla tribal
group which makes up the dominant part of the population of the
Arussi and Bali provinces. Until the last generation the Arsi, who now
inhabit the eastern shores of Lake Zwai and the adjoining dry
savannah, lived in an area of complete Galla dominance. They
subsisted on a transhumance pastoral economy that took them to the
highlands around Mt. Chilalo in the dry season and down to the Rift
valley plains in the wet season. Their only routine inter-ethnic con-
tacts were with the Laki islanders in Lake Zwai — a remnant from
earlier Abyssinian settlements during pre-Galla periods. With the
Ambharic conquest during the first decade of the present century the
picture changed radically. Veteran Amhara and Shoa-Galla soldiers
in the armies of Menelik were given land on the Arussi plateau.
Moving into the highland in great numbers they soon reduced and



=== PDF p45 R (book-seq 89) ===
R —— S R S S

DICHOTOMIZATION AND INTEGRATION /9

finally prohibited the transhumance of the pastoral Arsi-Galla. Being
deprived of one of the basic prerequisites for their ecological adapta-
tion the Rift valley Arsi in the Zwai area turned to a crude type of
maize and sorghum farming to compensate for the losses inflicted on
their cattle economy. As they had little previous agricultural experi-
ence and as the Rift valley climate necessitates either irrigation or
technically sophisticated dry farming, the Arsi experienced a rapid
pauperization. These changes coincided with major changes in their
tribal organization whereby the importance of the cohesion-creating
gada system declined and the ritual changed from a traditional to an
Islamized pattern — possibly as a protest against the Christian con-
querors,

These developments set the scene for the inter-ethnic relations
between the Arsi of today and their neighbours. As is clearly demon-
strated even by this very brief exposé, the character of the Arsi
ecological adaptation, their economy, and their political and cultural
life have undergone dramatic changes during a relatively short time.
In other words the Arsi of yesterday would not have had much in
common with the Arsi of today. Consequently a study of their cultural
inventory would not help us understand the maintenance of an Arsi
ethnic identity over generations. I shall therefore only include a
minimum of information on the way of life of the Rift valley Arsi,
and concentrate on the description of neighbour contacts in order to
indicate the nature of ethnic interaction and the mechanisms of
boundary maintenance in the area.

The Rift valley Arsi of today live in clusters of 5 to 15 homesteads,
inhabited by minimal lineages or segments thereof, on the dry acacia
savannah surrounding the Rift valley lakes. The normal homestead
is that of a polygynous household with three or four houses and a cattle
kraal fenced in by thorny acacia. Despite the recent adaptation of
maize and sorghum farming on some roughly cleared fields close to
the homesteads they still remain basically a cattle people. Part of the
herds use the still extensive areas of the clanlands between the shores
of Lake Zwai and the slopes towards the highland not yet cultivated
by the highland farmers. These herds are tended by the unmarried
men of the homestead under the leadership of some of the senior men.
Milch cows, calves, and young animals are kept close to the homestead
in order to provide milk and occasionally meat for the remainder of
the family.

Local political organization exhibits two dominant components: one



=== PDF p46 L (book-seq 90) ===
90 KArL Eric KNUTSSON

of government administration represented on the lower levels by
subdistrict governors and officially appointed local judges; the other
of local leadership furnished by groups of genealogically senior clans-
men, famous arbiters, descendants of former warleaders made hered-
itary nobles, so-called balabatts, by the administration (cf. Knutsson
1967), and kallus, ritual specialists claiming to perpetuate traditional
tribal religion and self-made sheiks. In many parts of southern
Ethiopia articulation between these two decision systems is poor. But
this is not the case in the Rift valley Arsi communities. In part because l
of reluctance on the part of the central administration to keep their
own officials in a potentially dangerous area in the lowlands, local
leaders are often appointed to administrative posts on the subdistrict
level.

Ethnic identity for the Arsi is intimately connected with the total
way of life on their dry, dusty and overgrazed plains. The few who
leave their cattle or those who have lost them and move into towns
are no longer regarded as ‘real’ Arsi. They have sold or lost the part
of their identity that derived from participation in Arsi life, although
they still retain their Arsi genealogical charters. In other areas of
Southern Ethiopia, especially in communities where inter-ethnic con-
tacts belong to the daily routine, the display of ethnic identity is either
restricted to certain sectors of interaction or determined by specific
individual or group strategies. Not so among the Arsi of the plain.
Here ethnic identity is continuously overtly expressed in what both
Arsi and their neighbours perceive as distinct forms of organization,
customs, and symbols. However, neither the Arsi nor the outsider are
able to attribute the identity to any specific element or factor. To be
an Arsi is to be born one, to be brought up like one, and live like one.
The realization of this represents an extra reason to abstain from any
attempt to map the whole inventory of Arsi culture and to concentrate
on the problems of inter-ethnic contacts.

Arsi and Laki.

The interaction between the Rift valley Arsi and the Laki islanders
in Lake Zwai presents most of the characteristics of a symbiotic inter-
relation. Some generations ago the Laki inhabited and cultivated large
portions of land on the eastern and southern shores of the lake.
Extensive traditions tell about fierce fighting between the Arsi and the
Laki over the control of the shore land. This district was of vital
importance to both groups, to the Laki as agricultural land from



=== PDF p46 R (book-seq 91) ===
DICHOTOMIZATION AND INTEGRATION o1

which they could supplement the limited produce of their island
terraces; to the Arsi for pastures and free access to the water for their
cattle. Eventually the Arsi succeeded in their raids and the Laki had
to withdraw to their islands. Today they are almost exclusively con-
fined to the islands of Tadecca, Tullu Guddu, and Fulduro, the only
exception being some hundred who live in a few clusters on the eastern
and southern shores of Lake Zwai. These latter have been able to
return to the old Laki shore territory only by completely adopting
the Arsi mixed cattle and agriculture economy and by conforming
closely to the Arsi style of life. The Laki on the islands subsist on
fishing and the meagre crops of their eroded and overcultivated
terraces. Without their skills as weavers and cloth traders survival on
their overpopulated stony islands would be difficult.

With the Arsi fully in control of the disputed shore-land, competi-
tion between the two groups has faded away and one finds instead
today the kind of symbiotic interrelation that can be expected between
two ethnic groups occupying distinct ecological niches. The islanders
supply cloth, fish, and some items of merchandise and the Arsi market
butter, ghee, fresh cheese, sorghum, corn, and occasionally meat. Of
especial interest is the increasing Laki sale or barter of fish, which is
caught in abundance in the shallow lake. All pastoral Galla as well as
their Sidamo neighbours observe a strong taboo against eating fish.
Fish was traditionally classified in the same general category as hippo-
potamus and regarded as unclean food. With the breakdown of the
transhumant system and the increasing shortage of food, the taboo on
fish has been weakened among the Rift valley Arsi, especially among
those close to the Zwai, who now consume fish quite regularly. Thev
do not, however, do any of the fishing themselves. This is left to the
Laki with their sophisticated technique of net-throwing from small
papyrus canoes.

Rift valley Arsi and the highland farmers.

The Amhara and the Shoa Galla of the Arussi highland are plough
farmers exploiting the same ecological niche with identical techniques.
They are members of the same, mainly immigrant, local communities.
In spite of their ethnically distinct origins they share a basically com-
mon value system dominated by Orthodox Christianity. Differences
between the two groups are articulated mainly in language and family
structure, and to some extent in land tenure and rituals. Thus the Shoa
Galla group tends towards bilingualism whereas the Amhara cling



=== PDF p47 L (book-seq 92) ===
92 KarL Eric KNUTSSON

to the exclusive use of Amharic; the Shoa Galla families are poly-
gynous where feasible, in contrast to the monogamy of the Amharas.
The Amhara adhere strictly to the rules of the Orthodox church while
the ritual life of the Shoa Galla exhibits a dual pattern of both
Orthodox Christianity and ecstatic tribal cults led by the kallus.
Another characteristic of this Amhara-Galla society is the presence of i
the general Ethiopian system of ethnic stratification, which in its turn
depends on differential control of such assets as administrative
authority, land, and access to the highly valued clerical knowledge of
the Orthodox church. According to this traditional stratification the
Ambhara both ascribe to themselves and are ascribed by the Shoa Galla
a higher rank than other groups in the highland community.

Despite this intra-community differentiation the Rift valley Arsi
lump the highland immigrants together in one big category, referring
to them either as Sidama (the Arsi word for Amhara) or as Shoa
(people from Shoa). Although the highland Galla farmers do not
identify themselves as Amhara in intercommunication with the Rift
people, they certainly dichotomize the lowland cattle people from
themselves and act towards them as do the Amhara. I therefore argue
that the boundary that exists between the highland community as a
whole and the Rift valley Arsi is the major one relevant to a discussion
of ethnic interrelations.

The main feature of the interrelation described here is that of
Highland superiority and Arsi inferiority. Most clearly this is seen
in the two groups’ competition over land. As indicated, the Arsi
pastoral type of land utilization has been displaced in the higher
zones by an agricultural technique and economy, the introduction of
which was made easy by the oscillatory nature of the former. The
only strategies for ecological readjustment that are left to the Arsi are
either sedentarization in the threatened areas or withdrawal to the as
yet uncultivated tracts which are today mostly areas where cultivation
without irrigation is impossible or close to impossible. There is also a
third course which has been tried. It consists of a compromise strategy
whereby part of a lineage settles in the neighbourhood of the highland
pole of their former transhumant territory, while the rest of the group
keeps a more mobile base at the bottom of the Rift. In some cases this
has made it possible to retain some transhumant mobility or to resort
to it during emergency situations.

Reviewing the ethnic interrelations between the Rift valley Arsi
and the highland farmers we do not find a boundary comparable to



=== PDF p47 R (book-seq 93) ===
DICHOTOMIZATION AND INTEGRATION 12

the ecological boundary between the Arsi and the Laki. Instead the

basic mechanism of ethnic differentiation is found in the different
technologies of land use, and the different efficiency of these for

retaining or expanding control over land. The ensuing competition

has increased the dichotomization of ethnic groups to a degree which

has made open conflicts common. Because of the dominance of the

highland group and especially because of the support it enjoys from

the Amhara-dominated administration, open defence of the tradi-

tionally pastoral areas by the Rift valley Arsi has not proved a

satisfying strategy. Violent resistance being ruled out, adaptation has

taken either of the two main forms described, dividing the present

Rift valley Arsi into two economically distinct groups: highland type

farmers on the slopes of the Rift, and savannah cattle herdsmen suf-

fering a progressive pauperization. A

As can be expected there are significant differences between both '

expression and maintenance of the ethnic identity between these two

groups. Among the Arsi farmers on the slopes of the Rift one finds a

more or less complete assimilation into the technological and economic

system introduced by the highland immigrants, although many of the [
Arsi farmers cooperate with their lowland kinsmen in the cattle sector
of their economy. However, even if the explicit aim of their new .
economic strategies is to become as much as possible like the highland

immigrants and even if overt expression of their ethnic affiliation in ‘
dress and symbols is reduced, an Arsi ethnic identity is still fiercely
maintained. This cannot be achieved in the traditional way, as this ‘
would imply retaining the whole pattern of their former pastoral life.

Instead it is done by the transition to a Moslem or rather semi-Moslem

system of knowledge, values and symbols that makes it possible in a

partly assimilated situation to maintain and perpetuate ethnic dichoto-

mization. This change provides an especially efficient mechanism for
polarization since the very core of the immigrant Amhara ethnic

identity has always been their Orthodox Christianity. Thus in contrast

to the process that made Baggara nomads out of Fur farmers, the

transition of Arsi cattle herdsmen to Amhara-like farmers has not
made them Ambhara. Instead the boundary maintaining mechanism is
transferred to another sector of their socio-cultural universe.

Rift valley Arsi and the Jille.

The Rift valley Arsi have as their northern neighbours the Jille, who '
belong to the Tulama tribal cluster among the Galla, and who strongly



=== PDF p48 L (book-seq 94) ===
94 KarL Eric KNUTSSON

deny any genealogical relationship with the Arsi, although both groups
agree that they are Galla. Like the Arsi, the Jille live on the Rift
slopes and bottom. They are not so pre-eminently a ‘cattle’ people
as Arsi, but have traditionally subsisted on a mixed economy of poor
maize, millet, and sorghum farming in combination with cattle herd-
ing. They have also traditionally been more sedentary and have never
adopted transhumance. They are the only northern Galla who still
have a functioning moiety system and they have also, more fiercely
perhaps than the rest of the Tulama group (with the exception possibly
of the Jidda), clung to their remnants of the Gada system and the
rituals accompanying it. Perhaps the interrelation between the Arsi
and the Jille should be classified as intertribal rather than interethnic.
After all they belong to the same main tribal group and speak dialects
not very remote from each other. However, the dichotomization
demonstrated in their interrelation, the fact that both stress not their
common but their different ancestry within the very large Galla
people, and finally the fact that they exhibit fairly different systems
of social organization, make it reasonable to include them in this
context.

In contrast to the cases already described, the territorial boundary
between the Arsi and the Jille is an absolute one following in the
main the Awash river in the east-west direction and the eastern side
of the Maki river in the north-south direction. In contrast also to the .
interaction between Arsi and both the Highlanders and the Laki,
where market exchange is a prominent feature, there are few, indeed
negligible, transactions of this kind between the Arsi and the Jille.
This can perhaps be correlated with the-fact that, in spite of other
differences, the two groups exploit similar types of territories with
similar techniques. The differences in technology and produce neces-
sary for the creation of an extensive market exchange simply does not
exist. The main markets in Jilleland are found in a semicircle to the
north where the Jille can trade with Tulama Galla from higher zones
and with immigrant Amhara, Gurage, and other groups.

Although presented here only as a sketch, the material allows a
rough identification of the interrelationship between the Arsi and
the Jille as one of segmentary opposition between groups striving to
monopolize the same type of ecological niche. The seriousness of the
competition over grazing land and plots of arable land has contributed
to both the hostility and to the creation of the jealously guarded
frontier. The similarities in their ecological adaptations have helped



=== PDF p48 R (book-seq 95) ===
DICHOTOMIZATION AND INTEGRATION R

not to bridge the boundary but to strengthen it as this very similarity
has precluded transactions and exchange. Thus paradoxically the
geographically and ‘politically’ most articulated ethnic boundary in
the Rift valley Arsiland obtains between the culturally most similar
groups.!

The polyethnic market village in Macha

Any discussion of inter-ethnic relations in Southern Ethiopia’s Galla-
land would be incomplete if it only contained reference to a system in
which ethnic groups tend to be territorial units. All over Southern
Ethiopia such a situation is actually rapidly changing into one where
different ethnic groups are living more or less mixed in the same areas
and local communities. It is in these communities that the typical
Ethiopian system of ethnic stratification can be observed.

When the rich Macha grazing and farming land was incorporated
into the Ethiopian Empire during the end of the last century radical
changes were brought about similar to those in highland Arussi. Tradi-
tional, segmentary rivalry between local groups was reduced and
eventually completely eliminated. Intra-Macha mobility and delocali-
zation increased and Machaland was opened up to immigration from
other parts of the Empire. The Amhara established their control over
local politics and administration. Veteran Amhara soldiers moved in to
become landlords and farmers.

With increased mobility went the creation of market villages and
the expansion of existing towns, a process that has received a tre-
mendous impetus from the construction of roads during the past few
decades. Although their couleur locale is influenced by the ethnic
origin of the people of the region and by the surrounding landscape,
these market towns have many traits in common all over Ethiopia.
They represent in the midst of their traditional rural hinterland a new
type of community. They serve as the administrative centres in their
districts and as such house government offices and courts both fre-
quented by crowds of people who, to the outsider, seem to be veritable
addicts to the procedures of litigation.

These towns grow rapidly by the immigration or rural population
from the hinterland attracted by town life and the services that can
be found in the shops, bars, clinics, and schools. To this comes the
influx of officials, traders, daily labourers, prostitutes, and beggars
often recruited from distant areas. Together, all this has created a



=== PDF p49 L (book-seq 96) ===
96 KARL Eric KNUTSSON

radically new setting for ethnic interrelations where ethnic boundaries

exist in the midst of the local community. The role of ethnicity as a

basis for organization consequently displays markedly different
features in comparison to the situation described above where ethnic
boundaries in the main coincided with territorial borders. Thus ethnic
amalgamation is more pronounced in the sense that all sectors
associated with decision-making and exchange are integrated. This is ]
readily seen in the field of local politics, where any mature male
member of the community may associate himself with any of the
existing factions. Likewise the exchange of goods and services com-
prises all groups in the town.

However, a tendency for single groups monopolize certain sectors
of community life is evident and overtly manifested. The administra-
tive machinery is in the hands of predominantly Amhara officials.
This is reflected in the sphere of factional politics, where the leaders
are usually Amharas or big ‘Amharized’ Macha landlords. In the |
sphere of economic exchange shopkeeping is more or less monopolized
by Gurage immigrants from the south-western part of the Shoa prov-
ince while grain trade is predominantly in the hands of Moslem
Galla immigrants from Jimma.

The system of ethnic stratification and the tendencies towards ethnic
monopolization of different sectors of community life are illustrated
by patterns of communication, specifically in language habits and
inter-ethnic marriages.

The ‘political’ language is without question Amharic. All com-

munication of an official nature, all court procedures, all discussions
within the ider — a community association — are held in Amharic.
If a significant group of the participants does not understand Ambharic,
translation may be arranged. Exceptions from this pattern are very
rare. Even if the judge, the official communicator, or the chairman
of the meeting happens to be a Galla he uses Amharic which may
then be retranslated into Galla.

In trade, which forms an interaction system incorporating the great
proportion of the total population of the village and its rural surround-
ings, choice of language is freer. But even here the system of ethnic
stratification can be registered. If one of the actors in a transaction
belongs to a ethnic group of higher rank, the tendency is to use, if
possible, his language in intercommunication. Thus the Galla grain
trader will use Amharic when discussing business with his Amhara
faction leader. He will, however, speak Galla to his Galla neighbour



=== PDF p49 R (book-seq 97) ===
DICHOTOMIZATION AND INTEGRATION o7

and also Galla to the Gurage shopkeeper, whom he regards as having
a ‘lower’ ethnic status.

The same observations are valid for the whole pattern of ethnic
identification both between members of the market village who are
well aware of their respective ethnic identity and between villagers
and outsiders. One can also easily recognize the ambivalence towards
ethnic identification associated with stratification. Thus rural Galla
with knowledge of Amharic would either deny or be reluctant to
accept an exclusive ethnic evaluation from any member of the market
village, which, by the rural population, is regarded as an Amhara
community. The same is true of ethnic demarcation between residents
of the village itself where such distinctions are accepted in dealings
with individuals of ‘higher’ ethnic status but rejected or suppressed
vis-a-vis members of a ‘lower’ ethnic group.

The same basic features are evident in the pattern of inter-ethnic
marriage. Intermarriage in the Macha market village largely con-
stitutes a one-way traffic of women from lower ethnic groups to
higher. An exception is the different pariah groups such as tanners,
potters, and the like, who are strictly endogamous. A similar situation
obtains for those with the lowest possible economic standard of life.

The upward transfer of women is related to the fact that a wife’s
ethnic background will not, or at least not seriously, affect the ethnic
status of the husband, his household or his children, whereas a woman
who marries a man of a lower ethnic status than herself will be down-
graded, since her household and her children are classified with the
husband.

Although strategies pursued by various ethnic groups in the fields
of politics and economics are ethnically determined, reference to ethnic
identity as such is rarely overtly expressed by the villagers in these
fields of interaction. The domains where ethnicity is explicitly used
as a basis for organization and as a criterion for separation and
dichotomization of persons are, as I have already indicated, most
prominently those of family and kinship and in part also the ritual
life, notably on the level of family and small group rituals.

Thus although marriages are no longer endo-ethnic, ethnic identi-
fication and references form a significant part of any marriage prep-
aration. But the overt expression of one’s ethnic identity is found in
small-scale rituals and feasts with exclusive participation of members
of a single ethnic group. During the Galla neighbourhood beer-feast
one can hear songs and stories about earlier independent periods. The

7. Barth



=== PDF p50 L (book-seq 98) ===
98 KARL Eric KNUTSSON

songs are about the brave Galla warrior and his cowardly enemies,
about the beautiful Galla girls, and the superiority of the Galla
pastoral life that the minstrel and the audience themselves have
abandoned. The same ethnically oriented up-grading and bragging
can be heard in the Macha Galla kallu rituals, the Moslem Jimma
Galla holidays, and the Gurage ritual brotherhood meetings.

So far I have emphasized trends towards ethnic monopolization
within the ethnically integrated sectors of the market village life and
circumscribed levels on which inter-ethnic integration is weaker and
polarization tendencies consequently stronger. Simultaneously, indica-
tions of decreasing polarization and diminishing influence of ethnicity
as a basis for organization are observed in the village today, partic-
ularly among the younger generation. Several conditions contribute
to this new trend:

The economic basis for all the villagers is the Central Ethiopian
Amhara type of agriculture or trade of agricultural products. The
majority of the village males and a large minority of the females are
bilingual, a fact that tends to neutralize the influence of ethnic,
cultural heritage and pave the way for smoother routine interaction.

The customs and habits of every day life are levelled little by little.

This also applies to ethnic symbols such as cloth, hair-do and orna- |
ments. The introduction, at least formally, of the Orthodox church
and its extensive regulation of life through its fasting and ceremonial
rules have also contributed to give the village community a unitary
set of symbols, although integration in the ritual field is, as I have
already pointed out, less marked than it might seem.

This general integration process has taken several different forms
in the market village community. One which is easily observed is the
Ambharization strategy adopted by a Galla or Gurage who has been
able to accumulate the resources needed that make such a role attrac-
tive — one must remember that to act the part of a poor Amhara
would be of little avail since one of the basic ingredients in the Amhara
ethnic status is its very connection with ecomomic and political
superiority. Amharization does not mean, however, that there is a com-
plete change of a person’s ethnic status. There is definitely a loss in
his original ethnic identity. It will be said about him that he is not
‘Galla any longer’, he likes to be ‘like Ambhara’. But he will
nevertheless not be accepted as Amhara either by his original group
or by the Amhara. He has lost part of his ethnic identity without
gaining a new one.



=== PDF p50 R (book-seq 99) ===
DICHOTOMIZATION AND INTEGRATION 3s

Another strategy is exemplified by some of the young and better
educated villagers: the teachers, the health personnel etc. It consists
of a conscious suppression of what the individual regards as tribal in
favour of what he believes to be an Ethiopian identity. The choice of
such a strategy does not, like the former, weaken the person’s original
ethnic identity in the eyes of his village neighbours, nor does it meet
with any envy from his group of origin or opposition from any aimed-
at ‘goal’ group. It creates instead a basis for more flexible interaction
with both high and low ethnic groups. In addition, although the ascrip-
tion of an ‘Ethiopic’ ethnic identity in most of the towns and villages
discussed here still mainly represents a theoretical strategy, it is being
increasingly acknowledged and promoted through the expanding
educational system.

Summary

This brief exposition of inter-ethnic relations and ethnic distinction
in Southern Ethiopia has certainly not helped to formulate any easy
answers to problems related to ethnicity. Instead it has revealed a
broad spectrum of various types of ethnic boundaries, boundary main-
taining mechanisms and inter-ethnic strategies. Here 1 shall only
briefly consider a few questions posed by the material.

It seems first of all to be quite clear that any concept of ethnic group
defined on the basis of ‘cultural content’ (e.g. Naroll 1964) will not
suffice as a tool for the analysis of ethnicity in its various interactional
contexts. Only when ethnic distinction, stratification, or dichotomiza-
tion are part of the individual’s or group’s strategies for preserving
or increasing control of resources social status or other values is a
meaningful interpretation feasible.

Hence ethnicity becomes not one single universally applicable term
but rather the representation of a wide range of inter-relations in
which the dominant reference is to an ethnic status ascribed on the
basis of birth, language, and socialization.

If one accepts this, a study of ethnic inter-relations becomes neces-
sarily a study of ethnic processes: that is the emergence, continuation,
and change of inter-ethnic relations. Thus several processes can be
recognized in the Ethiopian material:

In the case of the Rift valley Arsi versus the Highland peoples,
the tendency dominating the ethnic interaction is one of increasing
polarization and dichotomization in a situation of mounting competi-
tion over productive resources. Since the interaction is between a




=== PDF p51 L (book-seq 100) ===
100 KARL Eric KNUTSSON

dominant expanding highland population with a settled economy,
which controls administration and access to resources on the one hand,
and an originally transhumant and retreating Arsi lowland herdsman
population on the other, the latter’s only efficient strategy is adapta-
tion to, and, optimally, assimilation in, the highland ethnic groups.
This strategy, however, is not easily accemplished because of the
vested interests of the highland groups in the potentially rich agri-
cultural areas on the peripheries of the highland and because profitable
agriculture in the lowland areas is only possible for a sophisticated
plantation and irrigation agronomy.

In the East, the inter-ethnic relations between the Lake Zwai Laki
and the Arsi represents on the other hand a process of weakened
dichotomization in favour of symbiotic intercommunication, which
can certainly be explained by the reduction in this area through Arsi
dominance of the same competition over niche control and production
resources which are increasing on the highland slopes in the west. i

Towards the Jille no marked changes in a traditional polarized
relationship can be noted. Here a territorial division and a low degree
of intercommunication has continued because of the lack of the
minimum prerequisites for economic exchange and potentially con-
flicting interests in the same ecological niche.

A fourth basic process is finally found in the Macha market village,
where inter-ethnic integration is increasing in important sectors of
community life, although the Ethiopian ethnic stratification model is
still a decisive factor within the integrated spheres where it some-
times seems to form the very basis for the pattern of integration itself.

* I am here excluding the pariah groups of hippopotamus hunters, the Weyto,
who live scattered along the shores of Lake Zwai. Although there is complete social
separation between these and the Arsi, there exists economic exchange.



=== PDF p51 R (book-seq 101) ===
