CHAPTER 6



How Cooking Frees Men




“Voracious animals . . . both feed continually and as incessantly eliminate, leading a life truly inimical to philosophy and music, as Plato has said, whereas nobler and more perfect animals neither eat nor eliminate continually.”



—GALEN, Galen on the Usefulness of the Parts of the Body





Diet has long been considered a key to understanding social behavior across species. The food quest is fundamental to evolutionary success, and social strategies affect how well individuals eat. Group size in chimpanzees rapidly adjusts to monthly changes in the density and distribution of fruiting trees. Chimpanzee society differs markedly from gorilla society, thanks to the gorillas’ reliance on herbs. Humans are no exception to such relationships. The Man-the-Hunter hypothesis has inspired such potent explanations of bonding between males and females that it has seemed to some researchers that no other explanation is necessary. In 1968 physical anthropologists Sherwood Washburn and Chet Lancaster wrote, “Our intellect, interests, emotions and basic social life, all are evolutionary products of the hunting adaptation.” Such ideas have been highly influential, but they have rarely looked beyond meat. The adoption of cooking must have radically changed the way our ancestors ate, in ways that would have changed our social behavior too.



Take softness. Foods soften when they are cooked, and as a result, cooked food can be eaten more quickly than raw food. Reliance on cooked food has therefore allowed our species to thoroughly restructure the working day. Instead of chewing for half of their time, as great apes tend to do, women in subsistence societies tend to spend the active part of their days collecting and preparing food. Men, liberated from the simple biological demands of a long day’s commitment to chewing raw food, engage in productive or unproductive labor as they wish. In fact, I believe that cooking has made possible one of the most distinctive features of human society: the modern form of the sexual division of labor.





The sexual division of labor refers to women and men making different and complementary contributions to the household economy. Though the specific activities of each sex vary by culture, the gendered division of labor is a human universal. It is therefore assumed to have appeared well before modern humans started spreading across the globe sixty thousand to seventy thousand years ago. So discussion of the evolution of the sexual division of labor centers on hunter-gatherers. The 750-strong Hadza tribe are one such group. They live in northern Tanzania, scattered among a series of small camps in dry bush country around a shallow lake.



The Hadza are modern-day people. Neighboring farmers and pastoralists trade with them and marry some of their daughters. Government officials, tourists, and researchers visit them. The Hadza use metal knives and money, wear cotton clothes, hunt with dogs, and occasionally trade for agricultural foods. Much has changed since the time, perhaps two thousand years ago, when they last lived in an exclusive world of hunter-gatherers. Nevertheless, they are one of the few remaining peoples who obtain the majority of their food by foraging in an African woodland of a type that was once occupied by ancient humans.



Dawn sees people emerging from their sleeping huts to eat scraps of food from the previous night’s meal. As consensus quietly develops about the day’s activity; most of the women in camp—six or more, perhaps—take up their digging sticks and go toward a familiar ekwa patch a couple of kilometers (more than a mile) away. Some take their babies in slings, and one or more carries a smoldering log with which to start a fire if needed. Older children walk alongside. Meanwhile, in ones and twos, various men and their dogs also walk off with bows and arrows in hand. Some men are going hunting, others to visit neighbors. A scattering of people remain in camp—a couple of old women, perhaps, looking after toddlers whose mothers have gone for food, and a young man resting after a long hunt the previous day.



The women walk slowly, in pace with the younger children. They stop occasionally to pick small fruits that they eat on the spot. After less than an hour they break into smaller parties as each forager finds her own choice site in calling distance of her companions. The digging is hard and uncomfortable but it does not take long. A couple of hours later the women’s karosses—cloaks made of animal skins—are covered in piles of thick, brown, foot-long roots. These ekwa tubers are a year-round staple for the Hadza, always easily found. As the karosses fill, someone starts a fire, and shortly afterward the foragers gather for a well-deserved snack. They bake their ekwa by leaning the tubers against the coals. In barely twenty minutes, the smaller ones are ready. After the simple meal, some women chat while others dig up a few more ekwa to make sure they have enough for the rest of the day. Most have found other foods as well—a few bulbs, perhaps. They tie up their karosses and start homeward. Each woman totes at least 15 kilograms (33 pounds). They are back in camp by early afternoon, tired from the hard work.



Anthropologists sometimes debate whether hunting and gathering is a relaxed way of life. Lorna Marshall worked alongside Nyae Nyae !Kung women gathering in the Kalahari in the 1950s. “They did not have pleasurable satisfaction,” she said, “in remembering their hot, monotonous, arduous days of digging and picking and trudging home with their heavy loads.” But times and cultures vary. Anthropologist Phyllis Kaberry, who worked with aborigines in the Kimberley region of northwestern Australia, said the women enjoyed one another’s company and their foraging routine.



Back in the Hadza camp, each woman empties her kaross in her own hut. By early evening she has a fire, and a pile of ekwa lies baked and ready. She hopes the men will bring some meat to complete the meal. During the evening hours several men return. Some have honey, a few have nothing, and one arrives with the carcass of a warthog. After he singes the animal’s hair off in a fire, men and women gather to divide it. Following the typical practice of hunter-gatherers, many men in the camp get a share, but the successful hunter makes sure his friends, family, and relatives get the most. Soon each household fire is cooking meat. The delicious smells enrich the night air. The meat and the roasted ekwa are quickly consumed. As the camp settles into sleep, enough ekwa remains for breakfast the following day.



The Hadza illustrate two major features of the sexual division of labor among hunter-gatherers that differentiate humans sharply from nonhuman primates. Women and men spend their days seeking different kinds of foods, and the foods they obtain are eaten by both sexes. Why our species forages in such an unusual way (compared to primates and all other animals, whose adults do not share food with one another) has never been fully resolved. There are many variations in the particular foods obtained. Tierra del Fuego’s bitter climate provided few plant foods, so while men hunted sea mammals, women would dive for shellfish in the frigid shallows. In the tropical islands of northern Australia, there was so much plant food that women brought enough to feed all the family and still found time to hunt occasional small animals. Men there did little hunting, mostly playing politics instead.



Although the specific food types varied from place to place, women always tended to provide the staples, whether roots, seeds, or shellfish. These foods normally needed processing, which could involve a lot of time and laborious work. Many Australian tribes prepared a kind of bread called damper from small seeds, such as from grasses. Women gathered the plants and heaped them so their seeds would drop and collect in a pile. They threshed the seeds by trampling, pounding, or rubbing them in their hands, winnowed them in long bark dishes, and ground them into a paste. The result was occasionally eaten raw but was more often cooked on hot ashes. The whole process could take more than a day. Women worked hard at such tasks because their children and husbands relied on the staples women prepared.



Men, by contrast, tended to search for foods that were especially appreciated but could not be found easily or predictably. They hoped for such prizes as meat and honey, which tended to come in large amounts and tasted delicious. Their arrival in camp made the difference between happiness and sadness. Phyllis Kaberry’s description of an aborigine camp in western Australia is typical: “The Aborigines continually craved for meat, and any man was apt to declare, ‘me hungry alonga bingy,’ though he had had a good meal of yams and damper a few minutes before. The camp on such occasions became glum, lethargic, and unenthusiastic about dancing.” Hunting large game was a predominantly masculine activity in 99.3 percent of recent societies.



Hints of comparable sex differences in food procurement have been detected in primates. Female lemurs tend to eat more of the preferred foods than males. In various monkeys such as macaques, guenons, and mangabeys, females eat more insects and males eat more fruit. Among chimpanzees, females eat more termites and ants, and males eat more meat. But such differences are minor because in every nonhuman primate the overwhelming majority of the foods collected and eaten by females and males are the same types.



Even more distinctive of humans is that each sex eats not only from the food items they have collected themselves, but also from their partner’s finds. Not even a hint of this complementarity is found among nonhuman primates. Plenty of primates, such as gibbons and gorillas, have family groups. Females and males in those species spend all day together, are nice to each other, and bring up their offspring together, but, unlike people, the adults never give each other food. Human couples, by contrast, are expected to do so.



In foraging societies a woman always shares her food with her husband and children, and she gives little to anyone other than close kin. Men likewise share with their wives, whether they have received meat from other men or have brought it to camp themselves and shared part of it with other men. The exchanges between wife and husband permeate families in every society. The contributions might involve women digging roots and men hunting meat in one culture, or women shopping and men earning a salary in another. No matter the specific items each partner contributes, human families are unique compared to the social arrangements of other species because each household is a little economy.





Attempts to understand how the sexual division of labor arose in our evolutionary history have been strongly affected by whether women or men are thought to have provided more of the food. It used to be thought that women typically produced most of the calories, as occurs among the Hadza. Worldwide across foraging groups, however, men probably supplied the bulk of the food calories more often than women did. This is particularly true in the high, colder latitudes where there are few edible plants, and hunting is the main way to get food. In an analysis of nine well-studied groups, the proportion of calories that came from foods collected by women ranged from a maximum of 57 percent, in the desert-living G/wi Bushmen of Namibia, down to a low of 16 percent in the Aché Indians of Paraguay. Women provided one-third of the calories in these societies, and men two-thirds. But such averages do not give an accurate sense of the value of items each sex contributes. At different times of year, the relative importance of foods obtained by women and men can change, and overall each sex’s foods can be just as critical as the other’s in maintaining health and survival. Furthermore, each sex makes vital contributions to the overall household economy regardless of any difference in the proportion of food calories contributed.



The division of labor by sex affects both household subsistence and society as a whole. Sociologist Emile Durkheim thought that its most important result was to promote moral standards, by creating a bond within the family. Specialization of labor also increases productivity by allowing women and men to become more skilled at their particular tasks, which promotes efficient use of time and resources. It is even thought to be associated with the evolution of some emotional and intellectual skills, because our reliance on sharing requires a cooperative temperament and exceptional intelligence. For such reasons anthropologists Jane and Chet Lancaster described the sexual division of labor as the “fundamental platform of behavior for the genus Homo,” and the “true watershed for differentiating ape from human lifeways.” Whether they were right in thinking the division began with the genus Homo is debated. Though I agree with the Lancasters, many think the division of labor by sex started much later. But there is no doubt of its importance in making us who we are.



The classic explanation in physical anthropology for this social structure is essentially what Jean Anthelme Brillat-Savarin proposed: when meat became an important part of the human diet, it was harder for females than males to obtain. Males with a surplus would have offered some to females, who would have appreciated the gift and returned the favor by gathering plant foods to share with males. The result was an incipient household. Physical anthropologist Sherwood Washburn put it this way:



When males hunt and females gather, the results are shared and given to the young, and the habitual sharing between a male, a female, and their offspring becomes the basis for the human family. According to this view, the human family is the result of the reciprocity of hunting, the addition of a male to the mother-plus-young social group of the monkeys and apes.





Washburn’s statement captures a core feature of conventional wisdom, which is that the way to explain the evolution of the sexual division of labor is to imagine that, together, meat eating and plant eating allowed a household. An un-stated assumption was that the food was raw. But if food was raw, the sexual division of labor is unworkable. Nowadays a man who has spent most of the day hunting can satisfy his hunger easily when he returns to camp, because his evening meal is cooked. But if the food waiting for him in camp had all been raw, he would have had a major problem.



The difficulty lies in the large amount of time it takes to eat raw food. Great apes allow us to estimate it. Simply because they are big—30 kilograms (66 pounds) and more—they need a lot of food and a lot of time to chew. Chimpanzees in Gombe National Park, Tanzania, spend more than six hours a day chewing. Six hours may seem high considering that most of their food is ripe fruit. Bananas or grapefruit would slip down their throats easily, and for this reason, chimpanzees readily raid the plantations of people living near their territories. But wild fruits are not nearly as rewarding as those domesticated fruits. The edible pulp of a forest fruit is often physically hard, and it may be protected by a skin, coat, or hairs that have to be removed. Most fruits have to be chewed for a long time before the pulp can be fully detached from the pieces of skin or seeds, and before the solid pieces are mashed enough to give up their valuable nutrients. Leaves, the next most important food for chimpanzees, are also tough and likewise take a long time to chew into pieces small enough for efficient digestion. The other great apes (bonobos, gorillas, and orangutans) commit similarly long hours to chewing their food. Because the amount of time spent chewing is related to body size among primates, we can estimate how long humans would be obliged to spend chewing if we lived on the same kind of raw food that great apes do. Conservatively, it would be 42 percent of the day, or just over five hours of chewing in a twelve-hour day.



People spend much less than five hours per day chewing their foods. Brillat-Savarin claimed to have seen the vicar of Bregnier eat the following within forty-five minutes: a bowl of soup, two dishes of boiled beef, a leg of mutton, a handsome capon, a generous salad, a ninety-degree wedge from a good-sized white cheese, a bottle of wine, and a carafe of water. If Brillat-Savarin was not exaggerating, the amount of food eaten by the vicar in less than an hour would have provided enough calories for a day or more. It is hard to imagine a wild chimpanzee achieving such a feat.



A few careful studies using direct observation confirm how relatively quickly humans eat their food. In the United States, children from nine to twelve years of age spend a mere 10 percent of their time eating, or just over an hour per twelve-hour day. This is close to the daily chewing time for children recorded by anthropologists in twelve subsistence societies around the world, from the Ye’kwana of Venezuela to the Kipsigi of Kenya and the Samoans of the South Pacific. Girls ages six to fifteen chewed for an average of 8 percent of the day, with a range of 4 percent to 13 percent. Results for boys were almost identical: they chewed for an average of 7 percent of the day, again ranging from 4 percent to 13 percent.



The children’s data show little difference between the industrialized United States and subsistence societies. In the twelve measured cultures, adults chewed for even less time than the children. Women and men each spent an average of 5 percent of their time chewing. One might object that the people in the subsistence societies were observed only from dawn to dusk. Since people often have a big meal after dark, the total time eating per day might be more than indicated by the 5 percent figure, which translates to only thirty-six minutes in a twelve-hour day. But even if people chewed their evening meals for an hour after dark, which is an improbably long time, the total time spent eating would still be less than 12 percent of a fourteen-hour day, allowing two hours for the evening meal. However we look at the data, humans devote between a fifth and a tenth as much time to chewing as do the great apes.



This reduction in chewing time clearly results from cooked food being softer. Processed plant foods experience similar physical changes to those of meat. As the food canning industry knows all too well, it is hard to retain a crisp, fresh texture in heated vegetables or fruits. Plant cells are normally glued together by pectic polysaccharides. These chemicals degrade when heated, causing the cells to separate and permitting teeth to divide the tissue more easily. Hot cells also lose rigidity, a result of both their walls swelling and their membranes being disrupted by denaturation of proteins. The consequences are predictable. By measuring the amount of force needed to initiate a crack in food, researchers have shown that softness (or hardness) closely predicts the number of times someone chews before swallowing. The effect works for animals too. Wild monkeys spend almost twice as long chewing per day if their food is low-quality. Observers have recorded the amount of time spent chewing by wild primates that obtain human foods (such as garbage stolen from hotels). As the proportion of human foods rises in the diet, the primates spend less time chewing, down to less than 10 percent when all of the food comes from humans.



Six hours of chewing per day for a chimpanzee mother who consumes 1,800 calories per day means that she ingests food at a rate of around 300 calories per hour of chewing. Humans comparatively bolt their food. If adults eat 2,000 to 2,500 calories a day, as many people do, the fact that they chew for only about one hour per day means that the average intake rate will average 2,000 to 2,500 calories an hour or higher, or more than six times the rate for a chimpanzee. The rate is doubtless much more when people eat high-calorie foods, such as hamburgers, candy bars, and holiday feasts. Humans have clearly had a long history of much more intense calorie consumption than primates are used to. Thanks to cooking, we save ourselves around four hours of chewing time per day.





Before our ancestors cooked, then, they had much less free time. Their options for subsistence activities would therefore have been severely constrained. Males could not afford to spend all day hunting, because if they failed to get any prey, they would have had to fill their bellies on plant foods instead, which would take a long time just to chew. Consider chimpanzees, who hunt little and whose raw-food diet can be safely assumed to be similar to the diet of australopithecines. At Ngogo, Uganda, chimpanzees hunt intensely compared to other chimpanzee populations, yet males still average less than three minutes per day hunting. Human hunters have lots of time and walk for hours in the search for prey. A recent review of eight hunter-gatherer societies found that men hunted for between 1.8 and 8.2 hours daily. Hadza men were close to the average, spending more than 4 hours a day hunting—about eighty times as long as an Ngogo chimpanzee.



Almost all hunts by chimpanzees follow a chance encounter during such routine activities as patrolling their territorial boundaries, suggesting that chimpanzees are unwilling to risk spending time on a hopeful search. When chimpanzees hunt their favorite prey—red colobus monkeys—the colobus rarely move out of the tree where they are attacked. The monkeys appear to feel safer staying in one place, rather than jumping to adjacent trees where chimpanzees might ambush them. The monkeys’ immobility allows chimpanzees to alternate between sitting under the prey and making repeated rushes at them. In theory, the chimpanzees could spend hours pursuing this prey. But at Ngogo the longest hunt observed was just over one hour, and the average length of hunts is only eighteen minutes. At Gombe I found that the average interval between plant-feeding bouts was twenty minutes, almost the same as the length of a hunt. The similarity between the average hunt duration and the average interval between plant-feeding bouts suggests that chimpanzees can afford a break of twenty minutes from eating fruits or leaves to hunt, but if they take much longer they risk losing valuable plant-feeding time.



The time budget for an ape eating raw food is also constrained by the rhythm of digestion, because apes have to pause between meals. Judging from data on humans, the bigger the meal, the longer it takes for the stomach to empty. It probably takes one to two hours for a chimpanzee’s full stomach to empty enough to warrant feeding again. Therefore, a five-hour chewing requirement becomes an eight- or nine-hour commitment to feeding. Eat, rest, eat, rest, eat. An ancestor species that did not cook would presumably have experienced a similar rhythm.



These time constraints are inescapable for a large ape or habiline eating raw unprocessed food. Males who did not cook would not have been able to rely on hunting to feed themselves. Like chimpanzees, they could hunt in opportunistic spurts. But if they devoted many hours to hunting, the risk of failure to obtain prey could not be compensated rapidly enough. Eating their daily required calories in the form of their staple plant foods would have taken too long.





Washburn and other anthropologists have proposed that the human division of labor by sex was based on hunting. They suggest that on days when a male failed to find meat, honey, or other prizes, a female could provide food to him. As we now see, this would not have been sufficient, because a returning male who had not eaten during the day would not have had enough time left in the evening to chew his plant-food calories. The same time constraints apply whether our precooking ancestor obtained his staple plant diet by his own labor or received it from a female. A division of labor into hunting and gathering would not have afforded consumption of sufficient calories, as long as the food was consumed raw.



Suppose that a hunter living on raw food has a mate who is willing to feed him, that his mate could collect enough raw foods for him (while satisfying her own needs) and would bring them back to a central place, to be met by her grateful mate. Then suppose the male has had an unsuccessful day of hunting. Even modern hunter-gatherers armed with efficient weapons often fail. Among the Hadza there are stretches of a week or more several times per year when hunters bring no big-game meat to camp. The hungry hunter needs to consume, say, two thousand calories, but he cannot eat after dark. To do so would be too dangerous, scrabbling in the predator-filled night to feel for the nuts, leaves, or roots his gatherer friend brought him. If the hunter slept on the ground, he would be exposed to predators and large ungulates as he fumbled for his food. If he were in a tree, he would find it hard to have his raw foods with him because they do not come in tidy packages.



So to eat his fill he would have to do most of his eating before dusk, which falls between about 6 and 7 P.M. in equatorial regions. If he had eaten nothing while on the hunt, he would need to be back in camp before midday, and there he would find his mate’s gathered foods (assuming she had been able to complete her food gathering so early in the day). He would then have to spend the rest of the day eating, resting, eating, resting, and eating. In short, the long hours of chewing necessitated by a raw diet would have sharply reduced hunting time. It is questionable whether the sexual division of labor would have been possible at all.



The use of fire solved the problem. It freed hunters from previous time constraints by reducing the time spent chewing. It also allowed eating after dark. The first of our ancestral line to cook their food would have gained several hours of daytime. Instead of being an opportunistic activity, hunting could have become a more dedicated pursuit with a higher potential for success. Nowadays men can hunt until nightfall and still eat a large meal in camp. After cooking began, therefore, hunting could contribute to the full development of the family household, reliant as it is on a predictable economic exchange between women and men.





CHAPTER 7



The Married Cook




“The labor of women in the house, certainly, enables men to produce more wealth than they otherwise could; and in this way women are economic factors in society. But so are horses . . . the horse is not economically independent, nor is the woman.”



—CHARLOTTE PERKINS GILMAN,

Women and Economics: A Study of the

Economic Relation Between Men and Women

as a Factor in Social Evolution





An evening meal cooked by a woman serves her and her children’s needs. It also helps her husband by giving him a predictable source of food, allowing him to spend his day doing whatever activity he chooses. But while the arrangement is comfortable for both sexes, it is particularly convenient for the male. Why should a female cook for him? A focus on the peculiar properties of cooked food provokes a new understanding of the nature of married life and the human community. It suggests that the reasons why the sexes pair off go beyond the traditional ideas of mating competition, or the interests that women and men have in the product of each other’s labor. It leads to the uncomfortable idea that as a cultural norm, women cook for men because of patriarchy. Men use their communal power to consign women to domestic roles, even when women would prefer otherwise.



That women tend to cook for their husbands is clear. In 1973 anthropologists George Murdock and Catarina Provost compiled the pattern of sex differences in fifty productive activities in 185 cultures. Although men often like to cook meat, overall cooking was the most female-biased activity of any, a little more so than preparing plant food and fetching water. Women were predominantly or almost exclusively responsible for cooking in 97.8 percent of societies. There were four societies in which cooking was reportedly performed about equally by both sexes or predominantly by males. One of them, the Todas of South India, was an error: a 1906 report had been misleading. Murdock and Provost failed to catch a correction showing that Toda women did most of the cooking.



Even the apparent exceptions conformed to the general rule. The three standouts reveal an important distinction between two types of cooking: cooking for the family, done by women, and cooking for the community, done by men. The three were the Samoans, Marquesans, and Trukese, all in the South Pacific. Their cultural backgrounds are different and they are located hundreds of miles apart from one another, but they have one thing in common: their staple food is breadfruit. Breadfruit trees produce fruits the size of basket-balls, yield large volumes of high-quality starch, and demand cooperative processing.



The procedure for cooking the fruit pulp is physically arduous, takes many hours, and is performed in a communal house by a group of men on days of their choice. The men build a large fire, peel the fruits, cut them into chunks, and steam them. On the Truk island group of Micronesia (now often called Chuuk), the ringing sound of sweat-soaked men pounding the fruit meat with coral pestles could be heard a hundred yards away. It was late in the day before men were done wrapping the cooled mash into leaf packages. They distributed the surplus to men who had not been cooking. At the end of the day, all the men had food packages, and sometimes they ate together in the men’s house, where women were not allowed.



Men did not need women to feed them. They could spend weeks at a time in the men’s houses with men of their lineage, receiving no assistance from women. But when men ate at home they gave the breadfruit mash to their wives, and their wives used it as the basis for the evening meal. Women rounded it out with pork or fish sauces and vegetables they cooked themselves. If there was no breadfruit, the women cooked other starchy foods such as taro roots. Men cooked the main staple when they chose to do so, but women were responsible for cooking everything else and for producing household meals.



Might there be a few societies, not sampled by Murdock and Provost, in which women are so liberated that the gendered pattern of cooking is reversed? Cultural anthropologist Maria Lepowsky studied the people of Vanatinai in the South Pacific expressly because, from the outside, this society seemed like a woman’s dream community. In many ways, life was indeed very good for women. There was no ideology of male superiority. Both sexes could host feasts, lead canoeing expeditions, raise pigs, hunt, fish, participate in warfare, own and inherit land, decide about clearing land, make shell necklaces, and trade in such valued items as greenstone ax blades. Women and men were equally capable of attaining the prestige of being “big” (important) people. Domestic violence was rare and strongly censured. There was “tremendous overlap in the roles of men and women” and a great deal of personal control over how they chose to spend their time. Women had “the same kinds of personal autonomy and control of the means of production as men.”



Yet despite the apparent escape from patriarchy, women on Vanatinai did all the domestic cooking. Cooking was regarded as a low-prestige activity. Other chores for which women were responsible included washing dishes, fetching water and firewood, sweeping, and cleaning up pig droppings. All were again regarded as low-status duties—in other words, the kind of work men did not want to do. One day as a group of women returned after walking three miles with heavy baskets of yams on their heads, they complained to Lepowsky, “We come home after working in the garden all day, and we still have to fetch water, look for firewood, do the cooking and cleaning up and look after the children while all men do is sit on the verandah and chew betel nut!” But when they asked for help with these tasks, “The men,” wrote Lepowsky, “usually retort that these are the work of women.” Why should the men help, if they can get away with not helping?



The worldwide pattern is reflected in the English language. The word lady is derived from the Old English hlaefdige, meaning “bread kneader,” whereas lord comes from hlaefweard , or “bread keeper.” Of course, men are entirely capable of cooking. In industrial societies men can be professional cooks. Spouses in urban marriages often share the cooking, or husbands can do most of it. In hunter-gatherer societies men cook for themselves on long hunting expeditions or in bachelor groups. Men cook on feast days and ritual occasions, cooperating in public somewhat like the breadfruit cooks. But even the men who cook when no women are present or on ceremonial occasions still have their home foods prepared by women. The rule that domestic cooking is women’s work is astonishingly consistent.



The classic reason suggested for this pattern is mutual convenience. Each sex gains from sharing their efforts, as many happily married couples can attest. But the explanation is superficial because it does not address the more fundamental problem of why our species has households at all, or the darker dynamic that sometimes has husbands exploiting their wives’ labor. The men on Vanatinai could have shared the cooking easily, as the women would sometimes have liked them to do, but they chose not to. Charlotte Perkins Gilman noted that humans are the only species in which “the sex-relation is also an economic relation” and compared women’s role to that of horses. Molly and Eugene Christian complained that cooking “has made of woman a slave.” In theory, among hunter-gatherers both males and females could forage for themselves, like every other animal, and then cook his or her own meal at the end of the day. So what led to a sexual division of labor in which men routinely insist that it is women’s lot to do the household cooking?



Nonhuman primates mostly pick and eat their food at once. But hunter-gatherers bring food to a camp for processing and cooking, and in the camp, labor can be offered and exchanged. This suggests that cooking might be responsible for converting individual foraging into a social economy. Archaeologist Catherine Perlès thinks so: “The culinary act is from the start a project. Cooking ends individual self-sufficiency.” Relying on cooking creates foods that can be owned, given, or stolen. Before cooking, we ate more like chimpanzees, everyone for themselves. After the advent of cooking, we assembled around the fire and shared the labor.



Perlès’s notion that, by necessity, cooking was a social activity is supported by Dutch sociologist and fire expert Joop Goudsblom, who suggests that cooking required social coordination, “if only to ensure that there would always be someone to look after the fire.” Food historian Felipe Fernandez-Armesto proposed that cooking created mealtimes and thereby organized people into a community. For culinary historian Michael Symons, cooking promoted cooperation through sharing, because the cook always distributes food. Cooking, he wrote, is “the starting-place of trades.”



These ideas fit nicely with the ubiquitous social importance of cooked food. The contrast between communal and solitary eating is particularly pronounced among hunter-gatherers, for whom cooking is a highly social act, unlike eating raw food. When people are out of camp, their snacks tend to be raw foods such as ripe fruits or grubs, and these are normally collected individually and eaten without sharing. But when people cook food, they do so mostly in camp, and they share it within the family or, when feasting, with other families. Furthermore, much of the labor in preparing the meal is complementary. In a common pattern, a woman brings firewood and vegetables, prepares the vegetables, and does the cooking. A man brings meat, which either he or a woman might cook. Family members also tend to eat at roughly the same time (though the man may eat first) and often sit face to face around a fire.



But the suggestion that tending a fire, eating a meal, and sharing food require cooperation is obviously wrong. Alexander Selkirk, the real-life Robinson Crusoe, was very fit when he was rescued in 1709 after more than four years of cooking for himself in the Juan Fernandez Islands in the middle of the Pacific. Numerous solitary war survivors also have lived off the land and cooked for themselves, as Shoichi Yokoi did in Guam for almost thirty years before he was found in 1972. Hunter-gatherer women sometimes collect food and fuel, tend a fire, and do the cooking without any support from their husbands, such as Tiwi women in northern Australia. Men in societies ranging from hunter-gatherers to the United States can go on hunting expeditions for days at a time and cook for themselves. Examples of individual self-sufficiency clearly undermine the idea that the sheer mechanics of cooking require that it be practiced cooperatively.



Why, then, is the “culinary project” so often social, if it does not need to be? Relying on cooked food creates opportunities for cooperation, but just as important, it exposes cooks to being exploited. Cooking takes time, so lone cooks cannot easily guard their wares from determined thieves such as hungry males without their own food. Pair-bonds solve the problem. Having a husband ensures that a woman’s gathered foods will not be taken by others; having a wife ensures the man will have an evening meal. According to this idea, cooking created a simple marriage system; or perhaps it solidified a preexisting version of married life that could have been prompted by hunting or sexual competition. Either way, the result was a primitive protection racket in which husbands used their bonds with other men in the community to protect their wives from being robbed, and women returned the favor by preparing their husbands’ meals. The many beneficial aspects of the household, such as provisioning by males, increases in labor efficiency, and creation of a social network for child-rearing, were additions consequent to solving the more basic problem: females needed male protection, specifically because of cooking. A male used his social power both to ensure that a female did not lose her food, and to guarantee his own meal by assigning the work of cooking to the female.





The logic for this theory begins with the banal observation that cooking is necessarily a conspicuous and lengthy process. In the bush, the sight or smell of smoke reveals a cook’s location at a long distance, allowing hungry individuals who have no food to easily locate cooks in action. The effect among Homo erectus is easily imagined. Because females were smaller and physically weaker, they were vulnerable to bullying by domineering males who wanted food. Each female therefore obtained protection from other males’ wheedling, scrounging, or bullying by forming a special friendship with her own particular male. Her bond with him protected her food from other males, and he also gave her meat. These bonds were so critical for the successful feeding of both sexes that they generated a particular kind of evolutionary psychology in our ancestors that shaped female-male relationships and continues to affect us today.



The idea that cooking has influenced social relationships in this way is supported by the intense aversion to competition shown by hunter-gatherers eating their meals. Lorna Marshall’s description of the delicacy with which Nyae Nyae !Kung treat one another at mealtimes is typical of hunter-gatherers: “When a visitor comes to the fire of a family which is preparing food or eating, he should sit at a little distance, not to seem importunate, and wait to be asked to share. . . . We observed no unmannerly behavior and no cheating and no encroachment about food. . . . The polite way to receive food, or any gift, is to hold out both hands and have the food or other gift placed in them. To reach out with one hand suggests grabbing to the !Kung. I found it moving to see so much restraint about taking food among people who are all thin and often hungry, for whom food is a constant source of anxiety.”



Such spontaneous etiquette is universal within functioning hunter-gatherer societies. Nothing like it is found in any other social species. Among nonhuman animals, valuable items that cannot be eaten at once predictably induce fights. Most of the fruits eaten by chimpanzees are the size of plums or smaller, too small to be worth fighting over, but a single ripe breadfruit weighs up to eight kilograms (eighteen pounds) and can take a group two hours to eat. An individual does not have time to swallow it before others see the prize and come to compete for it. Offspring take advantage of the situation by begging from their mothers, and adults fight to possess whole fruits or large pieces. Among chimpanzees, males win. Among bonobos, females win. In each case, the winners are members of the dominant sex. Among various species of spiders, a male that cohabits on a female’s web likewise takes her food, and as a result she weighs less than if no male is there. Among savannah lions, females lose much of their prey to males.



Restraint is rare indeed in animal competition over food. Chimpanzees fight over any food that can be monopolized, but the contests are fiercest over meat, producing a fracas that can often be heard more than a kilometer (half a mile) away. Within seconds of a successful predation by a low-ranking chimpanzee, a dominant male is liable to snatch the entire carcass from the killer. In a large group, the carcass will be torn apart by screaming males desperate for a share. Meat-eating can continue for hours. Those without meat, or with only a small piece, beg hard with upturned hands and reaching mouths. The harder they beg, the more meat they get, often by simply tearing it or pulling it away. Possessors try to escape the pressure by turning their backs or climbing to an inaccessible branch. They occasionally charge at their tormentors or flail the carcass at them. Such tactics buy time but are rarely effective. Persistent begging is normally such a nuisance to the possessor that it reduces the rate at which he can eat, and for this reason he sometimes allows others to take a piece of meat. He occasionally even makes an outright donation to a pushy beggar, who immediately leaves with it. Possessing meat can thus be less rewarding than expected from its food value. Meat brings trouble because it takes time to eat.



The most subordinate individuals get little. In the mayhem of carcass division, females rarely end up with a large piece. Overall, females eat much less meat than males, and their low success rate is clearly due to their poor fighting ability. Females with close social relationships to male possessors may get some meat, but in general, meat has less nutritional impact on the lives of female and young chimpanzees than it does on males. Even sexually attractive females cannot expect meat.



If the first cooks were temperamentally like chimpanzees, life would have been absurdly difficult for females or low-status males trying to cook a meal. Cooked food would have been intensely valuable. Even the act of gathering creates value merely by assembling raw foods into a pile. Cooking only increases its attraction. Subordinate individuals cooking their own meals would have been vulnerable to petty theft or worse. If several hungry dominants were present, the weak or unprotected would have lost much or all of the food. Females would have been the losers, just as they are among chimpanzees. There are no indications that human females or their ancestors have ever been prone to forming the kinds of physical fighting alliances with one another that protect bonobo females from being bullied by males.



Consider the possibility that small groups of tough males could search for signs of a campfire as a way to feed themselves. They would be able to descend on an undefended cook and take his or her food at will—after waiting, perhaps, for the cooking to be done. If this ploy were regularly successful, the males could become professional food pirates, which in turn would mean they would not bother to feed themselves or prepare their own food, adding to their desperation to steal it. Male lions come close to doing this, regularly taking whatever meat they want from kills made by females. This scenario suggests that unless cooks somehow established a peaceful environment in which to work, cooking might not have been a viable method of preparing food at all.



Even humans steal readily in various circumstances, so our species is not inherently uncompetitive. The nervous child with a lunch box in the schoolyard knows the problem as well as the anxious late-night stroller with cash in his pocket. People who have the chance to take from members of a different social network have few qualms about doing so. Farmers living next to hunter-gatherers routinely complain of being robbed. Stealing, cheating, and bullying were prevalent among the troubled Ik in the uplands of northern Uganda observed by cultural anthropologist Colin Turnbull, whose book about them, The Mountain People, was said by writer Robert Ardrey to record a society without morality. The Ik were a hunting people who had been kept from their traditional hunting grounds. The result was starvation, disease, and mutual exploitation. Turnbull described an almost complete evaporation of their community spirit: “They place the individual good above all else and almost demand that each get away with as much as he can without his fellows knowing.” Turnbull’s description shows just how savage people can become when social networks break down and life is tough.



Ethnographers sometimes report cases of theft within stable hunter-gatherer communities. Turnbull described how Pepei, an Mbuti Pygmy, had to cook for himself because he was a bachelor with no female kin. As a result, he was often hungry. Several times he was caught stealing small quantities of food from another cooking pot or someone else’s hut, mostly from an old woman who had no husband to protect her. His punishment was public ridicule, receiving food fit only for animals, or a thrashing with a thorny branch. Pepei was forgiven after he ended up in tears.



Since hunter-gatherers are often hungry, one might imagine that food theft would be a daily problem. Like other people living in small-scale egalitarian societies, they have no police or any other kind of authority. A hunter-gatherer woman returns to camp in the middle of the day carrying the raw foods she has obtained. She then prepares and cooks them for the evening meal at her own individual fire. Men might return to camp at any time, alone or in a small group. Many of the foods a woman cooks are edible raw, so they could be eaten before, during, or after the cooking process. If a man returns from the bush feeling hungry and has no one to cook for him, he might be tempted to ask a woman for some food—or even simply take it—rather than doing his own cooking. He can also sneak about the camp at any other time, including night.



Yet such tactics are rare. The relaxed atmosphere Lorna Marshall described for the !Kung is due to a system that keeps the peace at mealtimes among hunter-gatherers and other small-scale societies. The system consists of strong cultural norms. Married women must provide food to their husbands, and they must cook it themselves, though other family members may help. Social anthropologists Jane Collier and Michelle Rosaldo surveyed small-scale societies worldwide. “In all cases,” they found, “a woman is obliged to provide daily food for her family.” That is why married men can count on an evening meal. As a result, they have little reason to take food from women who are not their wives.



The obligation of wives to cook for their husbands occurs regardless of how much other work each of them do, or how much food they give each other. Sometimes men produce much more than women, as among traditional Inuit of the high Arctic, where the almost wholly animal diet of sea mammals, caribou, and fish was produced entirely by men. A man would hunt all day and would come home to a dinner his wife cooked. Cooking was slow over a seal-oil lamp, and women often had to spend much of the afternoon on the task. Sometimes the whole family went hunting together, but the wife had to return early to have everything ready when her husband and others returned to camp. Even when the time of her husband’s return was uncertain, she risked punishment if there was no food available for him. But at least a wife’s obligation to cook for a husband was matched by his providing all the food.



On the other hand, in some societies women brought home almost all the food. This happened among the Tiwi hunter-gatherers of northern Australia, a polygynous people who lived in households of up to twenty wives and one man. Women foraged for long hours and still returned in the evening to cook the one meal of the day. There were few animals to hunt. Men mostly contributed occasional small animals, such as goanna lizards, and brought in such little food that they needed women’s food production for their own welfare. As one Tiwi husband said, “If I had only one or two wives, I would starve.” Men relied on their wives not only for their own food but also to feed others. The possession of surplus food was the most concrete symbol of a Tiwi man’s success, allowing him to host feasts and promote his political agenda. Women’s high food contribution did not sway the balance of power in their marriages. Despite their economic independence and key role in their husbands’ status, they were “as frequently and as brutally beaten by their husbands as wives in any other savage society.”



Among the Inuit, Tiwi, and all other small-scale societies on record, fairness in distributing labor among women and men was not the issue. Whether or not wives wanted to do so, they cooked for their husbands. As a result, married men were guaranteed adequate food whether they returned late, tired, and hungry from a day’s hunting or came home relaxed and early from discussing politics with a neighbor. The man might have eaten in a courteous manner and have had a friendly or even loving interaction with his wife, but the formal structure of their eating relationship was that he could count on her labor and take a large portion of her food—typically, it seems, the best part.



Peace in the camp is further cemented by the principle that unless a husband gave his blessing, a wife could feed no other man except her close kin. This rule applied to cooked food around the campfire, as well as to the raw food she gathered. Other than her kin and husband, no one else had any right to ask for a share, so she could trudge back to camp secure in the knowledge that she would be able to cook all the food she had obtained. In Western society, we take the principle of ownership for granted. But among hunter-gatherers, this manifestation of private ownership is noteworthy because it lies in remarkable contrast to the obligatory sharing of men’s foods in particular, and more generally to a strong ethos of communitywide cooperation.





So however hard a man labors to produce food, in hunter-gatherer societies his rights to the food are a matter of communal decision. A man follows the rules, even if that means he gets nothing from his labor. Sometimes he must allow others to distribute his meat. A common requirement among Native American hunters was for boys making their first kill to carry their prize back to camp and stand by while others cooked and ate it. The practice symbolized the subordination of men to the demands of the group. More often, he divided his food himself. The community might allow him to make personal choices about who to give meat to, but not necessarily. In the western desert of Australia, every large hunted animal had to be prepared in a rigidly defined fashion when it was brought to camp. The hunter’s own share of a kangaroo was the neck, head, and backbone, while his parents-in-law received a hind leg, and old men ate the tail and innards. The contrast with women’s ownership of their foods is striking. Although women forage in small groups and might help one another find good trees or digging areas, their foods belong to them. The sex difference suggests that the cultural rules that specify how women’s and men’s foods are to be shared are adapted to the society’s need to regulate competition specifically over food. The rules were not merely the result of a general moral attitude.



A woman’s right to ownership protects her from supplicants of both sexes. In Australia’s western desert, a hungry aborigine woman can sit amicably by a cook’s fire, but she will not receive any food unless she can justify it by invoking a specific kinship role. It is even more difficult for a man. A bachelor or married man who approaches someone else’s wife in search of food would be in flagrant breach of convention and an immediate cause of gossip, just as a woman would be if she gave him any food. The norm is so strong that a wife’s presence at a meal can protect even a husband from being approached. Among Mbuti Pygmies, if a family is eating together by their hearth, they will be undisturbed. But when a man is eating alone, he is likely to attract his friends, who will expect to share his food.



Under this system, an unmarried woman who offers food to a man is effectively flirting, if not offering betrothal. Male anthropologists have to be aware of this to avoid embarrassment in such societies. Cofeeding is often the only marriage ceremony, such that if an unmarried pair are seen eating together, they are henceforward regarded as married. In New Guinea, Bonerif hunter-gatherers rely on the sago palm tree for their staple food year-round. If a woman prepares her own sago meal and gives it to a man, she is considered wed to him. The interaction is public, so others take the opportunity to tease the new couple with jokes equating food and sex, such as, “If you get a lot of sago you are going to be a happy man.” The association is so ingrained that a man’s penis is symbolized by the sago fork with which he eats his meal. If a man takes his sago fork out of his hair and shows it to a woman, they both know he is inviting her for sex. In that society, for a woman to even look at a man’s feeding implement is to break the rule against her constrained food-sharing.



Because interactions occur in public, a husband’s presence is not necessary to maintain customary principles. The husband’s role is important not so much for his physical presence, but because he represents a reliable conduit to the support of the community. If a wife reported to her husband that another man had inappropriately asked her for food, the accused would be obliged to defend himself to both the husband and the community at large.



This may explain one of the reasons why marriage is important to a woman in these societies. Among the Bonerif, as among many hunter-gatherers, sexual intercourse is not tightly restricted to marriage. Wives are free to have sexual relations with several men at the same time, and may do so even when their husbands protest. Furthermore, they get little food from their husbands. But marriage means that her children will be accepted, according to anthropologist Gottfried Oosterwal. In addition, marriage gives a woman access to the only ultimate authority, which is the set of communal decisions reached by men in the men’s house. These decisions represent the “crystallized view of everyone about everything” and are accepted as the right view by the whole community. Having a husband means that when social conflict arises, a good wife has an advocate who is a member of the ultimate source of social control.



A link to the communal authority is critical, because the ability of victims to deter a bully or a persistent pest depends on their being a legitimate member of the community. Hunter-gatherers deal with braggarts, thieves, and violators of other social norms in a consistent way, according to anthropologist Christopher Boehm. They use communal sanctions. Whispers, rumors, and gossip evolve into public criticism or ridicule directed at the accused. If the offender continues to incur public anger, he or she will be severely punished or even killed. The killing is done by one or a few men but will be approved by all the elders. Capital punishment provides the sanction that most completely enforces hunter-gatherer adherence to social norms, and it is in men’s hands. Thus by virtue of being married (or, if unmarried, by virtue of being a daughter), a woman is socially protected from losing any of her food. Having a husband or father who is a legitimate member of the group, she is effectively protected by him.



In theory, cultural norms that oblige a woman to feed her husband but no other men could have arisen from a societal goal other than to protect women’s foods. Such norms might have arisen from a desire to avoid conflicts in general, or from a concern for reducing adultery in particular. But these alternative explanations are unconvincing because men needed their wives specifically to cook for them, rather than merely to behave in a way that promoted communal civility in general. Cross-cultural evidence described above shows that women’s cooking for the family is a universal pattern. From ethnographic reports it seems that this domestic service is often the most important contribution a wife makes to their partnership.





We have already seen that among the Tiwi a man depended on being fed by his wives, and it turns out that the Tiwi case is typical. Hunter-gatherer men suffered if they had no wives or female relatives to provide cooked meals. “An aborigine of this Colony without a female partner is a poor dejected being,” wrote G. Robinson about the Tasmanians in 1846. When an Australian aboriginal wife deserts her husband, wrote Phyllis Kaberry, he can easily replace her role as a sexual partner but he suffers because he has lost someone attending to his hearth. The loss is important because a bachelor is a sorry creature in subsistence societies, particularly if he has no close kin. As Thomas Gregor explained for the Mehinaku hunter-gardeners of Brazil, an unmarried man “cannot provide the bread and porridge that is the spirit’s food and a chief’s hospitality. . . . To his friends, he is an object of pity.” Colin Turnbull explained precisely why bachelors among Mbuti Pygmies were unhappy: “A woman is more than a mere producer of wealth; she is an essential partner in the economy. Without a wife a man cannot hunt; he has no hearth; he has nobody to build his house, gather fruits and vegetables and cook for him.” Examples like these are so widespread that according to Jane Collier and Michelle Rosaldo, in small-scale societies all men have a “strictly economic need for a wife and hearth.” Men need their personal cooks because the guarantee of an evening meal frees them to spend the day doing what they want, and allows them to entertain other men. They can find opportunities for sexual interactions more easily than they can find a food provider.



In societies with no restaurants or supermarkets, the need for a wife can lead a man to desperate measures. Among the Inuit, where a woman contributed no food calories, her cooking and production of warm, dry hunting clothes were vital: a man cannot both hunt and cook. The pressure could drive widowers or bachelors to neighboring territories in an attempt to steal a woman, even if it meant killing her husband. The problem was so pervasive that the threat of stealing women dominated relationships among Inuit strangers: unfamiliar men would normally be killed even before questions were asked. Lust was not the motivation for stealing wives. “The vital importance of a wife to perform domestic services provided the most usual motive for abduction,” according to ethnographer David Riches. Oosterwal recorded a comparable reason for wife stealing in New Guinea, where a woman’s domestic contribution was critical because of the sago meal she prepared. Men wanted to give feasts as large as possible, so they needed women to organize the food. This led them to conduct raids on neighboring groups to kidnap wives for sago production. Captured women were put to work at once. Their sexual services were an added bonus.



Another version of the same formula applied to many Tiwi marriages. In this highly polygynous culture, old men took most of the young wives, so more than 90 percent of men’s first marriages were to widows much older than themselves, sometimes as old as sixty. The old wives might have been past child-bearing age and physically unattractive, but young men delighted in the marriages because they were then fed. Among one nearby group, the Groote Eylandt Aborigines, adult bachelors were given a teenage boy to do the domestic chores. The teenager was called a boy slave, suggesting that wives may have been similarly perceived as fulfilling a slavelike role.



Although the Inuit and Tiwi offer extreme examples of how hunter-gatherer men acquired wives, the importance of marriage for a man in small-scale societies was universal. Collier and Rosaldo explained that a married man has status because once he has a wife, he need never ask for cooked food and he can invite others to his hearth. He is also likely to eat well because men typically eat before their wives and have the choice of the best food. In Michael Symons’s words, men “demand selfless generosity from women.” To favor the married man even further, small-scale societies have food taboos such that married men are allowed to eat more of the choice kinds of food than are bachelors or women. Women in these societies often dislike marriage specifically because as wives they are obliged to produce food for men, and they have to work harder than they would as unmarried women.





Inequitable as marriage is in certain respects for hunter-gatherer women, that women have to cook for men empowers them. “Her economic skill is not only a weapon for subsistence, but also a means of enforcing good treatment and justice,” wrote Phyllis Kaberry of Australian aboriginal women. A wife who cooks badly might be beaten, shouted at, chased, or have her possessions broken, but she can respond to abuse by refusing to cook or threatening to leave. Such disputes seem to be characteristic mostly of new marriages. Most couples easily develop a comfortable predictability, with wives doing their best to provide husbands their cooked meals and husbands appreciating the effort. Hunter-gatherer women are therefore not normally treated badly, and many ethnographers have concluded that, in comparison to most societies, married women lead lives of high status and considerable autonomy.



Catherine Perlès was right in saying that cooking ends individual self-sufficiency. Cooking need not be a social activity, but a woman needs a man to guard her food, and she needs the community to back him up. A man relies on a woman to feed him, and on other men to respect his relationship with her. Without a social network defining, supporting, and enforcing social norms, cooking would lead to chaos.



It is impossible to know how rapidly cooking would have ended individual self-sufficiency after it was first practiced, but in theory the protective pair-bond system could have evolved quickly. Admittedly, the first cooks were not modern hunter-gatherers, and we know too little about their way of life to confidently judge the effects of cooking on social organization. We do not know how linguistically skilled our ancestors were when cooking was adopted. Language is needed nowadays to enforce culturally understood rules, and because a woman’s food is made secure by her being able to report on a thief ’s activity. But at least we can say that three of the key behavioral elements found in the hunter-gatherer system—male food guards, female food suppliers, and respect for other’s possessions—are found in other animals, suggesting that a primitive version of the modern food-protection regime could have evolved rapidly among early cooks.



Gibbons illustrate the role of males as food guards. Pairs of these small tree-dwelling apes defend territories against their neighbors. When pairs meet at a tree in the border zone, males fight hard with each other, and the female of the winning male tends to eat better. While food guards are relatively common in animals, there is only one species in which females have been seen provisioning males: a tiny Australian insect called the Zeus bug. Male Zeus bugs are smaller than females and ride on the backs of their mates like jockeys. Females secrete a waxlike material on their backs that is eaten by the male and has no known purpose except to feed him. Males that have been prevented from eating the female’s secretions turn competitive: they steal the female’s fresh prey. The researchers who discovered this strange relationship hypothesize that females do better by feeding their riding males than by losing prey to them, perhaps because the waxy stuff contains nutrients that the females do not need. This system has apparently evolved to stop males from interfering with the female’s feeding. In other words, females feed males to reward them for behaving well. That is close to the system found in humans.



Male “respect for possession” is found more widely than female provisioning. Competition for mates among desert-living hamadryas baboons from around the Red Sea provides a striking example. Male hamadryas who do not know each other fight intensely over females, but among familiars a male is completely inhibited from interfering with an existing bond. Zoologist Hans Kummer demonstrated this with experiments in which he captured two wild males who came from the same group. He found out which of the males was dominant by putting food between them. He then kept the males in separate cages. While the dominant male was allowed to watch, Kummer introduced an unfamiliar female into the cage of the subordinate. The dominant saw everything, but being in a different cage, he could do nothing to stop the subordinate from interacting with the new female. Inside the pairing cage, the subordinate male approached the female and quickly mated with her. A few minutes later she showed him her approval by grooming him, and by that time a bond was formed.



At this point Kummer introduced the dominant male into the cage where the subordinate male and his new female were enjoying their honeymoon. An hour earlier the dominant had been so superior that he had taken food from his subordinate at will, but now the dominant lost all interest in competing for the female. The dominant showed complete respect for the subordinate’s possession of the female. Films of these experiments show the dominant looking anywhere but at the subordinate. The dominant develops an intense fascination with a pebble at his feet, which he rolls and twiddles with a pointed finger. He stares at the clouds as if entranced by the weather. The one direction he does not look is toward the most obvious thing in the cage: the two so recently paired baboons. When paired in equivalent circumstances with an unfamiliar male, by contrast, the dominant baboon shows no such respect. Kummer’s experiment identified male bonding as the source of respect between males.



The food guarding, provisioning by females, and respect for possession found in animals are associated with males competing over sexual access to females, but only in humans have they led to households. Something about humans is different from other species. A woman’s need to have her food supply protected is unique among primates and provides a sensible explanation for the sexual division of labor.



The proposal that the human household originated in competition over food presents a challenge to conventional thinking because it holds economics as primary and sexual relations as secondary. Anthropologists often see marriage as an exchange in which women get resources and men get a guarantee of paternity. In that view, sex is the basis of our mating system; economic considerations are an add-on. But in support of the primary importance of food in determining mating arrangements, in animal species the mating system is adapted to the feeding system, rather than the other way around. A female chimpanzee needs the support of all the males in her community to aid her in defending a large feeding territory, so she does not bond with any particular male. A female gorilla, however, has no need for a defended food territory, so she is free to become a mate for a specific male. Many such examples suggest that the mating system is constrained by the way species are socially adapted to their food supply. The feeding system is not adapted to the mating arrangement. The consequences of a man’s economic dependence takes different forms in different societies, but recall that according to Jane Collier and Michelle Rosaldo, his needing a wife to provide food is universal among hunter-gatherers. Food, it seems, routinely drives a man’s marriage decision more than the need for a sexual partner.



Furthermore, food relationships appear to be more tightly regulated than sexual relationships. Among the Bonerif, husbands disapproved of their wives having sex with bachelors, but the bachelors did it anyway. Husbands were relatively tolerant of their wives having sex with other husbands, perhaps because promiscuous sex involved less threat of losing her economic services than did promiscuous feeding. As in many other hunter-gatherer communities, Bonerif attitudes toward premarital sex are particularly open-minded. One girl had sex with every unmarried male in the community except her brother. But when a woman feeds a man, she is immediately recognized as being married to him. Western society is not alone in thinking that the way to a man’s heart is through his stomach.





Marriage in the United States affects women and men in different ways. Women tend to work longer hours after marriage, thanks to putting in extra time on household tasks, but men do no more household work than before they marry. The pattern is much the same as Jane Collier and Michelle Rosaldo found in small-scale societies, where marriage “binds specific people together in a particular, hierarchical system of obligations, requiring that women provide services for husbands.”



In Victorian England, the aesthetic writer John Ruskin argued that household labor was divided harmoniously and that women were superior to men. He credited women with greater organizational skills than men and explained that women were therefore better at managing households. But to philosopher John Stuart Mill, it was obvious that women were treated unfairly. Ruskin’s gallantry, he said, was “an empty compliment . . . since there is no other situation in life in which it is the established order, and considered quite natural and suitable, that the better should obey the worse. If this piece of talk is good for anything, it is only as an admission by men, of the corrupting influence of power.”



Mill’s accusation that Victorian British men used power to their own advantage might be applied equally well to all nonindustrial societies. The women living on Vanatinai had as much control over their lives as in any society. They were not regarded as inferior to men, and in the public realm they were not subject to male authority. But even when they were tired and men were relaxing, they still had to cook. Maria Lepowsky does not report what would have happened if a woman had refused to cook, but among hunter-gatherers who are similarly egalitarian, husbands are liable to beat wives if the evening meal is merely late or poorly cooked. When there is a conflict, most women have no choice: they have to cook, because cultural rules, ultimately enforced by men for their own benefit, demand it.



The idea that cooking led to our pair-bonds suggests a worldwide irony. Cooking brought huge nutritional benefits. But for women, the adoption of cooking has also led to a major increase in their vulnerability to male authority. Men were the greater beneficiaries. Cooking freed women’s time and fed their children, but it also trapped women into a newly subservient role enforced by male-dominated culture. Cooking created and perpetuated a novel system of male cultural superiority. It is not a pretty picture.





CHAPTER 8



The Cook’s Journey




“A great flame follows a little spark.”



—DANTE, The Divine Comedy





When Jean Anthelme Brillat-Savarin wrote, “Tell me what you eat and I shall tell you what you are,” he could not have known how right he was. Even nowadays no one knows how deeply the effects of cooking and the control of fire have been burned into our DNA.



Take the pace of our lives. Compared with great apes, we live a few decades longer and reach sexual maturity more slowly. Our long life spans suggest that our ancestors were good at escaping predators. Across species, those who can escape predators more easily tend to live longer. Tortoises, safe in their shells, have lives measured in decades, far longer than most animals their size. Flying species, such as birds or bats, live longer than those confined to the ground, such as mice or shrews. Even in captivity, terrestrial rodents rarely live more than two years, whereas bats of the same size can live for twenty years. Likewise, gliding animals live longer than their nongliding relatives. Bowhead whales stay so far north that killer whales cannot reach them, and they live more than a hundred years. The longevity of early humans is unknown, but their relative safety during evolution must have owed much to the use of fire to deter predators.



Or consider weaning. Cooked food, being soft, enables mothers to wean their young early. During human evolution, early weaning would have allowed a mother to recover her body condition rapidly after birth, promoting a short interval between births. In addition, the higher energy value of cooked food should have promoted a faster rate of growth for the young. The expected early weaning made possible by a human mother’s giving cooked food to her infant would have affected social behavior too. Mothers who weaned their babies early would have larger families than before, an infant and a toddler side by side. The advantages of help given by grandmothers and other kin would have increased. Chimpanzee grandmothers occasionally express interest in their daughters’ offspring through carrying or grooming, but they are normally preoccupied with their own infants. By generating easily donated gifts of cooked food that are useful for the young, the new system of processing food would have favored cooperative tendencies in rearing families.



Cooking also should have reduced the difficulties of finding enough to eat during the poorest seasons, when even now hunter-gatherers routinely find conditions hard. The notion of cooked food making life easier challenges the thrifty-gene hypothesis, which claims that because the environments of our hunter-gatherer ancestors were highly seasonal, we are physiologically adapted to periods of feast and famine. Accordingly, ancestral humans supposedly digested and stored energy in their bodies with exceptional efficiency. The thrifty-gene hypothesis suggests this efficiency was a useful adaptation when starvation was a consistent threat but is responsible for obesity and diabetes in many modern environments. The cooking hypothesis suggests a different idea: during our evolution, our use of cooked food would have left us better protected from food shortages than the great apes are, or than our noncooking ancestors were. It implies that humans easily become obese as a result of eating exceptionally high-energy, calorie-dense food, rather than from ancient adaptation to seasonality. Great apes become obese in captivity on a rich diet of cooked food.



Cooking and the control of fire must have had substantial influences on our ancestors’ digestive physiology. Compared with our close ape relatives, humans regularly experience a higher caloric intake in a short time (e.g., a rapidly ingested evening meal), a more easily digested protein intake, and a higher concentration of the dangerous Maillard compounds that are produced by the combination of sugars and amino acids during cooking. We can therefore expect to find changes in our insulin system compared with those of apes, in the nature of our proteolytic enzymes, and in our systems of defense against a range of carcinogens and inflammatory agents. We might find that we are better protected against Maillard molecules than other primates are, given our uniquely long exposure to ingesting them in high concentrations.





Anthropologists often propose that when fire was first controlled, one of its major contributions was to keep people warm, but that idea wrongly implies that our precooking ancestors would have had difficulty staying warm without fire. Chimpanzees survive nights exposed to long, cold rain-storms. Gorillas sleep uncovered in high, cool mountains. Every species other than humans can maintain adequate body heat without fire. When our ancestors first controlled fire, they would not have needed it for warmth, though fire would have saved them some energy in maintaining body temperature.



But the opportunity to be warmed by fire created new options. Humans are exceptional runners, far better than any other primate at running long distances, and arguably better even than wolves and horses. The problem for most mammals is that they easily become overheated when they run. After a chimpanzee has performed a five-minute charging display, he sits exhausted, panting and visibly hot, beads of sweat glistening among his erect hairs as he uses increased air circulation and sweat production to dissipate his excessive heat. Most mammals cannot evolve a solution to this problem, because they need to retain an insulation system, such as a thick coat of hair. The insulation is needed to maintain body heat during rest or sleep, and of course it cannot be removed after exercise. At best it can be modified, such as by hair being erected to promote air flow.



The best adaptation to losing heat is not to have such an effective insulation system in the first place. As physiologist Peter Wheeler has long argued, this may be why humans are “naked apes”: a reduction in hair would have allowed Homo erectus to avoid becoming overheated on the hot savanna. But Homo erectus could have lost their hair only if they had an alternative system for maintaining body heat at night. Fire offers that system. Once our ancestors controlled fire, they could keep warm even when they were inactive. The benefit would have been high: by losing their hair, humans would have been better able to travel long distances during hot periods, when most animals are inactive. They could then run for long distances in pursuit of prey or to reach carcasses quickly. By allowing body hair to be lost, the control of fire allowed extended periods of running to evolve, and made humans better able to hunt or steal meat from other predators.



The hair loss that benefited adults would have been a problem for babies because babies spend a lot of time inactive and are therefore at risk of becoming cold unless cuddled or nestled in warm surroundings. Perhaps at first babies retained their body hair even when their older siblings lost theirs. But an infant lying next to a fire would have risked burning his or her body hair. Nowadays, human babies are unique among primate infants in having an especially thick layer of fat close to the skin. Baby fat could well be partly a thermal adaptation to the loss of chimpanzee-like hair.



Even our ancestors’ emotions are likely to have been influenced by a cooked diet. Clustering around a fire to eat and sleep would have required our ancestors to stay close to one another. To avoid lost tempers flaring into disruptive fights, the proximity would have demanded considerable tolerance. The first dogs provide a provocative model for how tolerance might have evolved. According to biologists Raymond and Lorna Coppinger, wolves began their evolution into dogs when they were drawn to human villages in search of food refuse about fifteen thousand years ago. The Coppingers suggest that when wolves were attracted to these potent new food resources, there was intense natural selection in favor of the calmer individuals, because the calmer wolves were able to get closer to the settlements and more easily find the precious new foods. In effect, dogs experienced a form of self-domestication.



The first cooks probably experienced a similar process. Among the eaters of cooked food who were attracted to a fireside meal, the calmer individuals would have more comfortably accepted others’ presence and would have been less likely to irritate their companions. They would have been chased away less often, would have had more access to cooked food, and would have passed on more genes to succeeding generations than the wild-eyed and intemperate bullies who disturbed the peace to the point that they were ostracized by a coalition of the calm. A version of this system had probably already started before cooking, when groups of habilines clustered about a meat carcass.



A process similar to domestication could then have led to an evolutionary advance in ancestral humans’ social skills. In animals, more tolerant individuals cooperate and communicate better. Among chimpanzees, individuals that are more tolerant of each other cooperate better. Again, bonobos are more tolerant than chimpanzees, and they collaborate more readily to obtain food. Experimentally domesticated foxes are likewise more tolerant than their wild ancestors and are better at reading human signals. If the intense attractions of a cooking fire selected for individuals who were more tolerant of one another, an accompanying result should have been a rise in their ability to stay calm as they looked at one another, so they could better assess, understand, and trust one another. Thus the temperamental journey toward relaxed face-to-face communication should have taken an important step forward with Homo erectus. As tolerance and communication ability increased, individuals would have become better at reaching a mutual understanding, forming alliances, and excluding the intolerant. Such changes in social temperament would have contributed to a growing ability to communicate, including the evolution of language.



The changes wrought by cooked food would have included family dynamics and their supporting psychological mechanisms. The development of pair-bonds in early humans (or their elaboration, if habilines had already evolved a pair-bonding system) contributed to the importance of romantic attachments. On the other hand, domestic violence would have been promoted by the way in which, thanks to cooking, labor is sexually divided and exchanged. Hunter-gatherers are not the only cultures in which wife-beating can be stimulated by disappointments over cooking. Sociologist Marjorie DeVault studied American households and found that “expectations of men’s entitlement to service from women are powerful in most families, [and] that these expectations often thwart attempts to construct truly equitable relationships and sometimes lead to violence.” Sigmund Freud thought the control of fire led to self-control. Around a hearth, he said, we have to suppress a primal urge to quench the flames with a stream of urine. Freud’s notion is far-fetched, but he was right about one thing: our species must have changed radically when we learned to live with flames.





The changes all depend on the mysterious initial moment. We may never know for sure how cooking started, because the breakthrough happened so long ago and probably rather quickly in a small geographical area. But we can use our growing knowledge of great ape behavior, nutrition, and archaeology to speculate. Consider first the woodland apes, or australopithecines. By the period between three million and two million years ago, several genera and many species of australopithecines had already occupied the African woodlands for perhaps three million years. At that time, the only known species of australopithecines were Australopithecus afarensis, A. garhi, and A. africanus, and then even they disappeared.



Climate change appears responsible for the extinction of australopithecine species. Africa began getting drier about three million years ago, making the woodlands a harsher and less productive place to live. Desertification would have reduced the wetlands where australopithecines would have found underwater roots, such as cattails and water lilies, and they would have found fewer fruits and seeds. The species of Australopithecus had to adapt their diet or go extinct. Two lines survived.



One adapted by intensifying its reliance on the underground foods that had provided the backup diet of less preferred foods for australopithecines in times of food scarcity. Their descendants rapidly developed enormous jaws and chewing teeth, and are recognized in the naming of a new genus, Paranthropus, or the “robust” australopithecines. Paranthropus emerged around three million years ago, possibly descendants of Australopithecus afarensis or A. africanus. They flourished in some of the same dry woodlands as our human ancestors until a million years ago and still looked like upright-walking chimpanzees. But even more than their Australopithecus ancestors, Paranthropus relied mainly on a diet of roots and other plant storage organs.



The other line of descendants led to humans, and it began with meat eating. Australopithecines must always have been interested in eating meat when they found fresh kills, just as chimpanzees and almost every other primate are today. They would therefore have readily pirated carcasses from any predator they were willing to confront, such as cheetahs or jackals, both of which had close relatives present in Africa by 2.5 million years ago. Chimpanzees today steal carcasses of young antelope or pigs from baboons. But stealing meat from lions and saber-tooths must normally have been too dangerous for australopithecines. Even lions and hyenas kill each other in competition over food, and australopithecines would have been feeble and slow compared to any of the big carnivores.



Given these challenges, it is unclear how australopithecines obtained access to the meat of antelope and other game animals. Maybe they found new ways to kill, which would have given them a few minutes or more to cut meat off their prey before they were chased away by the arrival of big carnivores. Or perhaps they discovered how to stand up to the dangerous predators without serious risk of being wounded or killed. A bold group of australopithecines might have confronted the predators with simple spears modified from digging sticks that they had used to obtain roots. That technology would not have been a huge advance from the short sticks chimpanzees use to jab at bush babies hidden in tree holes, as happens in Senegal. Or maybe they threw rocks at their opponents, much as chimpanzees now sometimes scare pigs or humans with well-aimed missiles in Gombe, Tanzania. If they threw rocks, they might have noticed that sometimes the rocks smashed on landing and produced flakes that could be used for cutting.



Whatever the technique, by at least 2.6 million years ago, some groups were definitely getting meat from carcasses that previously only big carnivores would have eaten. Over the next few hundred thousand years, impact notches and cut marks on animal bones caused by stone tools attest to habilines spending long enough in the danger zones to be able to slice the meat off dead animals, from turtles to elephants. The result was a new and immensely beneficial food source. Knowing that habilines were able to cut steaks and that chimpanzees often pound nuts with hammerstones, we can be sure that habilines would have had the cognitive ability to batter their meat before they ate it, and they surely would have preferred their meat pounded.



Habilines must have also eaten substantial amounts of plant food. During periods of food shortage, such as the annual dry seasons, meat would have been particularly low in fat, down to 1 to 2 percent. Plant foods would then have become critical. Habilines’ chewing teeth were similar in size and shape to those of australopithecines, showing a continuing commitment to the same plant foods, including raw roots and corms during the most difficult seasons, and such items as soft seeds and fruits when they could find them. Probably habilines prepared nuts by smashing them to expose the edible seeds, as chimpanzees do. It is doubtful that habilines could process plant foods by any techniques that were much more elaborate than pounding. Almost all the methods hunter-gatherers use to improve the nutritional value of plant foods involve fire, because heat is needed to gelatinize starch. Until fire was controlled, habilines would have been stuck with eating raw plant foods whose caloric value could not be much improved by cold processing.



The breakthrough could have been simple, because it did not require that fire be made from scratch. If fire could be captured, the tending would have been relatively easy. Among hunter-gatherers, children as young as two years old make their own fires by taking sticks from their mothers’ fires. Even chimpanzees and bonobos can tend fires well. The bonobo Kanzi is famous for his ability to communicate with psychologist Sue Savage-Rumbaugh using symbols. During an outing in the woods, Kanzi once touched the symbols for “marshmallow” and “fire.” He was given matches and marshmallows, and he proceeded to snap twigs for a fire, light them with matches, and toast the marshmallows. By the time of habilines, brain size had roughly doubled compared with the relative brain size of great apes. It is very likely that habilines were mentally capable of keeping a fire alive.



The big question for the habilines that became Homo erectus is not how they tended fire, but how they would regularly have obtained it. In his Descent of Man, Charles Darwin mentioned an idea suggested by his archaeologist friend John Lubbock: sparks produced by accident from pounded rocks could have launched the control of fire. Anthropologist James Frazer liked the idea of human fire coming accidentally from hitting rocks together, and so did the Yakuts of Siberia, whose campfire tales recounted how hammering led to controlled fire. Certainly habilines would have seen sparks when they hit stones together to make tools. If they softened their meat by pounding it not only with logs but also with hammerstones, they would have had a second source of sparks. There often would have been dry tinder close by, such as grass or the tinder fungus that many people use today to catch a fire.



Anthropologists caution that the sparks produced by many kinds of rock are too cool or short-lived to catch fire. But when pyrites, a common ore containing iron and sulfur, are hit against flint, the result is a set of such excellent sparks that pyrites and flint are standard components of fire-making kits used by hunter-gatherers from the Arctic to Tierra del Fuego. If a particular group of habilines lived in an area exceptionally rich in pyrites, they could have found themselves inadvertently making fire rather often.





The steps to managing fire need not have involved the difficult process of deliberately making it. Here is an alternative scenario: during the tens of thousands of generations between the origin of habilines (at least 2.3 million years ago) and Homo erectus (at least 1.8 million years ago), from time to time the sparks resulting from habilines’ pounding rocks could have accidentally produced small fires in adjacent brush. Perhaps cocky juvenile habilines dared to grab the cool end of a branch and tease one another with the smoldering twigs or blazing leaves, much as young chimpanzees playfully bully one another with sticks they use as clubs. Adults learned the effect on one another of waving a burning log. The practice of scaring others with fire was then transferred to the serious job of frightening lions, saber-tooths and hyenas, similar to how chimpanzees use clubs against leopards. At first the fires went out. But over time, when sparks happened to start a fire, habilines learned that it was worth their while to keep it going. They cultivated fire as a way to help them defend against dangerous animals.



There are other possibilities. The climate was become increasingly dry. Natural fires could have become more frequent. Perhaps people walked behind brush fires looking for cooked seeds. Maybe they obtained fire from trees that burned slowly after being struck by lightning; a eucalyptus tree can smolder for eight months. Perhaps there was a permanent natural source somewhere in Africa, like the gas-fired strip of flame that has been burning nonstop near Antalya in southwestern Turkey ever since Homer recorded it in the Iliad almost three thousand years ago.



Repeated experience with natural fire would have been necessary to give individuals the confidence to use it, which would not have happened easily—otherwise, fire would have been controlled by every group of habilines. But if there were a natural source of fire, such as sparks, there would have been no need to learn to make fire, because it could be taken from nature again and again, and eventually from other groups: the chance of a rainstorm extinguishing every fire in a neighborhood would soon have become vanishingly small. Among Australian aborigines, groups that lost their fire from a drenching rain or flood would refresh their supply from neighbors, who would expect something in return, such as quartz flakes or red ocher. Sometimes the trade occurred across a territorial boundary, which made it dangerous, but risk did not prevent the vital recovery of fire.



Keeping a fire lit would have been a big achievement, but logs are easy to keep aflame when people are moving. Hunter-gatherers regularly carry fire in the form of a burning log. As long as the carrier is walking, the fire is well oxygenated and the log continues to smolder. When people stop, they start a small fire within a few minutes by adding a few sticks to the smoldering log and blowing.



An important step in fire’s becoming a central part of human lives was to maintain it at night. Suppose some habilines carried a smoldering log by day to protect against predators, then left it at the base of a sleeping tree when they climbed to make a nest for the night. It would not have been such a big step to give it extra fuel so the log would still be burning the next day—perhaps after seeing this happen first by accident. From there it would have been a smaller step to sitting near the fire to keep it burning, and thereby take advantage of its protection, light, and warmth.



Once they kept fire alive at night, a group of habilines in a particular place occasionally dropped food morsels by accident, ate them after they had been heated, and learned that they tasted better. Repeating their habit, this group would have swiftly evolved into the first Homo erectus. The newly delicious cooked diet led to their evolving smaller guts, bigger brains, bigger bodies, and reduced body hair; more running; more hunting; longer lives; calmer temperaments; and a new emphasis on bonding between females and males. The softness of their cooked plant foods selected for smaller teeth, the protection fire provided at night enabled them to sleep on the ground and lose their climbing ability, and females likely began cooking for males, whose time was increasingly free to search for more meat and honey. While other habilines elsewhere in Africa continued for several hundred thousand years to eat their food raw, one lucky group became Homo erectus—and humanity began.





EPILOGUE



The Well-Informed Cook



Cooking launched a dietary commitment that today drives an industry. The popular foods cooked in giant factories are often scorned as lacking in micronutrients, having too much fat, salt, and sugar, and having too few interesting tastes, but they are the foods we have evolved to want. The result is excess. By the turn of the twenty-first century, 61 percent of Americans were “overweight enough to begin experiencing health problems as a direct result.” With the ready availability of such products as high-fructose corn syrup, cheap palm oil, and intensely milled flour, measured daily energy intake in the United States rose by almost two hundred calories between 1977 and 1995. As a result, more people continue to die in the United States of too much food than of too little, as John Kenneth Galbraith first noted a half century ago. The trends toward easier foods and greater obesity are now found in many industrialized countries. To reverse the decline in health, we should eat more foods with a low caloric density. But few examples can be found in the typical supermarket, because we tend not to like them. We would find it easier to choose appropriate foods if we had a better sense of how many calories we obtain from them. We need to become more aware of the calorie-raising consequences of a highly processed diet.



To do so, we need to better understand nutritional biophysics. Consider meat: the biochemistry of protein digestion is well known. Researchers know precisely what secretions are applied to food molecules at each point in their journey down the alimentary canal. They can say which chemical bonds are severed by which enzymes at which point, how the cells and membranes carry the products of digestion across the gut wall, and how mucosal cells respond to changing pH or mineral concentrations. The detail of biochemical knowledge is exquisite.

Yet this impressive expertise concerns protein, not meat, digestion. Nutritional science is focused so intensively on chemistry that physical realities are forgotten. Researchers treat the food entering the stomach as if it were a solution of nutrients ready for a cascade of biochemical reactions. They forget that our digestive enzymes interact not with free proteins but with a slimy three-dimensional bolus, which after a meal of meat is a messy collection of chewed chunks of muscle, each piece of which is wrapped in multilayered tubes of connective tissue. Structural complexity matters because it affects how easily the food bolus is converted to digestible nutrients, and therefore how many calories we get from our food. As we saw in chapter 3, the rats that gained an extra 30 percent fat in Oka’s experiment had no extra calories in their food. They merely had their diet softened. The Evo Diet, described in chapter 1, was calculated to give the volunteers sufficient calories to maintain weight, yet they lost weight rapidly.

Assessing the energy value of foods is a difficult technical problem. Nutritionists cannot calculate the value of foods directly because foods are too complicated in their composition and structure, and digestive systems treat different foods in different ways. So instead of making precise calculations of exactly the number of calories people can obtain from a given food, nutritionists make rough guesses. They do so according to a set of agreed rules that are not perfect but provide a good approximation, at least for foods that are very easily digested. They call these rules a convention.





For more than a century, the convention that has dominated estimating energy values in foods, and now under-girds the food-labeling system of the Western world, has been the Atwater system. Wilbur Olin Atwater, who invented it, was born in 1844. He was a professor of chemistry at Wesleyan College in Connecticut at the end of the nineteenth century. His admirable aim was to ensure that poor people could use their limited resources to get enough to eat. He set out to discover how many calories different foods provided. Atwater knew that food contained three main items the body uses for energy: protein, fat, and carbohydrate. Using a simple laboratory device called a bomb calorimeter, he recorded how much heat was released when typical proteins, fats, and carbohydrates were completely burned. He found that there was not a lot of variation among the different types of each item. For example, all proteins tended to produce a little more than four kilocalories of heat per gram.



After that, Atwater needed to know two more things. First was how much of the major macronutrients—protein, fat, and carbohydrate—a food contains. Fat was easy, because unlike protein and carbohydrates, fat dissolves in ether. So Atwater chopped foods finely, shook them up with ether, and weighed how much material was dissolved in the ether. That gave him a food’s fat content (or, more strictly, lipid content: lipids include both fats, which are solid at room temperature, and oils, which are liquid). The same method is used today. Protein was harder to index because no test identifies proteins in general. However, Atwater knew that about 16 percent of the weight of an average protein was nitrogen. So he found a way to measure the amount of nitrogen, which gave him the concentration of protein.

Carbohydrates were the hardest. There was no test then, nor is there now, for identifying the concentration of carbohydrates in general. But Atwater knew the main organic matter in foods were the three big items, protein, fat, and carbohydrate. He also knew how to calculate the total amount of organic matter. He simply burned the food completely, leaving only the mineral ash that did not burn and was therefore the inorganic part. Knowing how much organic matter the food contained and how much fat and protein it held, he obtained the amount of carbohydrate by subtraction: the weight of carbohydrate was what was left when the weights of the fat, protein, and mineral ash had been subtracted from the total weight of the original food item.

Atwater was thus able to estimate the amount of protein, lipid, and carbohydrate in his food. The second piece of information he needed was how much of the food a person eats is digested, as opposed to being passed through the body unused. This required him to analyze the feces of people who were eating precisely measured diets, which he duly did. He was then able to estimate, for each of the three nutrients, how much of what was eaten was also digested. Once again he found that there was little variation within the categories of protein, fat, and carbohydrate, so he assumed the variation could be ignored.

The chemist now had what he wanted. He knew how much energy each of the three big types of macronutrient contained, how much of each macronutrient was present in the food, and how much of it was used in the body. Ignoring variation within each type of macronutrient, he proposed the convention that still dominates the food industry and government standards. By taking into account the proportion of the food that he found was not digested, which was rarely more than 10 percent, he claimed that on average proteins and carbohydrates each yield four kcal/gram, while lipids yield nine kcal/gram. These are known as Atwater’s general factors.

This simple and convenient system forms the basis of the Atwater convention and is essentially what the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s National Nutrient Database and McCance and Widdowson’s The Composition of Foods use to produce their tables of nutrient composition. But nutritionists have long recognized important limitations in the Atwater convention, so it has been modified in various ways. One way was to make the general factors more specific. In 1955 the Atwater specific-factor system was introduced to take advantage of a half century of nutritional biochemistry research. For example, the energy value of different types of protein is known to vary: egg protein produces 4.36 kcal/gram, whereas brown rice protein produces 3.41 kcal/gram, and so on. An exhaustive list of such variants has been compiled.

Modifications have also been made to the systems for analyzing nutrient composition. Atwater assumed that all the nitrogen in a food was part of a protein and that all proteins contained 16 percent by weight of nitrogen. However, nitrogen can be found in other molecules that may or may not be digestible, such as nonprotein amino acids and nucleic acids, and some proteins have more or less than 16 percent of nitrogen. So for several decades Atwater’s general average of 16 percent nitrogen per protein has been replaced by specific figures, such as 17.54 percent for macaroni protein and 15.67 percent for milk protein.

I mention these modifications to the Atwater system to show that nutritionists have been actively engaged in trying to improve it, and to show that the changes they have proposed have on the whole been rather minor. For example, although egg protein produces more kilocalories per gram (4.36) than brown rice protein (3.41), neither figure is very far from Atwater’s estimate of 4 kcal/gram. In fact, although the specific-factor system lends greater precision, the overall effects of the changes are so small that some nutritionists (particularly those in Britain) still prefer to use general factors, albeit modified since Atwater’s time.

The general factors have never been static; more factors have been added over time. Even Atwater modified his own system by separating alcohol into its own category (he gave it a rounded value of seven kcal/gram). Much later, in 1970, a general factor was added for the class of carbohydrates called monosaccharides, or simple sugars. New general factors have also been proposed for dietary fiber (or nonstarch polysaccharides), which are so much less well digested than other carbohydrates that they clearly deserve a lower energy value than four kcal/gram; a figure of two kcal/gram has been proposed. The system has also been modified to allow for energy lost in urine and gas production. These and similar modifications continue to tweak the original Atwater system while retaining its essential philosophy.

The Atwater system is thus a flexible convention that is continuously modified but still provides the fundamental basis for assessment of energy value in today’s foods. It allows people eating ordinary cooked foods to track their caloric intake sufficiently to get a good idea of when they are overeating or undereating. But it has two critical problems that undermine its ability to assess the food value of items of low digestibility, such as raw foods or foods like whole-grain flour with large particles.

The first problem is that the Atwater convention does not recognize that digestion is a costly process. When we eat, our metabolic rate rises, the maximum increase averaging 25 percent. The corresponding figures for fish (136 percent) and for snakes (687 percent) are vastly higher, showing that humans pay less for digestion than other species, presumably due partly to our food being cooked. But the cost of digestion is still significant for humans and can be reduced or raised depending on the food type.

When Atwater burned foods in a bomb calorimeter, he ignored this complexity. He assumed that humans could use all the energy present in a food and digested in the body. If food burns in the bomb calorimeter, Atwater seemed to conclude, it produces the same amount of energy value in our bodies. But the human body is not a bomb calorimeter. We do not ignite food inside our bodies. We digest it, and we use calories to pay for this complex series of operations. The cost varies by nutrient. Protein costs more to digest than carbohydrates, while fat has the lowest digestive cost of all macronutrients. In a 1987 study, people eating a high-fat diet achieved the same weight gain as others eating almost five times the number of calories in the form of carbohydrate. The higher the proportion of protein in the food, the higher the cost of digestion. Based on animal studies, we can expect that the costs of digestion are higher for tougher or harder foods than softer foods; for foods with larger rather than smaller particles; for food eaten in single large meals rather than in several small meals; and for food eaten cold rather than hot. Individuals vary too. Lean people tend to have higher costs of digestion than obese people. Whether obesity leads to a low cost of digestion or results from it is unknown. Either way, the variation is important for someone watching his or her weight. For the same number of measured calories, an obese person, having a lower digestive cost, will put on more pounds than a lean person. Life can be unfair.

Compounding the problem, a second big failure of the Atwater system is closely related and equally important. The Atwater system assumes that the proportion of food digested is always the same, regardless of whether the food is in liquid or solid form, part of a high-fiber or low-fiber diet, or raw or cooked. Recall that one of Atwater’s general factors was the proportion of food that is passed into the feces undigested. He found that this was low—10 percent or less—and he assumed that this proportion was constant. This assumption has long been known to be wrong. When A. L. Merrill and B. K. Watt introduced the Atwater specific-factor system in 1955, they noted specifically that the digestibility of a grain is affected by how finely it is milled. More extensively milled flour might be completely digested, whereas less milling could lead to 30 percent of the flour being excreted unused. So they called for specific data to be applied to the digestibility of every food. Such data, however, are often unavailable. Identifying the digestibility of each food according to its physical state is difficult, because large numbers of experiments are required. To complicate matters further, the digestibility of the same item varies according to the food context in which it is consumed. For example, protein digestibility tends to be lower when the protein is part of a high-fiber food than when part of a low-fiber food. For raw foods, we have only scattered information on how various durations of cooking, down to none at all, influence the proportion of a food that is digested. Very few studies use the only appropriate measure, ileal digestibility, which takes the sample of unused food at the end of the small intestine, rather than at elimination from the body.

All these factors play such an important role in determining the net value of a food item that many nutritionists have called for a major revision of the Atwater convention. But the information needed to account for the effects of variation in the cost of digestion and digestibility is hard to obtain and difficult to incorporate into a food-labeling system. A widespread preference therefore persists among professionals to keep the Atwater general-factor system. Essentially, nutrition science is faced with choosing between the immense effort of accumulating nutritional-value data that are difficult to quantify but accurate, on the one hand, or using easily quantified but physiologically unrealistic measures, yielding only a rough approximation of food value. Given the difficulty of acquiring the actual, contextually adjusted nutritional values of individual foods (and combination of foods), the general public is provided with estimates of food values that do not reflect the realities of the digestive process. The scientists who compiled the National Nutrient Database and The Composition of Foods must have known that raw foods would produce less net energy than cooked foods and that a higher proportion of raw food was likely to pass through the body unused. But they were locked into an old, approximate-measurement technique, and the result is a falsehood. The data in standard nutritional tables assume that particle size does not matter and that cooking does nothing to increase the energy value of foods, when abundant evidence shows the opposite to be true.

The physics of food matters because our foods and food processing techniques are changing in ways we can expect to contribute to the obesity crisis—thanks to our inability to assess the real caloric value of our diet. In our grocery stores, we find flour that has been ground ever finer, foods made ever softer, calories in ever greater concentration. Rough breads have given way to Twinkies, apples to apple juice. Consumers are misled by the current food-labeling system into thinking they will get the same number of calories from a given weight of macronutrients regardless of how it has been prepared. People are unlikely to experience consequences of our dietary choices any differently than the snakes that got more food value from eating meat that had been ground up, or the rats that got fat when their food pellets were soft. Only one study has been conducted to test the effect of food hardness on health. It found that Japanese women whose diets were softer had larger waists, which are associated with higher rates of mortality. That was a preliminary study. It will take time to show how consistent such effects are, but the indications are clear. We become fat from eating food that is easy to digest. Calories alone do not tell us what we need to know.





It is time to modify Atwater’s convention to include the effects of the physical structure of foods in estimates of a food’s nutritional value. And we must educate ourselves. As food writer Michael Pollan has argued, we should choose “real food,” not “nutrients.” For Pollan, real food is natural or only lightly processed, recognizable and familiar. By contrast, nutrients are invisible chemicals, such as essential oils and amino-acids and vitamins, objects of scientific expertise whose significance we must take on faith. The less processed our food, the less intense we can expect the obesity crisis to be.



We once thought of our species as infinitely adaptable, particularly in our diet. Different peoples survive on diets that range from 100 percent plants to 100 percent animals. Such flexibility buttresses a notion that human evolutionary success depended merely on inventiveness. Taken to extremes, our species seems to be free to create our own evolutionary ecology.

The cooking commitment says otherwise. The human ancestral environment was full of uniform problems: how to get fuel, how to regulate feeding competition, how to organize society around fires. The big problem of diet was once how to get enough cooked food, just as it is still for millions of people around the world. But for those of us lucky enough to live with plenty, the challenge has changed. We must find ways to make our ancient dependence on cooked food healthier.





